Pillars of Prosperity


The Yrjo ̈ Jahnsson Lectures
Year Lecturer and title Publisher
1963 Kenneth J. Arrow: Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Foundation Aspects of the Theory of Risk-Bearing
1967 Assar Lindbeck: Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Foudation Monetary-Fiscal Analysis and General Equilibrium
1968 L. R. Klein: Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Foundation An Essay on the Theory of Economic Prediction
1970 Harry G. Johnson: George Allard Unwin The Two-Sector Model of General Equilibrium
1973 John Hicks: Blackwell The Crises in Keynesian Economics
1976 Edmund Malinvaud: Blackwell The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered
1978 James Tobin: Blackwell Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity
1980 J  ́anos Kornai: Blackwell Growth, Shortage and Efficiency
1983 Jacques H. Dre`ze: Blackwell Labour Management, Contracts and Capital Markets
1985 Robert E. Lucas: Blackwell Models of Business Cycles
1987 Amartya Sen: Not yet published Rational Behavior
1990 A. B. Atkinson: Blackwell Three Lectures on Poverty in Europe
1992 Bengt Holmstr  ̈om: Not yet published Models of the Firm
1996 Paul R. Krugman: Not yet published Economic Theory and the East Asia Miracle
1999 Hans-Werner Sinn: Blackwell The New Systems Competition
2002 Alvin Roth: Not yet published The Timing of Transactions
2005 Ricardo Caballero: MIT Press Macroeconomics and Restructuring in the Global Economy
2007 Peter Diamond: Not yet published Thinking about Taxes
2010 Timothy Besley and Torsten Persson: Princeton University Press Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics of Development Clusters


Pillars of Prosperity
The Political Economics of Development Clusters
Timothy Besley and Torsten Persson
princeton university press Princeton and Oxford


Copyright © 2011 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Besley, Timothy. Pillars of prosperity : the political economics of development clusters / Timothy Besley and Torsten Persson. p. cm. — (The Yrjo ̈ Jahnsson lectures) Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-0-691-15268-4 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Economic policy. 2. Economic development. 3. Business incubators. I. Persson, Torsten. II. Title. HD87.B464 2011 338.8′7—dc22 2011016080
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Sabon using ZzTEX by Princeton Editorial Associates, Inc., Scottsdale, Arizona.
Printed on acid-free paper.
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


Contents
Series Foreword ix
Preface xi
CHAPTER 1 Development Clusters 1
1.1 Salient Correlations 6
1.2 The Main Questions 10
1.3 Fiscal Capacity 11
1.4 Legal Capacity 14
1.5 Political Violence 22
1.6 State Spaces 27
1.7 Development Assistance 31
1.8 Political Reform 32
1.9 Main Themes 34
1.10 Final Remarks 37
1.11 Notes on the Literature 38
CHAPTER 2 Fiscal Capacity 40
2.1 The Core Model 45
2.1.1 Basic Structure 46 2.1.2 Politically Optimal Policy 50 2.1.3 Fiscal-Capacity Investments 52 2.1.4 Normative Benchmark: A Pigouvian Planner 54
v


2.1.5 Three Types of States 56 2.1.6 Taking Stock 63
2.2 Developing the Model 64
2.2.1 Microfoundations for Fiscal Capacity 64 2.2.2 More General Models for Public Goods 67 2.2.3 Polarization/Heterogeneity 70 2.2.4 Income Inequality 73 2.2.5 Differences in Group Size 78 2.2.6 Tax Distortions 79 2.2.7 From Trade to Income Taxes 83 2.2.8 An Infinite-Horizon Model 86
2.3 Empirical Implications and Data 91
2.4 Final Remarks 99
2.5 Notes on the Literature 99
CHAPTER 3 Legal Capacity 103
3.1 The Core Model with Legal Capacity 108
3.1.1 Politically Optimal Policy 109 3.1.2 Investments in State Capacity 110 3.1.3 Comparative Statics 113 3.1.4 Taking Stock 117
3.2 Developing the Model 118
3.2.1 Microeconomic Foundations 118 3.2.2 The Genius of Taxation 131 3.2.3 Private Capital Accumulation 138 3.2.4 Predation and Corruption 144
3.3 Empirical Implications and Data 156
3.4 Final Comments 164
3.5 Notes on the Literature 165
CHAPTER 4 Political Violence 169
4.1 The Core Model with Political Violence 175
4.1.1 Model Modifications 175 4.1.2 Policy 177 4.1.3 Investments in Political Violence 179
vi contents


4.1.4 Empirical Implications 185
4.2 Developing the Model 189
4.2.1 Asymmetries 189 4.2.2 Polarization, Greed, and Grievance 190 4.2.3 Anarchy 191 4.2.4 Conflict in a Predatory State 192 4.2.5 Investing in Coercive Capacity 193
4.3 From Theory to Empirical Testing 194
4.4 Data and Results 198
4.4.1 Data 198 4.4.2 Cross-Sectional Correlations 201 4.4.3 Econometric Estimates 202
4.5 Final Remarks 211
4.6 Notes on the Literature 213
CHAPTER 5 State Spaces 215
5.1 State Capacity in the Comprehensive Core Model 216
5.1.1 Equilibrium Political Turnover 216 5.1.2 Investments in State Capacity Revisited 219
5.2 Developing the Model 223
5.3 Empirical Implications 227
5.4 Putting the Pieces Together 231
5.5 Final Remarks 234
5.6 Notes on the Literature 235
CHAPTER 6 Development Assistance 237
6.1 The Core Model with Aid 242
6.1.1 Cash Aid 243 6.1.2 Technical Assistance 250 6.1.3 Military Assistance 253 6.1.4 Postconflict Assistance 254
6.2 Final Remarks 256
6.3 Notes on the Literature 257
contents vii


CHAPTER 7 Political Reform 259
7.1 The Core Model and Political Reform 264
7.1.1 Political Reform under a Veil of Ignorance 265 7.1.2 Strategic Political Reform 267
7.2 Developing the Model 271
7.2.1 Micropolitical Foundations for θ 271 7.2.2 Micropolitical Foundations for γ 275 7.2.3 Constitutional Rules 280 7.2.4 Political Violence 282 7.2.5 Trust 287 7.2.6 Governance 290
7.3 Political Reform in Practice 293
7.4 Final Remarks 298
7.5 Notes on the Literature 299
CHAPTER 8 Lessons Learned 302
8.1 What We Have Learned 303
8.1.1 Answers to the Three Main Questions 303 8.1.2 Our Analysis and Traditional Development Research 307
8.2 The Pillars of Prosperity Index 310
8.2.1 Defining the Index 310 8.2.2 Predicting the Index 319
8.3 Where Next? 325
8.4 Concluding Remarks 332
References 333
Name Index 357
Subject Index 363
viii contents


Series Foreword
The Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Foundation was established in 1954 by Mrs. Hilma Jahn
sson, in accordance with the wishes of her deceased husband, Professor Yrj  ̈o
Jahnsson. Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson was not only an academic but also a versatile entre
preneur. The Jahnssons’ wealth accumulated in the 1920s and 1930s through
successful real estate investments.
The purpose of the Foundation is to develop and support Finnish research
in economics and medical science. In the field of economics the Foundation is
one of the most important sources of private research funding in Finland.
In 1963 the Foundation launched a special series of the Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson
Lectures to be organized every two or three years in Helsinki. The aim of
the Lectures is to offer an internationally renowned economist a forum to
synthesize and develop novel research ideas, and to offer the Finnish economics
community firsthand access to the latest scholarly developments. The lectures
are published in a special series.
The Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Lectures have been a great success. Since the first lecture,
which was given on December 16, 1963, by Kenneth J. Arrow, all lecturers
have been the leading researchers in the field of economic science.
The Foundation is proud to have Professor Timothy Besley and Professor
Torsten Persson as the 19th Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Lecturers. The lectures were given in
2010 in Helsinki. Professors Besley and Persson are among the most influential
thinkers in contemporary political economics and beyond. Their scientific prizes
ix


include the Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Award, which Proferssor Besley received in 2005 and
Professor Persson received in 1997 at the Annual Congress of the European
Economic Association.
The Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Foundation
Elli Dahl, Managing Director
Ari Hyytinen, Research Director
x series foreword


Preface
This monograph was written for graduate students and researchers who would
like to learn about what we hope will be a new and exciting area of research
the political economics of development clusters. By development clusters we
mean the observed tendency for effective state institutions, the absence of
political violence, and high income per capita to be positively correlated with
one another. We see this if we look across countries at a given point in time,
as well as if we look across time within a given country. Owing to the nature
of this topic, our main story is macroeconomic and macropolitical, taking a
bird’s-eye view of aggregate patterns at a country level. But we also attempt to
provide some microeconomic and micropolitical foundations for the reduced
form relations that tell the main story. Moreover, the prospective integration of
micro and macro offers ample opportunities for future work. The topic requires
a dynamic analysis, so that both the capabilities of the state and the presence of
violence in our modeling reflect purposeful and forward-looking investments
by different groups in society. The book is primarily an exploration of theory,
but we always try to stay in close contact with the patterns in the data.
The proximate reason for writing this book was the Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Lectures
that we gave together in Helsinki in June 2010. We are immensely grateful to
the Yrj  ̈o Jahnsson Foundation for the invitation in the first place and to Hannu
Vartiainen and Pentti Vartia, the Foundation’s Research Director and Chairman
of the Board at the time, for their warm hospitality during our stay in Helsinki.
Our preparations for the lectures and the valuable comments that we received
when we gave them were very important milestones in our preparation of the
xi


material for this book. As it turned out, the topic grew and the book goes deeper
and wider than the four lectures that we gave in Helsinki in several ways.
Naturally, the book would not have come about without our joint research in
the last few years. This research has also produced a number of research papers,
the first of which appeared in print in the summer of 2008. Our initial ideas
were conceived in a brainstorming session about state capacity in Stockholm
in the fall of 2006.
However, our interest in these ideas was kindled at meetings of the Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) program on Institutions, Organiza
tions and Growth (IOG), to which we have both been lucky enough to belong.
Directed by Elhanan Helpman, this program collects a remarkable group of
economists, political scientists, and historians, who have met for three days
three times a year since 2003. We have learned an enormous amount from
this sustained interaction with the 26 other members of the program and its
steering committee. It was a delight to present a crude version of the manu
script in October 2010. Membership of the IOG program is a real privilege
and this book is a small token of repayment to CIFAR for the faith that it has
shown in this area of research. Without our joint discussions of institutions
and development in this setting, the book would simply not have been written.
For its research underpinnings, our ongoing dialogues with Daron Acemoglu,
Jim Fearon, Jim Robinson, and Guido Tabellini have been particularly impor
tant. Their patient and supportive criticism has helped to shape our thinking
on almost every aspect of the book. Although they are not members of the
CIFAR group, we have also learned a lot from frequent discussions with Paul
Collier and from joint research with Ethan Ilzetzki, a coauthor of one of our
underlying, as of yet, unpublished research papers.
During the last few years, we have had the opportunity to present our emerg
ing ideas on these issues to a large number of seminar audiences and at several
plenary lectures: the Richard T. Ely Lectures (Johns Hopkins, 2008), the Econo
metric Society Presidential Address (Pittsburgh, Wellington, Singapore, Milan,
and Rio, 2008), the Conference on Economics and Democracy (Canberra,
2008), GSE Lecture (Barcelona, 2009), the Central Planning Bureau Lecture
(Amsterdam, 2009), the Manchot Lecture (Bonn, 2009), the Agnar Sandmo
Lecture (Bergen, 2010), the CEPR-CREI Conference on Political Economy of
Economic Development (Barcelona, 2010), the Yan-fu Lecture (Beijing, 2010),
the John von Neumann Lecture (Budapest, 2010), the ABCDE Conference
(Stockholm, 2010), The Twenty-First School in Economic Theory (Jerusalem,
xii preface


2010), EEA Presidential Address (Glasgow, 2010), and the First Annual Meet
ing of Swedish Economists (Lund, 2010). We are grateful to participants in
these seminars and attendees at these lectures for many perceptive comments,
which made us think even harder about both substance and presentation.
Many people have given us feedback on the papers that jointly form the
stepping stone for the book, including Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion,
Alberto Alesina, Oriana Bandiera, Bob Bates, Marco Battaglini, Jeremy Bulow,
Robin Burgess, Mauricio Cardenas, Anne Case, Paul Collier, Chris Coyne,
Steve Coate, Angus Deaton, Avinash Dixit, Jim Fearon, Avner Grief, Elhanan
Helpman, Anke Hoeffler, Henrik Kleven, Roger Myerson, Patrick O’Brien,
Philippe Martin, Erik Melander, Eric Neumayer, Gerard Padro i Miquel, Rohini
Pande, Raghu Rajan, Jim Robinson, Guido Tabellini, Ragnar Torvik, Andrei
Shleifer, Jan van Ours, Barry Weingast, Ruixue Xie, and Magnus  ̈Oberg.
Jean-Paul Azam, Oriana Bandiera, Pete Boetkke, Mauricio Cardenas, Chris
Coyne, Mark Dincecco, Joan Esteban, Mark Gradstein, Geoff Hodgson, Arye
Hillman, Ethan Ilzetzki, Adnan Khan, Tim Leunig, Elena Paltseva, Louis Put
terman, Simon Quinn, Marta Reynal-Querol, Andrei Shleifer, Guido Tabellini,
Jon Temple, and John Wallis were kind enough to read and comment on a pre
liminary version of the manuscript that we circulated, despite an unreasonably
tight deadline for responding. We are also very grateful for the detailed and very
helpful comments from our Princeton University Press reviewers: Jim Fearon
and Daniel Treisman.
The research has benefited a great deal from us being able to use parts of the
material in our graduate courses in Development and Political Economics, in
London and Stockholm. Some of our students helped us out by reading various
chapters carefully in the last month of our work on the book, and we are grateful
for the comments by Michael Best, Anne Brockmeyer, Konrad Burchardi,
Timoth ́ee Demont, Laura Derksen, Erika Deserranno, Anders Jensen, Sam
Marden, Prakarsh Singh, and Fredrik Naess Thomassen. Some of our students
have also served as industrious research assistants throughout the research
program: Anne Brockmeyer, Dario Caldara, Jason Garred, Alice Kuegler, David
Seim, and Prakarsh Singh.
Our research over the last few years has received generous funding from a
number of sources. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Tore
Browaldh Research Foundation, CIFAR, the ESRC, the iiG program of DFID,
the European Research Council, the Swedish Research Council, and the Torsten
and Ragnar S  ̈oderberg Foundation.
preface xiii


The two of us have joint appointments at two institutions (LSE and IIES)
with daunting and vibrant traditions in economics. It is striking how frequently
in this work we have stood on the shoulders of current and former colleagues
whose ideas are, in some cases, neglected in mainstream economics. These
include Peter Bauer, Ronald Coase, Friedrich Hayek, Assar Lindbeck, and
Gunnar Myrdal, all of whom have written perceptively about the topics in
this book.
In the final hectic stages of the work, we were fortunate enough to be able
to call on the cheerful and expert editorial assistance of Christina L  ̈onnblad.
We are also grateful to our editors Seth Ditchik, Terri O’Prey, and Peter Strupp
for their professional handling of the manuscript.
With so much help, we can only blame each other for any remaining errors
and infelicities.
Last, but not least, our families have suffered, off and on, from our pre
occupation with the manuscript during the time of writing, from the middle
of September to the end of December 2010. Without their love, support, and
understanding, the project would not have been worthwhile. We dedicate this
book to them.
London and Stockholm
xiv preface


Pillars of Prosperity




CHAPTER 1
Development Clusters
Little else is required to carry a state to the highest degree of opulence from the lowest barbarism, but peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice, all the rest being brought about by the natural course of things.
Adam Smith, 1755
Almost all economic analyses presume the existence of an effective state. Specif
ically, economists invoke the existence of an authority that can tax, enforce
contracts, and organize public spending for a wide range of activities. We then
study concepts such as market failure and the state’s response to it, the provi
sion of public goods, and optimal taxation for the funding of state activities.
But many of the major developments in world history have been about creating
this starting point. Arguably, the situation presumed by economists is relevant
only to the past 100 years of history for a fairly small group of rich countries.
The effective state is not only of historical interest. A tour of the developing
world today rapidly confirms that the building of a state capable of taxing,
spending effectively, and enforcing contracts remains a huge challenge. Weak
and failing states are a fact of life and a source of human misery and global
disorder.
These observations are especially poignant because income per head in
the world’s richest countries is about 200 times higher than in the poorest.
This enormous income gap is certainly one of the most pressing issues facing
humanity. Why some countries are rich and others poor is indeed a classic
research question not only in economics, but in other social sciences such as
economic history and political science as well. To better grasp the roots of
wealth or poverty of nations is interesting in and of itself. But these roots are
also of paramount importance for donors seeking to improve the lot of poor
communities through various forms of development assistance.
1


It has long been understood that economic development is about much more
than rising incomes. Indeed, state effectiveness is now given center stage in
practical policymaking, with a greater focus on how to deal with countries hob
bled by weak, fragile, or failed states. A number of national and international
actors—such as the World Bank, the European Union, DFID in the United King
dom, and SIDA in Sweden—have recently launched initiatives targeted toward
such problem states.
Specific Indexes of State Weakness and Fragility Alternative attempts have
been made to map the problem empirically, relying on a variety of measur
able indicators.1 Figures 1.1 and 1.2 illustrate two specific indexes of state
fragility/weakness, namely the Brookings Institution’s Index of State Weakness
for all but the richest countries in 2008 and the Polity IV project’s State Fragility
Index for all countries in 2009. Both of these maps illustrate the underlying
classification on a gray scale. Specifically, the countries in the decile with the
weakest or most fragile countries are colored in black, whereas deciles higher
up in the classification are marked on a sliding gray scale, with white denoting
the decile with the strongest states (missing countries are marked by a hatch
pattern).2
Although the precise classifications behind the indexes differ, both studies
find that some 40–50 states suffer from serious weakness or fragility, with the
strongest concentrations in Sub-Saharan Africa and South and Central Asia.
Of course, there is no general agreement on exactly what defines a weak or
fragile state. The State Fragility Index, e.g., is derived by aggregating indicators
in eight dimensions, aimed at capturing the effectiveness and legitimacy of the
state in the security, political, economic, and social spheres.3
A closer look at the underlying indicators raises a number of issues. Eco
nomic legitimacy is measured by the export share in manufacturing, but exactly
1. See Rice and Patrick (2008) for an overview of different attempts to empirically measure state weakness or fragility. 2. Since the Brookings index is not defined for 36 of the most developed countries (also marked by a hatch pattern), we do not use the white end of the scale in Figure 1.1. 3. Each country is scored in each of the eight dimensions on its situation from 1994 and onward. Specifically, security effectiveness is gauged by three measures of the frequency of outright conflict, 1994–2007; security legitimacy by a measure of state repression; political effectiveness by three measures of regime and leader durability and the frequency of coups; politcal legitimacy by three measures of factionalism, ethnicity, and fragmentation; economic effectiveness by GDP per capita; economic effectiveness by the share of exports in manufacturing production; social effectiveness by the Human Development Index; and social legitimacy by the infant mortality rate.
2 chapter one: development clusters


Figure 1.1 Brookings Index of State Weakness, 2008.


Figure 1.2 Polity IV State Fragility Index, 2009.


how to read this indicator is unclear. Leadership duration is the indicator
for political effectiveness, where the direction of the relation is also opaque.
Although these may seem like minor quibbles, they touch upon a deeper issue in
understanding state fragility—the need to distinguish carefully between symp
toms and causes. But this is next to impossible absent a properly developed
conceptual framework. These questions notwithstanding, the indexes in Fig
ures 1.1 and 1.2 clearly bring home one point on which we certainly can agree:
state fragility (or state weakness) is inherently a multidimensional concept.
A Challenging Agenda This book offers an approach to studying weak or fragile
states, taking a first step toward bringing them into mainstream economic
analyses. It is the hallmark of mature science that existing ideas should be
expanded into new domains. We proceed in this spirit by using more-or-less
standard ideas and methods to study the basics of state building. A key issue is
to understand what creates effective states.
Central to our approach is the idea of complementarities. As shown in
what follows, almost all dimensions of state development and effectiveness
are positively correlated. Moreover, historical accounts demonstrate vividly
that state authority, tax systems, court systems, and democracy coevolve in
a complex web of interdependent causality. Simplistic stories that try to paste
in unidirectional pathways are thus bound to fail.
However, this complexity does not mean that a quantitative approach of
theorizing and looking at data is hopeless. On the contrary, we argue through
out the book that building models as stripped-down representations of reality
provides useful windows onto complex processes, which allow us to see par
ticular features more clearly. Furthermore, looking at data and trying to codify
empirical regularities does more than simply breathe life into the narrative. The
data play a central role in developing our thinking about what is important
and what can be observed. Indeed, the modeling we put forward is structured
around variables and magnitudes that can be both theoretically defined and,
in principle, empirically measured. This disciplines the theory and extends the
domain of its applicability.
This introductory chapter lays out many of our main ideas in brief but acces
sible form. It is also an opportunity to review some of the historical evidence and
discuss some narrative accounts of development that shape our thinking. But we
do not intend our review to be exhaustive. Our primary aim is to demonstrate
a strong link between our work, with its clear roots in mainstream economics,
and research within other disciplines and less mainstream approaches.
development clusters 5


1.1 Salient Correlations
Several characteristics beyond income per capita enter our intuitive perception
of the defining qualities of a developed country. One is the institutional capa
bility of the state to carry out various policies that deliver benefits and services
to households and firms. We refer to this capability as state capacity. Another
development characteristic is that conflicting interests can be resolved peace
fully, rather than by alternative forms of violence. We refer to (the inverse of)
this feature as political violence.
Policy failures owing to weak state institutions tend to be found in coun
tries riddled with massive poverty and in societies plagued by violent internal
conflicts. In most developed countries, by contrast, nearly everything works:
we see strong policies supported by strong state institutions, high incomes, and
conflicts of interest resolved peacefully. These correlations create development
clusters, where the level of state capacity and the propensity for political vio
lence vary systematically with the level of income. Thus, our notion of clusters
does not describe a strong correlation for the same outcome variable in a set
of neighboring countries (even though Figures 1.1 and 1.2 hint at such geo
graphical clustering). Rather, we use the concept to describe strong correlations
among different outcome variables in the same country. To better understand
these clusters as manifestations of the general development problem is one of
the major objectives of this book.
Fiscal and Legal Capacity To illustrate the clustering, we need some concrete
empirical measures. For state capacity, we can distinguish two broad types of
capabilities that allow the state to take action. One concerns the extractive
role of the state. We call this capability fiscal capacity. Does a government
have the necessary infrastructure—in terms of administration, monitoring,
and enforcement—to raise revenue from broad tax bases such as income and
consumption, revenue that can be spent on income support or services to its
citizens? The other type of capacity concerns the productive role of the state.
Is it capable of raising private-sector productivity via physical services such
as road transport or the provision of power? Or does it have the necessary
infrastructure—in terms of courts, educated judges, and registers—to raise
private incomes by providing regulation and legal services such as the protection
of property rights or the enforcement of contracts? We focus on the latter
capability, which we refer to as legal capacity.
6 chapter one: development clusters


In later chapters, we consider different measures of both types of state
capacity. For now, we illustrate them with two specific measures. The first is
total tax revenue as a share of GDP, as measured by the IMF at the end of the
1990s (in 1999). We treat the overall tax take as an indicator of fiscal capacity.
The second is an index of government antidiversion policies, as measured by
the International Country Risk Guide, also at the end of the 1990s (in 1997),
and normalized to lie between 0 and 1. This index is itself an aggregation
of different perception indexes, but it has been commonly used in the macro
development literature to gauge the protection of property rights.4 We treat it
as an indicator of legal capacity.
As we emphasize later, fiscal and legal capacity are concepts that have not
been much studied by economists, so precise measurement is certainly an issue.
For example, using the total tax take raises obvious questions about the capacity
to tax versus the willingness to tax. The measures we use in this book are at best
approximations of different aspects of state capacity. As we will see, however,
the empirical patterns tend to be quite similar for a number of alternative
proxies. Chapters 2 to 4 provide much more detail and discussion about our
data and their sources.
Some Basic Facts Figure 1.3 shows that these indicators of fiscal and legal
capacity are positively correlated. It plots the tax share on the vertical axis
and the property-rights protection index on the horizontal axis. A clear picture
emerges. Countries that have better fiscal capacity also tend to have better legal
capacity. Both measures are also positively correlated with contemporaneous
GDP per capita. When we divide the observations into low-, middle-, and high
income countries, according to their 2000 GDP per capita in the Penn World
Tables, almost all of the high-income countries lie to the northeast in the chart,
whereas the low-income countries lie to the southwest. Moreover, the positive
relationship between fiscal and legal capacity is apparent within each of the
three income groups.
The two uppermost observations in the northeast corner of the graph are
Denmark and Sweden, both with high income, an overall tax take above 50%,
and a level of property-rights protection on a par with other top performers
such as Switzerland. The two leftmost observations in the southwest corner are
Mali and Niger, both with low income, among the lowest tax takes, and the
4. See, e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) and Hall and Jones (1999).
salient correlations 7


50
40
30
20
10
0
.4 .6 Property-Rights Protection Index
High income in 2000 Low income in 2000
Fiscal and Legal Capacity
Tax Share of GDP
.8 1
Middle income in 2000 Fitted values
Figure 1.3 Legal and fiscal capacity conditional on income.
two worst scores in our sample on the property-rights protection index. A few
outliers among the high-income countries stand out by deviating significantly
from the regression line. The observation with a tax share above 30% of GDP
and one of the lowest indexes of property-rights protection is the Seychelles.
The group of three high-income countries charging less than 10% of GDP in
taxes is made up of the oil states of Bahrein, Kuwait, and Oman.
Figure 1.4 illustrates that the two dimensions of state capacity are also
systematically correlated with political violence. Specifically, we divide the
countries into two groups: those that have experienced at least one year in
civil war in the half-century between 1950 and 2000 and those that have
not, according to the Armed Conflict Dataset (ACD). Clearly, past civil-war
experience is much more common at low levels of state capacity. Two countries
in the upper part of the graph stand out a bit. The high tax-take country with
some civil-war experience is France and the peaceful country with taxes above
40% of GDP and midrange property-rights protection is Botswana.
Figure 1.5 revisits the fiscal-cum-legal capacity plot, once again, when the
observations are subdivided by their scores on the 2009 State Fragility Index
i.e., the index underlying Figure 1.2. Here, the correlation is even starker. When
we classify countries by having some fragility or not, the observations divide
8 chapter one: development clusters


50
40
30
20
10
0
.4 .6 Property-Rights Protection Index
No civil war Fitted values
Fiscal and Legal Capacity
Tax Share of GDP
.8 1
Some civil war
Figure 1.4 Legal and fiscal capacity conditional on civil war.
50
40
30
20
10
0
.4 .6 Property-Rights Protection Index
No fragility Fitted values
Fiscal and Legal Capacity
Tax Share of GDP
.8 1
Some fragility
Figure 1.5 Legal and fiscal capacity conditional on fragility.
salient correlations 9


almost perfectly into a nonfragile, high-state-capacity group and a fragile, low
state-capacity group.
1.2 The Main Questions
One of the primary purposes of this book is to explain why development
clusters, as seen in Figures 1.3 to 1.5. To better understand such patterns in
the data, we basically have to pose—and answer—three general questions:
1. What forces shape the building of different state capacities and why
do these capacities vary together?
2. What factors drive political violence in its different forms?
3. What explains the clustering of state institutions, violence, and
income?
Adam Smith saw things very clearly more than 250 years ago when he
wrote the passage quoted at the beginning of this chapter. Smith listed “peace,
easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice” as sufficient conditions
for prosperity. His three pillars of prosperity are broadly the same as ours,
although with a somewhat different emphasis. For us, peace refers to the
absence of internal conflict (and political repression) rather than international
wars. Indeed, we argue that the latter can even be a force for effective state
building. For us, easy taxes means taxes that are easily extracted and broad
based—not a statement about the level. Further, for us, the analysis of justice
means finding ways of ensuring that the state supports contracts, enforces
property rights, and limits (public or private) predation. Subject to this slight
change of focus, our three main questions basically become an inquiry into the
circumstances that enable nations to erect Smith’s three pillars of prosperity.
In this endeavor, we pool together ideas from four broad research agendas:
(1) the study of long-run development and its determinants, (2) the study of civil
wars and other forms of internal conflict, (3) the study of the importance of
history for today’s patterns of development, and (4) the study of how economics
and politics interact in shaping societal outcomes. Thus, our work builds on
many earlier strands of scholarship, and in what follows we try to give due
credit to our predecessors in the large and in the small.
When grappling with the three central questions, we draw extensively on
our own research during the last few years on the economics and politics of
10 chapter one: development clusters


state building and violence in the process of development [see, e.g., Besley and
Persson (2009b, 2010a,b, 2011)]. Even though we rely heavily on this earlier
research, the book goes far beyond our articles and papers in terms of synthesis
and overall perspective. Like our research papers, it aims at presenting new
theory as well as new evidence. In line with that goal, most of the chapters
interweave theoretical and empirical material.
The theory appears as a sequence of formal models, designed to gradually
shed more light on the development clusters that we observe in the data. In
the grand scheme of development, of course, many economic and political
outcomes are jointly determined in a web of two-way relations, but to untangle
this web requires an approach that starts out simply and gradually adds new
layers of more complex interactions. For example, political institutions are
taken as given and as a determinant of other outcomes all the way up to
Chapter 7, where we start analyzing how these institutions might themselves
be determined.
Aside from providing motivation for the theory, the empirics largely take
the form of raw or partial correlations in cross-sectional contemporary and
historical data. These correlations are closely related to the predictions of the
theory. But with only a few exceptions, we stop short of an empirical strategy
that seriously tries to isolate the causal relations in the data. Taking that further
step is not so easy, because the whole point of our analysis is that most of
the variables of interest are determined jointly. Laying bare causal relations in
the data thus requires that we credibly isolate an exogenous variation in some
particular variable of interest. As usual with cross-country data, that is not a
trivial task.
The rest of this introductory chapter provides an overview of the book and
its main messages. We explain our theoretical approach, describe the most
important ideas that arise from it, and take an initial look at some data. As we
continue with the overview, we also outline the contents of the seven chapters
to follow. At the end of the chapter, we highlight some of the main themes that
recur in the gradual development of our argument.
1.3 Fiscal Capacity
Existing Research by Economists State capacity is not a concept that appears
prominently in traditional approaches by economists. With a few exceptions,
macroeconomic analyses of development view income per capita, rather than
fiscal capacity 11


policy-supporting institutions of the state, as the main outcome to be explained.
Consider the two measures of state capacity illustrated in Figures 1.3–1.5.
When it comes to fiscal capacity, theories of taxation—be it in public finance
or political economics—emphasize constraints on the government’s ability to
impose a certain tax rate on a certain tax base. But these are generally incentive
constraints, tied to asymmetric information or political forces, rather than
constraints owing to lack of an administrative infrastructure. As for legal
capacity, the government’s capability to enforce contracts or protect investors
is almost universally assumed, rather than analyzed, in contract theory or
finance. To abstract in this way from the hurdles for policymaking raised by the
extractive and productive capacities of government seems unwarranted in view
of the history of today’s rich countries and the reality of today’s poor countries.
Existing Research by Historians The lack of attention by economists stands
in stark contrast to the view taken by many political and economic historians
who see the state’s capacity to raise revenue as an important phenomenon in
itself. Moreover, historians link this capacity to a thirst for military success and
regard it as a key factor behind the successful development of nation states [see,
e.g., Brewer (1989), Hintze (1906), or Tilly (1975, 1985)]. As famously stated,
“war made the state and the state made war” (Tilly, 1975, p. 42).
In line with the core thesis, tax systems in countries such as the United States,
the United Kingdom, and Sweden have indeed been reformed and expanded
in connection with actual or latent external conflicts. Political scientists such
as Migdal (1988) have emphasized that one of the major problems of devel
oping countries is that their states are often too weak and lack the capacity
to raise revenue and govern effectively. However, historians have not really
systematically explored the links between the fiscal (extractive) capacity and
legal (productive) capacity of the state, although Strayer (1970) does stress the
building of fiscal and judicial institutions in the early development of European
states.
Basic Theoretical Approach One cornerstone of our framework is to distin
guish between policymaking and institution building. In particular, the capacity
of the state is built up over time, and current capacity constrains the policies
pursued by the current incumbent government. For example, today’s ability to
levy an income tax is constrained by the existing fiscal capacity of the state,
e.g., the administrative capacity to monitor and enforce tax payments and the
12 chapter one: development clusters


Common vs. redistributive interests
Cohesiveness of political institutions
Political stability
Fiscal capacity Income
per capita
Resource (or aid) independence
Figure 1.6 Scope of Chapter 2.
institutions necessary to implement income-tax withholding by firms. Another
cornerstone of our framework is to consider state building as the outcome of
purposeful and forward-looking decisions by successive incumbents. Specifi
cally, we model decisions about future state capacity as an explicit investment
problem. In this problem, incumbents weigh the present costs of investing
against uncertain future expected benefits.
Investments in Fiscal Capacity Chapter 2 lays down the very first building
block in our theoretical framework by formulating the simplest possible model
by which to analyze state building. The flowchart in Figure 1.6 is a stylized
illustration of the analysis in Chapter 2. The fonts in the chart as well as in
the flowcharts to follow have specific meanings. Thus, we use bold italics for
those outcomes that are endogenous in the analysis, italics for those that are
temporarily taken as given but will eventually be made endogenous, and a
regular font for those outcomes that are taken as given throughout the book. As
Figure 1.6 illustrates, most political and economic factors are taken as given in
Chapter 2, where they are represented by exogenous parameters; but when we
generalize the analysis in later chapters, several of these parameters are turned
into endogenous variables.
The simplest version of our core model has two symmetric groups, two
time periods, and a single form of state capacity. In each period, a government
representing one of the groups sets a tax rate on a given level of income. The
revenue can be used for various forms of spending, although existing political
institutions constrain how much money can be transferred to the incumbent’s
fiscal capacity 13


own group at the expense of the opposition group. At a cost, the period-1
incumbent government can invest in fiscal capacity that becomes available in the
second period. The survival of the incumbent until the next period is uncertain,
but exogenous, as are the future uses of government revenue. We analyze how
given economic and political factors affect the motives to invest.
Three Possible States Depending on its particular constellation of parameter
values, a particular country in a particular time period can end up in any of
three possible states. We call the first possible outcome a common-interest state.
Here, future government revenue is mainly expected to be used in the common
interest, e.g., on defense against the threat of external conflict. In common
interest states, any incumbent makes considerable investments in fiscal capacity.
The second possibility is a redistributive state. In such states, government
revenue is predominantly used for redistribution with the incumbent being
more or less constrained by political institutions. Incumbents still invest in fiscal
capacity, as there is enough political stability.
Finally, we may have a weak state, in which case government revenue is also
used for redistribution, but political institutions are noncohesive and political
instability is high. Under these circumstances, no incumbent invests in the fiscal
powers of the state.
A simple regression analysis shows that cross-country correlations in the
data are consistent with some of the basic theoretical predictions of the core
model.
Extensions of the Basic Framework Chapter 2 also shows how our core model
can be given microeconomic underpinnings. Moreover, it shows how one can
relax a number of the stark assumptions underlying the basic framework: only
two periods, no economic distortions by taxation, linear functional forms, only
one good, no income inequality, equally sized groups, the absence of political
polarization, and so on. In each of these extensions, we show how the core
model is altered, what the alterations mean for the analysis of investments in
fiscal capacity, and the principal additional insights obtained.
1.4 Legal Capacity
In Chapter 3, we begin our successive extension of the core model formulated
in Chapter 2. In particular, we introduce a second dimension of policy and state
14 chapter one: development clusters


capacity, namely market-supporting regulation and the constraints imposed by
legal capacity. This extension serves two useful purposes. It allows us to study
the relationship between the two aspects of state building. It also serves to
endogenize income, as better market support helps raise private incomes. The
chapter presents alternative microeconomic foundations for the reduced-form
model that we use in later chapters. One of these microfoundations emphasizes
imperfect contracting opportunities in the capital market and the other stresses
imperfect protection of private property rights against predation by other
private agents or government bureaucrats. Chapter 3 also demonstrates a way
to introduce private capital accumulation into our model on top of government
investments in the state.
Complementarities in State Capacity An immediate result in Chapter 3 is that
fiscal and legal capacity tend to be complements. In other words, investments
in one aspect of the state reinforce the motives to invest in the other. If future
fiscal capacity is higher, additional fiscal benefits make it more advantageous
to invest in legal capacity to expand market incomes and the prospective tax
base. Analogously, if future legal capacity is higher, it makes market incomes
and tax bases higher, which, in turn, raise the motive to invest in fiscal capacity.
This complementarity has important implications. On the one hand, it
provides a clear hint as to why fiscal and legal capacity may be positively
correlated with one another, as well as with income, as they are in Figure 1.3.
On the other hand, it suggests that many determinants of state capacity should
be common, i.e., factors that raise fiscal capacity should be expected to raise
legal capacity as well and vice versa.
Which major determinants does the approach in Chapters 2 and 3 identify?
A precise statement of the results must await our formal analysis. But it is useful
to preview some of the main predictions of the theory, the intuition behind these
predictions, and some of the correlations we find in the data. Figure 1.7 gives
a hint of the different determinants we consider. Note that income is in bold
italics rather than italics in this flowchart to illustrate the broader scope of the
analysis compared to Chapter 2.
The Use of Public Revenue If additional tax revenue is expected to be spent in
the common interest of both groups, say on classic public goods rather than on
redistribution, then incumbents from any group are happy to build additional
fiscal capacity. This prediction is clearly in tune with the argument put forward
legal capacity 15


Common vs. redistributive interests
Cohesiveness of political institutions
Political stability
Fiscal capacity
Legal capacity Income
per capita
Resource (or aid) independence
Figure 1.7 Scope of Chapter 3.
by the writers on economic and political history. By complementarity, however,
we get an auxiliary prediction: incumbents would also have stronger incentives
to build more market-supporting legal capacity, as higher tax rates can then be
imposed on a higher tax base.
War as a Measure of Common Interests Are the data consistent with this basic
idea? Consider defense, the classic example of a public good, as an instance
of common-interest spending. Assume that a high incidence of actual external
conflict in the past proxies well for a high perceived risk of conflict. Then, we
can crudely gauge the past demand for public goods by the historical prevalence
of war. The theory identifies the past demand for public goods as a positive
determinant of past investments in legal and fiscal capacity and therefore as a
positive determinant of the stock of state capacity we observe today. For each
country where the data exist, we use the Correlates of War data set to compute
the historical prevalence of war as the share of years in external war since 1816
or the year of independence, whichever occurs later, until the year 2000.
Of course, by taking past wars as given, this procedure does not address
the fact that wars reflect the joint interactions between two (or among many)
countries. Addressing this properly would require analyzing at least two coun
tries and the joint determination of state capacities and the risk of war. Such an
approach would certainly be natural and interesting, but is beyond the scope
of the present book.
Let us correlate past wars with the two measures of fiscal and legal capacity
in Figures 1.3 to 1.5. We show in Chapters 2 and 3 that alternative measures
16 chapter one: development clusters


yield similar results. Specifically, we compute the partial correlations between
state capacities and past prevalence of war, while holding constant other deter
minants of state capacity such as ethnic homogeneity, political institutions, and
political stability, as well as legal origins (Chapters 2 and 3 give further details
on the data and the computation of the partial correlations.)
Figure 1.8 shows that the partial correlations are consistent with the pre
diction of the theory: a larger incidence of war in the past is indeed associated
20
10
0
–10
–20
–.05 0 .05 .1 .15 Share of Years in External War
External War and Fiscal Capacity
Tax Share of GDP
.2
0
–.2
–.4
–.05 0 .05 .1 .15 Share of Years in External War
External War and Legal Capacity
Property-Rights Protection Index
Figure 1.8 State capacity and external war.
legal capacity 17


with higher state capacity today.5 The upper panel is for fiscal capacity, plotting
the overall tax share against the share of years in war.6 The slope is positive
with a magnitude such that a state with 20% more of its history in wartime
has a higher tax take in the present by 10% of GDP. The lower panel is for
legal capacity, plotting the index of property-rights protection against time in
war. Again, the slope is positive, and although the magnitude of this index is
harder to interpret directly, we see that part of its variation is associated with
variation in wartime experience. This preliminary evidence is thus consistent
with the extended Hintze-Tilly hypothesis.
Ethnic Homogeneity In Chapters 2 and 3, we also consider another aspect that
is likely to tilt a society’s spending patterns more in the direction of public goods
than redistribution, namely an absence of polarization or heterogeneity in the
demand for public goods among different groups. When this aspect is measured
by the degree of ethnic homogeneity in the population, we find a strong partial
correlation in the data between ethnic homogeneity and both forms of state
capacity.
This argument takes the degree of ethnic or cultural homogeneity as given.
An interesting extension, which we will not pursue in this book, would be
to explicitly consider the motives for the state to cultivate such homogeneity.
Indeed, it is a common argument among scholars of nationalism that the relative
ethnic and cultural homogeneity in Europe is, partly, the result of various
mechanisms used by European states to socialize their citizens so as to increase
the military power of the state. See Posen (1993) for a succinct statement of
this view and a supportive case study of the historical rivalry between France
and Germany.
Political Institutions A second determinant isolated by the theory is the struc
ture or—as we say—the cohesiveness of political institutions. In some countries,
incumbent groups are constrained to treat opposition groups quite well, by
5. There are two outliers in the sample: England and France with more than 40% of their history in wartime. To get nicer pictures, Figure 1.8 shows the partial correlations with state capacity when England and France are excluded from the sample, even though these countries have little effect on the underlying estimates. 6. Both the vertical and the horizontal axes include negative as well as positive numbers. This is because we hold other determinants of the tax share as well as the share of years in wartime constant. When partialing out the effects of these determinants, we obtain residuals of each variable, which are centered at zero.
18 chapter one: development clusters


institutions such as checks and balances on the executive or election systems
that grant a relatively large representation for electoral losers. Such political
institutions will tend to promote common-interest rather than redistributive
spending, whichever group holds power. This, in turn, ensures current incum
bents that the state will not be used against their own interests in the future,
which promotes investment in the state. Suppose now that we take cohesive
ness of political institutions as given, as we do until Chapter 7. Then, a high
incidence of cohesive political institutions in the past should be correlated with
high investments in both forms of state capacity in the past. As a result, we
should observe high levels of legal and fiscal capacity today.
Once again, let us look at the broad patterns in the data. We measure the
institutional constraints in the theory by the executive constraints variable in
the Polity IV data set (alternative measures of political institutions give similar
results in Chapters 2 and 3). Specifically, for each country, we compute its
average score on this variable in between 1800 (or the year of independence) and
2000. The original variable is coded on a scale from 1 to 7, but we normalize the
average score for each country to lie between 0 and 1. Figure 1.9 plots the partial
correlations, computed in the same way as for Figure 1.8, between cohesive
political institutions in the past and current fiscal capacity (upper graph) and
legal capacity (lower graph), respectively.
Evidently, the correlations with both types of state capacity are strong and
positive. The slope of the regression line in the upper graph indicates that a
country with average executive constraints one standard deviation (about 0.31)
higher than another has about 5% of GDP higher taxes today. Clearly, the
partial correlation between legal capacity and executive constraints displayed
in the lower panel is also positive and even stronger than the correlation with
fiscal capacity.
Political Stability Another determinant of state capacity in Figure 1.7 is polit
ical stability. If common interests are weak and political institutions are non
cohesive, each incumbent will tend to devote most of the state’s revenue to
redistribution in favor of her own group. If instability is high, so that a cur
rent incumbent faces a high probability of replacement, investments in fiscal
capacity may stop altogether, as such investments may backfire in the future
by enabling more redistribution away from the incumbent’s own group. As we
will see in Chapters 2 and 3, empirical measures of political stability do in fact
covary positively with alternative representations of fiscal and legal capacity.
legal capacity 19


30
20
10
0
–10
–20
Executive Constraints and Fiscal Capacity
Tax Share of GDP
–.5 0 .5 Average Executive Constraints
.2
0
–.2
–.4
Executive Constraints and Legal Capacity
Property-Rights Protection Index
–.5 0 .5 Average Executive Constraints
Figure 1.9 State capacity and executive constraints.
However, in many poor countries—especially those with weak or fragile
states—instability is intimately associated with political violence, one of the
topics to be considered later in the book. We thus return to political instability
later.
Economic Structure In addition to these political determinants of state capacity,
Figure 1.7 also highlights some economic determinants. One is economic struc
ture. If we hold constant the level of income, the relative shares of resource rents,
20 chapter one: development clusters


or (cash) aid, in income become important. To the extent that such resource
flows accrue directly to the government, a higher dependence on resources or
aid means that market incomes are smaller. The smaller tax base diminishes
the motives to invest in market-supporting legal capacity. By complementarity,
this also makes investments in fiscal capacity less attractive. Clearly, this sim
ple argument may provide an important clue as to why resource-dependent or
aid-dependent countries in Africa or parts of Asia may have weaker incentives
to build their states. This observation is similar to a standard argument about
obstacles to development in so-called rentier states [see, e.g., Mahdavy (1970)
for an early contribution with an application to oil revenue in Iran].
Income per Capita If we hold economic structure constant, a higher level
of income per capita means a higher level of market income, which raises
the incentives to invest in both sides of the state. Low income can thus serve
to diminish the investments in fiscal and legal capacity. That argument takes
income as given, however, and it is very likely that we also have feedback effects
in the other direction. In particular, low legal capacity to support markets will
keep income low, ceteris paribus. We show how such an effect arises in the
microfounded versions of the model.
In Chapter 3, we also discuss how low fiscal capacity may cause low income.
The mechanism for this is more subtle: without the capability for redistribution
via taxes and transfers, incumbents may try to redistribute by seeking rents for
their groups. Rent seeking pursued via measures such as inefficient regulation
creates production distortions that feed on to low incomes. We show that this
is not only a logical possibility, but may well be a plausible political equilibrium
when fiscal capacity is endogenously determined. The chapter explains how we
can interpret this result as a positive analog to the Diamond-Mirrlees normative
theory of production efficiency in the context of optimal taxation.
Correlations between state capacity and income such as those in Figure 1.3
may thus reflect causal links in both directions. Figure 1.7 illustrates such
prospective two-way feedback effects. Moreover, the existence of positive feed
back effects can create virtuous or vicious circles that may help produce clusters
of strong state capacities in strong economies or weak state capacities in weak
economies.
State-Capacity Traps We would expect states that lack sufficient state capacity
to acquire it by investing in economic institutions to raise taxes and support
legal capacity 21


markets. Our analysis gives insights into two main reasons why this may not
be the case.
In a weak state, there is no incentive to invest in fiscal capacity because
institutions are not cohesive. If a country ends up in such a fiscal-capacity trap,
this trap will seriously limit the ability of the state to provide public goods.
We also study predatory states. These arise when poor governance allows a
narrow elite to engage in predatory behavior that extracts transfers from private
producers. Such predation is typically related to high levels of corruption, but
may also include other forms of extralegal predation. Poor governance means
that the state is sanctioning and reinforcing such behavior by not extending
legal protection to producers. Such states end up in a legal-capacity trap with
no incentive to create effective legal systems so as to establish the rule of law.
1.5 Political Violence
Our analysis in Chapters 2 and 3 suggests that the risk of external violence can
promote state building by enhancing common interests relative to redistributive
interests across different groups in society. The risk of internal political violence
appears to be very different. Conditions that sow the seeds for internal violence
are hardly a sign of common interests but rather of extreme redistributive
struggles across groups. It is thus quite intuitive to suppose that the risks
of internal violence might drive the motives for state building in a different
direction compared to the risks of external violence. Consistent with that
intuition, we have already seen that countries where civil wars are common
tend to have low levels of state capacity (recall Figure 1.4). Chapters 4 and 5
take a closer look at this aspect of development clusters. We now preview some
of that analysis.
Some Basic Facts Sadly, civil war—the armed struggle between the government
and some insurgent group—has been quite a common phenomenon in the
last 60 years. According to the ACD, more than 10% of all country-years
in the world since 1950 have been associated with civil war. In addition to
such two-sided violence, many governments try to enhance their probability of
remaining in office by engaging in violent acts against the population without
civil war breaking out; we refer to this kind of one-sided violence as repression.
According to the Banks (2005) data set, 8% of all country-years since 1950
22 chapter one: development clusters


have been associated with repression in the stark form of purges (elimination
of political opponents) in the absence of civil war (see Chapter 4 for more details
on the data).
The upper and lower panels on the left of Figure 1.10 show the worldwide
prevalence of civil war and repression over time, plotting the share of countries
with civil war or repression by year. Clearly, civil war was on the rise until
a turnaround at the end of the Cold War, whereas repression (without civil
war) was on the decline during the same time period. The panels on the right
of the figure plot the prevalence of violence by country against per capita
income (measured in 1980). Civil war is mostly a poor-country feature, whereas
repression has its main mass a bit higher up in the world income distribution.
Interestingly, both sets of graphs give a clear sense of substitutability between
these two forms of political violence.
Existing Research by Economists and Political Scientists Not surprisingly, many
political scientists and some economists have studied the economic and political
determinants of civil war. This research is quite fragmented, however, at least
from our perspective of understanding the development clusters we observe in
the data. Existing theoretical work on conflicts and civil war has little room for
institutions, including state capacities, and is not particularly well connected to
the data. Existing empirical work on civil war and repression, on the other hand,
has weak connections to theory so some of its results are not easy to interpret.
Virtually all empirical research takes income as given, even though violence
and income may well have similar determinants; e.g., there are two separate
literatures on the “resource curse,” one claiming that resource dependence may
cause low income and growth and the other arguing that resource dependence
may cause civil war. Finally, there are separate literatures on civil war and
repression, even though both phenomena seem to reflect the fact that political
institutions fail to resolve conflicting interests in a peaceful way.
Our approach to analyzing political violence has two steps. First, we extend
our core model to incorporate the possibility of both repression and civil
war and make predictions about how these forms of violence are related to
the major determinants of investments in state capacity. This extended core
model effectively endogenizes one of the determinants of state building, namely
political stability. As a second step, we jointly analyze political violence and
state building in that richer framework.
political violence 23


.2
.15
.1
.05
0
Prevalence of Civil War over Time
Prevalence of Civil War
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Year
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
Prevalence of Civil War over Countries
Prevalence of Civil War
5 6 7 8 9 10
Log GDP per capita
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
Prevalence of Repression over Time
Prevalence of Repression
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Year
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
Prevalence of Repression over Countries
Prevalence of Repression
5 6 7 8 9 10
Log GDP per capita
Figure 1.10 Prevalence of civil war and repression.


Basic Theoretical Approach Thus we start out in Chapter 4 with the same
two-group, two-period model as in Chapter 3, although we take state-capacity
investments and therefore income per capita as given. On the other hand,
we allow both groups to invest in violence. The opposition group can invest
in armed forces in period 1, so as to try and take power in period 2. The
incumbent group can also invest in armed forces to raise its probability of
remaining in power. Absent conscription, soldiers are hired at prevailing wages:
the opposition has to raise the necessary resources from its own group, whereas
the incumbent uses revenue from the public purse. Both groups then face a
trade-off: the costs of investing in violence must be weighed against a higher
probability of holding power and controlling the opportunity to redistribute in
the group’s favor. In this simple setting, we can analyze two central questions.
(1) When do we observe violence rather than peace, and if so which type of
violence? (2) Which economic, political, and institutional variables determine
one-sided (repression) and two-sided (civil war) violence?
Three Possible Violence States Given the “conflict technology” that we posit,
both groups’ propensity to invest in violence is increasing in a common latent
variable, namely the ratio of expected marginal benefits to the marginal cost
of investment. We show that three conflict outcomes are possible and that
these outcomes are ordered in the latent variable. When the ratio of expected
benefits to cost is low, no group finds it worthwhile to invest in violence and
we observe a peaceful outcome. As this ratio becomes somewhat higher, the
incumbent but not the opposition takes to violence, and we observe repression;
the incumbent’s violence threshold is lower than the opposition’s threshold
because we assume that the incumbent has an advantage in terms of lower
costs or higher effectiveness of fighting. At high benefit-cost ratios, finally, both
groups invest in violence and we observe civil war.
Determinants of Political Violence What are the roots of repression and civil
war that this simple theory identifies? A first and simple insight is that the three
violence outcomes are ordered in the same latent variable. This means that their
determinants should be common and strongly suggests that the research on
repression and civil war ought to be integrated. Another set of results, of more
direct relevance for development clusters, follows when we relate the likelihood
of conflicts to the determinants of state capacity studied in Chapters 2 and 3.
political violence 25


Common vs. redistributive interests
Cohesiveness of political institutions Civil war
Repression Income
per capita
Resource or (cash) aid independence
Figure 1.11 Scope of Chapter 4.
To explain the results, we have to explore the expected marginal benefits and
costs of investments in violence in more detail. Given that a larger investment
in violence of any group raises its probability of holding power and setting
policy, the marginal benefit is the share a winner can expect to grab of the
total expected redistributive pie, i.e., expected future revenue minus spending
on public goods. The marginal cost is simply the real wage paid to the soldiers.
Consider Figure 1.11, where the determinants of state capacity are listed
as prospective determinants of violence. When common interests are low, it is
expected that less of future revenue will be spent on public goods, which raises
the expected benefit of investing in violence to boost the probability of holding
office. When political institutions are noncohesive, the winner gets a larger
share of any redistribution, which also raises the expected benefit of fighting.
A higher level of expected resource rents or cash aid also raises the expected
benefit of fighting, as this increases the available redistributive pie. Finally, a
lower level of income per capita diminishes the real wage, which cuts the cost
of investing in violence. Recalling the discussion around Figure 1.7, we reach a
striking conclusion: all factors that diminish the incumbent’s motives to invest
in the state tend to raise the two groups’ motives to invest in violence. To what
extent these stronger motives will actually translate into realized repression
or civil war depends on the levels of the incumbent’s and the opposition’s
violence thresholds. These, in turn, reflect factors such as the incumbent’s and
the opposition’s relative costs of raising resources for violence and their relative
capabilities in fighting.
26 chapter one: development clusters


Extensions of the Basic Framework Chapter 4 also looks at a few extensions
of the political-violence framework. One of these is to reintroduce political
heterogeneity or polarization in the same way as in one of the extensions
considered in Chapter 2. Generally, a higher degree of heterogeneity diminishes
the common interests in society, which raises the gain to holding power, and
this, in turn, boosts the incentives for both groups to invest in violence. This
extension provides a way to study the greed and grievance motives for conflict
[see Collier and Hoeffler (2004)] in the same analytical setting.
Another extension picks up the predation theme from one of the extensions
in Chapter 3. If the investments in violence by the incumbent group are made
by a small elite that is also the main benefactor of predation by the state, there
are additional motives for staying in power. As a result, the society’s propensity
for repression as well as civil war goes up, and this effect is stronger the less
institutions constrain the ruling elite from infringements on other citizens.
Empirical Support In the remainder of Chapter 4, we show how one may
go from theoretical predictions to serious empirical testing. The first step
uses the basic model, together with assumptions about what variables and
parameters are observable and unobservable in the data, to derive a set of
testable predictions. The second step finds credible sources of exogenous time
variation in the determinants suggested by the theory. Using the occurrence
of natural disasters for shocks to real wages and aid flows and revolving
memberships on the U.N. Security Council for shocks to aid flows, we find
quite strong econometric support for the model predictions. The exogenous
shocks affect the likelihood of observing government repression as well as civil
war within each country. In particular, we find that exogenous hikes in aid
significantly raise the probability of both types of conflict.
1.6 State Spaces
Having used essentially the same core model to study the investments in fiscal
and legal capacity in Chapter 3 and investments in political violence in Chap
ter 4, the next step is to put these pieces together. We do this in Chapter 5,
where the state-capacity investment problem is revisited with political stability
being endogenously determined by the investments in violence. The flowchart
in Figure 1.12 illustrates this analysis schematically.
state spaces 27


Common vs. redistributive interests
Cohesiveness of political institutions
Legal capacity Income
per capita
Fiscal capacity
Repression
Civil war
Resource or (cash) aid independence
Figure 1.12 Scope of Chapter 5.
State Capacity and Political Violence The analysis in Chapter 5 suggests three
channels whereby state capacity and political violence become related. First, as
we have just seen, a set of common variables drives both of these outcomes,
although in opposite directions. Second, there is a magnification effect: other
factors that raise the risk of internal conflict may raise the perceived political
instability for the incumbent, something that generally diminishes the motives
to build strong institutions. Third, the framework entails feedback effects,
whereby investments in state capacity alter the likelihood of conflict—these
can go in either direction.
Based on these insights, we expect state capacity and political violence to
become negatively correlated. Figure 1.4 suggested that the raw data are indeed
consistent with this expectation. Figure 1.13 goes one step further by plotting
the partial correlations (computed as in Figures 1.8 and 1.9) between the preva
lence of civil war from 1950 to 2000 and fiscal or legal capacity, respectively.
Whereas the corresponding correlations with external war (reproduced in the
upper panels of the figure) are positive, the correlations with civil war (in the
lower panels) are indeed negative. But there is certainly no claim of causal
ity here. Via the three channels mentioned earlier, state capacity and internal
violence are very much jointly determined.
28 chapter one: development clusters


20
10
0
–10
–20
–.05 0 .05 .1 .15
Share of Years in External War
External War and Fiscal Capacity
Tax Share of GDP
.2
0
–.2
–.4
–.05 0 .05 .1 .15
Share of Years in External War
External War and Legal Capacity
Property-Rights Protection Index
Share of Years in Civil War
Civil War and Fiscal Capacity
–.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
20
10
0
–10
–20
Tax Share of GDP
.2
0
–.2
–.4
Share of Years in Civil War
Civil War and Legal Capacity
Property-Rights Protection Index
–.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Figure 1.13 State capacity and external and civil war.


Peace
Repression
Civil War
Weak Redistributive Common Interest
Figure 1.14 Our state space.
Chapter 5 also reintroduces private capital formation into the analysis,
drawing on one of the microfounded extensions in Chapter 3. This extension
shows how a higher risk of civil war may deter private investments. Since
lower investments mean lower income, this illustrates yet another mechanism
whereby low income and the incidence of conflict may become linked to one
another.
The Bigger Picture Another way of expressing the results from our theoretical
analysis in Chapter 5 is laid out in Figure 1.14. This matrix illustrates nine pos
sible outcomes, combining our three investment states—weak, redistributive,
and common-interest—with the three violence states—peace, repression, and
civil war.
In Chapter 5, we show how the location in this state-space matrix for
a particular country at a particular time can be predicted by its parameter
values in our comprehensive core model. A precise description of these results
must await the formal analysis to follow. However, the verbal discussion in
our present overview gives a strong hint that we should expect a certain
concentration of outcomes along the diagonal of the matrix. In particular,
countries with high demands for public goods and cohesive political institutions
will find themselves in the upper-right corner associated with high state capacity
and the absence of political violence. A country without those preconditions is
a weak or redistributive state and suffers from one of the two forms of political
violence, but its exact location in the matrix depends on its particular parameter
constellation.
Once we have filled out the matrix in Figure 1.14, we refer to the results as
an Anna Karenina principle of development, based on the first sentence of Leo
Tolstoy’s 1870s novel: “All prosperous countries resemble each other; every
nonprosperous country is nonprosperous in its own way.”
30 chapter one: development clusters


1.7 Development Assistance
Whether foreign aid helps or hurts development or whether it all depends has
been a subject of constant discussion over the last few decades in the academic
community as well as the development community. Some optimists have argued
that aid can promote prosperity, whereas others have contended that it can even
have a pernicious effect on state building and conflict.
Different Types of Interventions in Different Types of States In Chapter 6, we
put our modeling machinery to work in analyzing that specific question. We
show how our analytical framework can be used to analyze different types of
foreign interventions: cash aid, project aid, technical assistance, peace keeping,
or postconflict resolution. Figure 1.15 illustrates the scope of this analysis. Our
framework allows us to discuss the equilibrium responses to different foreign
interventions of policy, state-building, conflict, and—ultimately—welfare.
Having filled in the matrix in Figure 1.14, we discuss how the response
to development assistance is affected by the preconditions. Fragile states
those that have poor state effectiveness and are prone to political violence—are
particularly complex. But our modeling framework can, at least, pose these
dilemmas in a sharp way. Although we do not reach any definitive conclusions,
we believe that our approach advances the discussion beyond the current state
of the art.
Common vs. redistributive interests
Development assistance
Cohesiveness of political institutions
Legal capacity Income
per capita
Fiscal capacity
Repression
Civil war
Resource or (cash) aid independence
Figure 1.15 Scope of Chapter 6.
development assistance 31


Symptoms versus Determinants Ongoing discussions about assistance to weak
states are not founded in any underlying theory, which explains why they tend
to mix up symptoms and determinants. For example, fragile-state indexes fre
quently include low income per capita as a criterion. Although low income may
certainly strengthen the motives to invest in violence ceteris paribus, it is only an
intermediate factor. Our approach implies that the fundamental determinants
of fragile states are such things as the strength of common interests in society,
the structure of political institutions, the degree of resource or aid dependence,
or the technologies for organizing and conducting violence. Other phenomena
such as civil war, repression, low spending on public goods, low taxation, weak
enforcement of property rights, and corruption are all symptoms.
The Bauer Paradox Overall, Chapter 6 shows how the likely effects of for
eign intervention depend on the type of aid, as well as the situation of the
receiving country. One of our overall conclusions resonates with the somewhat
pessimistic paradox suggested by Peter Bauer—that aid is most likely to work
well in countries that do not really need very much aid anyway. Our approach
can be seen to fuel either aid pessimism or optimism. The possibility that aid can
have negative consequences that reduce its impact may fuel a pessimistic view,
especially as such responses are poorly understood from an empirical point of
view. However, it is also clear that designing interventions well can make aid
more effective.
1.8 Political Reform
The core model in our book suggests that cohesiveness of political institutions
is an important determinant of state capacity as well as of political violence,
and an important condition for the effect of development assistance. Of course,
cohesiveness is a theoretical concept without an immediate real-world counter
part. In Chapter 7, we discuss how one can map theory into reality. In general,
we expect democracies to be more cohesive than autocracies; parliamentary
forms of government to be more cohesive than presidential forms of govern
ment; and proportional electoral systems to be more cohesive than majoritarian
electoral systems. However, federal governments may or may not be more cohe
sive than unitary governments.
As noted earlier, our gradual approach in this book takes the cohesiveness
of political institutions as given up to Chapter 6. Given the importance of
32 chapter one: development clusters


Common vs. redistributive interests
Political stability
Legal capacity Income
per capita
Fiscal capacity
Cohesiveness of political institutions
Resource or (cash) aid independence
Figure 1.16 Scope of Chapter 7.
political institutions in our argument and the fact that these institutions are
also subject to change over time, Chapter 7 makes a start on the difficult task of
endogenizing the choice of institutions. We discuss normative as well as positive
models of political reform along the lines suggested by Figure 1.16.
Different Horizons We first derive a normative benchmark result when institu
tions are designed once and for all at a constitutional convention behind a veil
of ignorance. In this case, the conveners will always create cohesive political
institutions because such institutional arrangements provide the best incentives
for creating state capacity.
We then look at the choices for period 2 made by the period-1 incumbent.
In this case, we show that choosing cohesive institutions requires a consider
able degree of competition for political power. This may shed some light on
political reforms in Europe in the decades around the turn of the nineteenth
century. Several countries with conservative or liberal governments—such as
Denmark, Sweden, and the Netherlands—followed up universal suffrage with
reforms toward full parliamentary democracy and/or proportional represen
tation elections, as the labor movement grew stronger in pace with ongoing
industrialization and the landed and industrial elites were too divided to work
toward a common purpose.
We also obtain the flipside of this result: reform toward less consensual
institutions becomes more likely if the incumbent faces little competition for
power. This result provides a way of thinking about the decade after indepen
dence in Africa. Incumbent rulers in several African countries—such as Nigeria,
political reform 33


Sudan, and Uganda—started their postcolonial era with European-style parlia
mentary regimes. First-generation incumbents, who did not face a strong threat
of replacement, quickly repealed those regimes in favor of presidential regimes
without too many checks and balances.
Micropolitical Foundations In Chapter 7 we discuss reform in a macro
political setting. But we also attempt to build micropolitical foundations for
the approach. In doing so, we study some institutional details in the process
whereby the policymakers are appointed and policy compromises are negoti
ated. This provides insights into what specific features of the political process
determine the cohesiveness of institutions and the peaceful rate of political
turnover.
We show that a latent possibility of violence introduces a trade-off in the
building of cohesive political institutions. Such institutions are more desirable
for incumbents in that they reduce the costly use of violence. However, since
violence also creates the possibility of entrenchment in power, this force will
tend to reduce incentives for creating cohesive institutions.
Our macro analysis of incumbent behavior neglects features that create
inertia in the choice of institutions. In Chapter 7, however, we show that
formal supermajority requirements will tend to make cohesive institutions more
sustainable. We also discuss the possible role of trust in supporting cohesiveness.
Finally, we turn to a different dimension of political institutions, introduced
in our extension in Chapter 3 on corruption and predation. This concerns the
possibility that an incumbent can improve governance to make predation more
difficult. As in the case of cohesive institutions, a low probability of turnover
makes improvements in governance less likely. But a new factor also plays a
very important role: entrenched elites, which make up only a small fraction of
the population, will typically resist such governance reform as it threatens their
rents from holding power.
1.9 Main Themes
In the preceding sections we sketched the contents of the book, chapter by
chapter. Here, we describe some of the main themes that run through the book
in parallel as the full story unfolds. This description serves as a reading guide
to those interested in particular aspects of our analysis.
34 chapter one: development clusters


The Core Model Many of our ideas are presented through the lens of the com
prehensive symmetric two-group, two-period model, the gradual development
of which we have just described. The perspective here is macroeconomic and
macropolitical, meaning that most of the analysis focuses on the investment
decisions made by the incumbent (in state capacities and political violence) and
opposition groups (in political violence), whereas the result of all other eco
nomic and political behavior is represented in reduced form.7 This model and
its results are contained in the first sections of Chapters 2 through 7, which all
carry a title involving “the Core Model.”
The reader who is interested in the gist of our theoretical argument can follow
the gradual building and extension of this core model by reading these sections
in sequence. Microeconomic and micropolitical foundations for the behavioral
relations in the core model are discussed in the following section of each chapter,
generally under the title “Developing the Model.” These auxiliary sections also
contain various extensions, which relax or modify the assumptions underlying
the core model.
Polarization and Inequality In the core model, the main political actors are two
completely symmetric groups. This is very convenient for the formal analysis,
but of course the symmetry assumption is a gross oversimplification. In reality,
phenomena such as polarization, income inequality, and groups of different
sizes are parts of economic and political life. One subtheme of the book explores
the implications of these phenomena. In particular, they appear in Subsections
2.2.3–2.2.5, 3.2.2, and 4.2. At the risk of oversimplifying, the general result we
find is that greater polarization and more income inequality tend to diminish
the motives for investments in the state, but boost the motives for investing in
political violence.
The Predatory State Many developing countries are governed by small and,
often, strongly entrenched elites. This causes tensions not only among groups,
but also within groups, between elites and rank-and-file members. Such tensions
constitute an important theme that spans a great deal of recent research on
development, in economics as well as in political science. We pick this up in
some of our extensions of the core model, notably in Sections 3.2.4, 4.2.4, 5.4,
and 7.2.6. Our general findings on this theme underscore the possibility of a
7. For a seminal macropolitical analysis of government applied to stabilization policy, see Lindbeck (1976).
main themes 35


predatory state that raises higher hurdles for investments in the state, creates
stronger motives for investing in violence, and poses additional obstacles for
welfare-enhancing political reform.
Resource and Aid Dependence Resource dependence and aid dependence are
important issues in the research community as well as the development commu
nity. In particular, the notion of the “resource curse” appears in one literature to
label the hypothesis that an abundance of natural resources (or aid) may actu
ally serve to reduce income. But it also appears in another, separate, literature to
label the hypothesis that resource abundance may promote violence. Resource
dependence appears throughout the book, most notably in the core model as
it is developed in Chapters 2 through 5, culminating in our finding—described
in Section 5.2—that both hypotheses may come out of a single comprehen
sive model. Chapters 4 and 6 focus on the effects of development assistance,
theoretically as well as empirically.
Private Accumulation To emphasize the most novel parts of the analysis, our
modeling generally zooms in on the accumulation decisions by incumbent gov
ernments and abstracts from private accumulation of physical capital, human
capital, and productive knowledge. This simplification is not only unrealistic,
but misses the possibility of making contact with traditional growth theory.
For these reasons, we devote some microfounded extensions to reintroducing
private capital accumulation. In particular, Section 3.2.3 considers the inter
actions between individual private investment and government investment in
state capacity and Section 5.2 considers the interactions between individual
private investment and the risk of conflict, given the collective investments in
violence. In both cases, private investments tend to magnify the effects pre
dicted by our simpler models, effectively adding a multiplier to the effects on
aggregate outcomes of interest.
Data Although we are trying to break new theoretical ground in much of
the book, we are also trying to stay closely connected to the data. Thus, the
introduction to each chapter includes some salient facts, typically displayed as
correlations or patterns in the raw data. Moreover, almost all the chapters end
by revisiting the data. Typically, each visit to the data takes the form of studying
some partial correlations in light of the predictions from the theory developed
in the chapter. But in Chapter 4, we take a longer tour into empirical territory,
deriving a more credible econometric strategy from our theory and applying it
to more serious empirical testing than in other chapters.
36 chapter one: development clusters


Notes on the Literature Throughout our journey, we try to acknowledge the
adventures of traveling companions, whose work is either prior or parallel to
our own. In some cases, we discuss this in situ at the appropriate point in the
text. But we try to not break the flow with literature reviews. Instead, we collect
a broader summary of themes and contributions in a short section at the end
of each chapter, called “Notes on the Literature.”
1.10 Final Remarks
Chapter 8 summarizes the main things we will have learned. Taking stock of
the findings is a bit premature at this early stage, however. Let us very briefly
preview some general answers, in the abstract, to the three questions about
development clusters that we posed at the beginning of this chapter.
1. What forces shape the building of different state capacities and why
do these capacities vary together? According to this book, the answer
lies in some common determinants and a crucial complementarity
between investments in different parts of the state. The book also
identifies conditions, investment traps, under which no motives for
state building exist.
2. What factors drive political violence in its different forms? Our answer
is that, to a significant extent, these factors are largely the same as
those factors, including income, that help determine state capacity.
3. What explains the clustering of state institutions, violence, and
income? The book says that the answer lies partly in common posi
tive determinants or lack thereof and partly in the two-way feedbacks
between income and state capacity and between income and violence.
In addition to an abstract theoretical discussion of the main messages of the
book, Chapter 8 also takes stock of our findings in a concrete empirical way.
Based on the main outcome variables emphasized in our theory, we define and
compute our own Pillars of Prosperity index for some 150 countries. Moreover,
using empirical counterparts to the theoretical determinants of state capacity
and political violence, we discuss how well one can predict the outcomes on
this index by a small set of socioeconomic and political variables. Comparing
actual and predicted outcomes for individual countries yields an interesting
final remarks 37


perspective on development clusters, but also suggests several shortcomings in
our theoretical framework.
Whatever the value of its findings, our book only takes a few steps toward
a fuller understanding of the observed clustering among income, institutions,
and violence. The final chapter ends by listing a number of issues where more
research might follow.
1.11 Notes on the Literature
Influential contemporary commentaries on government policy (national and
international) in developing countries include Collier (2007), Easterly (2006),
Sachs (2005), and Stern, Dethier, and Rogers (2005). The different perspectives
offered in these works serve as useful background reading to the debates
reflected in this book. Collier and Gunning (1999) and Sachs et al. (2004)
discuss the origins of Africa’s poor economic performance.
A long-standing debate concerns the proper role of the state in economic
development. Chenery (1975) nicely summarizes the discussions that shaped
development policy in the postwar period, identifying a set of important struc
tural features of developing economies where state intervention could, in prin
ciple, generate better economic performance. Bauer (1972) was a fervent critic
of this view and its implications for aid.
Myrdal (1968) saw the problem of weak institutions early on; the “soft
state”—facing a multidimensional problem with lacking legislation, weak
enforcement, collusion, and corruption—is indeed a recurring theme in his
Asian Drama. Bates (1981) offers a perceptive account of how government
failure lies at the heart of many policy problems in Africa. Nowadays, it is
commonplace to put politics at the heart of our understanding of development,
seeing economic and political development proceeding in step. Recent works on
development that put political economics at center stage include Acemoglu and
Robinson (2005), Bueno de Mesquita, Morrow, Siverson, and Smith (2003),
and North, Weingast, and Wallis (2009). Bockstette, Areendam, and Putterman
(2002), Chanda and Putterman (2004), and Putterman (2008), which link state
antiquity to contemporary economic performance with an emphasis on institu
tional factors, are also related works. A strong statement about the importance
of institutions for development can be found in Rodrik, Subramanian, and
Trebbi (2004).
38 chapter one: development clusters


State failure has become a central concept in discussions about development.
Collier (2008) focuses on the consequences of trying to introduce democracy
in poor countries. Bates (2008, 2009) discusses the problems encountered in
building effective states in Africa. As discussed at the beginning of the chapter,
an extensive policy literature deals with the problems of weak and failing states
[see ERD (2009), OECD (2010a), Rice and Patrick (2008), and USAID (2005)].
The economic-history literature has produced numerous explanations for
development patterns. A major concern has been to explain the rise in incomes
in Western Europe from the beginning of the nineteenth century. A series of
largely complementary explanations has emerged, which stresses the impor
tance of different factors. Thus, North and Thomas (1973) offer an explanation
based on institutions, Landes (1998) and Clark (2008) give greater weight to
cultural change, whereas Mokyr (1990) emphasizes the role of technology.
Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986) stress flexibility of market organization, as well
as the interplay between economics and politics.
Strayer (1970) is an important contribution to our understanding of the
central role played by fiscal and judicial institutions in the development of
European states in medieval times. Dincecco (2011) looks at weak and strong
states in historical perspective, and Ma (2010) provides an account of state
development in China based on incentives to build state capacities. Mann
(1986, 1993) is an influential account of sources of power and the development
of the state from a sociological perspective. Gellner (1983) is a classic reference
emphasizing the importance of nationalism in preceding state development.
As noted in the text, Posen (1993) argues that European states strategically
developed common nationalistic interests so as to facilitate warfare against rival
states.
Fiscal capacity and state building more generally and their relation to war
have constituted a major theme in the literature on economic and political his
tory, such as in the work of Brewer (1989), Hintze (1906), and Tilly (1985).
However, weak states were late to enter the academic economics literature. Ace
moglu (2005) develops a formal model, where rulers in weak states have short
time horizons and spend too little on productive public goods, which dimin
ishes their ability to raise future taxes, whereas rulers in strong states have blunt
accumulation incentives owing to their security of tenure. Besley and Persson
(2009b, 2010a) study fiscal and legal capacity building as a joint investment
problem and derive a general complementarity result. Acemoglu, Ticchi, and
Vindigni (2011) study the role of bureaucracies in creating (in)effective states.
notes on the literature 39


CHAPTER 2
Fiscal Capacity
The fiscal history of a people is above all an essential part of its general history. An enormous influence on the fate of nations emanates from the economic bleeding which the needs of the state necessitates, and from the use to which the results are put.
Joseph Schumpeter, The Crisis of the Tax State, 1918
Following on from the general overview in Chapter 1, we now begin our
presentation of an intellectual framework for understanding state capacity and
the forces that shape its creation and maintenance. In this chapter, we introduce
some of our principal ideas in a formal model, but with an exclusive focus on
building fiscal capacity. The crucial component in this approach is the idea that
fiscal capacity constitutes a capital investment, which makes it feasible to raise
more taxes in the future.
A government can choose levels of redistributive transfers and the provision
of public goods. The necessary revenue comes from an income tax, but the
level of taxation is constrained by fiscal capacity. In our core model, which
has only two time periods, the incumbent government in period 1 makes a
decision as to whether to increase fiscal capacity for period 2. Politics plays an
important role in the theory through two channels. Political institutions are a
key element in that they affect the use of tax revenue, in particular how much
of the available revenues an incumbent government can allocate to its own
group of supporters. Politics also enters via the process of political turnover. The
model delivers a prediction about investments in fiscal capacity as a function of
political institutions and the likelihood that the government will be replaced.
Economic structure also features in the model and helps to determine fiscal
capacity investments via the level of income and the government’s access to
nontax revenue, such as resource rents or foreign aid.
Our core model is very streamlined to make a number of points as clearly and
concisely as possible. The role of fiscal capacity is specified as a reduced form,
40


but later on in the chapter we show how our simple formulation can be given
microeconomic foundations. In a sequence of extensions, we relax a number
of the simplifying assumptions in the core model and show the consequences
for the main results.
Before going on to model the building of fiscal capacity formally, we present
some basic facts and a very brief sketch of the existing literature.
Some Basic Facts The growth of the fiscal state is an incontrovertible fact of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, at least in the now developed countries. To
make this growth possible, revenues had to be raised, which meant introducing
new taxes and extending the outreach of those already in place.
Figure 2.1 gives a very partial picture of how fiscal capacity has evolved over
time. It plots the distribution of two kinds of upgrading of tax systems for a
sample of 75 countries since 1800.1 Black lines demarcate the introduction of
the income tax and gray lines whether or not a country has a VAT. Although the
sample is limited, it illustrates clearly how such investments in tax collection
have evolved over time. Income taxes began appearing in the mid-nineteenth
century and are fully prevalent in the sample in the interwar period. VAT
was lagging further behind, with adoption still incomplete by the end of the
twentieth century. The model developed in this chapter is designed to explain
the forces that shape such changes in the tax system. One feature of the changes
illustrated in Figure 2.1 is that they required investments in administrative
structures that support tax collection.2
The narrow sample selection in Figure 2.1, however, ignores many of the
poorer countries in the world. We would also like the model in this chapter
to analyze how fiscal capacity varies over countries. From Figure 1.3 in the
first chapter, we already know that richer countries tend to raise more tax
revenue as a share of national income than poorer countries. Other measures
of fiscal capacity tell the same story. It is interesting to look at the relative uses
of different types of taxes, differentiated by the investments required for them
to be collected. Arguably, trade taxes and income taxes are two polar opposite
cases. To collect trade taxes requires being able to observe trade flows at major
1. The sample is limited by the set of countries for which we have confirmed data on when the income tax was introduced. 2. Aidt and Jensen (2009a) study the factors, such as spending pressures and extensions of the franchise, behind the introduction of the income tax in panel data for 17 countries from 1815 to 1939.
fiscal capacity 41


1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 Year
Income tax
Fiscal Capacity in a Sample of 75 Countries
Proportion of Countries
VAT
Figure 2.1 The historical evolution of fiscal capacity.
shipping ports. Although such tax allocations may encourage smuggling, it is
a much easier proposition than collecting income taxes. The latter requires
major investments in enforcement and compliance structures throughout the
entire economy.
We can thus obtain an interesting indication of fiscal capacity by holding
total tax revenue constant, and asking how large a share of it is collected from
trade taxes and income taxes, respectively. These shares are plotted against
each other in Figure 2.2.3 Both the income-tax and trade-tax shares in total tax
revenue are measured as late as possible (both in 1999), based on data from the
IMF (the omitted categories are consumption taxes, business taxes, and capital
taxes). The income-tax share is shown on the vertical axis and the trade-tax
share on the horizontal axis. We observe a clear negative correlation: countries
with a higher reliance on income taxes tend to have less reliance on trade taxes.
The figure also shows a striking pattern by income. High-income countries
3. Other taxes not included in either trade or income taxes include indirect taxes such as VAT, property and corporate taxes.
42 chapter two: fiscal capacity


.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0 .2 Share of Trade Taxes in Revenue, 1999
High income in 2000 Low income in 2000
Income Taxes and Trade Taxes by GDP
Share of Income Tax in Revenue, 1999
.4 .6
Middle income in 2000 Fitted values
Figure 2.2 Income taxes and trade taxes conditional on income.
tend to depend more on income taxes, whereas middle- and, in particular, low
income countries depend more on trade taxes.
Figure 2.3 also demonstrates the relationship between income taxes and
trade taxes at the end of the 1990s. But now the data are broken down by the
total tax take in GDP. We separate the observations into three groups: countries
that raise more than 25% of taxes in GDP, countries that raise 15–25% of taxes
in GDP, and countries that raise less than 15%. The countries in the high-tax
group again look markedly different, raising much more of their tax revenues
in the form of income taxes.
Existing Research on the Building of Fiscal Capacity Economists have not
devoted a great deal of attention to fiscal capacity. As noted in Chapter 1, most
normative and positive theories of taxation hardly ever touch upon the lack
of administrative infrastructure as an important constraint on the taxes that
governments can raise.
Public-finance economists have certainly paid some attention to the compli
ance and enforcement structures that facilitate efficient tax collection and deter
tax avoidance [see, e.g., Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002) for an overview]. How
ever, this body of research has a normative orientation and does not study the
fiscal capacity 43


.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0 .2 Share of Trade Taxes in Revenue, 1999
High tax share in 1999 Low tax share in 1999
Income Taxes and Trade Taxes by Tax Share
Share of Income Tax in Revenue, 1999
.4 .6
Middle tax share in 1999 Fitted values
Figure 2.3 Income taxes and trade taxes conditional on total tax take.
building of such structures as a purposive, forward-looking activity by politi
cally motivated incumbents. In this sense, our approach is related to the seminal
theoretical and empirical work by Cukierman, Edwards, and Tabellini (1992)
on how the use of seigniorage depends on the efficiency of the tax system and
how the strategic choice of the latter depends on factors such as political sta
bility and polarization.
The greater reliance on trade taxes (and seigniorage) relative to income taxes
in developing countries has, of course, been noted and discussed by many
authors [see Burgess and Stern (1993), Hinrichs (1966), and Tanzi (1992) for
early contributions]. More recently, Gordon and Li (2009) describe the tilted
tax structures as a puzzle that has to be understood. Their proposed explanation
relies on an interplay between informality and undeveloped financial systems,
but these features are basically taken as given and not seen as equilibrium
outcomes of a dynamic process.
In Chapter 1, we noted the extensive work by political and economic his
torians on the state’s fiscal capacity, the crucial role of wars in stimulating the
demand for such capacity, and the importance of this aspect of state building
for the successful development of nation states. This research has yielded many
44 chapter two: fiscal capacity


interesting historical case studies such as Brewer (1989). But there also attempts
at broader generalizations, as in the work by Schumpeter, quoted at the begin
ning of this chapter, as well as Levi (1988) and Tilly (1985). Tilly, in particular,
aims at explaining European exceptionalism. His work appears to have been
greatly inspired by the encyclopedic scholarship of the German historian Otto
Hintze (1906). Some authors, such as Centeno (1997), have claimed that Latin
America may be an exception to the Tilly hypothesis that war was a major
driving force in the building of fiscal capacity.
Development scholars such as Migdal (1988) have emphasized the problem
of weak states in developing countries. Such states often lack the capacity to
raise revenue and to govern effectively. Others, such as Herbst (1990, 2000),
have ventured the hypothesis that some countries in Africa might have been
able to strengthen their weak states if external wars on the continent had been
more frequent.
Plan of the Chapter In the next section, we lay out our bare-bones core model of
fiscal-capacity building. Having specified the model, we first provide a norma
tive benchmark, based on the policies and investments a social planner would
undertake. We then show that, depending on the constellation of parameters,
three types of states can emerge—a common-interest state, a redistributive state,
or a weak state.
In Section 2.2, we begin by providing some microeconomic foundations for
the reduced-form of fiscal capacity used in the basic model. We also show how
the basic model can be developed and extended in several different directions to
increase the realism of our approach. Thus, we introduce more general models
of public goods, polarization between groups, income inequality, group-size
differences, tax distortions, multiple tax bases, and an infinite number of time
periods—features that are all absent in the basic model of Section 2.1.
Section 2.3 discusses some of the empirical implications of our theory and
shows some partial correlations in the data. Section 2.4 concludes the chapter
and, as usual, the very last section has some notes on related literature.
2.1 The Core Model
We now introduce a workhorse model that we keep extending throughout
the book. Several of the economic and political factors that are represented
the core model 45


as parameters in this first version of the model are thus turned into endogenous
variables as we proceed. However, even in this chapter, the model is dynamic.
In fact, its main novel feature is that it gives governments the opportunity to
invest so as to improve the workings of the state, in addition to setting standard
policy instruments.
2.1.1 Basic Structure
There are two time periods s = 1, 2 with two groups of individuals, A and B ,
each of which comprises half the population. No private savings or government
debt enter the model. Total population size is normalized to 1. Every individual
has income ω. Income is an exogenous parameter throughout this chapter, but in
Chapter 3 it becomes an endogenous variable with appropriate microeconomic
foundations.
At the beginning of period 1, one group holds power and we refer to it
as the incumbent group, which we denote by I1 ∈ {A, B}. The other group is
the opposition and we denote it by O1 ∈ {A, B}. With exogenous probability γ ,
there is a peaceful transition of power between periods 1 and 2. Thus, parameter
γ is a measure of political instability. Such instability is a parameter throughout
this chapter and the next. However, in Chapter 4 it is made endogenous by
developing a model of conflict. Moreover, some micropolitical foundations for
the peaceful transition rate are discussed in Chapter 7.
Utility functions are (quasi-) linear:
uJ
s = cJ
s + αsV (gs), (2.1)
where the first term on the right, cJ
s , denotes private consumption of a typical
group-J member in period s and gs is a public good. Private consumption in
period s depends on the net of tax income and transfers received. It is given by
cJ
s = (1 − ts
) ω + rJ
s,
where ts is the income-tax rate and rJ
s is a transfer awarded to group J in
period s.
Public Goods In the second term of uJ
s , V (gs) is the utility from consumption
of public goods and αs (a shifter in) the value of such goods. The function V (.)
is smooth, increasing, and concave. In our core interpretation, we have in mind
an interpretation of gs as an archetypal public good. A classic example that we
refer to throughout the book is “defense,” in which case αs can be thought of
46 chapter two: fiscal capacity


as “external conflict (or not).” In practice, many transfer programs observed
in modern welfare states are reasonably well proxied by g since benefits are
universal, typically a form of insurance against sickness or unemployment and
benefits accrue more or less universally over the life cycle.
We assume that the value of public goods is stochastic: αs has a two-point
distribution αs ∈ {αL, αH }, where αH > 2 > αL > 1, and Prob[αs = αH ] = φ.
The shocks to α are assumed to be identically and independently distributed
over time with the realization of αs known when policy is set in period s. The
particular values of α are chosen so as to make public goods more or less
valuable relative to transfers in a way that depends on the structure of political
institutions (see more further on). The parameter φ plays an important role
in the analysis as a measure of the demand for public goods. In the defense
example, we can think of φ as “the threat of external conflict.”
Two convenient special cases are used to get specific insights: (a) a linear
case, where V (gs
) = gs, and (b) a nonstochastic case, where V (.) is smooth,
increasing, and concave, satisfying the Inada condition, and φ = 1 with αH = α.
Special case (a) is the mainstay of the analysis, although some important
economic effects are best illustrated in case (b).
Fiscal Capacity The income tax is constrained by existing fiscal capacity, i.e.,
ts ≤ τs, which we treat like a capital stock. As discussed further in Section 2.2.1,
this can be given microfoundations by supposing that an individual can earn a
share of her income (1 − τs) in the informal sector. The initial stock τ1 is given,
but it can be augmented to achieve fiscal capacity τ2 by investing τ2 − τ1 (1 − δ)
at s = 1, where δ ∈ [0, 1] is the depreciation rate. For the time being, it is best
to think about such investments as building the administrative institutions
necessary for efficient implementation of an income tax.
A limiting feature of this simple model is that (labor) income is the only
tax base. In practice, one of the greatest challenges for tax systems around the
world is to find ways of taxing capital rather than labor income. Many of the
attempts to limit tax avoidance and tax evasion are designed precisely to limit
arbitrage between tax bases.
We posit a convex cost, F (τ2 − τ1 (1 − δ)), for investing in fiscal capacity,
where Fτ (0) = 0, i.e., the marginal cost is negligible when there is no invest
ment.4 A fixed-cost component could be added without affecting the essence of
the main results. As we shall see, a possible outcome is a weak state in which
4. Here, and elsewhere, subscripts on functions denote partial derivatives.
the core model 47


the incumbent invests nothing. Adding a fixed cost would only serve to increase
the prevalence of such states. Note also that the income level ω does not affect
the cost of investing; we discuss this possibility later in Section 2.1.3.
For now, we assume that investments in fiscal-capacity building are ir
reversible, i.e., such investments cannot be negative, beyond depreciation. One
of the extensions in Section 2.2 allows for negative investments, where fiscal
capacity can be “eaten” or purposefully destroyed between periods.
Government Budget Recalling that each group is half the population, we give
the government budget constraint at date s is given by
R + tsω = gs + ms + rI
s + rO
s
2,
where
ms =
{ F (τ2 − (1 − δ)τ1) if s = 1
0 if s = 2
represents the investment costs in period 1 and R is an additional time
independent revenue source accruing only to the government. We interpret
R as natural resource rents or foreign (cash) aid. Like α, we allow R to be
stochastic.5 However, it is assumed to be realized before any policy decisions
are made and is then held fixed throughout the two time periods that we study.
Political Institutions Political institutions constrain the incumbent’s allocation
of transfers. For now, we assume no agency problem within the incumbent
group; whoever holds power on behalf of the group cares about the average
welfare of the whole group. Such agency problems are introduced in the next
chapter, where we introduce an elite within the ruling group that governs in its
own interests. The constraint on transfers is modeled as a requirement that the
incumbent group must give a fixed share σ to the opposition for any unit of
transfers awarded to its own group. It is convenient to work with the parameter θ= σ
1+σ ∈ [0, 1
2 ] to represent more “cohesive” institutions; the closer θ is to its
maximum value of 1/2, the more cohesive the political institutions.
5. The stochastic structure for R is not always important for our argument, and R could actually be treated as parametric in many cases. However, since we do make use of it in interpreting the data, we conduct the analysis throughout with the possibility of a random draw of R by nature as part of the timing that we outline below.
48 chapter two: fiscal capacity


This is an extremely simple, tractable but reduced-form way of looking at
politics. We interpret a higher value of θ in one of two broad ways. One real
world counterpart might be minority protection by constitutional checks and
balances on the executive as a result of some separation of powers. Further
more, in practice, we expect democracies to impose greater constraints on the
executive than do autocracies. An alternative real-world counterpart might be
stronger political representation of the interests of losers in policy decisions
through proportional representation elections or parliamentary democracy. The
literature on the policy effects of constitutional rules suggests that both of these
institutional arrangements tend to induce policymakers to internalize the pref
erences of a larger share of the population [see, e.g., Aghion, Alesina, and
Trebbi (2004), Persson, Roland, and Tabellini (2000), or Persson and Tabellini
(2000)].
The parameter θ can also be thought of as representing the extent to which
policymakers can commit in the dynamic setting that we explore in what
follows. In effect, a high θ allows institutional commitment to a more-or-less
equal division of future public resources, whereas with θ close to zero, there is
no commitment possible as the winner will take all. Any limited commitment
power as embodied in θ will motivate the desire of policymakers to hold on to
power in our framework.6
As we will see later, θ is one of the key parameters that affect policy decisions,
state capacity investments, and investments in violence. We keep it constant and
exogenous throughout most of the book. However, in Chapter 7, we discuss
different ways of giving micropolitical foundations for this parameter in detail.
In that chapter, we also deal with the implications of making θ (or the underlying
institutional features) endogenous, which allows us to explore the incentives for
political reform.
Timing Events in the core two-period model evolve as follows:
1. We begin with an initial stock of fiscal capacity, τ1, and an incumbent
group, I1. Nature determines α1 and R.
2. I1 chooses a set of period-1 policies
{
t1, g1, rI
1, rO
1
}
and determines
(through investment) the period-2 stock of fiscal capacity τ2.
6. Since we are working in a two-period setting, increasing commitment through repeated play is not an option. But obviously this is an interesting possibility for future extensions of the framework.
the core model 49


3. I1 remains in power with probability 1 − γ , and nature determines α2.
4. I2 chooses period-2 policy
{
t2, g2, rI
2, rO
2
} .
We solve for a subgame perfect equilibrium in policy and fiscal capacity invest
ments. This means solving the model backward, beginning at stage 4.
2.1.2 Politically Optimal Policy
The simple structure of the core model allows us to solve for the optimal policy
chosen by an incumbent for any given level of fiscal capacity. The latter, along
with the identity of the incumbent group, are the “state variables” of the model.
Whoever holds power chooses the policy vector {gs , ts , rI
s , rO
s
} to maximize
their own within-period payoff,
αsV (gs
) + (1 − ts
) ω + rI
s,
subject to
ts ≤ τs , rO
s ≥ σrI
s (2.2)
and the government budget constraint. The first constraint in (2.2) is due
to limited fiscal capacity, whereas the second is imposed by the structure of
political institutions. Optimal policy in each period can be described in terms
of its three components: the income-tax rate, transfers, and spending on public
goods. We first solve for the optimal ts. We then solve for rJ
s and plug this into
the incumbent’s objective, which we maximize to determine gs.
Equilibrium Taxes and Transfers First, observe that the equilibrium tax rate is
set to exhaust fiscal capacity, i.e.,
ts = τs.
This is because the gain to the incumbent from a higher tax rate is at least
2 (1 − θ) ω (the gain from larger transfers on the margin) and the loss is ω (the
reduction in private income). Thus the result follows since 2 (1 − θ ) ≥ 1.
Second, we look at the optimal transfer paid to each group. The incumbent
will wish to make her group’s transfer as large as possible all else being equal.
Using the government budget constraint, we get the following solution:
rJ
s = βJ [R + tsω − gs − ms] for J ∈ {I , O} , (2.3)
50 chapter two: fiscal capacity


where βI = 2(1 − θ ) and βO = 2θ . These transfers are a residual item after
netting out the spending on public goods and investments in fiscal capacity,
to be determined later. The parameter θ governs the way in which the residual
revenues are divided between the groups. If θ = 1/2, transfers are shared equally,
whereas a completely unconstrained incumbent, θ = 0, captures all available
revenue for her own group.
Equilibrium Public-Goods Provision Third, we look at politically optimal
public-good provision by defining the function gˆ (α, x) from the equation
αVg
(gˆ (α, x)) = x , (2.4)
where it is clear that gˆ is increasing in α and decreasing in x. The level of public
goods provided is then given by
G (α, τs
)=
⎧⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
R + τsω − ms if αVg
(R + τsω − ms
) ≥ 2 (1 − θ )
0 if αVg (0) < 2 (1 − θ )
gˆ (α, 2 (1 − θ )) otherwise.
(2.5)
There are two possible corner solutions. If public goods are extremely valuable
so that αVg
(R + τsω − ms
) ≥ 2 (1 − θ ), then all tax revenue not allocated to
investing in fiscal capacity is spent on public goods. This is more likely to be
the case when the value of public goods, α, is larger and/or θ is closer to 1/2.
We have the opposite corner solution if αVg (0) < 2 (1 − θ ) , i.e., if public
goods are not very valuable. In this case, all spending is devoted to transfers,
with the level of spending determined by setting gs = 0 in equation (2.3). This is
most likely to happen when α is low (e.g., it is bound to happen if α = 0) and/or
when θ is close to zero. The latter observation reflects the fact that with weak
institutional constraints, transfer spending is highly attractive to the incumbent.
Between these two corner solutions is a possible interior solution determined
by (2.4), where the marginal value of public goods is set equal to the marginal
cost in terms of foregone transfers, which is given by 2 (1 − θ ).
As mentioned earlier, we frequently make use of the tractable linear case
where Vg = 1. This permits only two of the three possibilities described in
(2.5)—the corner solutions. Thus, we have a so-called “bang-bang” solution
with all public spending devoted either to public goods or to transfers. This
assumption is certainly not realistic. But it does make the model very easy to
analyze, as there is a threshold value of α = 2 (1 − θ ), which depends on the
the core model 51


cohesiveness of institutions, above which all spending is on public goods. For
α below this threshold, the incumbent only provides transfers.
Indirect Utilities Substituting these politically optimal policies into the utility
function (2.1), we derive the following “indirect payoff” function for group
J ∈ {I , O} in period s:
W (αs , τs , ms , βJ ) = αsV (G (αs , τs
))
+ (1 − τs)ω + βJ [R + τsω − G (αs , τs
) − ms]. (2.6)
For future reference, it is also useful to define two “value functions”:
U I (τ2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, 0, βI )
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, 0, βI )]
for the incumbent and
U O (τ2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, 0, βO)
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, 0, βO)]
for the opposition group. These depend on τ2 and the expected value of public
goods as represented by φ. The model’s symmetry implies that the only thing
that differentiates the period-2 value is the incumbency status of the group.
Putting all of these pieces together, the expected period-2 utility of group J ,
as seen from period 1, is
W (α1, τ1, m1, 2 (1 − θ )) + [1 − γ ] U I (τ2
) + γ U O (τ2
)
for the incumbent, and
W (α1, τ1, m1, 2θ ) + γ U I (τ2
) + [1 − γ ] U O (τ2
)
for the opposition. These sum the period-1 realized payoff with an expected
future payoff, which depends on whether or not the incumbent expects to
survive in power, an event that occurs with probability (1 − γ ).
2.1.3 Fiscal-Capacity Investments
We now explore the decision to invest in fiscal capacity. To obtain sharp results,
we focus on the case where utility is linear in public goods, i.e., V (g) = g. We
discuss what happens if this assumption is relaxed in Section 2.2.2.
52 chapter two: fiscal capacity


The optimal fiscal-capacity investment is determined by maximizing
W (α1, τ1, F (τ2 − (1 − δ)τ1), 2 (1 − θ )) + [1 − γ ] U I (τ2
) + γ U O (τ2
),
by choosing τ2. This results in an investment “Euler equation,” which equates
the foregone consumption (in the form of transfers or public goods) from
greater investment in fiscal capacity to the future gains of being able to imple
ment a higher income-tax rate.7 This Euler equation is given by
−W m(α1, τ1, m1, 2(1 − θ ))Fτ
(τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1
) (2.7)
= (1 − γ ) U I
τ
(τ2
) + γUO
τ
(τ2
)
c.s. τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1 ≥ 0,
where c.s. stands for complementary slackness, recognizing the possibility that
the investments in fiscal capacity can be zero.
The period-1 cost is dependent on the marginal cost of public funds,
λ1 ≡ −W m(α1, τ1, m1, 2(1 − θ )) = max {α1, 2 (1 − θ )}.
The expression for λ1 reflects two possibilities in period 1. If α1 ≥ 2 (1 − θ ),
then the marginal cost of public funds is the opportunity cost of spending on
public goods with value α1. If instead α1 < 2 (1 − θ ), the opportunity cost is
from foregone transfers. This can be seen by inspecting equation (2.5).
Using the specific model structure, we can simplify the Euler equation (2.7) to
ω[E(λ2) − 1] ≤ λ1Fτ
(τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1
) (2.8)
c.s.τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1 ≥ 0,
where
E(λ2) = φαH + (1 − φ)λL
2 (2.9)
is the expected value of period-2 public funds with
λL
2=
{ αL if αL ≥ 2(1 − θ )
2[(1 − θ )(1 − γ ) + γ θ ] otherwise.
(2.10)
7. We use the term Euler equation to draw a parallel with a framework suitable for studying a multiperiod (i.e., more than two-period) model. We develop such a model for fiscal capacity later in Section 2.2.8.
the core model 53


The trade-off involved in the investment decision is transparent in equation
(2.8). The right-hand side is the marginal cost weighted by λ1 representing the
marginal value of foregone period-1 tax revenue.
The left-hand side of (2.8) is the “marginal benefit” of fiscal capacity. It has
two parts, one positive and one negative. The negative term is represented by
−ω on the left-hand side of (2.8). This is the loss of private earnings because
taxation has increased.
The positive term ωE (λ2
) is the future value of public revenues owing
to increased fiscal capacity. It depends on how revenues are allocated. Since
αH > 2 > 2 (1 − θ ), a high realization of the value of public goods always
results in spending on public goods. The only question is what happens when
α2 = αL. If public revenues are allocated to public goods even when αs = αL then
E (λ2
) = φαH + (1 − φ)αL. But if they are allocated to transfers, because αL <
2 (1 − θ ), then E (λ2
) = φαH + (1 − φ)2[(1 − θ )(1 − γ ) + γ θ ]. The expression
2[(1 − θ )(1 − γ ) + γ θ] is the expected value of transfer spending viewed from
the perspective of a period-1 incumbent who does not know whether her group
will be in office in period 2. With probability (1 − γ ), she survives and earns
2 (1 − θ) of the available revenue as a transfer, whereas with probability γ , she
does not survive and receives only 2θ (< 1) of revenues as transfers.
Recalling our assumption that Fτ (0) = 0, we can see that the logic of
comparing the marginal benefit and marginal cost as we have just discussed
immediately reveals that a necessary and sufficient condition for a positive
level of investment in fiscal capacity is that E(λ2) − 1 ≥ 0. Essentially, this
condition requires that future public funds be valuable enough relative to
foregone private consumption. Equation (2.8) makes it plain that this depends
on our key parameters: {φ, αH , αL, θ , γ }. Our next task is to understand how
investment decisions depend on these parameters and how this dependence can
be interpreted. In Section 2.3, we discuss the empirical implications of the model
in a more careful way.
2.1.4 Normative Benchmark: A Pigouvian Planner
Before discussing the positive implications of the model, we study a normative
benchmark against which to judge the equilibrium outcome. Specifically, we
define optimal policy and fiscal-capacity investment in world where a Pigou
vian social planner maximizes expected utility weighting the payoffs of the
two groups equally. This Utilitarian criterion seems natural here and mirrors
54 chapter two: fiscal capacity


the standard normative approach to policy taken in many public-economics
textbooks, such as Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980).8
Conveniently, the Utilitarian objective is embedded in our model of polit
ically optimal policy as a special case where θ = 1/2 and γ = 0. In this case,
the model predicts that no transfer spending is optimal, i.e., rI
s = rO
s = 0 in
both periods. With linear utility, a Pigouvian planner would never wish to re
distribute resources between the two groups. This allows us to identify precisely
the policy failure implicit in politically optimal policy when αL < 2 (1 − θ ). In
this case, the incumbent spends on transfers when she should optimally spend
on public goods. Thus, there is a potential for undersupply of public goods
and oversupply of transfers. However, there is no tax distortion in this simple
model, as the planner and the incumbent group would both set ts = τs.
The outcome is summarized in the following proposition:
Proposition 2.1: Suppose that the fiscal-capacity investment is made by a
Pigouvian planner with Utilitarian preferences. Then:
1. There is positive investment in fiscal capacity.
2. Higher φ or ω (or higher αH and αL) increases investment in fiscal
capacity.
The first part of the proposition follows by observing that E(λ2
) = φαH +
(1 − φ) αL > 1 since, under our assumptions, a planner spends all taxes on pub
lic goods. In words, public spending is sufficiently valuable to justify foregoing
a greater loss of private income owing to higher taxation. There is, of course,
nothing inevitable about this, as it depends on the quality of public projects
that are identified and the ability to adopt equally good projects at any scale
without diminishing the marginal value of public goods.
If we had assumed that the value of public goods was V (g) with V (.)
increasing and concave, then eventually a planner would not wish to increase
fiscal capacity beyond the point where the marginal value of increased public
spending minus the loss of private incomes is zero. The efficiency with which
public projects can be delivered is also a potential issue in a more general model.
8. In the core model, adding a preference for equality in the planner’s payoff would not affect the results.
the core model 55


Thus the normative benchmark that we have set up here is for illustrative
purposes only. However, it serves well to fix ideas when we explore how politi
cally optimal investment decisions may diverge from those chosen by a planner.
Certainly, we believe that large gains from investing in fiscal capacity to achieve
collective benefits is a plausible idea for many of the poorer countries in the
world where the state fails to deliver basic public health benefits such as sani
tation and clean water. The recent literature on randomized-controlled trials in
development economics has produced many examples of high-return projects,
such as deworming and vaccination programs [see, e.g., Duflo, Glennerster
and Kremer (2007) for an overview], which could be increased in scale. These
programs may not be pursued owing to lack of available public funding, a
problem exacerbated by low fiscal capacity. The failure of many countries to
achieve decent levels of personal security through establishing law and order
is another example where there is some potential for welfare-enhancing public
provision through greater taxation.
The comparative statics in part 2 of Proposition 2.1 are discussed in the next
section.
2.1.5 Three Types of States
In this subsection, we discuss for the first time a theoretical implication of
our model that resurfaces frequently throughout this book. We show that the
model predicts that one of three types of states can emerge as an equilibrium.
Under each of these types, we also discuss the relevant comparative statics with
respect to key parameters. Which type of state emerges depends primarily on
two critical conditions:
Cohesiveness: αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ ) .
This requires that θ be close enough to 1/2, i.e., political institutions are suffi
ciently consensual with enough checks and balances or minority representation.
Stability: φαH + (1 − φ) 2 [(1 − γ ) (1 − θ ) + γ θ ] ≥ 1.
This will be relevant only when the cohesiveness condition fails. Whether it
holds depends on the equilibrium level of political turnover as represented by
γ . It is more likely to hold if γ is low, i.e., when political turnover is low.
Figure 2.4 illustrates the conditions under which each of these conditions
holds in terms of two key parameters: θ and γ . The figure is drawn for the special
56 chapter two: fiscal capacity


Weak States
1/2
1 – αL/2 1/2 θ
Υ
Redistributive States
Common-Interest States
Figure 2.4 Parameters and different types of states (when φ = 0).
case when φ = 0. When φ becomes positive, the horizontal line describing the
stability condition shifts up and acquires positive slope, whereas the vertical
line describing the cohesiveness condition is unaffected.9 We now show how
the equilibrium investment in fiscal capacity depends on these two conditions.
A Common-Interest State We begin with the case where the cohesiveness
condition holds. In this case, we have the following result:
Proposition 2.2: If Cohesiveness holds, then the outcome is exactly as in
Proposition 2.1.
For this result to hold, we require that θ be close enough to 1/2 so that
marginal public revenues in period 2 are allocated to public goods whether αs
is high or low. In this case, the incumbent in period 1 is reassured that the state
9. In the general case, the parameter combinations for which the stability condition is satisfied with equality are given by the following curve:
γ (θ ) =
1−
( 1−φαH
2(1−φ)
)
−θ
1 − 2θ .
the core model 57


will use public resources for common interests, i.e., public goods regardless of
who is in power in period 2. This gives the incumbent confidence that there
are returns to building fiscal capacity. In this case, we have E (λs
) > 1, which
implies positive investments in fiscal capacity using equation (2.8).
Naturally, this is a sufficient but not a necessary condition The same outcome
(except for the comparative static result on φ) will obtain as φ, the probability
of the high-value public goods state, goes to 1.
We now discuss the comparative statics implied by this proposition and their
interpretation.
Common Interests and War Proposition 2.2 (and thus Proposition 2.1) high
lights how strong common interests play an important role for the incentives
to build fiscal capacity. Historically, defense has been a major collective good
provided through the state. Indeed, for a long period of time, it was the major
expenditure of many nation states. As noted earlier, variable αs can be thought
of as being indicative of war with—and prospective invasion by—an external
power, with φ being the probability of this event. The result captures the need
for spending to deter such conflict and the greater likelihood that a common
interest state (or a social planner) would invest in response to war risk.10
As discussed earlier, the desire to build military power has frequently been
cited as a key element behind the rise of the fiscal state. The model makes plain
how this can be captured by φ. The comparative statics in the second part of
Proposition 2.1 thus capture the classic war-making incentive for building state
capacity discussed by Hintze (1906), Tilly (1985, 1990), and others. Dincecco
and Prado (2010) use premodern war causalities to explain fiscal capacity today
(measured as direct taxes as a share of total taxes), and then go on to relate
GDP per capita to fiscal capacity.
This result has relevance for those seeking high-return public projects in the
developing world. If public interventions can be found through randomized
controlled trials and scaled-up to achieve large aggregate returns, we expect
this to assist in the creation of common-interest states. Arguably, finding high
return public projects has been the process through which Western welfare
states have become the engine of state development during times of peace.
Creating effective public health-care systems seems like an especially important
10. Naturally, if Pigouvian planners actually existed and were truly benevolent, they would presumably get together in godlike fashion to resolve all international disputes. But our planner in the previous section has a more limited domain, supporting the national interest of a country faced by an external threat.
58 chapter two: fiscal capacity


example. Such systems persist essentially because the returns are perceived by
citizens as common-interest spending.
Income The second comparative static result in Proposition 2.1 says that
investing in fiscal capacity becomes more attractive in a common-interest state
(or for the planner) when wages or incomes, ω, are higher. This follows naturally
from the fact that higher incomes expand the tax base. Therefore, it is consistent
with the observation in Chapter 1 that higher income per capita is associated
with a larger tax take in GDP.
However, there are reasons to doubt that our simple core model offers a
compelling justification for this correlation. First, income is exogenous and
many things that the state does, including its investment in state capacity,
can have positive or negative effects on income levels. Therefore, it is not
particularly reasonable to treat ω as exogenous. We explore these issues in detail
in the next chapter.
Second, the costs of investing in our formulation are not affected by ω
in any way, but it is plausible to think that this may not be the case. For
example, if labor were the only factor of production and F (.) expressed
investment costs in terms of labor requirements, the cost would plausibly be
ωF (τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1
). But then, ω would appear multiplicatively on both sides
of the Euler equation (2.8), and increases in income would have no effect on
fiscal-capacity investments because costs and benefits would be affected in equal
proportion.
More generally, the cost of investing in state capacity might depend on the
factor mix, and the nature of technological progress might affect investment
costs and private incomes. This is reminiscent of debates about unbalanced
growth, which Baumol (1967) took as a starting point for his famous cost
disease. If public-sector activities, as Baumol argued, benefit less from labor
saving technological change, then the costs of running the public sector would
tend to rise over time. This would include both the cost of providing g and the
cost of investing in τ . Thus, a higher ω might lead to a disincentive to provide
g and to invest in τ . But this disincentive would have to be weighed against the
higher benefits through higher incomes captured by Proposition 2.1. Clearly, a
more thorough discussion of these issues requires a multiperiod model, where
the investment technology is modeled in more detail.
Resource Dependence Finally, the result also helps us to think about how
the share of natural resources in GDP is likely to correlate with fiscal-capacity
the core model 59


investments. To see this, observe that the GDP share of natural resources, or
aid, R/ (R + ω) , is decreasing in ω. It follows that countries with higher R, as
we hold total income (R + ω) constant, should have lower levels of investment
in fiscal capacity. If we interpret R as natural resource rents, then their indirect
effect given the level of ω rests on it being relatively less expensive to enforce
compliance with taxing natural resources than taxing market incomes. This is a
plausible assumption for most prominent natural resource flows. The prediction
thus provides one possible reason why some resource-rich countries in Africa
and Central Asia have underdeveloped tax systems. In Section 1.2.2 we show
that this result holds even more strongly when there is curvature in the value of
public goods. Jensen (2010) presents econometric evidence consistent with this
notion, using country-specific price indexes constructed for natural gas and oil
and weighted by respective shares in total national energy production. He finds
(using panel data) that a 1% increase in the share of natural resource rents
in total government income is associated with a 1.4% decrease in the fiscal
capacity of a country.
A Redistributive State In a redistributive state, the Cohesiveness condition fails
while the Stability condition is satisfied. The latter implies that fiscal-capacity
investment is positive. We now have the following proposition:
Proposition 2.3: If Cohesiveness fails and Stability holds, the state is redistribu
tive with public revenues used to finance transfers when αs = αL. Then:
1. There is investment in fiscal capacity.
2. An increase in φ or ω raises investments.
3. A lower value of γ unambiguously raises investments, whereas an
increase in θ raises (cuts) investments if γ is above (below) 1/2.
In this case, the failure of the cohesiveness condition implies that a public
goods value of αL causes the government to spend on transfers. The decision
to invest in fiscal capacity is thus partly motivated by the prospect of future
transfers. But to earn rewards from this prospect requires that the probability
of retaining office be sufficiently high. Therefore, the model predicts that the
incentive to invest in fiscal capacity is at its strongest when γ → 0 and θ → 0.
Thus, conditional on institutions being noncohesive, political stability may
foster investment incentives; the ruling group is a classic residual claimant on
60 chapter two: fiscal capacity


the state and has a long time horizon. Such incentives could even be sustained as
φ → 0, i.e., without any common-interest motive for investing in fiscal capacity.
With enough stability, an incumbent may, in fact, invest more than a Pigou
vian social planner (with the same αL). This is reminiscent of the kind of
excessively large state that has been discussed extensively in the public-choice
literature, as in Buchanan (1967) and Buchanan and Tullock (1962). How
ever, the mechanism here through fiscal-capacity building is somewhat different.
Having a low θ is akin to the kind of political failures discussed by Buchanan
(1967), as policies do not satisfy Wicksellian unanimity when αs = αL.11
The comparative statics results on the importance of common interests and
income (φ and ω) corroborate those in a common-interest state. However, the
third part of Proposition 2.3 reveals some state-dependent comparative statics.
Political Stability Conditional on institutions being noncohesive, political sta
bility, as represented by a lower γ , fosters investment incentives by lengthening
the horizon of rulers.12
A good historical case study for how political stability can shape invest
ment in state capacity in a nondemocratic political system comes from England
after the Glorious Revolution in 1688, this led to the political dominance of the
Whigs in Parliament between 1715 and 1759 [see Stasavage (2007, Table 1)].13
Mathias and O’Brien (1976) calculate that taxes as a share of GDP rose from
16 to 20% of GDP over this period. Moreover, the administrative institutions
put in place during the same period meant that, after 1713, excises and indirect
taxes levied on domestically produced goods and services accounted for more
than three quarters of the tax revenue (O’Brien, 2005). The considerable invest
ment in state capacity by this dominant elite culminated in the introduction of
an income tax, underpinned the fiscal superiority of the British over the French
during the Napoleonic wars, and assisted Britain in credibly raising the public
debt to fight those wars. In the years from 1803 to 1812, the British government
had accumulated sufficient fiscal capacity to raise taxes equal to a remarkable
36% of GDP (Mathias and O’Brien, 1976).
11. The criterion proposed by Wicksell and developed by Buchanan is that policies should be unanimously preferred to a status quo of no spending. This automatically rules out any spending on transfers in our setting. 12. This is similar to an argument made in Dunning (2010) in which a low probability of political survival causes an incumbent not to invest in extracting natural resource rents. 13. Of course, this argument assumes that the Whigs anticipated their political dominance over this period when building fiscal institutions.
the core model 61


Political Institutions The other state-dependent comparative-static result con
cerns the cohesiveness of political institutions, as represented by the parameter
θ . Here, the result is ambiguous and depends on the degree of political stability.
When the incumbent can be fairly sure of surviving, i.e., γ is low (below 1/2),
more cohesive institutions reduce the incentive to invest. Since investments are
driven by the desire to redistribute, a higher θ—which means sharing more of
transfers with the opposition group—reduces the motive for investing in fis
cal capacity. In the opposite case of political instability, when the opposition is
more likely than not to take over (γ above 1/2), a higher value of θ works as
insurance against this possibility, and the incumbent becomes more willing to
invest in fiscal capacity.
Local and Global Comparative Statics These state-specific comparative statics
illustrate two aspects of the theory. The result for γ generates a specific predic
tion, namely that political stability should only matter for investments when
political institutions are insufficiently cohesive to create a common-interest
state. Empirically, this implies that we should see an interaction effect between
proxies for θ and γ in the data, something we return to in Section 2.3.
The result for θ illustrates another aspect of the model’s predictions. Some
of the model parameters affect investments in more ways than one. On the one
hand, the value of θ determines which type of state prevails: a high enough
value of θ is sufficient to create a common-interest state, which indirectly
affects fiscal-capacity investment. We refer to these kinds of effects as global
comparative statics, as they determine the type of state. Local comparative
statics, by contrast, are like those stated in Proposition 2.3. They represent
the direct effect on investment, conditional on being in a given type of state.
The global and local comparative statics may potentially be in tension with each
other and pull in different directions. This is illustrated by the possibility that
a higher value of θ may lower the investment in fiscal capacity (when political
instability, γ , is low). This local/global distinction is important in thinking
about the model’s predictions about the data and we return to it below.
A Weak State This is the case where both the cohesiveness and the stability
conditions fail together. The following result summarizes the behavior of a weak
state in the model:
Proposition 2.4: If Cohesiveness and Stability fail, the state is weak. There is
no incentive to invest in fiscal capacity.
62 chapter two: fiscal capacity


The fact that the stability condition fails now implies that the marginal
benefit of investing in fiscal capacity is negative. The absence of cohesive
institutions together with high political turnover mean that any fiscal capacity
investments are likely to be used by the opposition group when in office to fund
transfers, and this deters the incumbent from making an investment to increase
fiscal capacity. Given that the depreciation rate δ is positive, fiscal capacity
is actually falling in this case. If we were to include a fixed-cost component
into the cost of fiscal-capacity investment, then this would further increase the
likelihood that the state is weak. The net marginal benefit on the left-hand side
of the Euler equation (2.8) would not only have to be above zero, but it would
also have to be large enough to outweigh the fixed cost of investing.
To summarize, weak states suffer from three types of malaise: low θ, so
that political institutions do not safeguard common interests; high γ , so that
political instability is high; and low φ, so that common interests are weak. This
parameter combination implies that incentives to grow the tax base are weak.
Clearly, there are no local comparative static results to discuss in the weak
state since the investment level is always zero. But θ and γ can have global
and local effects on investment. In this case the θ and γ effects go in the same
direction: high γ raises the probability that the society ends up with a weak
state and, within a redistributive state, high γ decreases investment (as noted
in Proposition 2.3).
2.1.6 Taking Stock
Taken together, the predictions of the simple model are quite sharp. Several
of the parameters—θ , γ , and φ—should influence the type of state that we
observe in equilibrium and, hence, the investment that government makes in
fiscal capacity. Some parameters—ω and φ (and indirectly R)—should have a
local effect on investment only in the common-interest and redistributive states.
Others—γ and θ—should have a local effect only in the redistributive state.
Finally, none of the parameters should have a local effect on the investment
level in a weak state.
What can we say about the welfare economics of the three states? We have
already observed that only the common-interest state replicates the Pigouvian
outcome. This outcome is therefore always Pareto efficient. The main failure
of the redistributive state is that one group is favored and, hence, uses the state
as an extractive device based on its entrenchment in power. But the allocation
in this type of state is still Pareto optimal.
the core model 63


A weak state is more interesting since there exists a policy-cum-investment
vector that is Pareto superior. An incumbent group would be willing to invest
in fiscal capacity if it could be sure that there would be equitable sharing of
the revenues raised. The equilibrium therefore constitutes a political failure in
the sense of Besley and Coate (1998). In the language of Acemoglu (2003),
the weak state is an example of a failure of the Political Coase theorem.14 For
both groups to be better off, it would require that they be able to commit
themselves not to exploit their ability to use the state as an instrument for
lopsided redistribution whenever they have a hold on power. But they are
unable to make such commitments beyond any institutionalized commitments
embodied in the parameter θ. Naturally, this raises the question of why we
do not observe political reform to ensure this, a question that we return to in
Chapter 7.
2.2 Developing the Model
The core model in the previous section is certainly simple. Furthermore, owing
to the many simplifications we have made analyzing its implications is straight
forward. But these simplifications have a cost in that they abstract from poten
tially relevant features of the world that could shape state investments in prac
tice. However, it is reasonably easy to extend the model in a variety of ways
to expand its realism and relevance. This section discusses a number of such
extensions and their implications.
2.2.1 Microfoundations for Fiscal Capacity
The basic framework has a rudimentary reduced-form model of how fiscal
capacity is determined. To go into greater depth, suppose that there is an outside
option of working in the informal sector, where the wage is ω. Further, let ds
be the expected punishment for failing to pay taxes. If agents make a rational
calculation of whether to pay or to avoid taxes, the maximally enforceable tax
rate becomes
τs = ω + ds − ω
ω.
14. This idea goes back to the seminal paper on negotiation toward an efficient solution in the provision of public goods [Coase (1960)].
64 chapter two: fiscal capacity


Investments in fiscal capacity are then administrative investments that increase
the government’s taxing authority. Compliance structures, infrastructure to en
force the income tax (or impose a value added tax), can now be represented as
an increase in ds. The cost of fiscal capacity would then simply be a reflection
of investments in fines and detection, as in classic models of tax enforcement
such as Allingham and Sandmo (1972). Thus, F (.) is driven by the enforce
ment costs associated with ds.
The costs of enforcement could also be affected by features of the economic
structure. For example, Kleven, Thustrup Kreiner, and Saez (2009) argue that
formal employment in firms leads to the possibility of cross-reporting to tax
authorities by firms and workers. This reduces the cost of tax compliance
and lowers the need for direct monitoring by tax authorities. Changes in the
production structure that lower the cost of collecting taxes through cross
reporting could be arguments of the function F (.).
Less Than Full Tax Compliance Our core model assumed that tax compliance
is complete and universal. But there could well be heterogeneity in compliance.
A simple way to introduce this realistic feature is to let the impact of punishment
vary in the population according to preferences or opportunities for evasion.
Suppose that the cost of not complying is q (ds , ), where is uniformly
distributed in the population and normalized so that ∈ [0, 1] with q > 0 so
that a higher means that it is more costly/less desirable to evade taxes. For
example, we could have q (ds , ) = ds, where represents an opportunity
dependent probability of being detected and having to incur the punishment
of ds. Or else, q (ds , ) could represent the personal stigma or shame of being
caught cheating, with a higher representing a greater stigma and/or shame.
For a fixed ds, a citizen of type will comply with an income tax of ts if
ω + q (ds , ) − ω
ω ≥ ts ,
and the proportion of citizens who pay taxes will be 1 − ̂ (ts , ds
), where
ω + q (ds , ̂ (ts , ds
)) − ω
ω = ts ,
if we assume an interior solution. For a high enough ds, there could still be
complete compliance. It is clear that ̂ (ts , ds
) is increasing in ts and decreasing
in ds, i.e., fewer taxes are raised when the tax rate is higher and more taxes
developing the model 65


are paid when the penalties/detection are greater. Specifically, the tax revenues
raised from a tax rate of ts are
(1 − ̂ (ts , ds
)) tsω.
We can now express fiscal capacity as
τs = τˆ (ds
) = mtax
{(1 − ̂ (t , ds
)) tω} .
Once again, investments that increase ds will increase tax revenue for a given
tax rate ts by increasing compliance.
Tax Morale The model becomes more interesting if we consider a role for social
norms in affecting the level of tax compliance. Suppose that the cost of cheating
is q (ds , , ̂ ). Thus as well as being a function of one’s own compliance cost,
the cost depends on the equilibrium fraction of those who choose to comply:
̂ . A plausible interpretation of this formulation is as a model of stigma/shame,
where the perceived stigma/shame from being caught cheating depends on how
many others chose to comply. If q̂ < 0, i.e., an increasing fraction of cheaters
lowers the perceived cost of cheating, then there is a possibility of multiple
compliance equilibria. This could suggest a role for tax culture in affecting the
level of compliance. A country with a strong culture of compliance may find
it much cheaper to achieve a similar level of fiscal capacity compared to one
where the norm is unfavorable. This issue has been discussed by economists
and political scientists, e.g., Levi (1998), Rothstein (2000), and Torgler (2007).
Naturally, what goes into q (.) and how it behaves as a function of its argu
ments is somewhat open. One could, e.g., assume that the willingness to cheat
on taxes depends on the taxpayers’ perception of how the money is allocated.
Suppose, for instance, that the willingness to cheat depends negatively on the
expected level of public goods provided, gs. In such a setting, ̂ would depend
negatively on gs and, hence, indirectly on θ . That is to say, a country with
more cohesive institutions would achieve higher tax compliance in equilib
rium, everything else being equal. This would create a complementarity between
higher θ and the costs of investing in fiscal capacity. It also hints at the idea of
complying with taxation as a form of contract between citizens and govern
ment, where public goods are provide in exchange for greater compliance.
This discussion has been speculative and sketchy. But the issue of tax morale
is certainly important and it is plausible that it contributes to the high tax take
in many European countries. The idea of tax morale also goes to the heart
66 chapter two: fiscal capacity


of debates about state legitimacy, a concept we do not touch on further in the
present book. But the interactions among norms of compliance, state legitimacy,
fiscal capacity, and institutions constitute an interesting and important topic for
further research.
2.2.2 More General Models for Public Goods
We derived the results of fiscal-capacity investments under the assumption that
the preferences for public goods were linear with a value of public goods that
was stochastic with a two-point distribution. In this subsection, we investigate
some implications of relaxing this assumption.
Quasi-Linearity To see the implications of the linearity assumption, assume
that preferences are quasi-linear with
uJ
s = cJ
s + αV (gs),
where V (.) is a concave function and α is a known and constant parameter
in each period. This formulation captures the natural feature of diminishing
marginal utility of public goods. As noted in our discussion of equation (2.5),
we now have the possibility of an interior solution to the level of public-goods
provision. If Vg (0) → ∞ as g → 0, then the solution is always interior. This
adds greater realism, as the government allocates resources to achieve a mix of
transfers and public-good spending.
A key observation in this case is that the marginal value of public funds
becomes
λs = max {αVg
(G (α, τs
)) , 2 (1 − θ )} .
New Euler Equation This formulation of the demand for public goods does
not change the basic insights of the model. However, the Euler equation for
investing in fiscal and legal capacity does require modification. The expected
marginal value of public funds is now
E (λ2
) = γ λ2 + (1 − γ ) λL
2,
where
λL
2=
{
αVg
(G (α, τs
)) if αVg
(G (α, τs
)) ≥ 2 (1 − θ )
2θ otherwise.
developing the model 67


Once again, there will be a positive demand for investing in fiscal capacity
provided that E (λ2
) ≥ 1. Now, define τ ∗
2 from
ω[αVg
(R + τ ∗
2 ω) − 1] = Fτ
(τ ∗
2 − (1 − δ) τ1
) (2.11)
as the level of fiscal capacity that would be chosen by a Pigouvian planner,
assuming that τ ∗
2 > (1 − δ)τ1, i.e., the starting point is one where the state is
smaller than would be ideal. It equates the marginal value of public goods in a
common-interest state with the marginal cost of investing.
Different Types of States The cohesiveness condition is now modified to
Cohesiveness: αVg
(R + τ ∗
2 ω) ≥ 2 (1 − θ ) .
Once more, this is guaranteed to hold for θ close enough to 1/2. When it holds,
the Pigouvian level of fiscal capacity is sustainable since all spending is on public
goods. The stability condition is modified to
Stability: 2 [(1 − γ ) (1 − θ ) + γ θ ] ≥ 1.
This is bound to hold if θ and γ are close to zero.
We now have a characterization of states comparable to what we found in the
core model and the interpretation is similar. As in the core model, a common
interest state only spends on public goods. The cost of investing in fiscal capacity
implies that the optimal government size in the common-interest state always
falls short of that implied by the Lindahl-Samuelson rule, which in this context
would satisfy αVg (g) − 1 = 0. This is because the cost of building the state
has to be taken into account in determining the optimal size of government.
However, such cost-of-building effects are typically not considered in standard
public-finance models.
Redistributive and weak states allocate marginal fiscal capacity to transfers.
A redistributive or weak state spends on a mixture of public goods and transfers,
and even less is spent on public goods in such states. The logic of weak states
is the same; it is not worthwhile to build fiscal capacity when it is likely to be
spent on transfers paid to the other group.
Natural Resources This version of the model makes an even sharper prediction
about the impact of natural resource intensity on the incentive to invest in
68 chapter two: fiscal capacity


fiscal capacity. Differentiating (2.11), we observe that
∂τ∗
2
∂R = αVgg
(R + τ ∗
2 ω)
Fτ τ
(τ ∗
2 −(1−δ)τ1
)
ω − αωVgg
(R + τ ∗
2 ω) < 0,
i.e., the demand for fiscal capacity by a Pigouvian government is lower when
natural resources are greater.
The model suggests the possibility of an extreme rentier state if the following
condition is satisfied:
αVg (R) < 2 (1 − θ ).
In this case, we have a state that has so many natural resources that it is already
spending as much on public goods as it would like to given the quality of its
institutions. If such a state builds fiscal capacity further, then it is only for
the purpose of enhancing its redistributive capacity as would be the case in
a redistributive state.
This argument illustrates how natural resources can have both local and
global comparative statics—affecting the type of state that emerges and the level
of fiscal capacity within a state type (when the state is common interest). The
global effects can be negative or positive, depending on whether the stability
condition holds.
A Continuous Distribution of Public-Goods Values We now develop the core
model to include a continuous valuation of public goods, but revert to linear
demand. Instead of a two-point distribution of αs , we assume a continuous
distribution αs ∈ [1, αH
] , with αH > 2 with a distribution function H (α).15 In
this case, there is a critical value of α equal to 2 (1 − θ ) above which all public
spending is on public goods.
We now have to modify the expression for (2.9) to
E(λ2) = [1 − H (2 (1 − θ ))] E {α : α ≥ 2 (1 − θ )}
+ H (2 (1 − θ )) 2[(1 − θ )(1 − γ ) + γ θ ].
A change in the demand for public goods can now be stated in terms of a
first-order stochastically dominating shift in the distribution of α. Such a shift
15. This was basically the model used in Besley and Persson (2009b).
developing the model 69


will raise the demand for fiscal capacity and represents an increase in common
interests.
A weak state remains a discrete category and arises if E (λ2
) < 1. The main
change in the analysis is that the concept of a common-interest state becomes
less well defined; all economies with θ < 1/2 will have some underprovision of
public goods in the sense that the politically optimal choice of public goods is
lower than the Pigouvian optimum in the interval αs ∈ [1, 2 (1 − θ )]. One could
define a common-interest state in a strict sense as θ = 1/2, but this is possibly too
stark a definition. It is better to think about having either stronger or weaker
redistributive or common-interest motives for building fiscal capacity. States
can then move further away from, or closer to, being a common-interest state
depending on the values of θ and γ . As long as θ < 1/2, an increase in γ reduces
investment in fiscal capacity.
2.2.3 Polarization/Heterogeneity
Thus far, we have assumed that there is a common way of valuing public goods
across the two groups. However, this need not be the case, as has been forcefully
argued by Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999) among others.
Introducing Polarization in Preferences Studying group-specific values offers
a simple way of investigating the effect of polarization/heterogeneity between
the two groups. To explore this, we now assume that the demand for public
goods can be imperfectly correlated across the two groups. This may be due
to cross-cutting cleavages in society such as ethnicity, language, or religion.16
To make things clean, we allow the incumbent and opposition groups to have
different valuations, but assume that these are drawn from the same two-point
distribution {αH , αL
}. Thus, let {αI
s , αO
s
} be the realizations of the valuations
of public goods for groups I and O in period s and let the parameter
(1 − ι) = Prob{αO
s = z|αI
s = z} ≤ 1
measure the correlation between the valuations. Now, we can capture greater
polarization by higher values of ι, because this means that it is less likely that
interests will be aligned. This generalizes our baseline model which implicitly
assumed that ι = 0.
16. This could be microfounded by allowing the incumbent to choose a mix of public goods.
70 chapter two: fiscal capacity


In this discussion and what follows, we refer to polarization and heterogene
ity interchangeably. This makes sense in a two-group model like ours, although
in a multigroup setting these are conceptually distinct.17 However, in the empir
ical analysis that follows, we focus on heterogeneity, specifically a measure of
fractionalization that we feel is a reasonable way of capturing the likelihood of
preference diversity.
The Marginal Cost of Public Funds Revisited With this modification, the
realized marginal cost of public funds in period s is λs = max {αI
s , 2 (1 − θ )},
i.e., it depends on the incumbent group’s valuation of public goods. To see the
implications for investing in fiscal capacity, we have to pin down E(λ2), the
expected value of public funds for the period-1 incumbent, since this affects
the incentive to invest in fiscal capacity via equation (2.8). Now, let φ denote
the probability that the period-2 value of public goods is high for whomever is
the period-2 incumbent. Then, the expression for E(λ2) becomes
E(λ2) = φ [αH (1 − γ ι) + αLγ ι] + (1 − φ)λL
2 , (2.12)
where λL
2 is now defined as
λL
2=
{ [αL (1 − γ ι) + αH γ ι] if αL ≥ 2(1 − θ )
2[(1 − θ )(1 − γ ) + γ θ ] otherwise.
Since the decision rights belong to the incumbent, the probability of retaining
political control now has an effect on the expected value of public funds,
even when the incumbent chooses to provide public goods. This is because the
opposition sometimes has a low valuation of public goods when the current
incumbent has a high valuation.
Cohesiveness and Polarization/Heterogeneity When the cohesiveness condition
holds, we have that E(λ2) = φαH + (1 − φ)αL, so the unconditional expectation
of λ2 is independent of polarization. However, when the cohesiveness condition
fails, we have
E(λ2) = φ [αH − γ ι(αH − αL)] + (1 − φ) 2[(1 − θ )(1 − γ ) + γ θ ].
17. See Esteban and Ray (1994) for a discussion of how to measure polarization.
developing the model 71


If we define α ̃H = [αH − γ ι(αH − αL)] as the “effective value of public goods”
in the high-value state, we see that more polarization effectively lowers α ̃H and,
hence, weakens common interests. Thus
d E (λ2)
dι = −γ φ(αH − αL) < 0,
i.e., higher polarization lowers the expected value of future public revenue, and
this effect is more pronounced when political instability is high. Applying this
result to the investment problem for the incumbent, we have the following new
result:
Proposition 2.5: If Cohesiveness fails, increased polarization/heterogeneity, as
measured by a higher value of ι, decreases fiscal-capacity investments in a
redistributive state and raises the likelihood that the economy is in a weak
state. Both of these effects are larger when there is greater political instability
(a higher value of γ ).
Thus, the model now predicts a role for polarization/heterogeneity reducing
fiscal capacity investments in noncohesive polities.
This result rhymes with the findings of Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999),
who discuss how ethnic divisions result in a weaker incentive to provide public
goods. This effect does not appear in our framework with a linear demand
for public goods (although it would be easy to modify the model to include
this feature). Instead, our model predicts a weaker motive to invest in fiscal
capacity, conditional on being in a redistributive state. Thus in such cases we
would expect a negative correlation between the level of public-goods spending
and polarization. The model also predicts that ethnic (or religious or linguistic)
divisions raise the likelihood that we end up with a weak state that does not
invest anything in increasing fiscal capacity. Both these effects are stronger the
higher is political instability because a shift in power is more fearsome to the
incumbent the less correlated the preferences for public goods across groups.18
In this case, the local and global comparative statics go in the same direction.
We return to the prediction in Proposition 2.5 in Section 2.3, when we explore
the partial correlations in the data.
18. At a general level, the result is also related to the insight in Alesina and Tabellini (1990) that the incentive to issue debt increases with political polarization.
72 chapter two: fiscal capacity


2.2.4 Income Inequality
The symmetry assumption made in our core model is helpful analytically but
is unrealistic. This subsection considers asymmetric income levels and the next
looks at asymmetric group sizes.
Naturally, income inequality can also be viewed as a source of polarization
in society, as has been argued forcefully by Esteban and Ray (1994). Income
inequality can also be closely associated with political instability, as has been
shown empirically by Alesina and Perotti (1996). We do not pursue these
channels here, but they are interesting avenues for future research.
Income Structure and Taxation In standard models, income inequality is an
important determinant of decisions to tax income. A simple model of state
capacity investment in the presence of income inequality is presented in Besley
and Persson (2009b). Extensions of that framework with an emphasis on
income inequality have been pursued by C  ́ardenas (2010) and C  ́ardenas and
Tuzemen (2010).
To explore this issue here, we consider a difference in wages between the
incumbent and opposition groups with ωJ for J ∈ {I , O}. For simplicity, let
there be two levels of the wage: ωJ ∈ {ωL, ωH }. Let ω now denote the average
wage, ω = (ωH + ωL) /2. The transfers out of any residual tax revenue, i.e., the
revenue not spent on public goods or creating fiscal capacity, are constrained
by political institutions as in the core model.
After we plug in the transfer level, group J ’s utility function is
αsgs + (1 − ts)ωJ + βJ [R − tsω − gs − ms],
where βI = 2 (1 − θ ) and βO = 2θ .
Fiscal capacity is now fully utilized only if
λs ≥ ωI
ω,
i.e., if the marginal value of public funds is greater than the ratio of the
incumbent’s income share to average income, following the same logic as in
Meltzer and Richards (1981). If the period-s incumbent is poorer than average,
this will definitely hold and ts = τs as in the baseline case.
developing the model 73


When the incumbent is richer than average, there are three cases to consider:
1. High inequality: Rich incumbents will not choose to levy any income
tax to fund either transfers or public goods, i.e., ts = 0. This occurs
if the value of public goods is too low compared to the cost of
taxation, i.e.,
αH < ωH
ω.
In this case G (αH
) = G (αL
) = 0, where G (αs
) denotes the politi
cally optimal provision of public goods as a function of the period-s
valuation.
2. Moderate inequality: An income tax is levied by a rich incumbent (at
ts = τs) only when αs = αH . In this case,
αH ≥ ωH
ω > max {2 (1 − θ ) , aL
}.
We then have G (αH
) = τsω − ms and G (αL
) = 0.
3. Low inequality: Fiscal capacity is always used maximally by the
incumbent, ts = τs. This holds if
max {2 (1 − θ ) , aL
} ≥ ωH
ω.
In this case G (αH
) = τsω − ms, and G (αL
) = 0 if αL < 2 (1 − θ ),
whereas G (αL
) = τsω − ms if αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ ) . This is essentially the
same as in the core model.
We summarize the choice of taxation in these three cases in terms of two
functions: T (ωI , αs
) for the income tax rate and G (αs
) for public goods.
Fiscal-Capacity Investments Revisited We now consider the implications of
income inequality for investing in fiscal capacity. Using the analysis in the
previous subsection, we find that the “indirect” payoff function for group
J ∈ {I , O} in period s becomes
W (αs , τs , ms , ωJ , βJ ) = αsG (αs
) + (1 − T
(
ωI , αs
)
)ωJ
+ βJ [T
(
ωI , αs
)
ω − G (αs
) − ms].
74 chapter two: fiscal capacity


We can now define value functions for these cases, which now depend on ωJ .
These are denoted by
UI (
τ2, ωI )
=
[
φW (αH , τ2, 0, ωI , βI ) + (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, 0, ωI , βI )]
and
UO (
τ2, ωO)
=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, 0, ωO , βO)
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, 0, ωO , βO)]
.
The expected two-period utility of the incumbent in period 1 is
W (α1, τ1, F (τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1
) , ωI , 2 (1 − θ )) (2.13)
+ [1 − γ ] U I (
τ2, ωI )
+ γUO (
τ2, ωI )
.
In close analogy with the core model, the optimal level of fiscal capacity
maximizes this expression by the choice of τ2. As we are interested in how
equilibrium depends on ωI , we denote the solution by τ ̃2
(ωI ).
Before proceeding to the detailed analysis, we offer a bird’s-eye preview of
the results. If the incumbent is poor, ωI = ωL, it will tend to boost his investment
in fiscal capacity (compared to the model without any inequality). Intuitively,
a poor incumbent pays a smaller share of the cost of fiscal capacity than the
average citizen. By the same token, richer incumbents are less keen on fiscal
capacity. Whether this leads to greater or smaller fiscal capacity depends on the
joint distribution of economic and political power, i.e., whether the incumbents
are more likely to be rich or poor.
Modified Euler Equation To flesh this out, observe that maximizing (2.13) by
choice of τ2 yields the following modified version of our Euler equation,
ω[(E(λ2; ωI ) − ωI
ω ] ≤ λ1
(
ωI )
Fτ
(τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1
) (2.14)
c.s. τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1 ≥ 0,
where λ1
(ωI ) = max {α1, 2 (1 − θ ) , ωI /ω}. As before, E (λ2; ωI ) denotes the
expected value of period-2 public revenues. This depends on the incumbent’s
income level, a dependence that we now explore formally. What matters for
investment in fiscal capacity is to compare E (λ2; ωI ) to an incumbent’s income
share ωI /ω; this represents the cost-benefit ratio of an increase in the income-tax
rate, i.e., the so-called tax price of public spending.
developing the model 75


Low Inequality With low inequality,
E(λ2; ωI ) = φαH + (1 − φ)λL
2 (2.15)
for ωI ∈ {ωL, ωH
}, with λL
2 defined as in (2.10) above. We now have τ ̃2
(ωL) >
τ ̃2
(ωH ), i.e., poorer incumbents invest more in fiscal capacity whenever fiscal
capacity investments are positive. In this case, inequality has an effect purely
via its consequences for the costs and benefits of raising taxes. We call this the
tax-price effect of inequality. In every case, fiscal capacity is fully utilized.
Moderate Inequality With moderate inequality,
E(λ2; ωH ) =
{ φαH + (1 − φ)γ αL αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ )
φαH + (1 − φ)γ 2θ otherwise
and
E(λ2; ωL) = φαH + (1 − φ) (1 − γ ) max {αL, 2 (1 − θ )} .
The marginal value of fiscal capacity is reduced for both rich and poor incum
bents because a rich incumbent does not utilize fiscal capacity when α2 = αL.
This constitutes a further dampener on a rich incumbent’s incentive to invest
in fiscal capacity since λ1 = ωH /ω > max {αL, 2 (1 − θ )} is the period-1 real
ization of the value of public goods when α1 = αL. But the higher inequality
will boost the poor’s decision owing to a larger tax-price effect than with low
inequality.
High Inequality Finally, with high inequality,
E(λ2; ωH ) =
{ γ [φαH + (1 − φ)αL
] αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ )
γ [φαH + (1 − φ)2θ ] otherwise
and
E(λ2; ωL) = (1 − γ ) [φαH + (1 − φ) max {αL, 2 (1 − θ )}] .
Moreover, λ1 = ωH /ω > max {αL, 2 (1 − θ )} all of the time. Since the rich
incumbent does not utilize available fiscal capacity, such capacity is useful only
when the incumbent is poor. Again, this will tend to undermine investment
76 chapter two: fiscal capacity


efforts by both groups. However, as in the case of moderate inequality, there is
a boost to the poor’s decision owing to a larger tax-price effect.
Taking Stock Looking at the overall picture, we do not find a clear-cut
implication of greater income inequality for the decision to invest in fiscal
capacity. However, things become somewhat clearer if we combine economic
inequality with political inequality. A natural case to consider is the one where
the rich are in power and expect to remain so that ωI = ωH and γ = 0. Here,
high inequality will result in a fiscally weaker state and in the case of moderate
inequality, this situation can be remedied only by sufficiently strong common
interests (high φ). This is thus an important caveat to the observation in the core
model that political stability would lead to the emergence of a redistributive
state. That logic is restored only if inequality is not too great, or the group in
power is not rich, or common interests are strong enough.
C  ́ardenas and Tuzemen (2010) use a similar model and allow for income
inequality between two groups, called Elites and Citizens. When the (richer)
Elites are in power, in the presence of political instability both income and
political inequality lead to lower investment in state capacity. Conversely, if
the (poorer) Citizens rule, high political and income inequality results in higher
investment in state capacity.
The value of cohesive institutions is also undermined by high levels of
inequality, since αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ ) is no longer sufficient for a common-interest
state to emerge. Indeed, even if θ → 1/2 and the rich hold power, there need
not be any incentive to invest in fiscal capacity. With income-tax finance, the
tax price of public spending for the rich may simply be too high for investing
in fiscal capacity to be worthwhile.
The bottom line in this subsection is that there are good reasons to expect
income inequality to play an important role in the development of fiscal capac
ity. Even though the effects are not completely straightforward, our considered
expectation is that low inequality is more likely to foster large investments in fis
cal capacity. Given that a high level of income inequality curtails the investment
incentives particularly for a rich incumbent, this conclusion is strengthened if
we are willing to assume that economic power and political power tend to
go hand in hand.19 Ca ́ rdenas (2010) considers the question empirically, using
19. We have assumed in this discussion that the rich cannot destroy fiscal capacity. But if they could, it would sometimes be optimal for them to do so.
developing the model 77


cross-sectional data for more than 100 countries and finds that political and
(especially) economic inequality appears to be associated with lower incentives
to invest in state capacity. He uses income inequality to explain Latin America’s
generally underdeveloped fiscal capacity.
2.2.5 Differences in Group Size
To consider another source of asymmetry, which is not present in the basic
framework, suppose that the two groups differ in size. In our structure, the
relevant consideration is the fraction of the population in the group represented
by the incumbent. Thus, let ρJ , J ∈ {I , O} be the fraction of the population in
each group.
The main effect on the model from this type of asymmetry works through
the incentive to allocate transfers. The government budget constraint at date s
becomes
R + tsω = gs + ms + ρI rI
s+
(
1− ρI)
rO
s.
Given our institutional constraint, i.e., that rO
s ≥ σrI
s , we now have
rI
s= 1
ρI + (1 − ρI ) σ
[R + tsω − gs − ms
]
≡2
(
1 − θ I ) [R + tsω − gs − ms
],
where θ I ∈
[ ρI −1/2
ρI , 1
2
]
and
rO
s = 2θ O [Rs + tsω − gs − ms
],
with θ O ≡ σ (1 − θ I ) ∈
[
0, 1
2
] .
By sticking to the θ representation of institutions, the comparison with
the core model is clearer. The main difference is that now we have separate
parameters for the incumbent and the opposition determining their share of
transfers as a function of the size of their group.
Policy There is now the possibility that if ρI < 1/2, then we can have θ I < 0
if σ is low enough. This would imply that 2 (1 − θ I ) > 2. Intuitively, when a
small group is in office, making transfers becomes more attractive. For a given
σ , a dollar of tax revenue devoted to transfers goes disproportionately to the
incumbent group. At the other extreme, where ρI → 1, there is essentially one
large group so that θ I = 1/2 even if σ = 0. A group that makes up close to the
78 chapter two: fiscal capacity


full population finds it unattractive to redistribute via transfers because it pays
for such transfers out of its own pocket.
Using these new definitions of θ J , we find it fairly straightforward to derive
the implications for politically optimal policy and state-capacity investments.
Whether a government now chooses to spend on public goods depends on
whether 2 (1 − θ I ) ≤ αs. For a given σ , this is more likely if a large group is
in office compared to the core model. The flipside of this is that small elites in
power are less likely to pursue common-interest policies, all else being equal. In
such a case, there may well be no spending on public goods, even when αs = αH .
We now focus on this case, which arises when σ < 1 and ρI is small enough.
This is one way of using the model to think about “corrupt rule” by a small
elite. All spending is on transfers to the ruling elite, so we have λ1 = 2 (1 − θ I ).
The only possibility is now a redistributive state (at least in period 1).
Fiscal-Capacity Investments The fiscal-capacity Euler equation becomes
ω[2
[
(1 − γ )
(
1− θI)
+ γθO]
−1] = ω[2
(
1− θI)
[(1 − γ (1 − σ ))] − 1] (2.16)
≤2
(
1− θI)
Fτ
(τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1
) (2.17)
c.s. τ2 − (1 − δ) τ1 ≥ 0,
The condition for investment in fiscal capacity is now that (1 − θ I )
[(1 − γ (1 − σ ))] > 1/2. A fall in ρI , a smaller elite in power, now boosts the
incentive to invest.
The other side of the coin is that the larger the group in office, the better
its incentives to invest. Indeed, a change in political power from a narrow elite
to a larger group may move the country from a redistributive to a common
interest state. It is not immediately clear whether this boosts demand for fiscal
capacity, since that would depend on φ. However, a shift in power will lead to
a very different pattern of public spending with resources allocated to public
goods rather than to transfers favoring a narrow elite.
2.2.6 Tax Distortions
The core model assumes that levying an income tax has no disincentive effect.
This is easily modified by introducing a variable labor supply. Let preferences be
uJ
s = cJ
s + αsgs − + 1
(
lJ
s
) +1
,
developing the model 79


where lJ
s is labor supply by a member of group J in period s and is the labor
supply elasticity. This formulation continues to neglect income effects in labor
supply, which allows us to study policy and investment decisions separately.
Labor Supply and Tax Revenue The labor-supply function associated with the
previous preferences is
lJ
s = [(1 − ts
) ω] .
The response of labor supply to net wages leads to a standard deadweight
loss associated with a higher income-tax rate. The indirect utility function is
modified to
αsgs +
(ω (1 − ts
))1+
1+ + rI
s,
and the revenue from income tax is
ts
(1 − ts
) ω1+ .
Using these, we modify the government budget constraint to
R + ts
(1 − ts
) ω1+ = gs + ms + rI
s + rO
s
2.
The Optimal Income Tax Rate Determining the optimal income-tax rate now
resembles a more or less standard problem. Using the observation that
rI
s = 2 (1 − θ )
[
R + ts
(1 − ts
) ω1+ − ms − gs
] ,
we choose the public-goods level and the income-tax rate to maximize
αsgs +
(ω (1 − ts
))1+
1 + + 2 (1 − θ )
[
R + ts
(1 − ts
) ω1+ − ms − gs
] ,
subject to ts ≤ τs. This yields a politically optimal income tax of
t∗
s = min
{
τs ,
[λs − 1]
[λs (1 + ) − 1]
}
,
with λs = max {αs , 2 (1 − θ )}. The public-goods choice is exactly the same as
in the core model.
80 chapter two: fiscal capacity


This income tax is increasing in the shadow value of public revenue, λs,
which depends on whether the marginal unit of public revenues is allocated
to transfers or public goods. Two cases can arise. If λs is high enough, then
all fiscal capacity is utilized and t∗
s = τs. Alternatively, we can have an interior
solution, t∗
s < τs, where the level of the income tax is chosen to trade off the
value of public spending, as represented by λs, against the deadweight loss. The
result is a standard inverse elasticity (Ramsey) rule that a larger labor-supply
elasticity is associated with a lower optimal tax rate.
Underutilization of Fiscal Capacity? The second possibility of an interior
optimal tax rate raises a question. Given that there is a cost in building it up,
would a government ever wish to have a level of fiscal capacity where some of
that capacity is left unused? To understand this, we have to revisit the investment
decision. Suppose, first of all, that
min {αL, 2 (1 − θ )} ≥
(
1 − τ1 (1 − δ)
1 − τ1 (1 − δ)
)−1 .
This condition is bound to hold if the initial fiscal capacity level is low. This
says that if there is no investment in fiscal capacity, then the incumbent group
will fully utilize all of the fiscal capacity available to it in period 2.
Now define T (z) from
ω1+ (1 − T (z)) [z
(
1 − T (z)
1 − T (z)
)
− 1] ≤ Fτ
(T (z) − (1 − δ) τ1
) λ1
c.s. T (z) − (1 − δ) τ1 ≥ 0. (2.18)
This is the value of period-2 fiscal capacity that solves the fiscal-capacity Euler
equation when z is the expected value of fiscal capacity.20 It is clear that z
≤ E (λ2
), where E (λ2
) is defined in (3.6).21 A sufficient condition for some
investment in fiscal capacity is that
z≥ 1
(
1 − τ1(1−δ)
1−τ1(1−δ)
) . (2.19)
20. Formally:
T (z) = arg mτax
{
(ω (1 − τ ))1+
1+ +z
[
τ (1 − τ ) ω1+ ]
− λ1F (τ − (1 − δ) τ1
)}
21. The fact that z ≤ E (λ2
) is due to the possibility of unused fiscal capacity in period 2.
developing the model 81


To understand this condition, observe that if there is no investment the amount
of fiscal capacity left over after period 1 is (1 − δ) τ1. Since the right-hand side of
(2.19) is more demanding than z ≥ 1, the deadweight loss from taxation makes
investing in fiscal capacity less desirable. So the value of period-2 public goods
has to make the value of an extra dollar of public revenue more valuable when
we allow for any deadweight loss from the income tax.
In any investment optimum, there will be full utilization of all fiscal capacity
when α2 = αH . Otherwise, the marginal value of investing in additional fiscal
capacity would be zero, i.e.,
1 = αH
(
1 − τ2
1 − τ2
)
> E (λ2
)(
1 − τ2
1 − τ2
)
≥z
(
1 − τ2
1 − τ2
) ,
so that (2.19) cannot hold. This has interesting consequences for the standard
optimal income-tax model, which ignores investment costs. Our model predicts
that, since it is costly to build fiscal capacity, the government will sometimes be
constrained in the income-tax rate that it sets.
However, on other occasions, the unconstrained optimum income tax, i.e.,
underutilization of fiscal capacity, may be chosen by the period-2 incumbent.
A sufficient condition for an optimum where fiscal capacity is not fully utilized
when α2 = αL is that
[min {αL, 2 (1 − θ )} − 1]
[min {αL, 2 (1 − θ )} (1 + ) − 1] < T (φαH
).
This will hold if φαH is large enough, i.e., there is a strong enough desire to
build fiscal capacity in anticipation of a high demand for public goods, as would
be the case under a high risk of war or a deep economic crisis.
In general, the upper bound on fiscal capacity predicted by the model is
given by
τ2 =
[E (λ2
) − 1]
[E (λ2
) (1 + ) − 1] .
This level is below the fiscal capacity needed to pursue the revenue-maximizing
income-tax rate, i.e., the Laffer rate, which is τ2 = 1/ (1 + ).
In summary, this extension of the core model does not lead to any important
changes in logic. But it does incorporate more standard limits on the size of
government owing to considerations of deadweight loss. Specifically, a greater
elasticity of the tax base with regard to the tax rate will tend to diminish
82 chapter two: fiscal capacity


the demand for fiscal capacity, at least fiscal capacity as generated via the
income tax.
2.2.7 From Trade to Income Taxes
We now discuss what happens in the presence of an additional tax base.
Given the raw data presented in the introduction to this chapter, it is of
particular interest to study taxation of trade. This will allow us to think about
an important issue in fiscal-capacity building: the move from reliance on trade
taxes to reliance on income taxes in the process of economic development. For
simplicity, we revert to the simple case of no deadweight losses in the income
tax, although these could be retained at the cost of some algebraic complexity.22
Goods and Prices To explore this issue, we formulate a different utility function
to that in the core model, namely
uJ
s = αsgs + xA,J
s +ε
ε−1
(
xM,J
s
) ε−1
ε,
where xK ,J
s is the demand for good K ∈ {A, M} in period s. To fix ideas, think
of A as an agricultural good and M as a manufactured good. These goods can
both be imported and exported. Labor produces ω units of agricultural goods
and ω
κ units of manufactures where κ > 1. We have in mind a world in which
manufactures are imported and the government is able to tax these imports.
The price of the agricultural good is normalized to 1. The time-invariant world
price of manufactures, P , is assumed to lie in the interval P < κ + ψ, where ψ
represents trade costs.
We suppose that there is a ready technology for freely raising revenues from
tariffs and that, as earlier, fiscal capacity increases the ability to raise revenue
from an income tax. The consumer price of manufactures differs from the
world price, owing to a tariff zs, and is denoted by Qs = P − ψ + zs. Since the
parameter ψ represents trade costs, we can interpret its inverse as a measure of
“natural” openness.
Trade and Tariff Revenues The demand for manufactures is given by
xM,J
s = Q−ε
s.
22. This section is based on Besley and Persson (2010c) who consider deadweight losses from both tax bases.
developing the model 83


As in our treatment of labor supply, we simplify by not allowing for an income
effect on the demand for the taxed good. The tariff revenue from imported
manufactures is therefore
zs
(P − ψ + zs
)−ε
and the government budget constraint is modified to
R + tsω + zs
(P − ψ + zs
)−ε = gs + ms + rI
s + rO
s
2.
The only change from the core model is the additional revenue source in the
form of trade taxes. The government is limited in its ability to raise tariff revenue
by the fact that when the tariff rate becomes too high, it becomes attractive to
produce manufactures domestically and the trade tax base collapses. This will
happen if P − ψ + z ≥ κ. Assume that
−zε [P − ψ + z]−(1+ε) + (P − ψ + z)−ε > 0 for all z ∈ [0, κ − P + ψ].
This condition says that tax revenue is always increasing in the level of the
tariff up to the “choke price,” κ − P + ψ. The tariff revenue limit is therefore
reached at z = κ − P + ψ.
Equilibrium Taxes The incumbent group’s transfers now become
rI
s = 2 (1 − θ )
[
R + tsω + zs
(P − ψ + zs
)−ε − ms − gs
] .
For the same reasons as in the core model, it remains optimal to set ts = τs. Thus
it follows that the provision of public goods and the tariff rate will maximize
αsgs + (P + z)1−ε
ε − 1 + 2 (1 − θ )
[
R + τsω+zs
(P − ψ + zs
)−ε − ms − gs
] .
Defining Z (λ) from:
λ
[
−Zε [P − ψ + Z]−(1+ε) + [P − ψ + Z]−ε]
− [P − ψ + Z]−ε ≤ 0
c.s. Z ≥ 0,
we can state the optimal tariff rate as
z∗
s = min {κ − P + ψ , Z (λs
)}.
84 chapter two: fiscal capacity


As in the case of the income tax in the previous subsection, this follows standard
Ramsey-taxation logic. The tariff is set to raise revenue for either transfers or
public goods. Whenever the upper bound is not attained, the optimal tariff
solves
z∗
s
P + zs∗
=
[ λs − 1
λs
]1
ε,
which is inversely related to the demand elasticity. Clearly, the tariff is higher
when the value of public funds, λs, is higher. As before, the latter equals either
α, when public goods are provided, or 2 (1 − θ) , when public revenues finance
transfers.
Trade-Tax and Income-Tax Shares To examine the shares of the two tax bases
in total tax revenue, define
ηs = z∗
s
(P − ψ + z∗
s
)−ε
R + zs∗
(P − ψ + zs∗
)−ε + τsω
(2.20)
as the ratio of tariff revenue to total government revenue. It is clear that this is
decreasing in τs.
In this very simple model, the condition for the optimal investment in fiscal
capacity τs is essentially identical to that in the core model. So our predictions
about investment levels for three types of states carry over directly and now
become predictions about the share of tariff revenue in total tax revenue. The
model thus predicts that an increase in fiscal capacity raises total revenue and
decreases the revenue share of tariffs. This prediction is consistent with the
patterns observed in the raw data and illustrated in Figure 2.3. Intuitively
this happens because we have assumed that fiscal-capacity accumulation only
increases the capacity to tax incomes.
It is worth remarking on what happens if we reintroduce curvature in the
value of public goods. As in Section 2.2.2, let the value of public goods be
αV (g), where V (.) is increasing and concave. Then, the demand for public
goods is given by
αVg
(gˆs
) = 2 (1 − θ ) ,
assuming an interior solution. Public-goods demand will be at gˆs if fiscal
capacity is great enough. Otherwise, all taxes will be devoted to spending on
public goods. The marginal value of public funds is therefore
λs = max
{
αVg
(
R + τsω + zs
(P − ψ + zs
)−ε − ms
)
, 2 (1 − θ )
} .
developing the model 85


In this case, as fiscal capacity τs accumulates and the economy is constrained,
there is a reduction in the optimal tariff rate since this depends positively on
λs. Tariffs reach a minimum at Z (2 (1 − θ )) , which goes to zero as θ → 1/2,
i.e., when political institutions are fully cohesive. This is because a common
interest state has no redistributive reason to levy a tariff. The declining tariff
rate prediction reinforces the switch from tariff revenues to income-tax revenues
that we previously obtained solely through an increase in τs in the denominator
of (2.20). Note that the switch from tariffs to income taxes will be diminished
if incumbents have more revenue from natural resources or aid, R, available
to them.
2.2.8 An Infinite-Horizon Model
Given that we are studying only a two-period structure, our appeal to dynamics
might be viewed with some suspicion. Thus, we now explore what happens
when the model is extended to an infinite-horizon setting.23 We simplify on
other fronts to make this tractable and so assume nonstochastic quasi-linear
preferences for public goods, with a constant α multiplying V (gs); a linear
investment technology for fiscal capacity, Fτ = f ; and the absence of any
nontax revenue, so that R = 0.
Time Structure Time is now infinite with time periods denoted by s = {1, 2, . . .}.
As in the two-period model, at any given date, s, one group is the incumbent,
denoted by Is ∈ {A, B}, and the other group is the opposition, denoted by
Os ∈ {A, B}. At the beginning of each period, there is an exogenous probability
γ of a peaceful transition of power, so that Is = Is−1. With probability 1 − γ ,
the incumbent remains in power so that Is = Is−1. These transition probabilities
are independently and identically distributed over time.
Fiscal Capacity Income is constant over time and given by ω. An incumbent
enters period s with an accumulated stock of fiscal capacity, τs, which constrains
the choice of the current tax rate on income ts ≤ τs. We impose an upper bound
τ ̄ < 1, which may be interpreted as the highest technologically feasible tax rate,
as opposed to the highest institutionally feasible tax rate, which is τs. Fiscal
capacity depreciates at a rate δ in each period and the investment cost for
one unit of fiscal capacity is constant at f . In this case, we assume that fiscal
23. This section is based on Besley, Ilzetzki, and Persson (2010).
86 chapter two: fiscal capacity


capacity can be scrapped and “consumed,” i.e., fiscal capacity investments can
be negative. Throughout, we suppose that ω > 2δf . This assumption will hold
as long as the cost of maintaining the current stock of fiscal capacity is low
enough relative to the existing per capita endowment.
Policy and Indirect Utility The within-period political institutions constraining
transfers are identical to those in the core model. The government budget
constraint per period is
tsω ≥ gs + f (τs+1 − (1 − δ) τs
) + rI
s + rO
s
2 . (2.21)
The transfers accruing to each group are
rJ
s = βJ [tsω − gs − f (τs+1 − (1 − δ) τs
)],
where, as above, βI = 2 (1 − θ ) and βO = 2θ . As in the core model, it is always
optimal for the incumbent group to use all available fiscal capacity fully and
therefore to set ts = τs.
Given an inherited level of fiscal capacity τs, the indirect utility of group J
in period s is now
W
(
τs , gs , τs+1, βJ )
= αV (gs
) + βJ [τsω − gs − f (τs+1 − (1 − δ) τs
)]
+ (1 − τs
) ω. (2.22)
The Decision Problem We study a Markovian optimization problem for the
incumbent, where τ is the single state variable (conditional on the group that
holds power), using a particular equilibrium concept detailed in what follows.24
The value function of the incumbent, U I (τ ), can be defined recursively from
U I (τ ) = max
τ′,g
[
W (τ , g, τ ′, 2 (1 − θ )) + (1 − γ ) U I (τ ′) + γ U O (τ ′)]
(2.23)
subject to ωτ ≥ g + f (τ ′ − (1 − δ) τ ) (2.24)
and τ ′ ≤ τ ̄ . (2.25)
From here on, we suppress the time subscripts and let τ ′ denote the state capacity
left for the following period.
24. An interesting extension for the future would be to consider subgame perfection and a role for history-dependent strategies.
developing the model 87


We denote the policy functions that solve the incumbent’s problem by T (τ )
and G (τ ). Using these, we can also define the opposition’s value function
recursively from
U O (τ ) = W (τ , G (τ ) , T (τ ) , 2θ ) + γ U I (T (τ )) + (1 − γ ) U O (T (τ )). (2.26)
This expression recognizes that policy is governed by G (τ ) and T (τ ) and that
political power alternates with probability γ of the opposition becoming the
next government.
Equilibrium Definition Following Besley, Ilzetzki, and Persson (2010), we
look for a continuous symmetric Markov perfect equilibrium. This equilibrium
notion is formally stated as follows:
Definition: A continuous symmetric Markov perfect equilibrium (CSMPE) of
the dynamic state capacity game is a set of functions U I (τ ), U O (τ ), G (τ ),
and T (τ ) that satisfy the following conditions:
1. U I (τ ) satisfies (2.23) to (2.25).
2. G (τ ) and T (τ ) are the solutions for G and τ ′ in the maximization
problem (2.23) to (2.25).
3. U O (τ ) is given by (2.26).
4. The functions U I (τ ), U O (τ ), G (τ ), and T (τ ) are continuous for
all τ .
The model is a now a fully dynamic game, which we solve by characterizing
these functions.
The Generalized Euler Equations To study the equilibrium, observe that the
first-order conditions for g and τ ′ of the incumbent’s problem defined by (2.23)
to (2.25) are given by
αVg (g) = λ + 2 (1 − θ ) (2.27)
and
cαVg (g) ≤ (1 − γ ) U I
τ
(τ ′) + γ U O
τ
(τ ′) , (2.28)
88 chapter two: fiscal capacity


where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on (2.24). Equation (2.28) holds with
equality as long as (2.25) is not binding.
Note that λ = 0 whenever the public good is at gˆ, defined by
αVg
(gˆ) = 2 (1 − θ ) , (2.29)
which is essentially the interior solution from equation (2.5).
There is a cutoff point τ = τˆ at which government expenditures coincide
with gˆ, as defined in (2.29). Above τˆ, the incumbent optimally makes transfers.
State capacity evolves according to a generalized Euler equation, a nonlinear
second-order differential equation, which is discontinuous at τ = τˆ. We split this
equation into two, the first holding for choices of τ ′ ≥ τˆ and the second holding
for τ ′ < τˆ. When τ ′ ≥ τˆ, then
f αVg (g) = 2 (1 − θ ) (1 − γ ) [ω + f (1 − δ)] − ω (2.30)
+ 2γ θ [ω + f (1 − δ) − f Tτ
(τ ′)]
− (1 − γ ) [αVg
(g′′) (ω + f (1 − δ)) − ω − 2 (1 − θ ) f ] Tτ
(τ ′)
+ γ [αVg
(g′′) (ω + f (1 − δ)) − ω − 2θ c] Tτ
(τ ′) .
Furthermore, when τ ′ < τˆ, then
f αVg (g) = αVg
(g′) [ω + f (1 − δ)] − ω (2.31)
− (1 − γ ) [αVg
(g′′) (ω + f (1 − δ)) − ω − f αVg
(g′)] Tτ
(τ ′)
+ γ [αVg
(g′′) (ω + f (1 − δ)) − ω − f αVg
(g′)] Tτ
(τ ′) .
Although seemingly complex, these equations are quite intuitive.
In both cases, the left-hand side represents the opportunity cost of accumu
lating state capacity. The right-hand sides of (2.30) and (2.31) give the marginal
value of an additional unit of state capacity.
Pigouvian Benchmark It is worth briefly revisiting the Pigouvian solution in
this setting, where θ = 1/2 and γ = 0. The resulting problem boils down to a
more-or-less standard dynamic programming problem, with the value function
(2.23) written as
U I (τ ) = max
τ′,g
{
αV (g) + ω (1 − τ ) − g − f (τ ′ − (1 − δ) τ ) + U I (τ ′)}
developing the model 89


subject to
ωτ ≥ g + f (τ ′ − (1 − δ) τ ) .
The solution has a unique, globally stable, steady state with
αVg
(g∗) = ω
ω − f δ > 1 and τ ∗ = g∗
ω − f δ < τˆ.
If fiscal capacity were costless, the planner would accumulate sufficient fiscal
capacity to fund the Lindahl-Samuelson optimal level of public goods. How
ever, that level of public goods requires recurrent expenditures to maintain the
necessary stock of fiscal capacity. Indeed, f δ is the incremental cost of main
taining that level of fiscal capacity. Thus, in the long run, public goods are
provided below the Lindahl-Samuelson level. As in the case of a distortionary
income tax described earlier, the need to spend resources on the maintenance
of the tax infrastructure leads the solution to diverge from that prescribed in
traditional normative public-finance models. In the steady state, investment in
fiscal capacity is sufficient to support public-goods provision, but no transfers
are made by a Pigouvian planner.
Political Equilibria In cases where θ < 1/2 and γ > 0, there are three possible
long-run outcomes mirroring what we showed in the two-period model. Which
of these outcomes obtains depends on the following two conditions that suitably
modify the cohesiveness and stability conditions from the core model:
Cohesiveness: 2 (1 − θ) ≤ ω
ω − fδ
and
Stability: (1 − γ ) (1 − 2θ ) + θ > (1 − θ ) f + ω
2
f (1 − δ) + ω .
As in the core model, the cohesiveness condition guarantees that the outcome
converges to the Pigouvian optimum. This is a common-interest steady state. We
do not require that θ = 1/2 and γ = 0, but need only the weaker Cohesiveness
condition for the planning solution to be implemented. At the Pigouvian level of
public goods, no incumbent government would wish to divert resources toward
transfers. As can be seen from the cohesiveness condition, this common-interest
steady state requires that θ lie above a well-defined benchmark value.
90 chapter two: fiscal capacity


The remaining part of the (θ , γ ) space is split into two by the stability
condition. This split is similar to that seen earlier in Figure 2.4. A redistributive
steady state occurs when the cohesiveness condition fails and the modified
stability condition is satisfied. This has τ = τ ̄ and is also globally stable. Here,
the steady state has maximal fiscal capacity, public goods provision is at gˆ, and
residual tax revenue is used to make transfers.
Finally, and as before, the weak steady state is the case where the cohesiveness
and stability conditions both fail. In this case τ = τˆ, but the revenue is low
enough that the economy is not producing public goods anywhere near the
Lindahl-Samuelson level. This outcome is also globally stable.
We refer the interested reader to Besley, Ilzetzki, and Persson (2010) for
details on the dynamics and the steady states. The take-away message for the
reader is that the general insights of the two-period analysis are preserved in
this multiperiod setting.
2.3 Empirical Implications and Data
We end this chapter by taking a look at the cross-sectional data in light of the
implications of the theory that we have presented so far. Although we present
a number of partial correlations, it is important to point out that these are
no more than correlations. Thus, our empirical exploration is not intended
as a convincing test of the model’s predictions and we are not claiming to be
uncovering causal patterns in the data. Convincing tests of the theory would
require a more credible empirical strategy, one that isolates exogenous variation
in the predicted determinants of fiscal capacity. That said, we believe that the
empirics presented here do breathe life into the theory. Moreover, the theory in
this chapter does prove to be a useful guide for thinking about measurement.
Measuring Fiscal Capacity To measure fiscal capacity, the variable τ in the
model, we use five different proxies, four of which rely on data from the IMF.25
Some of them have already been taken into account in the figures that we
presented in Chapter 1 and earlier in this chapter.
From the IMF data, we take the ratio of total tax revenue to GDP, measured
at the end of the 1990s. Although it is not necessarily a measure of fiscal
25. The data are from Baunsgaard and Keen (2005).
empirical implications and data 91


capacity, we think that this variable is highly likely to be correlated with such
capacity. To hold the total tax take constant, we also use the IMF data to
measure the share of revenue from income taxes in total taxes, also at the end of
the 1990s. Since the model is about building the capacity to charge an income
tax, this is a natural measure of fiscal capacity. As argued in Section 2.2.7 on
the basic model extended with trade taxes, a decline in trade taxes is likely to
be an important part of the accumulation of fiscal capacity. Drawing on that
discussion, we use the IMF data to measure the share of nontrade taxes in
the 1990s. Finally, we use these data to compute the difference between the
income-tax share and the trade-tax share as a fourth measure of fiscal capacity.
Recalling the discussion about the microfoundations for fiscal capacity in
Section 2.2.1, the size of the informal economy is likely to be inversely related
to the ability of the government to enforce taxes. Hence, a larger size of the
formal economy is likely to be indicative of greater fiscal capacity. We gauge
the size of the formal economy as one minus the share of the informal economy
in GDP as measured by the World Bank in 2006.
In all of these cases, the variable we construct is thus higher the higher the
fiscal capacity. We rescale each variable by dividing by the standard deviation in
the sample, such that the regression coefficients we estimate are comparable for
the different versions of the dependent variable. Table 2.1 shows the correlation
coefficients among these different measures of fiscal capacity. As expected, they
are all positive and relatively high, suggesting that our proxies indeed pick up
some common component. Generally, the correlation among the IMF measures
is higher, between 0.7 and 0.95, than the correlations between with the formal
sector share and the tax shares, which lie between 0.55 and 0.62. A possible
explanation is that the formal sector is measured in a noisier way than the other
variables.
Measuring Parameters of the Model Next, we have to find empirical counter
parts to the core parameters that determine fiscal capacity in the model. For all
variables, we use values from before 2000, so that they can be viewed as prede
termined at the point at which we measure our outcome variables. Naturally,
this does not guarantee that the independent variables are not correlated with
the error. But it makes it less likely.
To proxy for the demand for common-interest spending, parameter φ in the
model, we compute the proportion of years in external war from 1816 (or when
92 chapter two: fiscal capacity


Table 2.1 Correlations among fiscal-capacity measures
Tax revenue Income-tax Nontrade-tax Income-tax Formal sector share in GDP share share bias share
Tax revenue share in GDP 1.000 Income-tax share 0.815 1.000 Nontrade tax share 0.729 0.693 1.000 Income-tax bias 0.846 0.954 0.878 1.000 Formal sector share 0.564 0.587 0.580 0.624 1.000
a country became independent) until 2000, as measured by the Correlates of
War (COW) database (in each year, we use the sum of the binary indicator
variables “interstate war” and “extrastate war”). Thus the idea is that a high
prevalence of war was associated with a high risk of war, which the theory
identifies as a positive determinant of fiscal-capacity investment (at least in some
types of states).
Another aspect of the demand for common-interest spending was highlighted
in Section 2.2.3. There we argued that polarization/heterogeneity between
groups in their valuations of public goods served to reduce α ̃H , defined as the
effective value of public goods in the high-value state from the perspective of
the period-1 incumbent. Empirically, we use the extent of ethnic divisions in
society as a proxy for this parameter. In particular, we gauge ethnic divisions
from the degree of ethnic fractionalization, as measured in Fearon (2003). As
other measures of ethnic fractionalization, this variable reflects the probability
that two randomly selected people in society belong to two different ethnic
groups. It ranges from 0 (perfectly homogeneous) to 1 (highly fragmented). To
measure a higher value of α ̃H , and thus less (polarization) heterogeneity and a
higher investment incentive, we take one minus this fractionalization measure
to obtain a measure of ethnic homogeneity.
To gauge cohesive institutions for each country, the parameter θ in the model,
we compute the average value from 1800 (or independence) to 2000 for its
constraints on the executive, as coded in the Polity IV database (the variable
“Xconst,” measured on a scale from 1 to 7 in each year). We believe that this
variable is a reasonable proxy for the constraints faced by the incumbent in our
model, and we normalize the country scores to lie between 0 and 1.
empirical implications and data 93


As for political stability, the parameter 1 − γ in the model, we use the
average values over the same period for open and competitive recruitment of
the executive. That is to say, we assume that in a country where the recruitment
of the executive is selected out of a small group through a closed process, an
incumbent becomes more entrenched in her (expected) hold on power. The data
we utilize are also from the Polity IV data (the combined score on variables
“Xrcomp” and “Xropen,” which take values between 2 and 7 in any given
year). To get a measure of political stability we invert these average values and
once more scale them to lie between 0 and 1.
For income, the parameter ω in the model, we use the logarithm of GDP per
capita measured in the year 2000 according to the Penn World Tables (variable
“Real GDP per capita in constant 2005 international prices,” in version 6.3 of
this database).
Income inequality was discussed in Section 2.2.4. To proxy for a value of
ωI /ω close to 1 in the model, we construct a binary indicator for a low level
of income inequality, measured as late as possible, in the Deininger and Squire
(1996) data (our specific measure is a Gini coefficient in the lower third of the
countries in the database).
As the observant reader will have noted, we have defined all the right-hand
side variables such that the theoretical prediction is for a positive association
with fiscal capacity, i.e., a positive regression coefficient in the results to follow.
Basic Correlations We begin by showing some basic partial correlations among
the five fiscal-capacity measures and the proxies for parameters φ, θ , (1 − γ ),
and α ̃H . Column (1) in Table 2.2 shows that, as expected from the theory, our
proxies for all four parameters—past wars, high executive constraints, political
stability, and ethnic homogeneity—are positively and significantly correlated
with the share of total taxes in GDP. With very few exceptions, the same
correlation pattern is also present for all the other measures of fiscal capacity.
What do the sizes of these coefficients imply? As an example, the estimated
coefficient for the prevalence of war fluctuates just below 2. This means that
a country history that entails 25%, rather than 0%, of the last 200 years
(or the time since independence) spent in wartime is associated with higher
fiscal capacity in the present by about half a standard deviation in the sample.
By a similar calculation, a country with a 25% higher historical value of its
constraints on the executive constraints score is associated with a higher present
fiscal capacity of about half a standard deviation in the sample. Concretely, half
94 chapter two: fiscal capacity


Table 2.2 Fiscal capacity and covariates: simple correlations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Tax revenue Income-tax Nontrade- Income-tax Formal sector share share tax share bias share in GDP in 2000 in 2000 in 2000 in 2000 around 2000
Prevalence external war before 2000
1.897* 1.213 2.387** 1.972** 1.671** (1.142) (0.952) (0.915) (0.965) (0.690)
Average executive constraints before 2000
2.130*** 2.309*** 1.135*** 2.001*** 1.768*** (0.374) (0.335) (0.312) (0.307) (0.356)
Average nonopen executive recruitment before 2000
1.080** 1.254*** 0.541 1.054*** 1.490*** (0.432) (0.451) (0.391) (0.392) (0.447)
Ethnic homogeneity (1 − ethnic fractionalization)
1.058*** 0.438 0.656** 0.606** 0.709** (0.300) (0.271) (0.304) (0.270) (0.298)
Observations 104 104 103 103 109 R-squared 0.503 0.465 0.301 0.482 0.317
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
a standard deviation is equal to about 5 percentage points of taxes in GDP and
10 percentage points of income taxes in total taxes.
Interaction Effects However, the correlations in Table 2.2 do not really engage
with the predictions of the model, particularly those that we discussed in
connection with the global and local comparative statics derived in Section 2.1.
Thus, we should expect that an increase in φ raises fiscal capacity, τ , in line with
the Hintze-Tilly hypothesis, only in a common-interest or redistributive state,
but not in a weak state, and that there is a stronger effect of war (high φ) when
cohesiveness (θ ) is high. Similarly, our model predicts that political instability
1 − γ has an impact on the decision to invest in fiscal capacity. However, these
local comparative statics are only present when θ is high enough and for the
range of γ where the stability condition holds. Thus we would expect higher
political stability to have a positive effect on the decision to invest in fiscal
capacity when cohesiveness is low, but to have no effect when cohesiveness is
high. Moreover, by the global comparative statics, we expect high values of θ to
empirical implications and data 95


raise the likelihood of a country being in the common-interest or redistributive
state and, hence, undertaking positive investments in fiscal capacity.
To study these issues, we construct a binary variable for high versus low
cohesiveness by splitting the countries into two groups, depending on whether
their (normalized) average score on the executive constraints variable is above
or below 0.5. For countries below that value, we code the binary cohesiveness
variable as low (a value of 0). This applies to about two-thirds of the countries
in our sample. For the remaining third, with an average score above 0.5, the
binary variable is coded as high (a value of 1).
We then add two terms to the specification in Table 2.2, namely the binary
high-executive constraints indicator times the continuous measure of past wars
and the binary low-executive constraints indicator times the continuous mea
sure of past political stability. (We also add the binary executive constraints
variable by itself, but this is never significant and is not shown in the table.)
Table 2.3 shows our estimates when this more theory-driven specification
is applied to the five measures of fiscal capacity. The basic parameters in the
theory continue to be significantly associated with the fiscal-capacity measures.
In particular, the average value of executive constraints continues to have a
strongly positive and significant correlation with all measures of fiscal capacity.
But the interaction terms rarely display the pattern expected from the theory.
Although this is somewhat disappointing, we want to stress a point made
earlier; cross-sectional correlations such as these are not reliable enough for
any meaningful test of the theory. At best, they can serve as useful diagnostics.
Thus, the estimates should be taken with a grain of salt. It seems likely that
more convincing tests of the theory will exploit time-series variation in a more
convincing manner rather than relying solely on cross-sectional variation.
Income and Income Inequality As we noted in Section 2.1, the model also makes
predictions on the link between income and fiscal capacity. All else being equal,
a higher ω raises state capacity in common-interest and redistributive states
in our basic two-period model. In the infinite horizon model of Section 2.2.8,
higher income also raises the likelihood of a redistributive state and higher fiscal
capacity. Given this, we should expect higher income per capita to be positively
correlated with fiscal capacity when executive constraints are high. We may
also be concerned that the right-hand-side variables of the regressions in Tables
2.2 and 2.3 are correlated with income per capita, and it would be good to
know whether these findings are robust.
96 chapter two: fiscal capacity


Table 2.3 Fiscal capacity and covariates: interaction terms
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Tax revenue Income-tax Nontrade- Income-tax Formal sector share in share tax share bias share GDP in 2000 in 2000 in 2000 in 2000 around 2000
Prevalence external war before 2000
3.136 1.221 7.819*** 4.604** −1.029 (2.928) (3.076) (2.426) (2.288) (2.790)
External war* high executive constraints dummy
−1.539 −0.134 −6.204** −3.096 3.176* (3.030) (3.180) (2.449) (2.421) (2.880)
Average nonopen executive recruitment before 2000
1.934* 2.074*** 1.053* 1.834*** 1.125** (1.167) (0.683) (0.536) (0.635) (0.562)
Nonopen executive recruitment* low executive constraints dummy
−1.425 −1.176 −0.838 −1.156 0.961 (1.140) (0.774) (0.636) (0.701) (0.630)
High executive constraints dummy
0.495 0.169 0.010 0.080 −0.572 (0.388) (0.371) (0.516) (0.365) (0.460)
Average executive constraints before 2000
1.083* 1.790*** 1.078** 1.679*** 2.772*** (0.596) (0.543) (0.516) (0.501) (0.658)
Ethnic homogeneity (1 − ethnic fractionalization)
0.774** 0.233 0.472 0.389 1.021*** (0.312) (0.285) (0.358) (0.291) (0.352)
Observations 104 104 103 103 109 R-squared 0.550 0.490 0.337 0.503 0.352
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Adding income to the regressions does raise other issues, however. In the
next chapter, we argue that a specification with income on the right-hand side
is problematic. The reason for this is that we expect a productive role for
government to generate a positive correlation between income per capita and
fiscal capacity. Moreover, this correlation is driven by the other determinants
isolated by the theory.
Nevertheless, the first three columns in Table 2.4 add log income per capita
to the same specification as in Table 2.2 for the tax share of GDP, the income
tax share in total taxes, and the size of the formal sector. (We have also
tried to add income interacted with high executive constraints with mixed
empirical implications and data 97


Table 2.4 Fiscal capacity and covariates: additional controls
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Tax revenue Income-tax Formal Tax revenue Income-tax Formal share share in sector share share in sector in GDP total revenue share in GDP total revenue share
Prevalence external war before 2000
1.536 0.884 1.203* 0.819 0.583 1.484** (1.076) (0.867) (0.660) (1.341) (0.860) (0.659)
Average executive constraints before 2000
1.595*** 1.757*** 0.891** 1.163** 1.240*** 1.131** (0.415) (0.383) (0.397) (0.452) (0.402) (0.429)
Average nonopen executive recruitment before 2000
0.686* 0.866** 0.989** 0.891* 0.473 1.249** (0.408) (0.410) (0.428) (0.474) (0.396) (0.475)
Ethnic homogeneity (1 − ethnic fractionalization)
0.718* 0.085 −0.010 0.423 0.024 0.084 (0.368) (0.339) (0.372) (0.384) (0.322) (0.397)
Log(GDP per capita) in 2000
0.209** 0.221** 0.398*** 0.350*** 0.342*** 0.378*** (0.105) (0.099) (0.106) (0.112) (0.083) (0.117)
Low value of inequality
0.513* 0.321** −0.182 (0.297) (0.151) (0.191)
Observations 103 103 109 83 83 90 R-squared 0.531 0.496 0.404 0.591 0.570 0.480
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
results.) The results for income are as expected from the theory and from
the empirical clustering already identified in Chapter 1. That is, income per
capita is strongly positively correlated with all three measures of fiscal capacity.
Almost all of the other parameters maintain the same sign as in Table 2.2,
but only the correlations with average executive constraints and nonopen and
noncompetitive executive recruitment are statistically significant.
The final three columns add our measure of low income inequality to the
same specification. Generally, low inequality is correlated with high fiscal
capacity. As argued in Section 2.2.4, this is consistent with the most likely
prediction of the theory, especially if we are willing to assume a positive relation
98 chapter two: fiscal capacity


between economic and political power. The other correlations are not very
much affected.
The empirical results that we have presented are purely illustrative. However,
they do suggest that some of the determinants highlighted by the theory may
be relevant to understanding the cross-country patterns in fiscal capacity. A
great deal remains to be done, however, to bring the theory to the data in a
more serious way. In particular, there is scope for trying to explain the within
country variation in the data, such as the introduction of new tax bases like the
income tax, by way of historical events, including wars and political reforms.
2.4 Final Remarks
In this chapter, we have explored the forces that shape investments in fiscal
capacity. We have set out a core model that shows how this aspect of state
building is influenced by economic and political factors, such as common
interests and political institutions. A key feature of the model has been to
delineate the types of states that can emerge in equilibrium. We have also shown
that the model can be given microeconomic foundations and demonstrated how
it can be extended in a number of directions that lead to more realism.
The main focus of the chapter has been on the extractive role of government
and on some of the issues raised in traditional public-finance models. This has
laid the groundwork for the analyses to come. The models in the chapter rest
on many simplifying assumptions, and although analytically tractable, these
assumptions come at a price. In particular, we have kept the level of productivity
in the economy fixed, and have thus treated income per capita as exogenous.
This is an important omission, given that one of our main ambitions in the book
is to understand the clustering of state capacity and income at different levels of
development. Moreover, many actions by government in its productive role do
affect private-sector income, either directly or indirectly through the working
of markets. The next chapter shows how these actions can be brought into the
framework.
2.5 Notes on the Literature
The core model used here is based on Besley and Persson (2009b, 2010b).
Many of the underlying ideas are developed verbally by Hintze (1906) and
notes on the literature 99


Tilly (1985, 1990). Cukierman, Edwards, and Tabellini (1992) develop an early
model in which investment in income taxes (fiscal capacity) reduces reliance on
seigniorage. They also spell out the implications of polarization and political
instability.
There is a vast literature on taxation and development, which relates to
the general issues in this chapter. Burgess and Stern (1993) and Kaldor (1963)
provide overviews of taxation in low-income countries and the ways that tax
collection can be restructured and improved. Collections of articles on taxation
and development issues include Bird and Oldman (1980), Gordon (2010), and
Newbery and Stern (1987). Keen (2010) gives an up-to-date review of the policy
experience and more recent literature.
Many influential contributions have studied the forces that have shaped
the tax system in history. These often emphasize the importance of political
institutions in shaping this process. Bonney (1999) is a collection of essays that
look at a variety of historical experiences with the different paths taken all
over Europe. Dincecco (2011, Chapter 1) provides a comprehensive overview
of the historical literature. Hoffman and Rosenthal (1997) offer an overview
of the issues relating public finance to warfare. For a specific discussion of
U.K. public finances with a central role for war see Brewer (1989) and O’Brien
(2001, 2005). Mathias and O’Brien (1976) contrast the historical experiences
of France and the United Kingdom, bringing out the differences in economic
and political structure. Karaman and Pamuk (2011) discuss the evidence from
early modern Europe.
Schumpeter (1918) is a classic reference in fiscal sociology and our opening
quote is from his work. A large modern literature links taxation to culture,
politics, and governance, including Br  ̈autigam, Fjeldstad, and Moore (2008),
Levi (1988), and Moore (2004). Increasingly this taxation is seen as part of
a broader state-building agenda. Levi (1988) discusses the idea that a tax
system can be viewed as a contract between citizens and government, linking
trust in government and taxation together. This idea is developed formally in
Perroni and Scharf (2007), who use a repeated game framework with collective
punishments.
At the heart of building fiscal capacity is the idea of expanding tax enforce
ment and compliance. The earliest formal paper in the tax-enforcement liter
ature is Allingham and Sandmo (1972), which models the gamble that people
take when deciding to pay their taxes, facing a probabilistic fine if they do
not comply. Cowell (1990) and Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002) survey the key
100 chapter two: fiscal capacity


models and the evidence, which mainly takes off from the Allingham-Sandmo
approach. Kleven, Thustrup Kreiner, and Saez (2009) consider the role of firms
in transmitting taxation as a means of reducing compliance costs and argue
that this was an important factor in shaping the large increases in tax revenue
raised by government in the twentieth century.
There is growing interest in the idea that tax morale is central to understand
ing tax compliance and Torgler (2007) surveys the theoretical and empirical
contributions, which draw on psychology and economics in explaining why
people pay their taxes. This literature tends to move away from the rational
gambler model toward a wider interpretation of motivation by tax payers. Zolt
and Bird (2005) is a useful overview of the issues involved in extending the
domain of personal-income taxation in developing countries, where compli
ance is a more serious problem.
Tanzi (1987) remains a useful quantitative overview of patterns of taxation
and development. For a comprehensive overview of the evidence on the choice
of tax levels and tax bases see Kenny and Winer (2006). A number of studies
have looked at the adoption of specific taxes. Aidt and Jensen (2009a) develop
an event study of factors influencing the introduction of an income tax. Berry
and Berry (1992) study the factors leading to adoption of income taxes in
the context of U.S. states. Scheve and Stasavage (2010) look at inheritance
taxation in historical perspective, highlighting the importance of both economic
and political developments. Keen and Lockwood (2010) study the factors
that have influenced the adoption of a VAT. Aizenman and Jinjarak (2008)
argue that political instability makes tax collection from a VAT less effective.
Gordon and Li (2009) stress the fact that developing countries rely heavily
on trade taxes and suggest a theoretical explanation. Baunsgaard and Keen
(2005) consider the impact of trade liberalization on taxes, and Jensen (2010)
studies the relationship between tax revenues from oil wealth and other forms of
taxation. Dincecco (2011) is a broad historical study of how taxation interacted
with political reform, especially fiscal centralization and limited government,
in several West European countries.
C  ́ardenas (2010) and C  ́ardenas and Tuzemen (2010) extend the model
in Besley and Persson (2009b) to study the impact of income inequality on
fiscal-capacity investments, theoretically and empirically. Gradstein (2008) and
Chong and Gradstein (2007) also consider the link between inequality and state
capacity. The impact of polarization on public finance was studied by Alesina,
Baqir, and Easterly (1999), who argue that greater polarization is associated
notes on the literature 101


with lower public-goods provision. Esteban, Ray, and Duclos (2004) study a
variety of polarization measures theoretically and empirically.
Overviews of the political economy of taxation and public-goods provision
include Hettich and Winer (1999) and Persson and Tabellini (2002). There is
a large emerging literature on dynamic public finance and political economy
related to the models developed in this chapter. Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Wern
ing (2006) survey the normative literature. Acemoglu, Golosov, and Tsyvinski
(2008, 2009), Azzimonti (2009), Bai and Lagunoff (2011), and Battaglini and
Coate (2007, 2008), among others, have studied dynamic political equilibria
with government turnover. The dynamic public-goods model in Battaglini and
Coate (2007) has many formal similarities with the infinite-horizon model stud
ied in Section 2.2.8. These papers are related to the literature on strategic public
debt by Aghion and Bolton (1990), Alesina and Tabellini (1990), and Persson
and Svensson (1989), who all study strategic issue of debt in the presence of
political turnover.
102 chapter two: fiscal capacity


CHAPTER 3
Legal Capacity
The public good is in nothing more essentially interested, than in the protection of every individual’s private rights.
William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England,
1765–1769
This chapter adds an important new dimension to the picture—government
efforts to improve the operation of private markets, an intervention that we call
legal capacity. This productive role for government can improve the efficiency
of resource use and shape the incentives to accumulate capital, issues that tend
to surface frequently in academic and policy discussions. Indeed, the need to
create a better business climate has been a constant refrain in the development
economics literature.
Standing back for a moment, we note that economists hold two broad
views on the big question of why some countries are poor, whereas others
are rich. The first view, as developed, e.g., in Aghion and Howitt (1998),
links poverty to technology: poor countries remain poor because they cannot
access or implement modern technologies. This is the modern incarnation of a
research program rooted in Solow (1956), where technological change is the
engine of long-run growth. The second view, as exposited, e.g., in Banerjee and
Duflo (2005), links poverty to resource misallocation: the root of low income
is the fact that countries fail to use stocks of capital, labor, and other scarce
factors of production in the most efficient manner. This latter view emphasizes
structural features that inhibit development and growth and represents the
modern incarnation of a research program rooted in Lewis (1954).
Our approach in this chapter takes off from the second view of development
and growth. Thus, we put resource misallocation owing to poorly working eco
nomic institutions at the heart of poor economic performance. Our treatment
of resource misallocation has both static and dynamic aspects.
103


Static resource misallocation means that an economy with given human and
physical capital does not exploit these stocks in the most productive way owing
to frictions in contracting or in the protection of property rights. Reducing the
extent of such frictions would raise national income for a given capital stock
and technology level. This possibility is at odds with the standard neoclassical
model and modern endogenous growth theory, where factors of production are
assumed to be put to their most productive uses.
Dynamic resource misallocation is then due to the fact that static resource
misallocation creates poor incentives for factor accumulation by lowering the
return to capital. Moreover, frictions might also inhibit structural change.
In the process of development, improvements in economic institutions can
thus help to raise the level and growth of income endogenously. Understand
ing the incentives governments may have to undertake such improvements is
therefore central to understanding economic prosperity and possible barriers
to progress.
To explore these issues, we continue developing our core model in this
chapter by adding in contractual frictions or badly protected property rights
associated with low legal capacity. We then consider why governments may or
may not try to alleviate these problems. As with fiscal capacity in the previous
chapter, we allow the government to invest in legal capacity, which we think
of as better economic institutions. Throughout, we study these investments
jointly with investments in fiscal capacity, so that the model now has two state
variables—fiscal capacity and legal capacity. As higher legal capacity makes
the economy work better, this extended framework also serves to endogenize
income.
In the core model, fiscal and legal capacity are complements. This makes
the model extremely tractable and allows us to generate a number of testable
predictions on the coevolution of fiscal and legal capacity. The complementarity
also gives us immediate insights into the reasons why fiscal and legal capacity
may be clustered in the raw data, as we observed in Chapter 1.
Having extended this reduced-form framework, we explore the micro
economic foundations of legal capacity. Specifically, we build a simple general
equilibrium model with labor and capital and use it to illustrate how the
government can build economic institutions. These institutions can help to
improve the economy’s resource allocation and raise its income by improving
the contracting environment for the private sector. Such institution building is
a core example of an investment in legal capacity.
104 chapter three: legal capacity


Using this simple general-equilibrium model, we consider how a lack of fiscal
capacity can affect incentives to grant equal access to legal capacity to different
groups, i.e., to establish the rule of law. We show how additional complementar
ities between legal and fiscal capacity may arise: governments in an economy
with a greater power to tax prefer to use efficient redistributive instruments
(taxes and transfers) rather than inefficient ones (production inefficiency lead
ing to reallocation of quasi-rents). We relate this to the Diamond and Mirrlees
(1971) production-efficiency arguments.
Moreover, we expand the model to include private capital formation, which
leads to further complementarities that can help to magnify the effect of the
standard growth-enhancing mechanisms in the economy.
Finally, we analyze an alternative role for legal support to private production
when there is the possibility of predation, either by other citizens or by a
kleptocratic bureaucracy. Legal capacity now enables governments to protect
private property rights against such predation. As we show, however, it is far
from clear that legal capacity will be fully exploited for this purpose, especially
when government decisions are taken by small elites who are able to capture
the main fruits of predation. In fact, the incentives of such rent-seeking elites
may cause a predatory weak state, which is caught in a legal-capacity trap.
Some Basic Facts Before proceeding with the model development, we remind
the reader of the clustering patterns discussed in Chapter 1. Figure 1.3 showed
a strong positive correlation between fiscal capacity, measured by the total
tax take in GDP, and legal capacity, measured by an index of property-rights
protection. In addition, these measures of state capacity were both strongly
correlated with income.
Essentially the same pattern also shows up for other measures of state
capacity. For example, we can use one of our alternative measures of fiscal
capacity in Chapter 2, namely the share of income taxes in total taxes at the
end of the 1990s. We plot this against one of the alternative measures of legal
capacity to be used in this chapter, namely an index of contract enforcement
(from the World Bank’s Doing Business Survey, applying to the early 2000s).
As the name suggests, that index focuses on the enforcement of contracts
rather than on the enforcement of property rights. The resulting scatterplot
is shown in Figure 3.1, which, like Figure 1.3, conditions on country income
per capita in the upper, middle, and lower thirds of the 2000 world income
distribution. Fiscal and legal capacity are, obviously, also positively correlated
legal capacity 105


.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 Contract Enforcement (Normalized Country Rank)
High income in 1990 Low income in 1990
Income Taxes and Contract Enforcement by GDP
Share of Income Tax in
Total Taxes, 1990–2000
Middle income in 1990 Fitted values
Figure 3.1 Income taxes and contract enforcement conditional on GDP.
when measured by these two alternative indexes. As in Figure 1.3, both legal
and fiscal capacity are positively correlated with income. Clearly, any model
that we develop should be consistent with such correlations.
Existing Literature A large literature related to this chapter studies the incen
tives for governments to create market-supporting institutions. In a seminal
contribution, North and Weingast (1989) argue that political reform during
the Glorious Revolution in England was the sine qua non for the development
of a market economy. Similar ideas are also key to the interpretation offered by
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) for the observed correlation between
income per capita and settler mortality in former colonies. Similarly, Engerman
and Sokoloff (2002) argue that factor endowments, leading to income inequal
ity, shaped different development patterns in the Americas via their effect on
institutions.
An important strand of literature is focused on the institutions that support
financial markets, such as the protection of minority shareholders or private
property rights—see, e.g., Acemoglu and Johnson (2005), La Porta, Lopez de
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Pagano and Volpin (2005), and Rajan
and Zingales (2003). An early contribution by Svensson (1998) argues theo
106 chapter three: legal capacity


retically and empirically that political instability and polarization hamper the
incentives for governments to develop protection of property rights and that this
feeds back to private investment. In line with this literature, we treat market
supporting institutions as endogenous. But a key difference of our approach is
that we study market-supporting institutions together with taxation.
Many researchers have found a positive correlation between measures of
financial development, or property-rights protection, and economic growth
[see, e.g., Hall and Jones (1999) and King and Levine (1993)]. However, those
expecting to find a negative relation between taxes and growth have basically
come up empty-handed [see, e.g., the overview in Benabou (1997)].
Since the appearance of the work by La Porta et al. (1998), a large literature
has emerged that studies how a country’s legal origin shapes aspects of its
economic development. The leading interpretation of these findings is that legal
systems influence how contracts are written and enforced in different societies.
Plan of the Chapter The structure of the chapter is as follows. In Section 3.1,
we expand the core model framework from Chapter 2 to include legal capacity.
Here, the government’s ability to support markets and production is modeled
on reduced form. We study investment decisions by incumbent governments,
showing how the basic analytical approach from Chapter 2 carries over to a
two-dimensional conception of state building. We also develop some compara
tive statics, showing that the determinants identified in Chapter 2 now become
joint determinants of both forms of state capacity.
Section 3.2 broadens and deepens the core model in a number of directions.
A first subsection model lays microeconomic foundations for legal capacity
in the form of contract enforcement in a two-period, two-group, two-sector,
two-factor model. Apart from providing underpinnings to the core model, the
microeconomic foundations allow us to explore a number of additional issues.
In Subsection 3.2.2, we ask whether a given level of legal capacity will always
be fully utilized and whether that situation is likely to persist. Subsection 3.2.3
adds private capital accumulation and observes that this becomes a complement
to legal-capacity building. In Subsection 3.2.4, we provide a model with an
alternative interpretation of legal capacity, namely as stronger protection of
property rights against predation, and how this setup can be used to think
about rule by a small corrupt elite. This last extension shows the possibility
of a legal-capacity trap, where a weak state becomes rooted not so much in
political instability but in the rent-seeking incentives of ruling elites.
legal capacity 107


Section 3.3 discusses empirical implications of the theory developed in the
chapter and extends the empirical results from Chapter 2 to include legal
capacity. In Section 3.4, we offer concluding comments, before providing some
notes on related literature in Section 3.5.
3.1 The Core Model with Legal Capacity
Suppose now that income for group J is no longer given parametrically, but
by a function y = y (pJ
s
), for J ∈ {I , O} , where y (.) is increasing and concave
with pJ
s ≤ πs. The variable pJ
s represents productivity-enhancing group-specific
legal support and πs is legal capacity that constrains a government’s ability to
offer such support. In Section 3.2.1, we discuss alternative microfoundations
for this formulation and explore their implications further. We also discuss what
is specific about this formulation compared to general productivity-enhancing
investments. In the formulation used here, the income level of a group depends
solely on the legal support granted to that group. We assume that legal capacity
does not depreciate and that it can be augmented for period 2 by period-1
investments according to the increasing, convex cost function L(π2 − π1) with
Lπ (0) = 0. Examples of spending to increase legal capacity include building
court infrastructure and training and employing judges, as well as building
institutions to enforce court judgments, such as employing bailiffs and setting
up regulatory agencies.
Analyzing the implications of legal-capacity investment requires only two
fairly minor modifications to the model formulated in Section 2.1. As in Chap
ter 2, taxation applies to income y (pJ
s
) , which can now be in the form of
wages or returns to ownership of other factors such as land or capital. Private
consumption of group J in period s now becomes
cJ
s = (1 − ts
)y
(
pJ
s
)
+ rJ
s.
This is increasing in pJ
s since private incomes are higher with better legal support
for that group.
The government budget constraint at date s is modified to
R + ts
y (pI
s
) + y (pO
s
)
2 = gs + ms + rI
s + rO
s
2 . (3.1)
108 chapter three: legal capacity


Here, it is apparent that taxable income is higher if pJ
s is higher for either
group. As the budget constraint makes clear, policy on legal support {pI
s , pO
s
}
and fiscal policy through {rI
s , rO
s } can be used in a discriminatory fashion across
groups.
We also have to incorporate two additional features into government policy
choices. First, we must consider government policy on legal support for each
group for a given amount of legal capacity, i.e., the decision over {pI
s , pO
s
}.
Second, we have to consider the decision to invest in legal capacity, πs, alongside
investment in fiscal capacity.
Timing The timing structure of the model is essentially the same as in the
previous chapter. However, for completeness, we remind the reader here:
1. We begin with initial stocks of state capacities {τ1, π1
}and an incum
bent group I1. Nature determines α1 and R.
2. I1 chooses a set of period-1 policies {t1, rI
1, rO
1 , pI
1, pO
1 , g1} and deter
mines (through investments) the period-2 stocks of fiscal and legal
capacity {τ2, π2
}.
3. I1 remains in power with probability 1 − γ , and nature determines α2.
4. I2 chooses chooses period-2 policies {t2, rI
2, rO
2 , pI
2, pO
2 , g2}.
As in the previous chapter, we look for a subgame perfect equilibrium in policy
and state-capacity investments.
3.1.1 Politically Optimal Policy
The incumbent chooses {gs , ts , pI
s , pO
s , rI
s , rO
s
} to maximize
αsgs + (1 − ts
)y
(
pJ
s
)
+ rI
s
subject to
ts ≤ τs , pJ
s ≤ πsfor J ∈ {I , O)} , and rO
s ≥ σrI
s , (3.2)
and the government budget constraint (3.1). These are just the familiar require
ments that the state-capacity constraints are respected and that the government
is constrained by institutions when it chooses transfers.
the core model with legal capacity 109


Public-goods provision, taxes, and transfers are determined as in the basic
framework analyzed in Chapter 2. Fiscal capacity is fully utilized; transfers are
set so that the incumbent receives a residual claim of 2 (1 − θ) times the revenue
that has not been spent on public goods or investments in state capacity; all tax
revenue, minus the costs of building the state, is devoted to public goods if
αs ≥ 2 (1 − θ ) and to transfers otherwise.
The new policy issue is the choice of legal support, pJ
s . Here, we have the
following result:
Proposition 3.1: For s ∈ {1, 2} any incumbent Is and any αs, all legal capacity
is fully utilized, pIs = pOs = πs.
Thus the government offers full legal support, within the constraint of its legal
capacity, to both groups. This is an obvious implication of our model and has
a simple logic. Since y (.) is increasing in pJ , there are gains to increasing legal
support in terms of private goods, as well as through the government budget
constraint. In a simplified sense, therefore, the result is related to the famous
Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) production-efficiency result.
This result parallels the finding for fiscal capacity, at least in our core model,
that all capacity that has been created is in fact used. But crucial properties
of the model driving this result are that y (p) is increasing and depends only
on the “own group’s” legal protection pJ
s . In Section 3.2, we revisit this in a
microfounded model and explore when it may be optimal for incumbents to
restrict the opposition group’s access to legal capacity.
3.1.2 Investments in State Capacity
Having shown that legal capacity will be fully deployed, we can now plug
the full set of politically optimal policies into the incumbent’s and opposition’s
payoff functions to derive the following “indirect” payoff function for group
J ∈ {I , O} in period s:
W (αs , τs , πs , ms , βJ ) = αsG (αs , πs , τs
) + (1 − τs)y (πs
)
+ βJ [τsy (πs
) − G (αs , πs , τs
) − ms]. (3.3)
When we study the optimization problem of the period-1 incumbent, we now
have to consider two state variables {τ2, π2
}. We can rewrite the new investment
objective of this incumbent as
110 chapter three: legal capacity


W (α1, τ1, π1, F (τ2 − τ1) + L(π2 − π1), 2(1 − θ ))
+ (1 − γ )U I (τ2, π2) + γ U O(τ2, π2),
where U J (τ2, π2
) are the value functions for J ∈ {I , O}.1 These are defined by
U I (τ2, π2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, 0, βI )
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, 0, βI )]
and
U O (τ2, π2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, 0, βO)
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, 0, βO)]
for the incumbent or the opposition group in period 2, depending on the two
state variables.
As will be clear to the reader, very little modification of the core model
has been necessary to introduce a productive as well as an extractive role for
government. We now consider the implications for investments in both forms
of state capacity.
Euler Equations The Euler equations (first-order conditions) for legal and fiscal
capacity are now given by
y(π2)[(E(λ2) − 1] ≤ λ1Fτ
(τ2 − τ1
) (3.4)
c.s. τ2 − τ1 ≥ 0
and
yπ (π2)[1 + (E(λ2) − 1)τ2] ≤ λ1Lπ
(π2 − π1
) (3.5)
c.s. π2 − π1 ≥ 0.
As in the previous chapter,
λ1 = max {α1, 2 (1 − θ )}
is the realized value of period-1 public funds and
E(λ2) = φαH + (1 − φ)λL
2 (3.6)
1. For symmetry, we assume that, like legal capacity, fiscal capacity does not depreciate, so that the costs of fiscal-capacity investments are simply F (τ2 − τ1).
the core model with legal capacity 111


is the expected value of period-2 public funds, with
λL
2=
{ αL if αL ≥ 2(1 − θ )
2[(1 − θ)(1 − γ ) + γ θ] otherwise.
(3.7)
Equation (3.4) is essentially of the same form as in Section 2.1, whereas (3.5)
is new.
The left-hand side of (3.5), which is the marginal benefit of a small increase
in legal capacity, has two parts. The first is yπ
(π2
) , which represents the direct
impact on productivity in period 2. The second is yπ
(π2
) τ2
[E (λ2
) − 1] , which
represents an additional “indirect” effect of investing in legal capacity, which
accrues via increased public resources owing to the expansion of the tax base.
Complementarity One important aspect of the model emerges immediately.
Fiscal and legal capacity are complementary investments whenever E(λ2) − 1 ≥
0, i.e., when investing in one form of state capacity increases the marginal return
to investing in the other. To see this, note that the left-hand side of (3.5) is
increasing in τ2 and the left-hand side of (3.4) is increasing in π2.
Intuitively, an increase in legal capacity increases incomes and hence tax
revenues making fiscal capacity more valuable on the margin. An increase in
fiscal capacity increases the value of raising private incomes if the marginal
value of public resources is high enough, since there is a return on the margin
in the form of greater tax revenue.
As well as being interesting in its own right, this property is analytically
convenient since the payoff function is supermodular and we can exploit results
on monotone comparative statics. Specifically, any factor that raises the value
of the left-hand side of both (3.5) and (3.4) will increase investments in both
forms of state capacity.2 More formally, suppose that we write an objective
function in “reduced form” as n (τ2, π2; φ) for relevant “parameters” φ and
suppose that n (.) is supermodular in (τ2, π2
) . Then (τ2, π2
) is monotonically
increasing in φ if ∂2n (.) /∂τ2∂φ ≥ 0 and ∂2n (.) /∂π2∂φ ≥ 0. This is exactly the
condition wherein a change in a certain parameter increases the left-hand side
of both (3.5) and (3.4).
2. See Theorems 5 and 6 in Milgrom and Shannon (1994). This result was originally due to Topkis and was generalized in Milgrom and Shannon (1994, Theorem 4).
112 chapter three: legal capacity


Equilibrium Investments and Different Types of State We now ask under what
conditions both investments are positive. Given the assumption that there are
no fixed costs, Fτ (0) = Lπ (0) = 0, a sufficient condition is that E(λ2) − 1 ≥ 0.
The necessary condition for legal capacity is weaker, however, because of the
direct benefit from legal-capacity investments according to the first term on the
left-hand side of (3.5).
As in Chapter 2, we still have three types of states and the conditions
for them to arise are exactly the same. If the cohesiveness condition holds
(αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ )) and/or φ tends to one, then we have a common-interest state
that invests in both capacities. Again, this will correspond to the Utilitarian
optimum. If the cohesiveness condition fails and φ is not near one, but the
stability condition holds (φαH + (1 − φ) 2 [(1 − γ ) (1 − θ ) + γ θ ] ≥ 1), then we
have a redistributive state, which also invests in both forms of state capacity.
Finally, if the cohesiveness and stability conditions both fail, then we have a
weak state. The weak state does not invest in fiscal capacity, but it may still
invest in legal capacity. However, even if it does, the legal-capacity investments
are lower than in a common-interest or a redistributive state, all else being
equal. This is because when E(λ2) < 1, the second term on the left-hand side
of (3.5) is negative.
3.1.3 Comparative Statics
We now explore the implications of this richer model for state building, as
measured by the pace of investment in fiscal and legal capacity. This is done
in a series of comparative statics results, which we relate to discussions in the
literature by economists and historians.
Value of Public Goods Our first result concerns the impact of having a high
demand for public goods.
Proposition 3.2: A higher expected demand for public goods raises investments
in state capacity in common-interest and redistributive states:
∂ E (λ2)
∂φ = αH − λL
2 > 0.
Common interests make fiscal capacity more valuable. This result can be
utilized to make sense of the Hintze-Tilly hypothesis on the importance of war
in building state capacity. However, it clearly applies more widely to any public
goods that are national in character, such as broad health-care programs or
the core model with legal capacity 113


building a welfare state. These are common-interest activities, but they have
to be financed. If demand for such public goods or services is expected to be
high, then there is a strong incentive to invest in fiscal capacity, and also—by
complementarity—to invest in legal capacity.
Political Instability and Cohesiveness We next look at the stability and cohe
siveness of political institutions.
Proposition 3.3: If institutions are not cohesive and we are in a redistributive
state, then investments in fiscal and legal capacity are promoted by lower
political instability.
Formally, this can be seen by observing that a lower γ raises the likelihood
that Stability holds. Moreover, λL
2 is decreasing in γ if this condition holds.
This effect is stronger, the more noninclusive the political institutions. As in
Chapter 2, more cohesiveness has an uncertain effect on state capacity within
the redistributive regime, but if θ rises above the value implied by αL = 2 (1 − θ ),
it moves the economy across the boundary to the common-interest regime.
In Chapter 2, we referred to Great Britain in the century following the
Glorious Revolution as an historical example of how political stability—a long
period of parliamentary rule for the Whigs—in a noncohesive political system
can lead to considerable investments in fiscal capacity. War threats at the time,
a high value of φ, should have pulled in the same direction. According to the
extended model in this chapter, this building of fiscal capacity should also have
been followed by investments in legal capacity, i.e., in the support of markets.
In fact, a recent study by Klerman and Mahoney (2005) documents a series
of reforms of the British legal system during the eighteenth century. In stepwise
reforms, Parliament increased judicial independence by making it harder to
remove judges from office (in 1701) and increasing their tenure beyond the
rule of a certain monarch (in 1761). Parliament also substantially increased the
salaries of judges on three occasions during the century (in 1758–1759, 1779,
and 1799, respectively). Klerman and Mahoney show in event-study fashion
that equity returns went up at the time of these reforms, indicating that the
reforms were indeed perceived as a strengthening of property rights.
The British case in the eighteenth century thus appears consistent with the
broad thrust of our model, inclusive of the complementarity. The Glorious
Revolution increased the power of Parliament—a rise in θ in terms of our
114 chapter three: legal capacity


model.3 When faced with constant threats of war against France—a high φ in
terms of our model—the stable coalition dominating Parliament implemented
reforms that increased the state’s ability to raise taxes, as well as reforms to
provide more credible and better legal services in support of private markets
increases in τ and π in terms of our model.
Costs of Investment How do factors that determine investment costs affect
investment decisions? This is answered in the following proposition:
Proposition 3.4: Lower costs of either legal or fiscal capacity increase invest
ments in both legal and fiscal capacity in common-interest and redistributive
states.
This can be thought of in terms of a downward multiplicative shift in L(.) or
F (.), which cuts the right-hand side of (3.5) and (3.4) for given π2 and τ2.
Many recent studies of institutions, following La Porta et al. (1998), empha
size the importance of legal origins. Our model suggests a straightforward
theoretical role for legal origins via the cost function L (.). If some legal origins
affected the ease with which contracting could be done, we would expect this to
boost investments in legal capacity. Perhaps less trivially, we would also expect
the same legal origins to affect investments in tax systems in the same direction
through the basic complementarity between the two forms of state capacity.
Income and Growth Suppose that there are exogenous productivity differences,
which vary over countries or over time. We model these as a shifter on the y (pJ
s
)
function, i.e.,
yJ
s = sy
(
pJ
s
) .
Different values of s could represent natural productivity differences between
countries, owing, say, to geography or to Hicks-neutral improvements in pro
ductivity. We now have the following:
Proposition 3.5: More productive economies (higher 2 ) choose greater invest
ments in fiscal and legal capacity in common-interest and redistributive states.
3. This depends on the micropolitical foundations of θ , which we discuss further in Chapter 7.
the core model with legal capacity 115


This comes from observing that a higher 2 will increase the left-hand side of
both (3.5) and (3.4). Given the complementarity, this increases investment in
both forms of state capacity. This result has both cross-sectional and time-series
implications.
Turning to implications for cross-country income differences, we should
expect countries with inhospitable geographical environments to have less
investment in state capacity. Such investments will tend to magnify these under
lying differences, as they feed back to income. Moreover, the generated income
differences are likely to be the largest when political institutions are weak, i.e.,
θ is low enough to imply a weak state because weak states do not invest much
in any form of capacity.
When we look at time-series differences, our model predicts that positive
productivity shocks—owing, say, to new technology—will also tend to be
magnified by accompanying improvements in institutions. At least this will
be the case when the state is not weak and the economy is institutionally
constrained. Growth will be slower in weak states, which will not benefit from
the magnification effect we have identified.
Changes in 2 generate “exogenous” growth. But even if such shifts are
absent, the model exhibits “endogenous” growth owing to institutional devel
opment through the accumulation of legal capacity. To see this, we define
aggregate income by
Y (pI
s , pO
s , R) = R + s(y (pI
s
) + y (pO
s
))
2.
Then, the growth rate predicted by the model in this section is
Y (π2, π2, R) − Y (π1, π1, R)
Y (π1, π1, R) .
If π2 > π1, the growth rate is positive, even if all standard sources of growth,
e.g., technological improvement and capital accumulation, are absent.
By improving the contracting or property-rights environment, and hence
resource allocation, the government is the engine of growth. Moreover, by
complementarity, (expected) government size grows together with legal capac
ity and income. It follows from the earlier comparative statics results that this
rate of endogenous growth is influenced by political institutions and political
stability: (θ , γ ).
116 chapter three: legal capacity


3.1.4 Taking Stock
The comparative statics results are interesting, given the correlations in the raw
data shown in Figures 1.3 and 3.1. It is pretty clear that the complementarity of
fiscal and legal capacity may help explain the strong correlation between them
that we observe in these graphs.
When it comes to the positive correlation between income and state capacity,
the picture is somewhat more complex. Legal capacity may be closely related to
financial development (in the microfounded model to be presented in the next
section, e.g., private credit to GDP is proportional to π). Financial development
owing to better institutions can thus cause endogenous growth in income, as
discussed earlier. But the relationship can easily go the other way: according
to Proposition 3.5, higher income through exogenous growth increases the
incentives to invest in legal capacity, leading to financial development.
The complementarity between fiscal and legal capacity also has interest
ing implications for the relationship between taxation and income growth. If
greater legal capacity is driven by the determinants suggested in this section,
we would expect it to go hand in hand with greater fiscal capacity. Variation in
these determinants would tend to induce a positive correlation between taxes
and growth. Even in weak states, where E(λ2) < 1 (and investment in fiscal
capacity is zero), legal capacity and national income are still positively corre
lated even though taxation and growth are uncorrelated.4
These observations relate to recent empirical findings in the macroeconomics
of development. Many researchers have found a positive correlation between
measures of financial development, or property-rights protection, and eco
nomic growth [e.g., Hall and Jones (1999), King and Levine (1993), and many
subsequent papers], although Proposition 3.5 warns us that such correlations
may not reflect a causal effect of financial markets, but rather reverse causation.
But many researchers who expected to find a negative relation between taxes
and growth found nothing [see, e.g., the overview in Benabou (1997)]. Simple
though it is, our model suggests a possible reason for these findings.
4. However, recall the discussion of income distribution in Chapter 2. Besley and Persson (2009a) show that changes in income distribution generally drive fiscal and legal capacity in opposite directions, inducing a negative correlation between taxes and growth.
the core model with legal capacity 117


3.2 Developing the Model
This section is designed to deepen and broaden our understanding of the core
model with legal capacity. We begin by showing how to give microeconomic
underpinnings to the analysis in Section 3.1 in a simple general-equilibrium
model. Then, this model is extended in several directions to investigate the
consequences of quasi-rents to capital owners, private capital accumulation,
and legal capacity as a means of protecting private agents against predation.
3.2.1 Microeconomic Foundations
So far, we have just posited a reduced-form function y (pJ
s
). We now put some
microeconomic structure beneath this function and study the implications of
doing so. For example, an important feature of the reduced-form specification
is that income in group J depends solely on legal support granted to that group
and is unaffected by what is offered to the other group. We explore when this
assumption is justified. To approach this issue and others like it, we begin
by formulating a model without legal capacity and then consider how legal
capacity can be introduced.
A Two-Sector Economy The model in Section 3.1 did not specify any kind
of production structure, stating simply that income per capita in group J and
period s is given by y (pJ
s
). In this section, we set up a model economy with
capital and allow individuals to own capital as well as labor. We also assume
that some individuals have entrepreneurial talent. If they do, they can acquire
capital and hire labor in the economy’s factor markets. These markets may work
more or less well depending on the extent of contractual frictions. Demands
for capital and labor determine factor prices: the equilibrium wage and rental
rate on capital. The government can support the economy by providing legal
support to reduce market frictions.
This framework will be the parable of the classic dual-economy approach,
first introduced by Lewis (1954) and extended by Fei and Ranis (1964). Fol
lowing that approach, we refer to the two as the “advanced” and “traditional”
sector. Unlike earlier contributions, however, we give institutions a central place
in fostering the development of the advanced sector. The role of the dual
economy parable is to generate an outside option in traditional production,
which provides an outside wage, ω.
118 chapter three: legal capacity


Production Technologies The advanced sector uses labor and capital in a
constant-returns, Cobb-Douglas production function:
Hs (K , L) = KηL(1−η), (3.8)
where K and L are the amounts of capital and labor employed. A fraction
of citizens, κJ , in group J are able to operate this technology. Let κ = κA+κB
2
be the economy-wide fraction of the population with such abilities. Implicitly,
this formulation thus includes a third unpriced factor, “entrepreneurial talent,”
which is endowed by nature.
Production in the traditional sector uses only labor and offers a wage of ω.
We can think of the analysis in Chapter 2 as an economy where ω = ω, i.e.,
there is only traditional production.
Factor Endowments and Prices Each member of group J has an endowment of
capital of KJ
s at date s , which is exogenously given for the time being (we add
private capital accumulation in Section 3.2.3). Unlike the reduced-form model
in Section 3.1, this allows output to be heterogeneous across groups. Let
Ks = ∑
J
KJ
s
2
be the economy-wide capital stock per capita. Thus, we can have between
group inequality, even though there is no within-group inequality. We assume
that individuals can unilaterally earn a return, ρ via some backstop technology.
The backstop could be putting the money under a mattress, in which case ρ < 1
if there is a risk of theft or inflation. It could also be the return to U.S. Treasury
Bills, traditionally regarded as a safe investment, in an open world capital
market. The economy has two factor prices: ρ is the price of capital traded,
when individuals choose to lend to the advanced production sector, and ω is
the wage rate. Obviously, for any advanced-sector production to take place, we
must have ρ ≥ ρ and ω ≥ ω.
A Neoclassical Benchmark Economy We first consider a frictionless world with
these production technologies and factor endowments. This is the standard
world of neoclassical economics, where markets work perfectly.
Following standard practice, it is useful to work with a production function
in intensive form, which relies on k = K/L, i.e., the capital intensity of advanced
developing the model 119


production. With factor prices (ρ , ω), an advanced-sector producer chooses
{k, L} to maximize
L [(k)η − ρk − ω].
If we denote the solution by
{kˆ , Lˆ
}
, it is straightforward to see that it must
fulfill
ρs = η
(kˆ
)η−1 and ωs =
(kˆ
)η − ρskˆ. (3.9)
The marginal product of capital equal to the rental rate and the wage rate
exhausts all surplus. With common factor prices, all firms in the advanced sector
behave in the same way. What is not immediately clear from (3.9) is whether
there is any traditional sector production. To understand this, it is necessary to
solve for the general equilibrium and the associated factor prices.
Four Possible Neoclassical Equilibria It is relatively straightforward to show
that there are four possible general-equilibrium outcomes, depending on
whether some factor prices are set by their outside options. To examine these
possibilities, it is helpful to define k ̄ from
η
( k
)η−1 = ρ
as the maximal amount of capital per worker that will be employed in the
advanced sector given the available outside option.
Case 1: ρs = ρ and ωs = ω. This will hold if Ks ≥ k and (1 − η)
(
ρ/η
)η
η−1 ≤ ω.
In this first case, there is production in both sectors and some capital is devoted
to its outside option. This will happen in an economy where either capital is
plentiful or the outside return to capital is high. Consequently, the returns to
capital and labor in the advanced sector are bid down to their reservation prices.
This case is not a possibility (at least when capital stocks are finite) if ρ is too low.
Case 2: ρs = ρ and ωs > ω. We get this outcome if Ks ≥ k and (1 − η)
(
ρ/η
)η
η−1
> ω. In Case 2, we see only advanced-sector production. However, some capital
is allocated to its outside option. Once more, this can only happen when capital
is plentiful and ρ is not too low.
120 chapter three: legal capacity


Case 3: ρs > ρ and ωs = ω. This occurs when Ks < k and (1 − η) (Ks
)η < ω.
Here, as in Case 1, there is positive production in both sectors. However, capital
is fully utilized in the advanced sector. This is the case of a fairly productive
traditional sector, which can compete successfully with advanced production.
In this world, capital is fairly scarce.
Case 4: ρs > ρ and ωs > ω. The final possibility occurs if Ks < k and
(1 − η) (Ks
)η > ω. In this case, production is only positive in the advanced
sector, and both factors earn returns in excess of their outside options. Case
4 is the one that will prevail when advanced-sector production is sufficiently
profitable relative to traditional production. Effectively, this economy works
like a one-sector model. Each entrepreneur runs an advanced-sector firm, each
of which uses the same share Ks/κ of the capital stock and 1/κ of the workforce.
Hence, the factor prices are given by
ρs = η (Ks
)η−1 and ωs = (Ks
)η − ρsKs = (1 − η) (Ks
)η .
The level of the capital stock determines these factor prices as well as the level
of income per capita, namely ys = (Ks
)η.
This neoclassical economy has a level of national income that is determined
entirely by technology and factor availability, where institutions do not seem
to matter. In effect, however, we have implicitly assumed an important role for
institutions by supposing that all transactions are frictionless, property rights
are perfectly enforced, and there is no theft or predation. These are all very
strong assumptions in any economy, especially in economies at an early stage
of development. Our next task is to explore the consequences of institutional
imperfections. This will focus our minds on how legal capacity might improve
the functioning of an economy.
An Institutionally Constrained Economy The neoclassical economy is reminis
cent of the standard textbook model of a market economy, where institutions
to enforce contract or protect property rights are taken for granted. We now
offer a simple modification of the model, which brings these assumptions into
the daylight and opens a role for legal capacity to improve resource alloca
tion. The alternative economy is institutionally constrained, as it operates less
efficiently than the frictionless neoclassical world. However, the institutional
constraints imply that the government can potentially improve the efficiency of
developing the model 121


the economy by reducing frictions through investments in legal capacity. In a
sense, the examples we consider are illustrations to breathe life into the idea of
legal capacity. But they are important in order to get an idea of the precise way
in which higher legal capacity may improve incomes.
Capital-Market Imperfections There is a long tradition in development eco
nomics to see capital-market constraints as a central and important charac
teristic of poor economies.5 We follow this tradition as a way of getting into
the market-supporting role of government. Specifically, we assume that there
is limited enforcement in borrowing, since a borrower can potentially walk
away, i.e., fail to repay from any uncollateralized loan. Thus, an individual can
only borrow in proportion to his/her initial wealth, which is used as collateral.
Formally, we have
K≤
(
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s , (3.10)
where pJ
s ∈ [0, πs
]. This collateral constraint effectively restricts an entrepre
neur from borrowing more than a specific fraction of his wealth denoted by pJ
s KJ
s . As suggested by the notation, we consider the legal support of the gov
ernment as raising the amount of effective collateral that can be pledged by
borrowers. The legal capacity constraining such legal support can readily be
interpreted, e.g., as the number of courts and qualified judges, and the existence
and quality of a government credit registry.
Labor Demand and Capital-Market Constraints If the capital constraint binds,
optimal labor demand in group J , denoted by L ̃ J
s , solves
ωs = (1 − η)
( (1 + pJ
s
) KJ
s L ̃ sJ
)η
for J ∈ {I , O}, (3.11)
This means that production in the advanced sector earns quasi-rents.
We focus on the extreme case where ρ = 0, so that all capital in the neo
classical economy would be deployed in the advanced sector (Case 3 or 4
described earlier).6 This means that the supply price of capital to the advanced
sector is effectively zero. In the absence of institutional constraints, as we
5. See Banerjee (2003) and Banerjee and Duflo (2010) for overviews. 6. This considerably simplifies the algebra. It is straightforward to incorporate the more reasonable case where ρ > 0, but the basic analytics remain the same as long as we are in Cases (3) and (4).
122 chapter three: legal capacity


just saw, the capital operated per advanced-sector firm is Ks/κ. However, the
entrepreneur is limited to operating (1 + pJ
s
) KJ
s . Thus if
κJKJ
s
(
1 + pJ
s
)
< Ks ,
the institutional constraint is binding for group J . An economy is institutionally
constrained for both groups if
1 + πs < min
{
Ks κI KsI
, Ks
κ O KsO
}
.
In other words, πs is small enough so that neither group can access sufficient
capital for the neoclassical economy outcome to be attained. In the symmetric
case, this boils down to the simple condition that (1 + πs
) κ < 1.
We now assume that both groups are indeed so constrained and examine
the resulting output levels and how they depend on pJ
s . There are two cases
to consider depending on whether the wage rate is set by the traditional-sector
outside option or not.
Case 3′: Some traditional production. This is the baseline case, which we
highlight in what follows. The relevant case is when
(∑
J κJ ((1 + pJ
s
)) KJ
s
2
)η
(1 − η) ≤ ω. (3.12)
That is, if all available labor (hypothetically) were to be deployed in the
advanced sector—and existing legal capacity is maximally employed in both
groups—the marginal product of labor would be below the wage in the tradi
tional sector.
The equilibrium wage rate is then pinned down by the traditional wage, ω,
and the general equilibrium is one where labor works in both the traditional
and the advanced sectors. This is like Case 3 in the previous section. Labor is
allocated between the two groups to solve (3.11) at ωs = ω.
The per capita income of group J is then
yJ (
pJ
s
)
= κJ
[((
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s
)η (L ̃ J
s
)1−η − ωL ̃ J
s
]
+ ω (3.13)
=η
[ω
(1 − η)
](1− 1
η
)(
1 + pJ
s
)
κJKJ
s + ω (3.14)
developing the model 123


using (3.11). The first term is the quasi-rent, owing to the fact that institutions
constrain the allocation of capital.
Now, consider an improvement in the contracting environment for group
J , such that it can borrow a larger amount for any given collateral. Owing
to the linear utility in private consumption (and hence risk-neutrality), we
can interpret this improvement as a higher likelihood that a typical court will
enforce a debt contract if it is called upon to do so. The effect is given by7
yJ
p
(
pJ
s
)
= κJη
((
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s
)η−1 (L ̃ J
s
)1−η
(3.15)
=η
[ω
(1 − η)
]1− 1
η
κJ KJ
s > 0,
which is proportional to the capital ownership of group J .
This microfoundation therefore supports the basic model in Section 3.1 in
the case of equal ownership of capital across groups. Legal support increases
production by improving the contracting environment, decreasing the friction
in capital markets, and enhancing the scope for entrepreneurial activities. But
each group’s income depends only on its own access to legal support.
Case 4′: No traditional production. We now consider what happens if (3.12)
does not hold. All labor is now in the advanced sector and the wage rate is
given by
ωs
(
pI
s , pO
s
)
= (1 − η)
(∑
J
κJ
2
(
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s
)η
. (3.16)
In this case, access to legal support of both groups affects equilibrium wages
and, hence, there is a (pecuniary) externality between the groups. Here,
∂ ωs
(pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psJ
= (1 − η) η κJ
2 KJ
s
(∑
J
κJ
2
(
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s
)η−1
> 0.
With greater access to capital, labor demand increases, as does the wage rate.
The income in one group now depends on the legal support offered to both
groups. Average income per capita in group J is
7. This calculation uses the envelope condition and equation (3.11).
124 chapter three: legal capacity


yJ (
pI
s , pO
s
)
= κJ
[((
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s
)η (L ̃ J
s
)1−η − ωs
(
pI
s , pO
s
) L ̃ J
s
]
+ ωs
(
pI
s , pO
s
)
=
(∑
J
κJ
2
(
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s
)η [
η κJ ((1 + pJ
s
) KJ
s
)
∑
J
κJ 2
(1 + psJ
) KsJ
+ (1 − η)
]
,
(3.17)
where we have used (3.11) and (3.16). Once again, the first term is the quasi-rent
earned by entrepreneurs in the advanced sector.8
Now consider the effect of increasing pI
s and pO
s on the income per head of
the incumbent group. This is given by
∂yI (pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psI
=
(
1 − κI L ̃ I
s
) ∂ωs
(pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psJ
+ κIη
((
1 + pI
s
)
KI
s
)η−1 (L ̃ I
s
)1−η for J = I (3.18)
and
∂yI (pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psO
=
(
1 − κI L ̃ I
s
) ∂ωs
(pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psJ
for J = O. (3.19)
There are two effects to consider. Both (3.18) and (3.19) include an effect owing
to the change in the equilibrium wage. As already observed, the wage rate
increases as more capital is deployed in advanced production. Whether this
benefits the incumbent group on the margin depends upon whether that group
is a net demander or supplier of labor. If κJ L ̃ J
s = 1, the group is self-sufficient
and hence changes in the wage rate lead to within-group redistribution but
no between-group redistribution. However, even if both groups are identical
ex ante, in terms of fractions of entrepreneurs and capital holdings, they will
not be identical ex post if pI
s = pO
s . Thus the allocation of legal support can
change a group from being self-sufficient to being either a net demander or a
net supplier of labor.
The second effect only appears in (3.18) and is the same as in (3.15), reflecting
the increase in quasi-rents from extending the amount of capital in use. It
is always positive up to the point where all capital is deployed in advanced
production.
8. Observe that if the groups are identical and have equal access to property rights
then yJ (ps , ps
) = (κ (1 + ps
) Ks
)η, which is below the neoclassical output for this case if
κ (1 + ps
) < 1.
developing the model 125


Observe that national income per capita is
Y
(
pI
s , pO
s
)
= yI (pI
s , pO
s
) + yO (pI
s , pO
s
)
2
=
(∑
J
κJ
2
(
1 + pJ
s
)
KJ
s
)η
. (3.20)
It is therefore clear that
∂Y (pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psJ
> 0 for J ∈ {I , O} . (3.21)
Thus, national income is unambiguously increased by a full extension of legal
support to both groups. Changes in wages make one group gain and the other
group lose, but this is purely a transfer between the groups and so leaves the
national income unaffected. What increases the national income is the fact that
more legal support brings more capital into productive use.
Legal Capacity and Total Factor Productivity We now show that changes in
legal capacity can be thought of as changes in total factor productivity (TFP).
For this purpose, we use the model of capital-market imperfections, where
wages in the advanced sector exceed ω (Case 4′). Suppose that {pI
s , pO
s
} is
the access that the two groups have to the legal system. Income per capita in
the economy Y (pI
s , pO
s
) is as in (3.20).
For given factor endowments, capital, Ks, and the unit labor endowment, we
have already shown how income varies with access to legal services. Moreover,
if pJ
s = πs for both groups, then increased investment in legal capacity raises
an economy’s income per capita. Indeed, comparing income on two dates, we
find that this can be a source of growth.
Productivity-Enhancing Legal Capacity To see how legal capacity can be a
source of growth, consider an economy with capital Ks and labor endowment 1.
Then, the maximum potential output per capital is (Ks
)η. Write actual output as
Y
(
pI
s , pO
s
)
=λ
(
pI
s , pO
s
) (Ks
)η ,
where λ (pI
s , pO
s
) ≤ 1 is a measure of the distance from the production
possibility frontier owing to capital-market imperfections and hence, indirectly,
to suboptimal institutions.
126 chapter three: legal capacity


As national income is given by (3.20), we have
λ
(
pI
s , pO
s
) =
(∑
J
κJ
2
(
1 + pJ
s
) KJ
s
Ks
)η
.
Suppose, for the sake of illustration, that we are in a symmetric case, where KJ
s = Ks and κJ = κ for J ∈ {I , O}, i.e., there are no differences in capital
ownership or entrepreneurial ability between the two groups. Then, if pI
s= pO
s = πs, such that all legal capacity is deployed, we can write
λ (πs , πs
) = (κ (1 + πs
))η .
Thus, output is below its potential value as long as κ (1 + πs
) < 1. This is
an intuitive condition. It says that the amount of capital that can be used
by entrepreneurs—namely the fraction κ of entrepreneurs scaled up by the
quality of institutions (1 + πs
)—is less than the capital available in the whole
population, the size of which we have normalized to one.
Note also that in an equilibrium of this economy, the ratio of total credit to
GDP can be written as
πs (1 + πs)η
(Ks )1−η
κη .
This ratio, which is a central measure in the literature on financial development,
is thus monotonically increasing in the economy’s legal capacity. We return to
this measure in Section 3.3 when we address the empirical implications of the
model.
Interpretation The discussion of the level of national income illustrates how,
all else being equal, changes in legal capacity would be measured as improve
ments in TFP. However, these are not technological changes; they are simply
improvements in the efficiency of resource allocation owing to better market
institutions.
This view—that growth can be stimulated by institutional improvements
fostering a more efficient use of resources—is part of an older tradition in
development economics that we discussed earlier and is somewhat different
from the preoccupation with technology that prevails in much of modern
growth theory.
developing the model 127


In many ways, the approach pursued here is more closely associated with the
institution-based perspective on economic growth and development presented
by such authors as Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) and North
(1990). We are thus able to embed such ideas into our approach and link it
to investing in state capacity.
Legal Capacity as a Public Good If access to legal services were a pure private
good, then granting more access to one group would have to come at the
expense of the other group. If this were the case, decisions about access to
legal support would irreducibly be a redistributive policy between the two
groups. However, our presumption is that legal capacity has some elements
of a public good. A pure public good, as we know, has two properties: it is
both nondepletable and nonexcludable.
In our formulation, extending legal rights as embodied in pJ
s assumes that πs
is a nondepletable but excludable good, so that more access by one group does
not reduce the amount that is available for the other. We capture this formally
by supposing that pJ
s ≤ πs for J ∈ {I , O}. This parallels the way in which we
modeled fiscal capacity in the previous chapter. Even though there is no directly
redistributive issue, there is still a question of whether each group is granted
full access to legal capacity, i.e., whether pJ
s = πs.
Excludability and the Rule of Law If legal capacity were a pure public good,
no discrimination between groups would be possible, as it would then be both
nondepletable and nonexcludable, and we would necessarily have pJ
s = πs for
J ∈ {I , O} . This would correspond to a case where it is impossible to exclude
anyone from contracting in the shadow of the law once courts and other
forms of protection/enhancement infrastructure have been built. If groups were
completely identical this might be the natural assumption. But if groups differ
in their geographic location, sectoral composition, or ethnicity, it is certainly
possible for incumbents to adapt the legal services rendered by the courts in a
way that would benefit certain regions, sectors, or ethnic groups.
Whether it occurs technologically or as the result of a decision made by the
incumbent, the case where full legal rights are extended, pJ
s = πs, corresponds
to the standard interpretation of what it means for a society to have the rule
of law.9 Not only should laws and the means to enforce them exist, but all
9. Of course there is more to the rule of law than universality. The concept includes the ideas that legal rules be reasonably known in advance rather than subject to the whim of executive decisionmaking.
128 chapter three: legal capacity


citizens should be subject to these laws on an equal basis. In the case where
legal capacity is excludable, we are thus able to ask whether the rule of law
prevails in a policy equilibrium.
Legal Capacity versus Infrastructure Legal capacity as modeled here does
have some distinctive features compared to general productivity enhancing
investments in infrastructure. For such cases, it would be natural to suppose that
infrastructure such as roads, telecommunications, and bridges directly enter the
production function, so that output in the advanced sector would be
(πs
) KηL1−η,
where (.) is an increasing concave function and πs is the stock of infrastruc
ture. This, e.g., is essentially the formulation of state investments in Acemoglu
(2005).
It would be natural to think that infrastructure could be targeted geographi
cally to groups and hence we could have group-specific stocks of infrastructure
{π J
s
}
J ∈{A,B}. However, such a model would not be equivalent to the pJ
s deci
sion that we are modeling here, where a decision is made ex post about how
the stock of infrastructure is deployed. Hence, whether one group has access to
infrastructure would be determined in period s − 1, rather than by the period
s incumbent. This may mean that investments in the incumbent’s areas may
persist over time, even when the incumbent is out of office. Such infrastructure
might depreciate over time, of course, but the incentives will be rather different
compared to investing in an asset, the allocation of which has a discretionary
ex post component.10
Nevertheless, there are many similarities between investing in legal capacity
(especially when it is fully deployed) and general productive infrastructure.
Thus many of our ideas on productive investments by the government can carry
over to traditional infrastructure investments.
Additional Complementarities The complementarity on which we focused in
Section 3.1 comes entirely through the government budget constraint. But our
model suggests an additional source of complementarity. Suppose that, as in
Section 2.2.1, ω represents an untaxed option in the traditional sector. Suppose
further that we are in Case 2 described earlier, with wages in the advanced
10. One should not exaggerate the differences too much. Decisions about access charges and maintenance programs are discretionary ex post.
developing the model 129


sector above the reservation wage available in the traditional sector, i.e., the
formal sector wage is ωs
(pI
s , pO
s
) ≥ ω.
Then, the private agent faces a choice between working in the advanced
(formal) sector and paying tax or working in the traditional (informal) sector
and not paying tax. Simple tax arbitrage implies that an individual in the
advanced sector will pay an income-tax rate of ts only if
ts ≤ ωs
(pI
s , pO
s
) + ds − ω
ωs
(psI , psO
),
where ds , as in Section 2.2.1, is any direct punishment incurred by someone
who gets caught cheating on his/her taxes. As explained in Chapter 2, we can
think about the investments in fiscal capacity as raising ds. Now define
τs = ωs
(pI
s , pO
s
) + ds − ω
ωs
(psI , psO
)
as the fiscal-capacity limit on the income tax. In this formulation, fiscal capacity
is tied directly to legal capacity and is increasing in pJ
s for either group J . In
particular, if pI
s = pO
s = πs, then
τs = ωs
(πs , πs
) + ds − ω
ωs
(πs , πs
)
is increasing in πs. Better advanced-sector opportunities create an incentive to
work there and to pay tax. This creates an additional complementarity between
fiscal and legal capacity—legal capacity raises wages in the advanced sector,
where taxes can be enforced, which raises fiscal capacity.
There are other “administrative” complementarities between fiscal and legal
capacity worth mentioning. An important aspect of building legal capacity may
be to invest in an institution such as a land registry, to be better able to enforce
private property rights over land, or a credit registry, to be better able to en
force debt contracts. But having such registries also creates information about
the ownership of land and financial assets. This information, in turn, makes it
easier to use land or assets as tax bases. Investments in such registries may thus
be viewed as a form of “joint production,” which increases the government’s
ability to raise tax revenue as well as the direct benefits in supporting markets.
In other words, they increase both legal and fiscal capacity.
130 chapter three: legal capacity


3.2.2 The Genius of Taxation
In the core model of Section 3.1, it is always optimal to extend legal capacity
maximally to each group. However, as explained in Section 3.2.1, an incumbent
group can either raise or lower its income by extending the access of the
opposition group to legal capacity. In this subsection, we explore the incentives
to extend legal capacity to both groups and thus to uphold the rule of law, i.e.,
a situation in which access to legal protection is universal.
The Policy Problem Revisited The issues are more complicated once we let
taxation and redistribution re-enter the picture. Whether the incumbent benefits
or loses by changing the legal support to the opposition group also involves the
effects on public revenue. We now explore this further and uncover yet another
important complementarity between taxation and legal capacity, which we call
the genius of taxation effect.
To explore this, we now allow yJ to depend on the vector (pI
s , pO
s
) as in
equation (3.17) from Case 4′ in Section 3.2.1. Hence, the policy payoff of the
incumbent in period s is
αsgs + (1 − ts
) yI (
pI
s , pO
s
)
+ rI
s.
If the incumbent group demands more labor than the opposition group then
∂yI (pI
s , pO
s
) /∂pO
s < 0. As we explained in Section 3.2.1, the negative effect
on the incumbent group’s income is due to the fall in the quasi rents that are
earned by the entrepreneurs in the group when the common wage rises owing
to greater labor demand. The government budget constraint is now modified to
R + tsY
(
pI
s , pO
s
)
= gs + ms + rI
s + rO
s
2.
Plugging in the level of government transfers and assuming that the income tax
is set at its maximal level, we can write the incumbent’s payoff as
αsgs + (1 − τs
) yI (
pI
s , pO
s
)
+ 2 (1 − θ )
[
R + τsY
(
pI
s , pO
s
)
− gs − ms
] .
(3.22)
developing the model 131


Fiscal-Capacity Limits to the Rule of Law We now make the following obser
vation:
Proposition 3.6: Suppose that κI KI
s > κOKO
s ; then there exists τˆ (α) with
τˆ (αH
) < τˆ (αL
) such that for all τs ≥ τˆ (α), all legal capacity is fully utilized,
i.e., pIs = pOs = πs. But if τs < τˆ (αs
), then pIs = πs and pOs = 0.
Proof: Differentiating (3.22) with respect to pJ
s yields
(1 − τs
) ∂yI (pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psJ
+ τsλs
∂Y (pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psJ
, (3.23)
where λs = max {αs , 2 (1 − θ )}. For J = I , it is clear that this is increasing so pI
s = πs. Then with (3.17), for J = O, the first term has the sign of
1 − 2κI KI (1 + πs
)
κI KI (1 + πs
) + κOKO (1 + psO
),
which is negative for all pO
s ∈ [0, πs
] if κI KI
s > κOKO
s . The second term in
(3.23) is positive. Now define τ ̃ (λs
) ∈ [0, 1] such that
(1 − τ ̃ (λs
)) ∂yI (pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psO
+ τ ̃ (λs
) λs
∂Y (pI
s , pO
s
)
∂psO
= 0.
Observe that τ ̃ (λs
) < 1. Now let
τˆ (αL
) = τ ̃ (max {αL, 2 (1 − θ )})
> τ ̃ (max {αH , 2 (1 − θ )}) = τˆ (αH
).
This proves the proposition.
This result says that an incumbent from the group with more entrepreneurs
denies the opponent access to the legal system unless fiscal capacity is sufficiently
high. This is because she prefers lower wages and can ensure this by keeping pO
s
low. Taxation creates a demand for collective consumption in the form of public
goods, g, and hence socializes the gains from increasing income per capita. The
cutoff value of taxation thus depends positively on the strength of demand for
public goods. The reason for this is that a higher demand for public goods
raises the value of public funds and hence encourages the incumbent to set
improved property rights for the opposition group to generate higher wages,
132 chapter three: legal capacity


which create benefits through the tax system. This common-interest motive
reduces the temptation for inefficiently keeping down the opposition’s wages
and the economy’s income per capita.
The cutoff value of τ also depends on the extent of inequality in entrepre
neurial activity across groups. When there is more concentration of entre
preneurs in the incumbent group, the cutoff for fiscal capacity is higher. The
proposition does not hold when the groups are identical, as then lower wages
no longer benefit the incumbent since income per capita is lower.11 Proposition
3.6 also shows why even small differences in κI KI and κOKO can be magnified
through decisions to allocate legal protection differentially across the groups.
This increases the degree of inequality.
Proposition 3.6 suggests a further complementarity between taxation and
efficiency. By undertaking redistribution through the tax-transfer system, the
government is encouraged to pursue the rule of law, extending market support
for the society as a whole, rather than furthering the narrow interests of its own
group. Moreover, the case for the rule of law is stronger when the common
interest motive for the use of the state is stronger.12
Implications for State-Capacity Investments The possibility that legal capacity
is not fully utilized affects incentives to invest in fiscal and legal capacity. We
look first at fiscal-capacity investment in isolation and then consider implica
tions for legal capacity.
A first effect on fiscal-capacity investment comes from the observation that
failure to fully extend legal protection to both groups, as illustrated in Proposi
tion 3.6, leads endogenously to greater inequality. As we have already observed
in Section 2.4.4, adding inequality to the model changes the incentive for invest
ing in fiscal capacity—the low-income group wants more fiscal capacity and the
high-income group wants less. These preferences are simply a reflection of the
marginal cost of fiscal capacity in terms of foregone private earnings in each
group. The larger inequality created by the effect in Proposition 3.6 means that
11. Another way of getting this result without inequality in capital holding is illustrated in Besley and Persson (2011). That analysis supposes that entrepreneurs do not supply any labor. Then, both groups as incumbents might prefer to generate higher incomes through lower wages. 12. The complementarity between efficiency and taxation is a general phenomenon. But if there is a deadweight loss associated with taxation, it may be that taxes will not be high enough to encourage extension of legal protection to the opposition.
developing the model 133


this effect will be exaggerated at low levels of fiscal capacity where the result
in Proposition 3.6 applies.
The model suggests that having a poorer group in power can now boost
incomes if the group invests sufficiently in taxes to cross the threshold τˆ (αs
).
This will lead to a more efficient use of legal capacity and hence raise incomes.
Such effects on output will be permanent to the extent that investments in fiscal
capacity are irreversible.
The second effect on fiscal-capacity investment is independent of which
group is in power. To illustrate this, suppose that τˆ (αH
) ≤ τ2 ≤ τˆ (αL
) and
Cohesiveness does not hold. Then, the marginal benefit of investing in fiscal
capacity is lower for both groups. For a richer incumbent group, this marginal
benefit is
(1 − φ) (1 − γ ) 2 (1 − θ ) Y (π2, 0) + [φαH + (1 − φ) γ 2θ ] Y (π2, π2
),
whereas for a poorer incumbent group it is
(1 − φ) γ 2 (1 − θ ) Y (π2, 0) + [φαH + (1 − φ) (1 − γ ) 2θ ] Y (π2, π2
).
Both of these figures are less than φαH + (1 − φ) 2 [(1 − γ ) (1 − θ )
+γ θ ] Y (π2, π2
), the marginal benefit when legal capacity is fully utilized, since
Y (π2, 0) < Y (π2, π2
). This reduces the incentive to invest in fiscal capacity and
hence enhances the possibility of a weak state persisting when income is low
because taxes are low.
Finally, we have to consider what happens to legal-capacity investment. The
effect on the underutilization of legal capacity is to lower the return to investing
in such capacity.13 This will lead to less investment in legal capacity all else
being equal. If fiscal-capacity investment is also lower, the negative effect on
legal capacity will be further compounded by the complementarity between the
two forms of state capacity. Thus, we would expect that a state with low taxes
and low and biased utilization of legal capacity, as illustrated in Proposition
3.6, also makes fewer investments in legal capacity. This further reinforces the
coincidence of low taxation and low income.
13. This is not completely obvious since, with less capital in use, the marginal product of capital is also higher. However, it can be shown that this is indeed the case with our assumed Cobb-Douglas technology.
134 chapter three: legal capacity


Implications of the Weak State for Incomes and Growth The discussion of
underinvestment in fiscal capacity has important implications for thinking
about incomes and growth. As stated before, the growth rate of income per
capita is
Y
(
pI
2, pO
2
)
−Y
(
pI
1, pO
1
)
Y
(
pI
2, pO
2
) =∑
J ∈{I ,O}
⎡
⎢⎣
yJ (
pI
2, pO
2
)
− yJ (
pI
1, pO
1
)
2yJ
(
pI
1, pO
1
)
⎤
⎥⎦.
Even if πs is fixed over time, an increase in fiscal capacity can lead to growth if
it leads to pO
2 = π2, i.e., if the economy crosses one of the thresholds spelled out
in Proposition 3.6. However, weak states, which do not invest in fiscal capacity,
do not escape the fiscal-capacity trap. This creates a strong correlation between
taxation and income per capita.
To illustrate these ideas further, consider two states W (for weak) and S (for
strong). Assume that they have the same initial legal capacity π W
1 = πS
1 = π1, but
that τ W
1 < ̂τ (αL) and τ S
1 > ̂τ (αL), so that they find themselves on opposite sides
of the fiscal-capacity threshold in Proposition 3.6 because of different initial
fiscal capacities, τ W
1 < τS
1. Let us compare income levels in periods 1 and 2. If the incumbent is rich in
period 1, then
YS
1 −YW
1 = Y (π1, π1) − Y (π1, 0) > 0,
i.e., in period 1, economy W has a lower income level owing to the inefficient
legal protection of the opposition group. If the rich persist in power in period 2,
we have
YS
2 −YW
2 = Y (π S
2 , πS
2 ) − Y (π W
2 , 0) > Y (π1, π1) − Y (π1, 0),
where the inequality follows from π S
2 > πW
2. Owing to its low fiscal capacity, economy W pursues a policy of less efficient
legal protection than economy S in period 2. As legal-capacity investments are
lower, there is also weaker growth. The stronger state not only has the higher
GDP level, but its income advantage compared to the weaker state is growing
over time.
These implications of Proposition 3.6 suggest another possible interpretation
of the correlations in Figure 1.3. Using the results in Section 3.1, we may
developing the model 135


observe a weak state together with low income either because the two are jointly
determined by other factors or because low income causes a weak state (recall
Proposition 3.2). The results in this subsection suggest that a weak state can
now actually cause low income, to the extent that it encourages policies that
distort production.
It is interesting to think about ways out of inefficient legal protection in an
investment trap. Our results suggest that exogenous circumstances as well as
political reform may play a role. Circumstances such as a higher likelihood or
expected severity of external conflict (higher φ or αH ) may make it too costly to
pursue inefficient legal protection by raising the prospect of a future common
interest state. A reform that diminishes political instability (a lower value of
γ ) may induce a first-period investment in fiscal capacity. We return to the
likelihood of such a reform in Chapter 7.
The Case for an Independent Judiciary This subsection maintains the assump
tion that the control over legal support, and therefore the decision whether to
follow the rule of law, is in the hands of whomever holds political office. If
both groups can agree not to exploit their ex post power to extract rents by
invoking inefficient and discriminatory legal support across groups, it might
lead to ex ante welfare gains for members of both groups. But, naturally, in
our model such an agreement would not be credible ex post, once power has
been allocated. This suggests that delegating these decisions to an independent
judiciary that cares about economic efficiency and/or equal access to legal pro
tection might bring welfare gains to the society.14 Such delegation would be
particularly valuable when the rich have a monopoly of political power. Thus
“investing” in judicial independence would be complementary with investments
in fiscal and legal capacity.
This discussion gives some additional perspective on the case often made for
the beneficial effects of an independent judiciary. However, there are thorny
issues to be dealt with here: de jure independence does not necessarily imply
de facto independence.15 And exactly what makes delegation to an independent
agency any more credible than an informal agreement between the two groups?
14. The argument is similar to the case for an independent and conservative central bank made by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Rogoff (1985). 15. Feld and Voigt (2003) offer a good discussion of such issues and provide empirical measures of de jure and de facto judicial independence.
136 chapter three: legal capacity


We will return to these issues in Chapter 7 when we discuss political and
institutional reform.
Links to Debates about Financial Development It is worth relating the results in
this subsection to recent work on the political origins of financial development.
As we discussed in the introduction, this work argues that a desire to create or
preserve rents can prevent a ruling elite from building the institutions needed
for well-functioning financial markets [see, e.g., Pagano and Volpin (2005) or
Rajan and Zingales (2003)]. This work generally considers the financial sector
without reference to the tax system. Thus, the political-origins argument may
implicitly assume a lack of fiscal capacity, which makes it unattractive for the
incumbents to invest in markets or maximize income and instead has them
carrying out their desired redistribution via taxes and transfers.
As stressed in Acemoglu (2003, 2006), it is important to pose the Political
Coase theorem question explicitly, i.e., why the groups involved cannot get
together and bargain over the outcome that maximizes income per capita,
dividing the gains between themselves. At least, one has to be explicit about
the frictions that prevent that outcome. In our analysis, the friction comes from
the absence of a credible mechanism to transfer any efficiency gains beyond
the institutional commitments entailed in the value of parameter θ . This is
because fiscal capacity is low.16 The key innovation in the approach applied
to the political origins of financial underdevelopment is to think about both
aspects of state capacity as evolving together endogenously and influencing
policy incentives.
We believe that the argument is much more general than the specific example
in this subsection. Further research might consider the joint determination of
weak states and other policy-induced production distortions that lead to low
income, such as tariffs or red-tape regulation.
Complements or Substitutes? In our core model, state capacities are natural
complements. There are always forces pushing in this direction, which our
model identifies. However, in certain formulations these forces are weaker and
we can even have cases where state capacities become substitutes. To illustrate
this, we return to the formulation in Section 2.2.2, where there is curvature in
16. Promises by the poor to the rich in exchange for better access to the legal system are assumed not to be credible in the absence of the fiscal capacity/institutions to support them.
developing the model 137


the demand for public goods. The expected period-2 marginal value of public
funds is now
E (λ2
)=
{ αVg
(τ2y (π2
) + R) if αVg
(τ2y (π2
) + R) > 2 (1 − θ)
2 [(1 − γ ) (1 − θ) + γ θ] otherwise.
The Euler equations remain effectively as in (3.4) and (3.5).
If αVg
(τ2y (π2
) + R) ≤ 2 (1 − θ), then we have complements as in the core
model. However, if αVg
(τ2y (π2
) + R) > 2 (1 − θ), then we find that fiscal and
legal capacity are complements only if
1 + τ2y (π2
)
τ2y (π2
)+R
(
Vggg2
Vg
)
≥ 0.
This requires that the elasticity of demand for public goods (−Vggg2/Vg
) be low
enough. Intuitively, the issue arises because the marginal value of public goods
falls as more state capacity is accumulated. This lowers the marginal return to
investing in state capacity of each type by lowering E (λ2
).
We have focused on comparative statics of determinants that raise the mar
ginal return to investing in one or both state capacities. This may create the
false impression that the demands for state capacities by both groups are always
aligned. But this need not be true and demands for different kinds of state capac
ity can shift with political control when demands are not aligned. This happens
to be the case with income inequality, as we introduced it in Section 2.2.4. In a
very similar formulation, Besley and Persson (2009a) show that higher-income
groups have stronger demands for legal rather than for fiscal capacity, and vice
versa for poorer groups.
Although both forms of state capacity remain complements, the forms of
state capacity are substitutable issues across groups. Our model would then
begin to resemble something like traditional class-based politics—one group
wants higher taxes and weaker market development, whereas the other wants
lower taxes and stronger market development. The evolution of the mix of state
capacities would then differ according to which group holds political power and
the extent of economic inequality.
3.2.3 Private Capital Accumulation
The basic model in Section 3.1 is dynamic, but the only accumulation concerns
the two forms of state capacity. In this subsection, we augment the model to
138 chapter three: legal capacity


allow for private capital accumulation. For simplicity, we look at one-period
capital, so that—absent investments in new capital—the entire period-1 capital
stock depreciates before period 2. Naturally, the focus is on the interactions
between state capacity and private accumulation.
Model Modifications To home in on the point of interest, we consider the case
in Section 3.2.1, where everyone is identical within and between groups and
the wage rate exceeds ω. Our assumption is that each citizen has a probability κ
of being an entrepreneur in each period and has to make his/her accumulation
decision before the resolution of this uncertainty. Everyone is thus the same
ex ante.
We also suppose that the parameters are such that pI
s = pO
s = πs, i.e., legal
capacity is fully utilized. Then, expected income per capita (making this explic
itly dependent on the per capita capital stock K) is
y (πs; K) =
{ ρ (K2
) K + ω (K2
) + R if κ (1 + πs
)≥1
(κ (1 + πs
) K)η + R otherwise, (3.24)
where ρ (K2
) = η (K2
)η−1 is the market-determined rental price of capital. In
the case where κ (1 + πs
) ≥ 1, income depends on aggregate capital per head
since capital is fully intermediated into the advanced sector. Citizens take the
level of capital per head in the population as a whole, K2, as given and un
affected by their private accumulation decision. In the case where κ (1 + πs
) < 1,
it is instead their own holding of capital that matters since that is what deter
mines their access to capital as entrepreneurs.
Using (3.24), we have that
yK
(πs; K) =
⎧⎨
⎩
η (K2
)η−1 if κ (1 + πs
)≥1
η [κ (1 + πs
)]η (K)η−1 otherwise.
Evaluated at K = K2, the marginal return to saving is highest when there is
no institutional constraint on the deployment of capital in production because
when the institutional constraint is binding κ(1 + πs
) < 1.
To study the accumulation decision regarding K, note that period-1 utility is
y(π1; K1) (1 − τ1
) + α1g1 + rJ
1 − K.
developing the model 139


Thus accumulation simply reduces private consumption in period 1. Period-2
utility becomes
y (π2; K) (1 − τ2
) + α2g2 + rJ
2.
Timing The timing of the model is now modified to the following:
1. We begin with initial stocks of state capacities {τ1, π1
} , a capital stock
per capita of K1, and an incumbent group I1.
2. All citizens choose how much capital, K , to accumulate for period 2.
3. Nature determines α1 and R and which citizens are entrepreneurs in
period 1.
4. I1 chooses a set of period-1 policies {t1, rI
1, rO
1 , pI
1, pO
1 , g1} and deter
mines (through investments) the period-2 stocks of fiscal and legal
capacity {τ2, π2
}.
5. I1 stays in power with probability (1 − γ ), and nature determines
α2 ∈ {αL, αH
} and which citizens are entrepreneurs in period 2.
6. I2 chooses period-2 policies {t2, rI
2, rO
2 , pI
2, pO
2 , g2}.
The only new feature of the model is the decision on private investments for
period 2. We have placed this decision before the period-1 realization of α1
and R. The precise timing is unimportant here, but will be important when we
reintroduce private investments in Chapter 5, where collective investments in
political violence determine political instability γ .
As usual, we look for a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Optimal Private Investment The public decisions on the choice of public goods,
taxation, and transfers are essentially as described earlier. The new interesting
decision is over capital accumulation at stage 2. Define
W (αs , τs , πs , ms , βJ ; K , Ks) = αsG (αs , πs , τs , Ks
) + (1 − τs)y (πs; K)
+ βJ [τsY (πs; Ks
) − G (αs , πs , τs , Ks
) − ms],
where βI = 2 (1 − θ ) and βO = 2θ . Observe that expected period-1 utility
viewed from stage 2 in the timing above is
φW (αH , τ1, π1, m1, βJ ; K1, K1) + (1 − φ) W (αL, τ1, π1, m1, βJ ; K1, K1) − K .
140 chapter three: legal capacity


Note that K is simply deducted from the rest of the expression to recognize
that the private-consumption cost of investing is the same regardless of α1.
The period-2 value functions now depend on private capital stocks and the
average period-2 per capita capital stock. They are given by
U I (τ2, π2; K , K2
)
=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, 0, βI ; K , K2
)
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, 0, βI ; K , K2
)]
for the incumbent and
U O (τ2, π2; K , K2
)
=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, 0, βO; K , K2
)
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, 0, βO; K , K2
)]
for the opposition.
The optimal capital accumulation decisions are characterized by
Kˆ I
2 = arg max
K ≥0
{
(1 − γ ) U I (τ2, π2; K , K2
) + γ U O (τ2, π2; K , K2
)−K
}
for the incumbent and
Kˆ O
2 = arg max
K ≥0
{
γ U I (τ2, π2; K , K2
) + (1 − γ ) U O (τ2, π2; K , K2
)−K
}
for the opposition. Since both groups have the same production function and
face the same tax rate in period 2, the outcome is straightforward and has Kˆ I
2 = Kˆ O
2. We now prove the following proposition:
Proposition 3.7: Suppose that (1 − τ2
) ωη < 1. Then, the optimal level of
period-2 capital solves
(1 − τ2
) yK
(
π2; Kˆ J
2
)
= 1for J ∈ {I , O} .
Proof: Observe first that for κ (1 + π2
) < 1, the optimization yields
η [κ (1 + πs
)]η (Kˆ J
2
)η−1 = 1.
developing the model 141


If κ (1 + π2
) ≥ 1, the optimal accumulation decision for an individual with
realized period-1 income, y1, is
Kˆ J
2
(K2, y1
)=
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
= 0 if (1 − τ2
) η (K2
)η−1 < 1
∈ [0, (1 − τ1
) y1
] if (1 − τ2
) η (K2
)η−1 = 1
= (1 − τ1
) y1 if (1 − τ2
) η (K2
)η−1 > 1.
We require private investment to be a fixed point of this mapping Kˆ J
2
(K2
) = K2.
It is straightforward to see that Kˆ J
2 (0) > 0 and, under the assumption in
Proposition 3.7, Kˆ J
2
(ω) < 1 since y1 ≥ ω. As Kˆ J
2 is continuous, the Intermediate
Value theorem implies that we have a fixed point with symmetric investments if
(1 − τ2
)η
(
KJ
2
)η−1 = 1,
which is the claim in the proposition.
The condition makes intuitive sense and says that the net-of-tax return to
capital just has to equal the marginal value of period-1 consumption.17 If this
were not the case, then each individual would be able to gain by saving more
or less. This condition holds if markets are imperfect and individuals benefit
from their own saving if they become entrepreneurs. But it also holds if they
are saving in a world where the markets are perfect and determine the rental
price for capital, as would be the case in a neoclassical economy.
Complementarity between Private Capital and Legal Capacity By Proposi
tion 3.7, the post-tax marginal return to capital is set equal to one, i.e., the
opportunity cost in terms of foregone period-1 consumption. From that con
dition, it follows that when the economy is institutionally constrained, so that
κ (1 + π2
) < 1, then
∂Kˆ 2
∂ πs
=η
1− η
Kˆ 2
(1 + πs
) > 0.
In other words, we have a complementarity between better legal institutions
and private capital accumulation. This result implies that there is indeed a link
17. The assumption made in the proposition is sufficient to guarantee that there is an interior solution.
142 chapter three: legal capacity


between more standard models of investment and growth and our approach
where growth is generated by the government’s accumulation of legal capacity.
This link suggests that we should see a further dimension of clustering in the
data between capital intensity in production and legal capacity.
Given this observation, let us derive the effect of an increase in legal capacity
on income per capita, taking the complementarity into account. The total effect
on income from an increase in π2 is given by
dy
(
π2; Kˆ 2
)
d π2
=y
(
π2; Kˆ 2
)η
1 + π2
[
1 + 1 + π2
Kˆ 2
∂Kˆ 2
∂ π2
]
=y
(
π2; Kˆ 2
)η
(1 + π2
) (1 − η) .
Thus investing in better legal capacity has a multiplier effect on income owing
to the additional private capital that it generates.
In terms of empirical predictions, the complementarity means that we should
observe similar determinants of private investment rates and the economy’s legal
capacity. We return to this observation when we discuss empirical implications
in Section 3.3
State-Capacity Investments Revisited Now, consider the impact of private
accumulation on the decision to invest in legal capacity. Start with the case
when τs is fixed and exogenous. Referring back to equation (3.5), we see that
the incumbent’s marginal return to investing in legal capacity is higher than in
the case without a multiplier effect.
Naturally, much work remains to fully integrate our model of productivity
with standard growth models. But, in general, we should expect improvements
in economic institutions to reinforce the standard mechanisms of economic
growth. Another application of the same general idea might be to endogenous
innovation, which requires institutions to protect intellectual property rights
combined with institutions allowing technology to be licensed.
What happens when we endogenize fiscal capacity? The reader will correctly
guess that with endogenous capital accumulation, we will get disincentive
effects from taxation that parallel those in the analysis of endogenous labor
supply in Section 2.2.6. Thus investments in fiscal and legal capacity will tend
to operate in competing directions. Once legal capacity has reached the point
where κ (1 + πs
) ≥ 1, then we only get the standard negative effect of taxation
developing the model 143


on capital accumulation. However, below that point, the impact of higher
taxation will be attenuated by the building of more legal capacity.
3.2.4 Predation and Corruption
The microfoundations for legal capacity in Section 3.2.1 focused on economic
institutions to facilitate contract enforcement in the private sector, especially
in private capital markets. In this subsection, we take another tack by looking
at the economic costs of predation. Predation might be due to private coercive
authority because the rule of law is poorly established. It might also be due to
the actions of bureaucrats, who abuse their power for self-enrichment. In either
case, resources are misallocated as predatory behavior basically works as a tax
on production, which leads to production inefficiency.
The state can improve the situation for producers by building economic
institutions that strengthen the rule of law and the protection of private property
rights via better access to legal systems. It can also invest in the means to curb
the power of bureaucrats by giving legal authority to producers to counter
maladministration by the state.
We study these phenomena by adapting the two-sector model developed
earlier in this chapter. In doing so, we assume that predatory behavior is only
an issue in the advanced production sector. Hence, predation operates as a
potential deterrent to structural transformation of the economy toward this
sector and leads to lower income per capita.
We use the adapted model to study the implications of rule by a rent-seeking
class that lives on such predatory behavior. This kind of rule leads to very poor
incentives to build protection against predation and can be the source of a
legal-capacity trap.
Introducing Predation To study these issues as simply as possible, we focus
on a symmetric case where every citizen in the economy has the same (exoge
nously given) holding of private capital, K, and there is a common fraction of
entrepreneurs, κ, in each group.
Predation by private agents or bureaucrats is a form of (informal) taxation,
whose technology we specify in what follows. There is a group of identical
predators that includes members of both groups in the economy, J = I , O. We
denote the share of predators coming from group J by nJ ∈ [0, 1] , with nI +
nO = 1. The rents are shared equally among the predators, so a share nJ of the
144 chapter three: legal capacity


resources extracted through predation accrues to group J . Similarly, predators
belonging to group J bear a share nJ of the costs incurred in predation.
This setting can easily capture pure corruption as a special case with nI =
1 − nO = 1, i.e., all predation rents accrue to the ruling group. (We could also
model a case where rents are purely redistributive within group.)
We continue to assume that the incumbent government acts in the interests
of its own group by maximizing its average utility. In what follows, we also
consider another case, which is perhaps more realistic, where rent extraction is
concentrated in the hands of a small subgroup—i.e., in the hands of an elite.
Predation as a Tax Suppose that after there has been production in the advanced
sector, a producer in group J faces the possibility that part of her output
is subject to “theft” by predators. We model this theft exactly like a tax on
output, which we denote by μ. The predators can discriminate among the
different groups J in their predation efforts, which they can target depending
on the group-specific profitability of predation. The extent of this tax depends
on formal protection of the targeted group’s property rights pJ
s and efforts
by the predators when targeting group J , denoted by χ J
s . Even though we
are assuming that groups have the same underlying productive capabilities, if pI
s = pO
s predation rates may differ.
We assume a simple functional form in which the tax rate is
μ (χ , p) = (1 − p) χ .
In this case μχ = (1 − p) > 0, i.e., the tax rate is higher with a higher predation
rate. If p = 1, then there are no returns to predation. As in the previous section,
we can assume that pJ
s ∈ [0, πs
], where πs is the level of legal capacity in the
economy.
Objective of Predators Expected output produced in the advanced sector by
group J in period s, net of predation, is now
[
1− μ
(
χJ
s , pJ
s
)]
K η L1−η .
We suppose that χ J is determined an by effort decision where all predators act
in consort. Together, the predators act like a monopolistic “predatory firm”
with shares in the firm equal to nI and nO held by agents in the incumbent and
opposition groups, respectively.
developing the model 145


For each targeted sector, we assume that predatory effort costs are given by
C (χ) , where C (.) is increasing and convex. Thus the predatory profits (rents)
from sector J are
μ
(
χ ,J
s , pJ
s
)
KηL1−η − C
(
χJ
s
) .
We focus on the case where
[
1− μ
(
χJ
s , pJ
s
)]
η (Ks
)η−1 > ρ. (3.25)
This means that the return to capital in its outside option is sufficiently low
and that all capital is deployed in advanced production. However, given the
outside wage available in traditional production, there are two cases to consider
depending on whether the following condition holds:
Advanced-Sector Productivity:
[
1− μ
(
χJ
s , pJ
s
)]
(1 − η) (Ks
)η > ω. (3.26)
This assumption is more likely to hold in a more capital-rich economy, where
advanced production is more attractive when the traditional wage is low and
when there is relatively little equilibrium predation so that μ (., .) is a long way
from one.
Some Traditional Production Suppose that (3.25) holds, but that the advanced
sector productivity condition fails. Then, labor demand, L ̃ J
s , solves
[
1− μ
(
χJ
s , pJ
s
)]
(1 − η)
(
Ks
L ̃ sJ κ
)η
= ω. (3.27)
This is like Case 3 in the neoclassical model of Subsection 3.2.1.
The optimal predation rate toward group J at date s maximizes predatory
rents, namely
χˆ J
s = arg max
{ μ
(
χ , pJ
s
) (Ks
)η (
κL ̃ J
s
)1−η − C (χ )
} .
Labor is now partially deployed in the traditional sector. This optimal predation
rate equates the marginal benefit from predation effort to the marginal cost and
is given by the condition
(
1 − pJ
s
) (Ks
)η (
κL ̃ J
s
)1−η = Cχ
(
χˆ J
s
) .
146 chapter three: legal capacity


There are two effects of increasing the legal support for group J , pJ
s . The first
is a predation effect, owing to χˆ J
s being lower, and the second is a reallocation
effect, owing to labor moving into the advanced sector to work for group J
entrepreneurs, since labor demand is determined by equation (3.27).
No Traditional Production If the advanced-sector productivity condition (3.26)
holds, then L ̃ J
s , as defined by (3.27), is equal to 1/κ and all labor is deployed
in that sector.
The optimal predation rate targeted toward group J at date s is now
χˆ J
s = arg max
{ μ
(
χ , pJ
s
) (Ks
)η − C (χ )
} ,
for which, if we assume an interior solution, the first-order condition is
(
1 − pJ
s
) (Ks
)η = Cχ
(
χˆ J
s
)
. (3.28)
In this case, we have only a predation effect, and no reallocation effect, when pJ
s is increased.
The Assignment of Legal Protection We now use the framework to consider
the government’s decision to set the levels of {pI
s , pO
s
} given the stock of legal
capacity πs.
To determine this, observe first that productive output per head in the
advanced sector in group J at s is given by
[
1− μ
(
χˆ J
s , pJ
s
)] y ̃
(
pJ
s
) ,
where
y ̃
(
pJ
s
) =
⎧⎨
⎩
(Ks
)η if [1 − μ (χ J
s , pJ
s
)] (1 − η) (Ks
)η > ω
(Ks
)η (
κL ̃ J
s
)1−η otherwise.
Net predatory income generated to group J from predation is
nJ [μ
(
χˆ I
s , pI
s
) y ̃
(
pI
s
)
+μ
(
χˆ O
s , pO
s
) y ̃
(
pO
s
)
−C
(
χˆ I
s
)
− C(χˆ O
s )].
developing the model 147


Putting these expressions together, we have
yI (
pI
s , pO
s
) =
[
1 − nOμ
(
χˆ I
s , pI
s
)] y ̃
(
pI
s
)
+ nI μ
(
χˆ O
s , pO
s
) y ̃
(
pO
s
)
− nI (
JC
(
χˆ J
s
)) +
(
1 − κL ̃ I
s
)
ω. (3.29)
Note that the income generated to group I by predation of its own members,
nI μ (χˆ I
s , pI
s
) y ̃ (pI
s
), nets out within the group.
A Normative Benchmark Adding this expression to the corresponding expres
sion for group O , we obtain income per capita as
Y
(
pI
s , pO
s
) =
∑
J ∈{I ,O}
(
y ̃ (pJ
s
) − C (χˆ J
s
)+
(
1 − κL ̃ J
s
) ω
)
2.
Since the terms in μ (χˆ J
s , pJ
s
) are pure transfers between predators and their
prey, they drop out of this expression.
We now have the following strong normative result:
Proposition 3.8: Income per capita is maximized when pI
s = pO
s = πs, i.e., full
legal protection is granted to producers, given the available legal capacity.
Proof: The proof is simple. The gross value of production, ∑
J ∈{I ,O}
(
y ̃ (pJ
s
)+
(
1 − κL ̃ J
s
) ω
)
, is maximized by minimizing the implicit taxes on
advanced-sector production, i.e., by setting pI
s = pO
s = πs. Moreover, the total
deadweight loss from predation, − ∑
J ∈{I ,O} C (χˆ J
s
), is minimized by deterring
predation as much as possible, i.e., by setting pI
s = pO
s = πs.
This result is just like the one we found in the model of Section 3.2.1. The
only prospective effect of encouraging predation is redistributive. But since it
lowers output, there is no social benefit and it is best to have the lowest possible
level of predation for each group, granting the rule of law.
Political Equilibrium The normative result in Proposition 3.8 would continue
to hold in political equilibrium if all predation were to be an entirely within
group affair, i.e., with all predation efforts and revenues remaining within
the group. This would exactly replicate the logic leading to Proposition 3.1;
each group would only care about the predation rate in its own group and
would set predation as low as possible.
However, in the predatory case considered here, full legal protection for
both groups may no longer be optimal for the incumbent, depending on how
148 chapter three: legal capacity


rents from predation are allocated. The key point is that no government can
commit in our framework to setting pJ
s > 0 so that legal capacity may go
unused ex post even if it is created ex ante. For example, if the incumbent
group has a disproportionate share of the rents, nI >> nO, it may be better
to offer differentiated legal protection to maximize the net incomes available
for the incumbent group. If nI is close to one and nO is close to zero, it is
clear from (3.29) that predation of group I generates mostly deadweight costs,
via the term nI C (χˆ I
s
) (since almost all predatory rents are transferred within
group I ). Thus, it may be best to minimize these costs by maximal deterrence
of predation against group I , i.e., to set pI
s = πs. At the same time, predation
on group O members generates substantial rents for group I , via the term
nI μ (χˆ O
s , pO
s
) y ̃ (pO
s
) . Thus, it may be best to enable maximal rents to be
extracted from group O, i.e., to set pO
s = 0. The complete formal argument
is very similar to the one that we rehearsed in Subsection 3.2.2 on the genius
of taxation, and it will not be repeated here. Note, however, that our earlier
insight on how high fiscal capacity may help rectify distortions in production
efficiency by assigning a large enough weight to average income also applies in
the present setting.
Implications The analog to the analysis in the discussion of the genius of
taxation in Section 3.2.2 suggests yet another observation. There, we argued
that the prospective welfare losses to society from opportunistic short-run rent
seeking behavior by incumbents called for delegating the deployment of legal
services to an independent judiciary. The same kind of argument can be made
here: it may be in the long-run interest of society to delegate the pursuit of
predators to an independent body with a clear mission. When the predators
are themselves government bureaucrats, the case would call for politically
independent (and honest) surveillance of the bureaucracy. But experience from
many attempts at fighting corruption in developing (and developed) countries
suggests that such reform is easier said than done. Changing social norms and
the motivations of enforcement agents is notoriously difficult.
A Predatory State? So far, we have assumed that the returns to rent seeking
are widely held and that the incumbents within groups act on the basis of the
average income of the group as a whole. These imply a Coasian bargain within
each group that is perhaps too optimistic. Intuitively, we often think about a
world of rent seeking and predation as one where small dominant cliques run
these operations on the basis of their narrow personal interests. This alternative
developing the model 149


world has much more damaging implications and can serve as the foundation
of a predatory state.
Suppose now that the ruling group is a self-interested and corrupt elite, which
carries out all the predation and thus monopolizes the predatory rents. To model
this situation, suppose that all rents from predation go to a fraction eI < 1 of
the incumbent group that also bears the cost of predatory activity. We assume
that the predation level is set to maximize the income from predation net of
such costs. For simplicity, we assume that both groups are ruled by an elite
in the same way and that the size of the elite is the same within each group.
Political turnover, if it occurs, is between the rulers in these elites.
Governance In this setup, we may introduce an additional parameter for
political institutions to complement θ and γ . We refer to the governance
parameter, denoted by ζ ∈ [0, 1]. Think about ζ as a transaction cost imposed
on the elite that reduces the rents that they can extract given any level of legal
protection, pJ
s . Thus, the realized level of per capita rents accruing to the elite
is now
∑
J ∈{I ,O}
[μ (χˆ J
s , pJ
s
) y ̃ (pJ
s
) − C (χˆ J
s
)]
eI (1 − ζ ),
with ζ = 0 being the weakest type of governance and ζ = 1 the strongest. One
interpretation of ζ might be the extent to which an independent judiciary holds
the government to account. Of course, the qualifier made earlier regarding the
possibility of credible delegation to an independent judiciary is still valid.
As in our core model, the citizens from the group in power benefit from offi
cial resources allocated through the tax system, in which case the incumbent is
constrained by political institutions as represented by θ . In theory cohesiveness,
as measured by θ , and good governance, as measured by ζ , concern distinct
distributional issues. In reality, however, we would expect θ and ζ to be linked,
as both are associated with constraints on the executive.
Indirect Utilities The utility of a nonelite citizen of type J is
αsgs + (1 − ts
)[
1− μ
(
χˆ J
s , pJ
s
)] y ̃
(
pJ
s
)
+ rJ
s.
The utility of a representative member of the elite (always a member of group
I by assumption) is
150 chapter three: legal capacity


∑
J ∈{I ,O}
[μ (χˆ J
s , pJ
s
) y ̃ (pJ
s
) − C (χˆ J
s
)]
eI (1 − ζ )
+ αsgs + (1 − ts
)[
1− μ
(
χˆ I
s , pI
s
)] y ̃
(
pI
s
)
+ rI
s . (3.30)
The elite attaches less weight to the general group interest as represented by the
second term in (3.30). However, this also depends on the quality of governance
ζ . If ζ = 1, then the incumbent cares only about group welfare. This formulation
assumes (quite reasonably) that the rents earned from predation are not subject
to income taxation because they are informal.
Solving for transfers using the government budget constraint yields
rI
s = 2 (1 − θ )
[
R + ts
[
1− μ
(
χˆ I
s , pI
s
)] Y
(
pI
s , pO
s
)
− gs − ms
]
. (3.31)
As in the core model of Section 3.1, we still have ts = τs and public-goods
demand determined by a corner solution, depending on the value of αs com
pared to 2 (1 − θ). The only interesting new issue is how legal protection against
predation is pursued.
Legal Protection Reconsidered Plugging (3.31) into (3.30) with ts = τs and
the optimal public-goods decision yields the incumbent’s payoff function. We
assume that the resulting payoff function is concave in (pI
s , pO
s
). The choice
of pJ
s will maximize this payoff subject to the constraints on legal and fiscal
capacity. The first-order conditions are
∂ [μ (χˆ I
s , pI
s
) y ̃ (pI
s
) − C (χˆ I
s
)]
∂psI
[1 − ζ ]
+ eI [(1 − τs
) + τsλs
] ∂ [1 − μ (χˆ I
s , pI
s
)] y ̃ (pI
s
)
∂psI
>−< 0 (3.32)
c.s. pI
s ∈ [0, πs
]
for the incumbent group and
∂ [μ (χˆ O
s , pO
s
) y ̃ (pO
s
) − C (χˆ O
s
)]
∂psO
[1 − ζ ]
+ eI τsλs
∂ [1 − μ (χˆ O
s , pO
s
)] y ̃ (pO
s
)
∂psO
>−< 0 (3.33)
c.s. pO
s ∈ [0, πs
]
developing the model 151


for the opposition, where, as before, λs = max {αs , 2 (1 − θ )} is the marginal
value of public funds.
The first term in both (3.32) and (3.33) is negative and, as pJ
s is increased,
represents the marginal loss to the elite from greater rents owing to weaker legal
protection. The second term is positive and represents the gain in income from
strengthening legal protection. For the incumbent group, this includes the fact
that its income is higher as well as the gain coming via the government budget
constraint.
Using (3.32) and (3.33), we now have the following result:
Proposition 3.9: The protection of property rights depends on the strength
of governance. There are two thresholds: ζH
(τs , πs , λs , eI ) > ζL
(τs , πs , λs , eI )
such that:
1. If ζ ≥ ζH
(τs , πs , λs , eI ), then pI
s = pO
s = πs.
2. If ζ ∈ (ζL
(τs , πs , λs , eI ) , ζH
(τs , πs , λs , eI )), then πs ≥ pI
s > pO
s ≥ 0.
3. If ζ ≤ ζL
(τs , πs , λs , eI ), then pI
s = pO
s = 0.
Proof: First observe by (the envelope theorem) that
∂ [μ (χˆ J
s , pJ
s
) y ̃ (pJ
s
) − C (χˆ J
s
)]
∂psJ
= −χˆ J
s y ̃
(
pJ
s
)
< 0,
i.e., rents are always higher when pJ
s decreases. Now, define ζH from
−χˆ O
s y ̃ (πs
) [1 − ζH
] + eI τsλs
∂ [1 − μ (χˆ O
s , πs
)] y ̃ (πs
)
∂ πs
= 0.
Since the payoff function is assumed to be concave, pO
s = πs for for all ζ ≥ ζH .
Moreover, using (3.32), we also see that pI
s = πs. Observe that ζH always exists
in the unit interval. Now define ζL from
−χˆ I
s y ̃ (0) [1 − ζL
] + eI [(1 − τs
) + τsλs
] ∂ [1 − μ (χˆ I
s , 0)] y ̃ (0)
∂psI
= 0.
Since the function is concave, pI
s = 0 for ζ ≤ ζL. For ζL > 0, we require eI to
be small enough; otherwise ζL = 0. Moreover, it is straightforward to see from
(3.33) that pO
s = 0 at ζL and a fortiori for all ζ ≤ ζL. Finally, observe that for
152 chapter three: legal capacity


ζ ∈ [ζL, ζH
], pI
s is strictly positive at least for the incumbent. From (3.32) and
(3.33), it is also straightforward to see that pI
s > pO
s.
Interpretation Proposition 3.9 gives us three cases. If governance is good
[ζ ≥ ζH
(τs , πs , λs , eI )], then maximal protection against predation is given
to both groups and all legal capacity is utilized. If governance is bad [ζ ≤
ζL
(τs , πs , λs , eI )], neither group is offered any legal protection against pre
dation. Between these two extremes, legal protection favors citizens in the
incumbent group. This is like an oligarchic system of property-rights protection,
where protection is different for each group, with the incumbent group being
favored. However, legal protection still falls short of using all legal capacity.
The striking feature of Proposition 3.9 is that—unlike the model of Sec
tion 3.2.1—both groups may be denied access to the legal system. This provides
a vivid illustration of how corruption/predation can be economically costly.
The point is not just the standard channel of raising μ (χˆ J
s , pJ
s
) , but also that
corruption reduces the interest of the ruling elite in offering legal support for
citizens against such activity. The damage may not stop with this static effect,
however, since predation also reduces the incentive to invest in legal capacity.
We return to this possibility shortly.
The proof of Proposition 3.9 shows that equilibrium bad governance
requires that the elite be small enough. To see this, observe that as eI → 0,
the second term in (3.32) and (3.33) goes to zero, so that gains in rent seeking
from worse legal protection dominate any positive effect on private incomes
or any effect owing to the government budget constraint. Intuitively, a lower
eI makes the elite less and less representative of the interests of its group and
hence brings about greater divergence from a Coasian outcome.
The governance thresholds also depend on λs. This is clear from (3.32) and
(3.33), which show that the gain from improving property-rights protection
comes, in part, from higher public revenues. It is possible, however, that if
αs = αH —with the value of public goods being very large (such as in a war-time
economy)—common-interest motives may become strong enough to trigger
attempts to stamp out corruption and predation. But for strong and small elites,
such a common-interest “shock” would have to be very large indeed. The main
hope for restoring incentives to deploy legal capacity efficiently is that ζ will
increase.
Finally, observe that one way of undermining these incentives is to try to tax
returns from predation and corruption. This seems unlikely by the very nature
developing the model 153


of the activity. But to the extent that predation returns are taxed, it will have a
similar effect to that of improving governance.
Incentives to Invest in Legal Capacity We now explore the implications of bad
governance for incentives to invest in improving legal capacity. Let us focus
on the case where governance is bad. Following Proposition 3.9, we define the
following:
Bad Governance: ζ ≤ ζL
(
τs , πs , λs , eI )
.
As we saw in Proposition 3.9, under bad governance the government has no
incentive to offer legal protection to members of either group. If pI
s = pO
s = 0,
we have yπ
(π2
) = 0. Applying this logic to the legal-capacity Euler equation
(3.5) implies that there is no incentive to invest in legal capacity. We refer to
this case as a predatory state, since it is the unchecked predation of the ruling
elite that undermines the incentives to create legal institutions and sustain the
rule of law.
We summarize this observation in the following proposition:
Proposition 3.10: If bad governance holds, the state is predatory and has no
incentive to invest in legal capacity. This also reduces the period-1 incumbent’s
incentive to invest in fiscal capacity.
The predatory state in some ways parallels the weak state we identified in
Sections 2.1 and 3.1, since the incumbent has no incentive to invest in one
form of state capacity. There are three important differences, however.
First, weak states were defined by a lack of incentive to invest in fiscal
capacity because of limited institutional cohesion in allocating government
resources. In predatory states, the weakness is due to the rulers benefiting
directly from weak legal institutions because of poor governance, i.e., a low
value of ζ .
Second, a predatory state can, in principle, coexist with all three kinds
of states identified in the last part of Section 2.1. It may even be possible
to have a common-interest state that is simultaneously predatory! The rent
seeking problem arises, not predominantly because of a lack of cohesion across
groups, but rather because of an “agency” problem within groups. However,
given that high θ and ζ are likely to have many common features, it is unlikely
that a common-interest state will also be predatory. We thus expect predatory
154 chapter three: legal capacity


states to arise mainly when the Cohesiveness condition fails, i.e., in weak and
redistributive states.
Third, unlike weak states predatory states have direct implications for eco
nomic efficiency: such states will have low and inefficient levels of production.
This creates a direct link among low legal protection, corruption, and low
income.
Given the complementarity we have identified between fiscal and legal capac
ity, the unwillingness to build legal capacity also results in weaker incentives
to invest in fiscal capacity. In a predatory state, none of the elite groups has an
incentive to break out of this trap—even if γ is high and power is expected
to turn over—since whatever legal capacity might be created will never be
deployed. In other words, moves to strengthen the rule of law will simply be
emasculated.
Even in the absence of the worst form of bad governance, any situation with
ζ < ζH
(τs , πs , λs , eI ) will imply weak incentives to invest in legal capacity.
Improving governance will therefore be a complement to investing in legal
capacity, as well as in fiscal capacity.
Incentives to Invest in Private Capital We can also observe that a predatory
state will have extremely poor incentives for private capital accumulation, as
the rate of return is reduced by (1 − μ (χˆ J
s , pJ
s
)). Thus, if we were to introduce
private capital accumulation in the same way as in Section 3.2.3, we would
also expect predatory states to have lower levels of private accumulation. This
effect would not necessarily be related to τs because the predatory margin is
separate from the standard tax margin. Owing to the lower incentive to build
legal capacity in predatory states, we would expect the predatory margin to be
more important than the tax margin.
Taking Stock The analysis of the predatory state extends our approach to
incorporate a new set of concerns. We stress the usual static distortions of pre
dation and corruption. But we also highlight two other (linked) margins, where
predation distorts: (1) incentives to deny citizens access to legal protection,
and (2) incentives to create ineffective legal institutions. Thus the predatory
state reveals new dimensions of state fragility, which complement the dimen
sion identified earlier.
In Chapter 4, we will see that the presence of a predatory state will also
have other negative consequences. In particular, it will strengthen the motives
developing the model 155


for elites dominating incumbent and opposition groups to invest in violence,
so as to maintain or acquire a hold on power.
Moreover, our analysis motivates the need to improve governance as a means
of promoting development, a regular theme in the recent development-policy
literature. Through the lens of the model in this subsection, the right agenda
would be political reform to improve the governance parameter ζ . In Chapter 7,
we discuss reforms that are designed to reduce elite capture and when we might
expect such reforms to come about endogenously.
3.3 Empirical Implications and Data
We end this chapter as we ended Chapter 2—by taking a look at the cross
sectional data in light of the implications of the theory we have presented.
As in the previous chapter, what we present here are no more than suggestive
correlations. However, as in Chapter 2, we argue that theory is a useful guide
to our measurement and the way we interpret these correlations.
Measuring Legal Capacity To measure legal capacity, variable π in the model,
we use five different proxies, one from the International Country Risk Guide
(ICRG) and four from the World Bank’s Doing Business project.18 Some of
these have already figured in the graphs in this chapter as well as in Chapter 1.
From the ICRG, we take the annual measure of government antidiversion
policy, which is intended to serve as a catch-all for private investment incentives
affected by government. We use the value of this measure in the last year that it
is available (1997). As it is quite a broad measure, it is hard to relate precisely to
any specific theoretical mechanism. As mentioned in Chapter 1, however, this
index has been commonly used in the macroeconomic development literature
to gauge the protection of property rights. As it has this connotation, the index
resonates well with our theoretical discussion of predation in Subsection 3.3.4.
In analogy with some of our measures of fiscal capacity, it is not completely
clear whether this is a measure of πs or of {pI
s , pO
s
}.
Our second measure is also quite general. It is a country’s (normalized) rank
on the Doing Business indicator, an index aggregated across a series of measures
that rank the business environment of particular countries. It reflects a whole
18. See www.doingbusiness.org.
156 chapter three: legal capacity


Table 3.1 Correlations among legal capacity measures
Government antidiversion Doing Registering Obtaining Contract policy business property credit enforcement
Government 1.000 antidiversion policy Doing business 0.801 1.000 Registering property 0.508 0.567 1.000 Obtaining credit 0.668 0.788 0.436 1.000 Contract enforcement 0.728 0.706 0.385 0.407 1.000
gamut of frictions that governments impose on business. However, we can be
fairly confident that there is a strong link to the underlying economic institutions
and, hence, a reflection of πs.
For our third, fourth, and fifth measures, we select specific indicators from
the Doing Business project that are closer to the theory. The third measure is a
country’s (normalized) rank on ease of registering property. This clearly relates
to the ease with which assets can be collateralized, which is quite close to the
microfounded model in Subsection 3.2.1, where pJ
s = πs allowed entrepreneurs
to leverage their wealth. The fourth measure is a country’s (normalized) rank in
the ease of access to credit, which also relates well to the microfounded model
with capital-market imperfections. The fifth measure is a country’s (normalized)
rank on a measure of enforcing contracts, which should also be relevant to trade
in capital markets, but perhaps also to the legal system in general.
Table 3.1 shows a correlation matrix for the five measures of legal capacity.
Not surprisingly, these are positively correlated. This reflects the kind of clus
tering that we have been emphasizing throughout. However, there are clearly
some differences among the measures.
Measuring Parameters of the Model For these measures, we proceed exactly as
in Chapter 2 and the reader may wish to refresh her memory of how we chose
to construct proxies for {φ, θ , 1 − γ , α ̃H
}. However, it is worth highlighting
two differences between the approach we take here and the one in Chapter 2.
Both of these are motivated by the theoretical models in this chapter.
First, in Chapter 2, income per capita was taken as exogenous and used as a
regressor in Table 2.4 on the grounds that the model offered predictions about
the correlation between fiscal capacity and exogenous income ω. However, this
empirical implications and data 157


chapter has emphasized the endogeneity of income, which clearly calls into
question the interpretation of such regressions. Indeed, the model of this chapter
could even be used to argue that income per capita should appear on the left
hand side of the regression.
Second, the models in this chapter suggest that we may want to highlight
variables that affect the costs of investing in better legal institutions. As dis
cussed in Section 3.1, this suggests a natural link to the empirical literature
on legal origins. Indeed, our models offer a natural interpretation of legal ori
gins through the impact they might have on the L (.) function. Therefore, we
include a set of legal-origin indicators in all the specifications that follow. In fact,
the theory suggests that something more than legal origins affect legal capac
ity. Through the complementarity we have identified, there should be common
effects on both the legal and the fiscal capacity of legal origins, as well as other
determinants identified by the theory. This tells us something precise about
which correlations we should expect to find in the data, and hence we revisit
some of our measures of fiscal capacity to see whether the predicted correlation
structures are present in the data.
Measuring Other Outcomes Although our focus is on legal capacity, we also
want to check whether the suggested determinants of legal capacity are also
correlated with other outcomes suggested by the theory. As pointed out in our
discussion of the microeconomic model in Section 3.2.1, we should expect
private credit to be monotonically related to determinants of legal capacity.
Following common practice in the financial-development literature initiated by
King and Levine (1993), we measure private credit as a share of GDP in the
last year it is available to us (namely 1997).19
Referring to Section 3.2.3 and the complementarity between legal capacity
and private investment, we should expect private investment to be positively
correlated with the determinants of legal capacity. We measure private invest
ment in the year 2006 from the Penn World Tables (variable “ci” in version 6.3
of the database) to parallel the timing of our main measures of legal capacity.
Given the extension on predation and corruption in Section 3.2.4, we should
expect realized corruption to be negatively correlated with the determinants of
legal capacity. We measure corruption via an index based on several sources of
corruption perceptions. This is provided by Transparency International for a
19. We are grateful to Giovanni Favara for providing us with these data.
158 chapter three: legal capacity


number of years and once more we use the 2006 outcome.20 Note that higher
values of this index imply less corruption.
Basic Correlations In Table 3.2, we begin by showing the partial correla
tions between our five legal-capacity measures and the proxies for parame
ters φ, θ , (1 − γ ), and α ̃H , plus the legal-origin indicators. Column (1) shows
that—as expected from the theory—past wars, high constraints on the exec
utive, nonopen and noncompetitive recruitment of the executive, and ethnic
homogeneity are all positively and significantly correlated with the government
antidiversion policy at the end of the 1990s. The same correlation pattern is
also present for the other measures of legal capacity, although the correlations
are somewhat weaker for registering property. For the four ranks extracted
from the Doing Business survey, the estimated coefficient for the prevalence of
war fluctuates around 0.5. This means that a country history that entails 25%,
rather than none, of the last 200 years spent in wartime is associated with about
12.5% higher performance, i.e., about 20 steps, in the world ranking. By a sim
ilar calculation, a country with 20% higher historical average in its historical
constraints on the executive score is associated with a higher world ranking of
around 10%, i.e., about 15 steps.
Legal origins are also correlated with our measures of legal capacity. Par
ticularly consistent is the positive and significant effect of Scandinavian and
German legal origin compared to French legal origin (the omitted category).
Perhaps surprisingly, given all the emphasis on common law in the legal-origins
literature, British legal origin is less strongly correlated with our legal capacity
measures, as is—perhaps less surprisingly—Socialist legal origin.
Interaction Effects As argued in Chapter 2, the correlations in Table 3.2 do
not really engage with the detailed predictions of the model, as discussed in
connection with the global and local comparative statics of the model. The
arguments are essentially the same as those that we discussed in relation to
fiscal capacity, but reinforced when fiscal and legal capacity are complements,
as in Section 3.1. As a higher φ raises legal capacity π only in a common
interest or redistributive state, we expect a stronger effect of war (high φ or
α) when cohesiveness (θ ) is high. As political instability 1 − γ has an impact
on legal capacity only when θ is low enough, and for the range of γ where
20. This is their variable CPI. The CPI focuses on corruption in the public sector and defines corruption as the abuse of public office for private gain.
empirical implications and data 159


Table 3.2 Legal capacity and covariates: Simple correlations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Government antidiversion Doing Registering Obtaining Contract policy business property credit enforcement
Prevalence external war before 2000
1.294** 0.427** 0.278 0.355* 0.749*** (0.580) (0.185) (0.441) (0.203) (0.230)
Average executive constraints before 2000
2.085*** 0.535*** 0.222* 0.358*** 0.287*** (0.291) (0.084) (0.122) (0.092) (0.108)
Average nonopen executive recruitment before 2000
1.467*** 0.235** 0.229 −0.082 0.202* (0.303) (0.109) (0.152) (0.114) (0.09)
Ethnic homogeneity 1.079*** 0.241*** 0.257*** 0.286*** 0.104 (0.259) (0.073) (0.091) (0.089) (0.096)
English legal origin −0.157 0.148*** 0.106* 0.062 0.103* (0.189) (0.050) (0.064) (0.054) (0.054)
Scandinavian legal origin 0.706*** 0.276*** 0.327*** 0.127 0.452*** (0.204) (0.067) (0.079) (0.081) (0.069)
German legal origin 0.627*** 0.280*** 0.244*** 0.219*** 0.365*** (0.185) (0.054) (0.079) (0.051) (0.063)
Socialist legal origin 0.013 0.062 0.155** −0.007 0.265*** (0.153) (0.050) (0.059) (0.059) (0.053)
Observations 122 147 147 147 147 R-squared 0.623 0.552 0.293 0.414 0.442
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. French legal origin is the omitted category.
the stability condition holds, we expect higher political stability to positively
affect legal capacity when cohesiveness is low, but not when it is high. By the
global comparative statics, we expect high values of θ to raise the likelihood of a
common-interest or redistributive state and larger investments in legal capacity.
We proceed as in Chapter 2 and add two interaction terms to the specification
used in Table 3.2: (1) the binary high-executive constraints indicator times the
continuous measure of past wars, and (2) the binary low-executive constraints
indicator times the continuous measure of past political stability.
160 chapter three: legal capacity


Table 3.3 shows our estimates when the more detailed and theory-driven
specification is applied to the five measures of legal capacity. The results are of
mixed success. Although a number of the correlations go in the expected direc
tion, many are insignificant. However, the findings from Table 3.2 regarding
Table 3.3 Legal capacity and covariates: Interaction terms
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Government antidiversion Doing Registering Obtaining Contract policy business property credit enforcement
Prevalence external war before 2000
1.369 0.708 1.529*** 0.515 1.052* (1.918) (0.518) (0.549) (0.659) (0.561)
External war* high executive constraints dummy
0.146 −0.299 −1.535** −0.203 −0.320 (2.062) (0.554) (0.680) (0.676) (0.596)
Average nonopen executive recruitment before 2000
0.547 −0.030 0.151 −0.059 −0.038 (0.630) (0.199) (0.257) (0.210) (0.229)
Average nonopen executive recruitment* low ex constraints
1.097* 0.245 0.028 0.010 0.254 (0.657) (0.204) (0.259) (0.212) (0.233)
Average executive constraints before 2000
2.147*** 0.632*** 0.235*** 0.613*** 0.216 (0.561) (0.127) (0.175) (0.147) (0.150)
Ethnic homogeneity 1.150** 0.256*** 0.241*** 0.310*** 0.102 (0.296) (0.070) (0.091) (0.089) (0.096)
English legal origin 0.137 0.145*** 0.112* 0.074 0.092 (0.171) (0.050) (0.065) (0.053) (0.057)
Scandinavian legal origin 0.931*** 0.340*** 0.347*** 0.171 0.492*** (0.286) (0.101) (0.091) (0.107) (0.097)
German legal origin 0.714*** 0.305*** 0.265*** 0.227*** 0.388*** (0.286) (0.054) (0.078) (0.059) (0.067)
Socialist legal origin −0.037 0.061 0.132** 0.005 0.254*** (0.171) (0.052) (0.062) (0.062) (0.056) Observations 122 147 147 147 147 R-squared 0.635 0.566 0.318 0.441 0.450
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. French legal origin is the omitted category.
empirical implications and data 161


average executive constraints, ethnic homogeneity, and legal origins continue
to hold up in a strong way.
Other Outcome Measures Although legal capacity should be the primary chan
nel through which our institutional variables affect outcomes, these variables
should also be related to the other outcome measures suggested by the theory. To
the extent that our measures of legal capacity are imprecise, it is worth looking
at some reduced-form partial correlations with the three outcomes mentioned
earlier: financial development, private investment, and corruption. Indeed, if
these correlations did not follow the patterns we found in Tables 3.2 and 3.3,
we might be concerned about the mechanisms suggested by the theory. Thus
these correlations serve as a further reality check.
The results are presented in the first three columns of Table 3.4, which uses
the same specification as Table 3.2. We find a remarkably consistent picture
with all determinants—war experience, strong executive constraints nonopen
and noncompetitive executive recruitment, ethnic homogeneity, and German
legal origin—being positively correlated with the three alternative outcome
measures. This is precisely what we would expect if these determinants are
indeed working through investments in legal capacity.
Common Determinants of Fiscal and Legal Capacity Finally, we turn to the
important prediction of our theory that fiscal and legal capacity are jointly
determined. Owing to the complementarity between the two, common factors
should drive both legal and fiscal capacity. This is explored in the final columns
of Table 3.4, which repeat the correlations from Table 2.2. We use three of
our previous fiscal-capacity measures—overall tax take, income-tax share, and
the size of the formal sector—as dependent variables. In line with the theory
in this chapter, however, we now also include the legal-origins dummies on the
right-hand side.
The results in columns (4)–(6) confirm that the pattern of correlations is
similar for fiscal and legal capacity when it comes to our proxies for parameters
φ, θ , (1 − γ ), and α ̃H , plus German and Scandinavian legal origins. Given the
amount of general clustering in the raw data between income and state capacity,
this is perhaps not too surprising. But the theory we have developed in this
section gives us a precise way of thinking about such clustering, where theory
and data are saying the same thing.
162 chapter three: legal capacity


Table 3.4 Other outcomes and covariates: Simple correlations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Private Private- Tax-revenue Income-tax Formal credit Corruption investment share share in sector to GDP perceptions rate in GDP total revenue share
Prevalence external war before 2000
2.490*** 2.130*** 0.132 3.227*** 2.056* 2.159*** (0.571) (0.495) (0.659) (1.160) (1.100) (0.807)
Average executive constraints before 2000
1.729*** 1.799*** 0.906*** 1.491*** 1.690*** 1.485*** (0.331) (0.275) (0.260) (0.420) (0.421) (0.375)
Average nonopen executive recruitment before 2000
1.099** 0.870*** 0.751** 0.640 0.849* 1.249*** (0.429) (0.310) (0.356) (0.388) (0.473) (0.471)
Ethnic homogeneity 0.489 0.693*** 0.991*** 0.650** 0.171 0.549 (0.301) (0.254) (0.216) (0.311) (0.283) (0.353)
English legal origin 0.131 0.078 0.298* 0.047 0.225 0.089 (0.218) (0.156) (0.161) (0.178) (0.183) (0.233)
Scandinavian legal origin
−0.346 1.719*** 0.154 1.966*** 1.114*** 0.499** (0.41) (0.212) (0.212) (0.348) (0.293) (0.215)
German legal origin 1.618*** 1.117*** 0.272 0.677* 1.273*** 0.892** (0.407) (0.231) (0.232) (0.359) (0.219) (0.221)
Socialist legal origin N/A −0.376*** 0.268* −1.027*** −0.308 −0.172 (0.120) (0.146) (0.171) (0.450) (0.239)
Observations 96 147 154 104 104 109 R-squared 0.633 0.643 0.332 0.630 0.554 0.375
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. French legal origin is the omitted category.
In the same way as for the correlations given at the end of Chapter 2, the
results presented here are only illustrative and suggestive. But they do continue
to suggest that our theoretical ideas are relevant to explaining cross-country
differences in legal and fiscal capacity. The next phase of empirical research,
however, must focus on exploiting the time variation in the data found within
countries.
empirical implications and data 163


3.4 Final Comments
This chapter has focused on the productive role of government in improving
the environment for doing business. Improvements in the performance of gov
ernment are measured as TFP and differences in income across countries can
be explained by differences in the quality of their economic institutions. This
makes it essential to understand why some countries make the right investments
in legal institutions and deploy such legal capacity effectively.
A running theme of the chapter is the possibility of a complementarity
between the extractive (taxation) and the productive (supporting markets)
roles of government. This is at the heart of the empirical observation that
market development and state development move hand in hand. But the key
insight from our framework is that we have to understand the incentives of
a government to make investments to improve the workings of the economy.
The common drivers of state and market development are political institutions
as well as natural endowments that affect productivity. The core model we
have developed in Chapter 2 and extended here lays bare these common
determinants.
Three further sources of complementarity have emerged in this chapter. First,
a better ability to redistribute through the tax system makes government less
inclined to use inefficient forms of redistribution, such as denying legal services
to some groups of entrepreneurs. Second, improved legal systems may bring
people out of the informal economy and into the formal economy, which lowers
the cost of tax enforcement. These two channels were discussed in Section 3.2.1.
Third, increases in legal capacity can encourage capital accumulation and
promote growth through the conventional accumulation channel, as discussed
in Section 3.2.3.
The framework developed in this chapter also helps us to understand the
forces behind the observed clustering between income and both forms of state
capacity. On the one hand, some common factors, such as common interests
and cohesive political institutions, determine both forms of state capacity. But
legal capacity will promote income via the endogenous growth mechanism
discussed in Section 3.1 and the complementary private accumulation channel
discussed in Section 3.2.3. Moreover, as discussed in Section 3.2.4, higher fiscal
capacity may also promote income by stimulating incumbents not to engage in
production-distorting rent seeking. On the other hand, Section 3.1 highlighted
a force operating from income to state capacity, namely that higher exogenous
164 chapter three: legal capacity


growth increases prospective tax bases and thus promotes investments in legal
as well as fiscal capacity.
It is easy to see that the positive feedbacks entailed in these two-way relations
between income and state capacity can generate virtuous or vicious circles. Such
circles can help explain an important dimension of the development clusters we
observe in the data.
Finally, we explored the role of extralegal taxation (predation). This is
most damaging when combined with elite control and highlights the role of
governance relations between the elite and the citizenry when predatory rents
accrue to the elite. This leads to the possibility of a legal-capacity trap, which
we referred to as a predatory state. The predation effects further reinforce the
mechanisms identified earlier in the chapter.
3.5 Notes on the Literature
Our models of legal capacity in this chapter focus mostly on enforcement of pri
vate contracts by a public body. In the terminology of Dixit (2009), we are con
sidering enforcement-based rather than information-based institutions. In par
ticular, we do not deal with self-enforcing agreements between private parties.
In the terminology of Greif (2005), we are primarily considering (public-order
and designed) contract-enforcement institutions, i.e., government enforcement
of agreements between private parties, rather than coercion-constraining insti
tutions, i.e., obstacles to government expropriation of private parties. But the
governance institutions we introduced in the predatory state would be of the
latter type.
A long-standing tradition in development economics sees reallocation of
resources to higher return activities as the main mechanism for raising incomes.
Perhaps the most famous statement of this view is in the paper by Lewis
(1954), who highlighted the movements of labor from traditional to advanced
production as the key mechanism of development. More recent work in this
vein has accorded increasing recognition to misallocation in capital markets,
as in Banerjee and Duflo (2005).
Hseih and Klenow (2009) stress the aggregate productivity consequences of
factor market misallocation using microdata from India and China. Restuccia
and Rogerson (2008) also look at aggregate implications of policy-induced
resource misallocation. More general implications of these views are developed
notes on the literature 165


in Hseih and Klenow (2010), who conclude that 50–70% of income per capita
differences between countries can be accounted for by differences in TFP rather
than in physical or human capital. Related work on China by Song, Storesletten,
and Zillibotti (2011) considers the process of capital accumulation through the
entry of new firms as the main source of Chinese growth and argues that this
pattern is due to capital-market imperfections.
Acemoglu (2006) underlines the political origins of resource misallocation
with a particular focus on adverse factor price effects that lead to inefficiencies
in production. This work also highlights the importance of fiscal capacity,
although it takes such capacity as given.
Many researchers have emphasized the links between financial development
and growth. See Beck (2010) for a useful general overview of the literature on
legal institutions and their impact on economic development. Early discussions
include Gerschenkron (1962) and Schumpeter (1934). Aghion, Howitt, and
Mayer-Foulkes (2005) and King and Levine (1993) offer modern-day tests of
these ideas. Levine (2005) provides an overview of the large literature on finance
and economic growth.
The factors—economic and political—that shape capital-market develop
ment have been an active area of research. The legal-origins tradition pioneered
by La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) has emphasized how
some legal traditions—particularly those rooted in common law—are more
conducive to development of some kinds of capital markets. This body of
research is summarized in La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer (2008).
La Porta et al. (1999) discuss the quality of government more generally and
a variety of factors—including legal origins—that determine it. They find that
larger governments are associated with more effective governments in many
dimensions. Chong and Gradstein (2007) and Gradstein (2008) also consider
the link between inequality and property-rights protection both theoretically
and empirically. Hodgson (2006) finds that fractionalization, measured using
Fearon’s (2003) measure, is one of the most important and statistically sig
nificant variables in explaining differences in post-1989 real GDP growth per
capita among ex-Soviet countries.
The importance of the business climate for economic development has been a
major theme in much recent research, a great deal of which emphasizes the sig
nificance of legal origins. For example Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007)
find that legal origins are an important determinant of both creditor rights and
information-sharing institutions, which, in turn, affect the supply of credit.
166 chapter three: legal capacity


Djankov, La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) find a relationship
between the regulation of business entry and legal origins. Cantoni and Yucht
man (2009) study how historical market development patterns within Germany
are affected by the availability of legal institutions and try to circumvent the
simultaneity problem by using the locations of medieval universities following
the Papal Schism in the late 1300s as an instrument for legal institutions.
Rajan and Zingales (2003) and Svensson (1998) emphasize the role of poli
tics in affecting financial-market development, as do Pagano and Volpin (2005)
alongside legal origins. Further work in this tradition includes Pagano and
Volpin (2001, 2006) and Perotti and von Thadden (2006). Caselli and Gen
naioli (2008) develop an interesting political-economics model of institutional
reform in financial markets.
A variety of macroeconomic models with political-economic orientations
have explored the links between government policy and economic growth.
These include Alesina and Rodrik (1994), Krusell and R ́ıos-Rull (1996), Parente
and Prescott (2000), and Persson and Tabellini (1994). Acemoglu (2003) builds
the link between these ideas around a Political Coase theorem. Besley and
Coate (1998) develop a theory of political failure based on governments not
implementing Pareto-improving policies.
There is a now a large microeconomic literature on the role of private
property rights in improving resource allocation in developing countries, which
is surveyed in Besley and Ghatak (2010). There is also an emerging empirical
literature using microdata, which entails work by Banerjee, Gertler, and Ghatak
(2002), Besley (1995), Field (2007), and Johnson, MacMillan, and Woodruff
(2002).
Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) look at conventional links between taxes
and growth where taxation is spent on productive investments. There are a
number of contributions that have tried to link taxation and growth surveyed
in Benabou (1997). More in the spirit of the arguments in this chapter Dincecco
and Prado (2010) argue that there is positive link between fiscal capacity and
development; they use casualties sustained in premodern wars to instrument
for current fiscal institutions.
The predatory state as a constraint on development is an old idea. The notion
is reviewed in historical perspective by De Long (2000). Pioneering work by
North (1990) and North and Thomas (1973) highlights the central role played
by property-rights protection in fostering historical developments in Western
Europe. De Long and Shleifer (1993) use city growth in medieval Europe as a
notes on the literature 167


testing ground for these ideas. North and Weingast (1989) regard the Glorious
Revolution in 1688 leading to the establishment of secure property rights as
a pivotal moment in U.K. history. In addition, this set important fiscal and
financial changes in motion. Stasavage (2003) discusses their arguments looking
at both France and Great Britain.
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) stress the empirical importance
of settler mortality in explaining modern-day income levels by predicting the
creation of productive or predatory state institutions. Similar ideas lie behind
the empirical work of Hall and Jones (1999). Jellema and Roland (2010)
emphasize the clustering of institutions. Seminal studies by Bates (1981, 2009)
have explored the importance of state institutions in an African context.
Theoretical models of predatory states have been proposed by many
researchers, including Azam, Bates, and Biais (2009), Grossman and Kim
(1995), Grossman and Noh (1994), McGuire and Olson (1996), Moselle and
Polak (2001), Olson (1993), and Weingast (1997). Within the institutions lit
erature, there is considerable debate about which aspects of institutions are
the most important. Acemoglu and Johnson (2005) argue that the most robust
finding is that protecting private-property rights rather than promoting con
tracting institutions is the more important. This would put more weight on the
dangers of a predatory state.
Related to studies of the predatory state, there is now a large literature on
corruption—its causes and consequences. See Treisman (2000) and Svensson
(2005) for overviews of this literature. An early contribution by Mauro (1995)
emphasized the negative correlation in the cross-country data between corrup
tion and growth, although the direction of causality is notoriously hard to
determine. Hodgson and Jiang (2007) argue that the study of corruption should
not be confined solely to the public sector, in part because public/private bound
aries are often unclear. This provides a link to the literature on rent seeking since
such activity can be either public or private. The original rent-seeking models
are due to Krueger (1974) and Tullock (1967). Hillman (2011) offers a recent
overview of the main ideas and existing literature on such behavior.
For all the importance attached to institutions, some scholars remain doubt
ful about how much institutions can help explain economic growth. Bloom and
Sachs (1998) and Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger (1999) stress geography rather
than institutions, whereas Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer
(2004) stress human capital rather than institutions.
168 chapter three: legal capacity


CHAPTER 4
Political Violence
A prince ought to have two fears, one from within, on account of his subjects, the other from without, on account of external powers.
Niccolo Machiavelli, The Prince, 1513
In Chapters 2 and 3 we developed a framework for analyzing how the extractive
and productive capabilities of the state are built, with particular emphasis on
investments in fiscal and legal capacity. Politics certainly played an important
role in that argument, but we modeled the forces of politics with two simple
parameters, capturing the nature (cohesiveness) of political institutions and the
rate of political turnover (stability). Although analytically useful, this approach
kept the mechanisms for resolving political conflicts in the background. It is now
time to explore these issues in more detail.
Our purpose in this chapter is to take a first step toward a better understand
ing of the observed clustering of development with political violence. Studying
the causes of political violence is important in and of itself. Thus we begin by
isolating the likely determinants of internal political violence, drawing on
and extending—the existing literature. Furthermore, political violence ties in
closely with our previous modeling in at least two ways.
First, the theory in Chapters 2 and 3 suggests that the risk of external
violence, i.e., the risk of war, can promote state building by enhancing common
interests relative to redistributive interests across different groups in society.
The risk of internal political violence appears to be different. Conditions that
sow the seeds for internal violence are hardly a sign of common interests but
rather of an extreme form of redistributive struggle across domestic groups.
Intuitively, the risk of internal political violence may therefore drive incentives
for state building in a different direction than the risk of external violence. Thus,
we might expect the incumbent’s two fears, highlighted by Machiavelli in the
169


opening quote, to be associated with different consequences for state-capacity
investments.
Second, the theory that we have proposed suggests that political instability
parameter γ in previous chapters—may be an important hurdle for investments
in the state, especially outside the realm of common-interest states (recall the
stability condition). Manifestations of political violence such as insurgencies
and civil wars are important determinants of political instability in countries
where they take place.
For both of these reasons, it is essential to explore the determinants of
political violence both theoretically and empirically—the main goal of this
chapter.1 That exercise will serve to endogenize the previously parametric γ ,
and this will allow us to revisit investments in state capacity in a more general
setting, which is the task of Chapter 5. Before delving into the theory and
empirics of political violence, we discuss some background facts about different
forms of violence and give a brief overview of some of the existing research in
political science and economics.
Background Facts Political violence is a hallmark of weakly institutionalized
polities. The starkest manifestation of such violence is outright conflict in the
form of civil war. The Armed Conflict Dataset (ACD) codes any year in a given
country as a year of civil war if a conflict between a national government and
some insurgent group(s) claims more than 1000 battle deaths. When we apply
that definition to all countries and years since 1950 where data are available,
the average yearly prevalence of civil war is more than 10%, with a peak higher
than 15% in the early 1990s. The upper-left panel of Figure 1.10 illustrates the
variable trend in the worldwide prevalence of civil war by year, according to the
ACD. The upper-right panel of the same figure displays the prevalence of civil
war by country (since 1950 or independence, if later) against GDP per capita
in 1980, showing how civil wars have been disproportionately concentrated
in the poor countries of the world. The cumulated death toll of these conflicts
exceeds 15 million people.2
1. Chapter 4 is closely related to Besley and Persson (2009a) and especially (2010b), although both the modeling and the empirical work in those papers are somewhat different. The idea that external and internal violence may drive state capacity in different directions appears in Besley and Persson (2008). 2. See Lacina and Gleditsch (2005).
170 chapter four: political violence


A key feature of civil war is two-sided violence between an insurgent and
the government. However, many citizens also suffer consequences of one
sided political violence, owing to government repression through a variety of
infringements of human rights. The Banks (2005) data set reports a stark form
of repression, namely purges—i.e., the removal, by assassination or arrest, of
political opponents considered undesirable by the incumbent government. To
create nonoverlapping measures of repression and civil war, we code any year
in a country when it has no civil war (according to the ACD definition), but a
positive number of purges in the Banks data. By this measure, some 7% of all
country-years since 1950 are associated with repression. The lower-left panel
in Figure 1.10 shows the worldwide development of purges, absent civil war,
over time. Interestingly, up to the early 1990s, the repression series is almost a
mirror image of the civil-war series in the earlier graph.3 The lower-right panel
completes the picture by plotting the prevalence of repression by country against
1980 GDP per capita and showing that repression has been most common in
countries with somewhat higher incomes than in those where civil war has been
prevalent.
Both the variation across time and the variation across countries in Fig
ure 1.10 suggest that the two forms of violence tend to be substitutes for one
another.
The analysis to follow is designed to identify determinants of violence and we
show that some variables, such as cohesive political institutions, are common
elements behind both one-sided and two-sided political violence. Naturally,
outright conflicts and government repression come in different forms and inten
sities. Our focus here is on large-scale and serious manifestations of violence,
i.e., civil war rather than civil conflict and major rather than minor acts of gov
ernment repression.4 In contrast to much of the civil-war literature, we focus
on the incidence of violence (for both civil war and repression) rather than the
onset and duration of violence, since our theory has much less to say about the
latter two.
3. We show in Section 4.4 that this mirror image is not a mechanical consequence of a large number of overlapping observations with both purges and civil war. 4. We also ignore other forms of violence such as riots and political intimidation. See, e.g., Urdal (2008) or Bohlken and Sergenti (2010) for some recent work on how such violence relates to economic factors in India.
political violence 171


Table 4.1 reveals the countries that hide behind the dots in Figure 1.10. It
lists the countries that have been basically free from conflict, as well as those
that have experienced repression, civil war, or both types of violence. For civil
war, the line between the left and right parts of the table is drawn between
no year versus some year or years of civil war, since 1950 or independence (if
later). For repression in the absence of civil war, the line between the upper and
lower parts of the table is drawn at 5%—alternatively at 0%—of all years since
1950 (or independence). The table shows that 67 out of the 149 countries in
the table have been violence-free according to the 5% definition of repression.
This number becomes 40 when the repression cutoff is set at 0% of the years
countries in the upper part of the table that had in between 0 and 5% of all
years in repression are marked by italics. Of the others, 39 countries have
experienced both civil war and repression and 35 have experienced repression
but no civil war, whereas only 8 have seen repression without civil war; these
numbers become 44, 62, and 3 when the repression cutoff is set at 0%. Thus,
the number of countries that have had a civil war but no separate instance of
repression is much lower than the number that have experienced repression but
no civil war. This is consistent with the idea that repression and civil war are
ordered variables and suggests that government repression may often serve as
a prestage to full-scale civil war.
Existing Research on Civil War and Repression The analysis in this chapter
builds on earlier research, which, although comparatively recent, has developed
both in its scope and its sophistication. By now, there is a large body of empirical
work by both political scientists and economists on the causes of civil war. This
literature has progressed from mainly cross-sectional inference using country
level data to panel-data studies, which exploit within-country variation [see
the survey by Blattman and Miguel (2009)]. A largely independent literature
[surveyed by Davenport (2007)], has explored the determinants of government
repression and violations of human rights. [See, however, Collier and Rohner
(2008) for the connection between repression and civil war.]
The main focus in both these strands of work has been on exploring empirical
regularities, in some cases searching for credibly exogenous sources of variation.
But the links between theoretical models of conflict and violence are limited. In
fact, the surveys of Blattman and Miguel (2009) and Davenport (2007) both
172 chapter four: political violence


lament the fact that so few empirical findings forge links between the theory
and data.5 Thus, the former pronounce:
the theoretical and empirical conflict literatures have too often run along
parallel paths, informing each other, yes, but seldom directly intersecting;
greater efforts need to be made to identify and test the precise empirical
implications of the leading theoretical frameworks.
In this chapter, we argue that theory indeed provides a natural way of joining
our understanding of the common pathology of civil war and repression. This
will be seen clearly, as we approach the data.
Virtually all empirical research takes income as given. The correlation
between civil war and poverty is commonly seen as a relation from income
to civil war, with two leading interpretations; Collier and Hoeffler (2004) see
it as a reflection of a low opportunity cost of fighting at low levels of income,
whereas Fearon and Laitin (2003) understand it as a reflection of low-income
countries having poorer state capacity. Taking income as given is problematic,
though, since violence and income may well have common determinants. For
example, there are two separate literatures on the “resource curse,” one claim
ing that resource dependence may cause low income and low growth and the
other arguing that resource dependence may cause civil war. On top of this,
realized civil wars are likely to exert a negative impact on income.6 Moreover,
as we argued at the outset of this chapter, political violence and its effects on
political instability may also affect investments in state capacity.
Plan of the Chapter The empirical links among political violence, income, and
state capacity are likely to reflect a complex web of multidirectional relations.
An explicit theoretical framework is an indispensable tool if we wish to untangle
this web and interpret the patterns observed in the data.
5. There are certainly exceptions, however, such as Dube and Vargas (2008), who build explicitly on the theoretical framwork developed by Dal B  ́o and Dal B  ́o (2006). See also Fearon (2008). 6. See Collier (1999) for a discussion of the effects of civil war on income and Skaperdas (2010) for a more general overview of the various losses owing to civil war. Some recent work, beginning with Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) has addressed the reverse causality problem by isolating exogenous variation in income, e.g., through instrumenting income growth with weather shocks.
political violence 173


Table 4.1 Repression and civil war by country
Some civil war No civil war
Less than 5%
repression
Bosnia Australia Cyprus Jamaica New Zealand Switzerland
Cameroon Bahamas Czech Republic Kuwait Norway Tanzania
Guinea-Bissau Bahrain Denmark Lesotho Oman Togo
Liberia Barbados Djibouti Luxembourg Panama Trinidad-Tobago
Nepal Belize Equatorial Guinea Madagascar New Guinea Tunisia
Rwanda Benin Fiji Malawi Qatar United Kingdom
Sierra Leone Bhutan Gabon Malaysia Saudi Arabia Uzbekistan
Yemen Botswana Gambia Maldives Senegal
Brunei Guinea Mali Singapore
Burkina Faso Guyana Malta Slovak Republic
Canada Honduras Mauritania Slovenia
Cape Verde Iceland Mauritius Solomon Islands
Central African Republic Ireland Mongolia Suriname
Costa Rica Israel Namibia Swaziland
Croatia Ivory Coast Netherlands Sweden
More than 5%
repression
Afghanistan India South Korea Albania Ghana Taiwan
Algeria Indonesia Sri Lanka Austria Greece Thailand
Angola Iran Sudan Bangladesh Haiti Uruguay
Argentina Iraq Syria Belgium Hungary Venezuela
Burundi Laos Turkey Bolivia Italy Zambia
Cambodia Lebanon Uganda Brazil Japan
Chad Libya United States Bulgaria Jordan
China Morocco Vietnam Chile Kenya
Colombia Mozambique Zimbabwe Comoros Mexico
Congo Nicaragua Dominican Republic Niger
Cuba Nigeria Ecuador Paraguay
El Salvador Pakistan Egypt Poland
Ethiopia Russia Estonia Portugal
France Somalia Finland Romania
Guatemala South Africa Germany Spain
Note: Countries with fewer than 5%, but more than 0%, of all years (since 1950 or independence) in repression are printed in italics.


We turn to building a theoretical structure in Section 4.1. In that section,
we add investments in political violence to the core state-capacity model as
formulated in Section 3.1. These investments affect the allocation of political
power in period 2. In the present chapter, we do not fully solve that model, but
focus on the solutions for violence while treating state-capacity investments
as given. Section 4.2 develops the extended core model in a few directions,
allowing for asymmetries, polarization, and predation along the same lines as
the extensions in Chapters 2 and 3.
Having solved for the determinants of violence theoretically, we take a some
what lengthy detour into empirical territory. In Section 4.3, we discuss how the
theoretical model, together with specific assumptions about observability and
time variation, allows us to design an empirical strategy that can be used to test
the theoretical predictions. Section 4.4 then approaches the data with this strat
egy in hand. Unlike the empirical sections in Chapters 2 and 3, the ambition
here is to isolate causal relationships. Thus, we exploit only the within-country
variation in the data and arguably exogenous variation in the variables sug
gested by the theory. Section 4.5 concludes the chapter, before the customary
notes on the literature.
After this empirical detour, Chapter 5 returns us to the theory and explores
the joint determination of investments in state capacity and violence. It also
includes a further discussion of the empirical clustering among violence, state
capacity, and income.
4.1 The Core Model with Political Violence
4.1.1 Model Modifications
We take a starting point in the two-period, two-group, state-capacity frame
work of Chapter 3. In this chapter, we provisionally keep the legal and fiscal
capacities in each period fixed, postponing the study of their endogenous deter
mination until Chapter 5. Thus, not only are fiscal capacity and legal capacity,
τs and πs, taken as given, but so are wages and income levels, ω(πs) and y(πs).
As before, we treat exogenous government income, R, as stochastic and drawn
from a distribution with finite support [RL, RH ]. This variable has not played
a particularly important role in the previous two chapters. But as we shall see
soon, it now enters center stage.
the core model with political violence 175


Violence and Transitions of Power The most important feature of this chapter is
that we replace the exogenous transition of power, summarized in the parameter
γ , with the outcome of a potential conflict that is triggered by investments in
violence by the incumbent and the opposition. In particular, the opposition
group in period 1, O1, can mount an insurgency with an army of size LO ≤ L.
This investment is paid for within the group, at some exogenously given
marginal cost of funds ν. Analogously, the incumbent group I1 can invest in
an army of size LI ≤ L. This investment is paid out of the public purse, at
marginal cost λ1 (given endogenously by the realized cost of funds in period 1).
There is no conscription; each soldier must be paid the period-1 wage, ω(π1).
The probability that the opposition wins office in period 2 depends on
these investments, according to a conflict technology γ (LO , LI ; ξ ), which is
increasing in LO and decreasing in LI , with ξ denoting a set of parameters
governing this technology. Later, we impose some further conditions on the
technology γ (.) and relate these conditions to common assumptions in the
literature on contest functions. If nobody arms, the probability of a peaceful
transition is γ (0, 0; ξ ). Notwithstanding whether the transition takes place
peacefully or violently, the winner becomes next period’s incumbent, I2 ∈ {A, B}
and the loser becomes next period’s opposition, O2 ∈ {A, B}.
Timing of Events The timeline of events in this more comprehensive model is
identical to that in Section 3.1, except that we add the investments in violence
by the first-period incumbent and opposition, which we assume to take place
simultaneously with the other choices in period 1:
1. We begin with initial stocks of state capacities {τ1, π1
} and an incum
bent group I1. Nature determines α1 and R.
2. I1 chooses a set of period-1 policies {t1, rI
1, rO
1 , pI
1, pO
1 , g1}, and deter
mines (through investments) the period-2 stocks of fiscal and legal
capacity {τ2, π2
}. I1 and O1 simultaneously invest in violence levels
LI and LO.
3. I1 remains in power with probability 1 − γ (LO , LI , ξ ), and nature
determines α2.
4. I2 chooses period-2 policies {t2, rI
2, rO
2 , pI
2, pO
2 , g2}.
176 chapter four: political violence


Eventually, we will study a full subgame-perfect equilibrium in policy, violence,
and state-capacity investments. Since the problem is recursive, we are able to
study these three parts separately. In this chapter, we look at the choices of policy
and investments in violence, in that order, taking the levels of state capacity
as given. Chapter 5 goes on to the complete analysis with endogenous state
capacity investments.
The Source of Conflict Models that generate outright conflict as an equilibrium
outcome rely on either imperfect information or inability of the parties to
commit. The key friction in our model is of the second type—an inability
of any prospective government to offer postconflict transfer credibly and an
inability of potential insurgents to commit to not using their capacity to engage
in conflict. In other words, if at stage 2 the incumbent and opposition could
make a binding agreement not to exploit their (peacefully obtained) hold on
power to redistribute resources in their own favor at stage 4, costly conflict
might be avoided. But in the present model such agreements are infeasible,
beyond the institutional commitments entailed in the value of θ .
4.1.2 Policy
As in Chapter 3, there are four dimensions of policy: regulation, transfers,
taxation, and public goods, and the period-s incumbent chooses the optimal
policy vector {gs , ts , pI
s , pO
s , rI
s , rO
s
} so as to maximize
αsgs + (1 − ts
)y
(
pI
s
)
+ rI
s , (4.1)
subject to ts ≤ τs, pJ
s ≤ πs, and rO
s ≥ σrI
s and the government budget constraint.
The government budget constraint is identical to equation (3.1) in Chapter 3,
except that investment expenditures ms include not only the costs of any (given)
investments in state capacity but also the incumbent’s investments in violence,
ms =
{
F (τ2 − τ1) + L(π2 − π1) + ω(π1)LI if s = 1
0 if s = 2.
(4.2)
As the incumbent’s problem continues to be recursive, the fact that the
objective function and the constraints are identical implies exactly the same
solution as in Section 3.1. Thus, the group-specific extension of property-rights
protection exhausts any available legal capacity with pI
s = pO
s = πs. The income
the core model with political violence 177


tax is set at its maximum ts = τs. Public goods satisfy one of two corner solutions
given by
gs = G (αs , τs
)=
{
R + τsy(πs) − ms if αs ≥ 2 (1 − θ )
0 otherwise.
(4.3)
Finally, transfers are determined residually as shares of the (tax plus other)
revenue not spent on public goods or investments,
rJ
s = βJ [R + τsy(πs) − G (αs , τs
) − ms], (4.4)
where the shares reflect the cohesiveness of political institutions: βI = 2(1 − θ )
and βO = 2θ .
Indirect Payoffs When we plug these optimal policies into (4.1), we obtain the
“indirect” payoff function
W (αs , τs , πs , R, ms , βJ ) = αsG (αs , τs
) + (1 − τs)y(πs)+
βJ [R + τsy(πs) − G (αs , τs
) − ms] (4.5)
for being the incumbent or opposition group in period s depending on the state
variables {τs , πs
}. As in Chapter 3, we define “value functions”
U I (τ2, π2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, R, 0, βI )
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, R, 0, βI )]
and
U O (τ2, π2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, R, 0, βO)
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, R, 0, βO)]
for being the incumbent or opposition group in period 2 depending on the state
variables {τ2, π2
}.
When we put these together, the expected period-2 utility of group J in
period 1 becomes:
W (α1, τ1, m1, βJ ) (4.6)
+ (1 − γ (LO , LI , ξ ))U I (τ2, π2
) + γ (LO , LI , ξ )U O (τ2, π2
)
for the incumbent group and
W (α1, τ1, m1, βJ ) − νω (π1
) LO (4.7)
+ γ (LO , LI , ξ )U I (τ2, π2
)+
[
1 − γ (LO , LI , ξ )
]
U O (τ2, π2
)
178 chapter four: political violence


for the opposition group. For the opposition, we have deducted the private cost
of violence: νω (π1
) LO , whereas for the incumbent, violence is funded from
the public purse and thus embodied in the definition of W (α1, τ1, m1, βJ ).
4.1.3 Investments in Political Violence
Preliminaries We now characterize the Nash equilibrium in violence levels
denoted as
{Lˆ O , Lˆ I }
. These maximize (4.6) and (4.7). The first-order condi
tions are
−γI (Lˆ O , Lˆ I , ξ )
[
U I (τ2, π2
) − U O (τ2, π2
)]
− λ1ω (π1
) ≤ 0, (4.8)
where—as in Chapters 2 and 3—λ1 = max {α1, 2 (1 − θ )} is the realized mar
ginal value of tax revenue for the period-1 incumbent, and
γO(Lˆ O , Lˆ I , ξ )
[
U I (τ2, π2
) − U O (τ2, π2
)]
− νω (π1
) ≤ 0. (4.9)
This way of writing the first-order conditions makes it clear that the marginal
benefit of investing in violence comes from the increased probability of being
the incumbent in period 2 and that the marginal cost is the resources needed
to finance additional violence, whether from public or private funds. For both
groups, this marginal benefit is proportional to [U O (τ2, π2
) − U I (τ2, π2
)], the
value of being an incumbent in period 2. The parameter λ1 is the opportunity
cost of public funds to the incumbent.
A key observation to motivate the result that follows is that the common pos
itive term in the two first-order conditions, (4.8) and (4.9), can be expressed as
U I (τ2, π2
) − U O (τ2, π2
) = ω (π1
) 2 (1 − 2θ ) Z, (4.10)
where
Z = R + τ2y(π2) − E(G(α2, τ2))
ω(π1) (4.11)
and the expectations are taken over the uncertain future value of public goods
(since α2 is stochastic).
In the definition of Z, the numerator is the expected size of the redistributive
“pie” in period 2 and the denominator is the wage in period 1. The marginal
benefit of investment in violence for both groups is thus proportional to the
numerator of Z, whereas the marginal cost of investment for both groups is
the core model with political violence 179


proportional to the denominator of Z. It follows that Z can be interpreted as
a benefit-cost ratio from the use of violence. As can be seen from (4.10) and
(4.11), the term ω(π1) appears in both terms of (4.8) as well as (4.9) and thus
drops out of the first-order conditions.
The Conflict Technology We impose the following restrictions on the conflict
technology
Assumption 4.1: For all LJ ∈ [0, LJ ], we have:
(a) if γ ∈ (0, 1),γO > 0, γI < 0, γOO < 0, γII > 0,
(b) −γI (0, 0; ξ )
γO (0, 0; ξ ) ≥ αH
ν , and
(c) γI γOO
γO
≥ γI O ≥ γOγI I
γI
.
Condition (a) just says that fighting always has positive returns for both groups,
albeit at a decreasing rate. The property in (b) ensures that the incumbent has
a higher marginal return to fighting when neither party invests in violence. It
guarantees that the incumbent has a sufficient advantage in military terms vis- `a
vis the rebels. Finally, (c) restricts the extent of any strategic complementarities
or substitutabilities in the conflict technology. These conditions are discussed
further after the proof of Proposition 4.2.
Nash Equilibria We now study properties of the equilibrium investments (4.8)
and (4.9) for each group and how these violence decisions depend on some key
parameters. Our first result is the following proposition:
Proposition 4.1: If (1) αL ≥ 2(1 − θ ), or (2) φ → 1, no group invests in violence,
i.e., Lˆ I = Lˆ O = 0.
Proof: Suppose first that α2 = αH > 2 > 2(1 − θ ). In that state, G (α2, τ2
)=
R2 + τ2y(π2) and no transfers are paid. Then, clearly if the probability of state
αH goes to 1, i.e., φ → 1, then Z → 0. It follows that both (4.8) and (4.9)
become strictly decreasing in LJ , and none of the groups invests anything, as
the marginal benefit of investments in violence goes to zero.
Suppose, alternatively that αL > 2(1 − θ ). Then, cohesiveness holds and any
incumbent spends nothing on transfers independently of which value of α2
is realized. Thus, we have Z = 0. Again, neither the incumbent group nor
180 chapter four: political violence


the opposition group invests anything in violence as the marginal benefit of
investments in violence is equal to zero.
This proposition says that as long as institutions are sufficiently cohesive or
there is a high permanent demand for public goods, there is never any political
violence. We recognize (1) and (2) as the conditions for a common-interest
state from earlier chapters. The intuition is simple. If condition (1) holds, all
future revenue will be spent on public goods. If (2) holds, transfers are paid
when α2 = αL, but the probability of this state goes to zero. Therefore, expected
transfers, and from (4.11) Z, are zero or go to zero. Neither group invests in
violence, since investing in violence carries a cost but yields no return.7
We now explore what happens when the conditions in Proposition 4.1 do
not hold.
Proposition 4.2: If Assumption 4.1 holds, αL < 2(1 − θ ) and φ < 1, there are
two thresholds ZI (θ , ξ ) and ZO(θ ; ξ ),
ZI (θ ; ξ )=− λ1
γI (0, 0; ξ ) 2(1 − 2θ )
< ZO(θ ; ξ ) = ν
γO (0, 0; ξ ) 2(1 − 2θ ) ,
such that:
1. If Z ≤ ZI , there is peace with ̂LO = ̂LI = 0.
2. If Z ∈ (ZI , ZO), there is repression with ̂LI > ̂LO = 0.
3. If Z ≥ ZO, there is civil conflict with ̂LI , ̂LO > 0.
Moreover, ̂LO and ̂LI , whenever positive, increase in Z.
Proof: In this case, all spending is on transfers when α2 = αL, such that the
wage-adjusted expected redistributive pie becomes Z = (1 − φ) [R + τ2y(π2)]/
ω(π1). The complementary-slackness conditions for the problems faced by LI
7. This bang-bang solution for transfers is a stark but convenient consequence of the linear utility function in our core model. However, using the alternative formulation from Chapter 2 with concave utility V (g) of public goods yields very similar results to those obtained here.
the core model with political violence 181


and LO , assuming that LI > 0 and LO > 0, are
−γI
(
LO , LI ; ξ
)
xZ − λ1 <> 0
c.s. L ̄ I ≥ LI ≥ 0
and
γO
(
LO , LI ; ξ
)
xZ − ν <> 0
c.s. L ̄ O ≥ LO ≥ 0,
where we use the shorthand x = (1 − 2θ).
First, we show that, at any interior solution, resources devoted to fighting
by both groups are increasing in Z. To see this, observe that differentiating and
using the first-order conditions when they hold with equality yield
[ −γII xZ −γIOxZ
γI OxZ γOOxZ
] [ dLI
d LO
]
=
[ γI xdZ
−γO x d Z
]
. (4.12)
Define =
[
−γI I γOO + (γI O
)2]
x2Z2 > 0. Solving (4.12) using Cramer’s rule
yields
d LI
dZ = x2Z [γI γOO − γOγI O
]
>0
and
d LO
dZ = x2Z [γI I γO − γI γI O
]
> 0,
where we have used both parts of Assumption 4.1c.
We now derive two trigger points for violence. Define Lˆ (Z) from
−γI
(
0, Lˆ (Z) ; ξ
)
xZ − λ1 <> 0
c.s. L ̄ I ≥ Lˆ (Z) ≥ 0.
It is simple to check that this is an increasing function of Z under Assump
tion 4.1b. Clearly with LO = 0, LI = Lˆ (Z). We can define ZI (θ ; ξ ) from
Lˆ (Z) = 0, i.e.,
ZI (θ ; ξ ) = −λ1
γI (0, 0; ξ ) x .
182 chapter four: political violence


Next, define ZO(θ ; ξ ) implicitly from
γO
(
0, Lˆ (ZO(θ ; ξ )
)
xZO(θ ; ξ ) = ν.
The expression for dLO
dZ implies that for Z ≥ ZO, we must have LO > 0.
As the next step, we prove that ZO(θ ; ξ ) > ZI (θ ; ξ ). Suppose not, then
γO (0, 0; ξ ) xZO(θ ; ξ ) = ν.
If so,
ZO(θ ; ξ ) = ν
γO (0, 0; ξ ) x ≤ ZI (θ ; ξ ) = −λ1
γI (0, 0; ξ ) x
or
−γI (0, 0; ξ )
γO (0, 0; ξ ) < λ1
ν ≤ αH
ν,
which contradicts Assumption 4.1c for all values of θ .
Finally, it is easy to see from the explicit definition that ZI (θ ; ξ ) is an
increasing function. Using the implicit definition of ZO(θ ; ξ ) and the fact that
Lˆ (ZO(θ ; ξ )) is (weakly) increasing, we find that this function is increasing as
well. This concludes the proof of the proposition.
The proposition describes three states of political violence. When Z is below
ZI , no conflict erupts as both the incumbent and the opposition accept the
(probabilistic) peaceful allocation of power, where the opposition takes over
with probability γ (0, 0; ξ ). When Z ∈ [ZI , ZO], the government invests in
violence to increase its survival probability, but the opposition does not invest
in conflict. It is natural to label this case government repression. Finally, when
Z > ZO, the opposition mounts an insurgency, which is met with force by the
incumbent group, and we have civil war. Variation in Z may reflect variation in
factors such as exogenous income R or period-1 wages ω(π1), whereas variation
in the thresholds ZI and ZO may reflect variation in the costs of raising revenues
λ1 and ν or in the efficiencies of fighting as captured by ξ .
Discussion Although the results in Proposition 4.2 may be intuitive, it is
important to discuss the specific assumptions behind them. Assumption 4.1b
rules out an undefended insurgency. It says that the return to fighting is strong
the core model with political violence 183


enough for the incumbent, given the threat of political transition under peace. If
this assumption does not hold, we may have a range of Z where the incumbent
does not bother to fight the opposition when it rebels. This might be true, for
instance, if γ (0, 0; ξ ) is very close to zero and −γI (0,0;ξ)
γO(0,0;ξ) is close to zero, so
that the incumbent is not very much threatened by a transition and/or has low
competence in defending against it. We find it natural to rule out undefended
insurgencies, since we think such a phenomenon is rare. But as shown in
Section 4.2, such insurgencies can be encompassed as a theoretical possibility
in our framework.
Assumption 4.1c guarantees that the fighting propensities of both the incum
bent and the opposition increase in the “prize of winning,” as measured by Z.
Given that a civil war is under way, this ensures that a higher Z does not make
either party give up. This will be true as long as the marginal return to fighting
is not strongly affected by the fighting decisions of the other group, placing
bounds on γIO, not allowing a too strongly positive or strongly negative cross
partial.8 In fact, under the assumption, both parties fight harder as Z goes up.
We have presented the results for a general conflict technology, or contest
function. But the analysis works with a number of reasonable and commonly
used specific contest functions. For example, it works in the logistic formulation
[see Hirshleifer (1989)] if9
γ
(
LO , LI ; ξ
)
= exp[ξOLO]
exp[ξOLO] + exp[ξI LI ]
and ξI
ξO ≥ αH . The same argument also holds in the popular ratio formulation
[see Skaperdas (1992) and Tullock (1980)] if
γ
(
LO , LI ; ξ
)
= ξ LO
ξ LO + LI ,
where (scalar) parameter ξ ≥ 1. It also holds in the semilinear formulation
γ
(
LO , LI ; ξ
)
= γO + ξ1
[ h
(
LO )
− ξ2h
(
LI )]
,
8. We could make the weaker assumption that ∂
∂λ
( −γI (λx ,(1−λ)x)
γO (λx , (1−λ)x)
)
≥ 0 for λ ∈ [0, 1] and x ≥
0, which is implied by Assumption 4.1c. This amounts to saying that the conflict technology
is quasi-concave, i.e., it has level sets that are convex in (LO , LI ) space. This makes total spending on conflict by the two parties monotonic in Z, but not necessarily the spending by each group. In economic terms, this could lead to a resumption of repression or undefended insurgency at high levels of Z as one group drops out of the fight. 9. By l’Hopital’s rule: γ (0, 0; ξ ) = ξ
ξ +1 .
184 chapter four: political violence


where h (.) is an increasing bounded and concave function, with hL (0) > 0, a
function that describes how investments in arms translate into violence, with the
parameter restrictions ξ1 > 0, ξ2 ≥ αH /ν and 1 − ξ1h (L ̄ ) > γO − ξ1ξ2h (L ̄ ) > 0.
4.1.4 Empirical Implications
Our results have some striking empirical implications when the logic of political
violence is expressed as a function of latent variable Z. As explained earlier,
Assumption 4.1 rules out undefended insurgencies and any of the parties
dropping out of a civil war as Z gets higher. Under that assumption, our theory
predicts an ordering in Z of the three violence states: peace, repression, and
civil war.10 This ordering is particularly interesting against the backdrop of
Figure 1.10 and Table 4.1, which suggest that repression and civil war have
been substitutes for one another, at least for some of the time and in some of
the countries in the postwar world.
In countries where αL < 2(1 − θ ) and φ < 1, transfers are paid, but only in
the state when α2 = αL. Then, we can write the latent variable as
Z = (1 − φ) [R + τ2y(π2)]
ω(π1) .
This expression summarizes a few important determinants of violence, which
we introduce in the following corollaries. We state these in terms of likeli
hoods, implicitly assuming that some factors are not only uncertain but also
unobserved by an outside analyst. A more precise formulation of the empirical
predictions—along precisely these lines—is found in the Section 4.3.
Corollary 4.1: Higher wages, ω(π1), reduce the likelihood that an economy will
experience political violence, i.e., be in repression or civil war, unless political
institutions are cohesive or the demand for public goods is high (θ close to 1/2
or φ close to 1).
The result follows from Proposition 4.2 by observing that ω(π1) is the denomi
nator of Z. Given the distributions of α and R, when ω(π1) is higher the whole
distribution of Z shifts to the left. Based on this, we can definitely say that
higher wages make peace more likely (political violence less likely). We can
10. In an earlier version of Besley and Persson (2010b), we considered a case where the incumbent makes her investment in violence before (rather than simultaneously with) the opposition group and found a similar result.
the core model with political violence 185


also definitely say that civil war becomes less likely. But whether repression is
more or less likely depends on relative densities (in the p.d.f. of Z; see further
Section 4.3). The conditional statement regarding θ at the end of the corollary
follows directly from Proposition 4.1.
Naturally, this result reflects a higher opportunity cost of fighting at higher
wages and, hence, a lower net gain from winning a conflict to both parties.
In the literature on civil war, this effect is well known at least since Grossman
(1991) and has been emphasized, in particular, by Collier and Hoeffler (2004).
Here, we see that the result extends to political violence more generally.
In the empirical literature, this opportunity cost channel is most often prox
ied by the level of income per capita. However, whether changes in income per
capita are a good proxy for wage changes depends on the underlying source of
the shock.11
Corollary 4.2: Higher exogenous income, such as natural resource rents or aid,
a higher value of R, increases the likelihood that a country will be in repression
or civil war, unless political institutions are cohesive or the demand for public
goods is high (θ close to 1/2 or φ close to 1).
The corollary follows from Propositions 4.1 and 4.2, once we note that Z
depends directly on the level of expected natural resource rents or exogenous
income to the government from other sources, such as aid. In a more general
model, with a resource sector that also uses labor, higher available resource
rents—triggered, say, by an increase in world market prices—would also drive
up the real wage. Such a Dutch-disease effect would (partly) counteract the
impact effect in Corollary 4.2 by raising the cost of fighting.
Grossman (1992) argues that foreign aid can increase the probability of
insurrection by raising the stakes of holding on to the government. The effect of
resource rents has been emphasized in the empirical literature on civil war [see,
e.g., Humphreys (2005) and the surveys in Blattman and Miguel (2009) and
Ross (2004)], but few papers have derived the theoretical result [see, however,
Aslaksen and Torvik (2006) and Olsson and Fors (2004)]. As far as we know,
the rent-seeking channel does not figure much in the literature on repression
and human-rights infringements.
11. In the two-sector conflict model of Dal B  ́o and Dal B  ́o (2006), e.g., world price shocks drive real wages and returns to capital in opposite directions, producing an unclear correlation between wages and income per capita.
186 chapter four: political violence


Corollary 4.3: In the range of φ for which the equilibrium is not necessarily
peaceful, higher expected spending on common-interest public goods, a higher
value of φ, reduces the likelihood of observing repression or civil war, unless
political institutions are cohesive (θ close to 1/2).
This follows because an increase in φ raises the expected spending on public
goods, which reduces expected transfers and hence reduces Z. To the best of
our knowledge, this specific prediction of our model is new to the formal mod
eling of civil war, since conflict models are typically not embedded in an explicit
public-finance context. At a general level, however, the broad selectorate frame
work in Bueno de Mesquita, Smith, Siverson, and Morrow (2003) considers the
split of government revenue into public goods versus redistribution, as well as
government repression and civil war, as endogenous outcomes. In their analy
sis, some institutional variation—such as a larger winning coalition within the
selectorate—might produce a correlation between public goods and violence
similar to the one in Corollary 4.3.
Although these three implications of the model all reflect variations in Z,
other parameters will also influence the likelihood of conflict by changing
the two trigger points ZO and ZI . Such will be the case with parameters of
the conflict technology ξ , but sorting these out requires additional specific
assumptions. The two trigger points are also affected by the costs of investments
in conflict through ν and λ1. We postpone to the next chapter the analysis of
how these parameters affect conflict risks and political turnover. However, we
state here an additional result concerning the effect of political institutions.
Corollary 4.4: In the range of θ for which the equilibrium is not necessarily
peaceful, political institutions with more checks and balances (more minority
representation), a higher value of θ , reduce the likelihood of observing repres
sion or civil war, unless the demand for public goods is high (φ close to 1).
This follows by observing that ZO(θ ; ξ ) and ZI (θ ; ξ ) in Proposition 4.2 are both
increasing functions of θ . Intuitively, more inclusive institutions make control of
the state less valuable, and thus shift up the point at which Z triggers violence for
both the incumbent and the opposition. Many of the papers in the civil-war and
repression literatures discuss and attempt to estimate the dependence of violence
on political institutions, typically as a direct effect in line with Corollary 4.4.
However, Propositions 4.1 and 4.2 together imply that Corollaries 4.1–4.3
should only hold in societies and times where θ —the minority protection or rep
the core model with political violence 187


resentation embedded in political institutions—is below a certain lower bound
or where φ—the demand for public goods—is below a certain lower bound.
Empirically, this does not imply a direct effect of political institutions, but rather
an interaction effect between political institutions and other determinants. As
far as we know, this specific theoretical insight from our model is also new.
Comparative Statics and the Determinants of State Capacity The corollaries of
the model can also be described in terms of the global and local comparative
statics discussed in Sections 2.1 and 3.1. The global comparative statics are
associated with the levels of θ and φ, which determine whether a country
finds itself in a peaceful state with certainty. The local comparative statics
are associated with variations in parameters ω(π1), R, θ , and φ, given that
the country finds itself potentially outside the peaceful state. There is thus an
analytical commonality to the frameworks we have developed in the last three
chapters.
Our model of conflict has other comparative statics as well, which are tied to
the costs of raising resources and the military capabilities of the incumbent and
opponent groups, captured by parameters ν , λ1, and ξ . Since these parameters
were not part of the core state-capacity framework in Chapters 2 and 3, we have
not stressed them so far. However, factors such as these do figure prominently in
some of the civil-war literature. For example, Fearon (2004, 2008) and Fearon
and Laitin (2003) stress how the military capabilities of the government (ξ in
our model) relate to outcomes such as income and state capacity. As noted
above, we return to the role of these forgotten parameters in Chapter 5.
Since the model framework is common, it is interesting to compare the
determinants of political violence with the determinants of state-capacity invest
ments that we isolated in Chapters 2 and 3. When we do so, we find a striking
result: basically, all the factors that raise the likelihood of violence tend to drive
down investments in state capacity. To see this, consider our earlier typology
of states.
In the earlier chapters, common-interest states were defined by the global
comparative statics, specifically the cohesiveness condition αL > 2(1 − θ ) or the
condition φ → 1. Evidently, those coincide with the conditions in Proposition
4.1 that guarantee a peaceful outcome. When these conditions did not hold in
earlier chapters, we had redistributive or weak states. According to Proposition
4.2, those states sometimes experience violence. In Chapters 2 and 3, weak
states had no investment in fiscal capacity and little investment in legal capacity.
188 chapter four: political violence


Redistributive states had some investments, and in those the same variables that
raise the likelihood of violence (weakly) decrease state-capacity investments.
These are the local comparative statics discussed earlier: more resource or aid
dependence (a higher level of R), lower wages [a lower level of ω(π1) given
income y(π2)], and a lower demand for public goods (a lower value of φ), as
well as a lower cohesiveness for political institutions (a lower value of θ).
The distinction between redistributive and weak states was made on the
basis of the stability condition, however, which included the exogenous stability
parameter γ . Drawing such a distinction is no longer straightforward because
the rate of turnover is endogenous in the present model. Moreover, our analysis
of political violence in this chapter has taken state capacity as given. For both
of these reasons, we have to complete the analysis of the model looking at the
full-fledged equilibrium outcomes when (potentially violent) political turnover
and state capacity are jointly determined. This is exactly what we do in Chapter
5. Before taking on that task, however, we present a few developments of the
violence model and then embark on a relatively long detour, discussing how the
predictions we have derived about political violence can be taken to the data
and what happens when we do so.
4.2 Developing the Model
We now sketch a handful of ways in which the basic model can be extended
and how this would affect the main conclusions.
4.2.1 Asymmetries
In the basic model presented earlier the two groups are completely symmetric.
This feature is very convenient because group decisions do not depend on group
characteristics, just on their incumbency status. But there are natural ways of
relaxing this rather strong assumption.
First, we could introduce income inequality in the form of asymmetric wages,
in a similar way as in Section 2.4.4. Such asymmetry might make the richest
group less inclined to violence. This would be the case if there were a “loyalty
premium,” requiring the high-income group to recruit soldiers from within its
own ranks, as that would raise the cost of violence. Ideally, however, rich and
violence-motivated groups would wish to hire low-wage mercenaries to carry
out violence on their behalf to offset this comparative disadvantage.
developing the model 189


Second, one group could be better organized in raising resources for fighting
when in opposition. Crudely, this could be captured with groups having differ
ent values of ν. One of the groups would then tend to fight more, making civil
conflict more likely when the low-ν group is in opposition.
Yet, another possibility—which is discussed in the empirical civil-war
literature—would be that the government does not have a full monopoly on
natural resource rents. In the model, this could be represented as the opposition
group having access to a share of exogenous income, R, perhaps because of its
geographical location. Again, the likelihood of observing violence would then
depend on the identity of the group in power.
4.2.2 Polarization, Greed, and Grievance
A large literature emphasizes the role of polarization in promoting conflict
[see, e.g., Esteban and Ray (1994, 1999) for theoretical foundations and
Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005) for empirical patterns]. As we saw in
Chapters 2 and 3, polarization/heterogeneity in the preferences for public goods
reduces common interests and hence affects state-capacity investments. Having
identified the importance of common interests in using political violence, it is
not surprising to see that it also affects incentives for violence.
To illustrate this, we employ the same modeling as in Section 2.4.4, where
1 − ι is the probability that the two groups have the same preferences for public
goods. In other words ι > 0 represents polarization or heterogeneity in the
demand for public goods; as noted in Chapter 2, it is hard to make a clear
distinction between, say, ethnic heterogeneity and polarization in our two
group context. The key observation is that the expression for the expected utility
difference between incumbent and opposition in (4.10) is now replaced by
U I (τ2, π2
) − U O (τ2, π2
) = φι [αH − αL
] + ω (π1
) 2 (1 − 2θ ) Z,
where Z is defined as in (4.11).
The first term on the right-hand side is new and reflects the forces of polar
ization/heterogeneity. In particular, this term is positive whenever parameter ι
is positive. Moreover, its magnitude depends on the distance between αH and
αL. Proposition 4.1 now no longer holds, since as φ → 1 and/or θ → 1/2, the
polarization/heterogeneity term remains and could be a source of conflict, in
dependently of the mechanism that we have already identified. This is because
φ → 1 is no longer a guarantee of common interests.
190 chapter four: political violence


Crudely speaking, this extended model captures both of the most widely
quoted motives for violence—greed and grievance [see Collier and Hoeffler
(2004)]. In our core model, the motives for capturing the state were based
on private-goods benefits from redistribution, which corresponds to greed.
Polarization/heterogeneity introduces another dimension in connection with
the way the state can be used, perhaps reflecting decisions on noneconomic
issues such as religion or ethnicity. Moreover, this could be the sole motive
for mounting an insurgency, which corresponds to grievance. The extended
model sketched here shows how these motives fit together and how they can
be considered jointly.
One interesting possibility suggested by the extension would be to allow the
incumbent group to pick a leader who is more or less polarizing. One could
think of a world where the main issue is religious polarization/heterogeneity
and the leader could either be a zealot or a moderate. With a zealot in charge
polarization/heterogeneity would be a much bigger issue. The incumbent would
then have a choice between, say, setting ι = 0 or ι = 1, knowing that this would
affect the incentives for violence. A hardliner who credibly would use violence
might sometimes be preferred to a moderate. For example, if having a hardliner
in place would result in repression but not in civil war, it would enhance
the probability of the incumbent group staying in power. The shift between
different types of leaders in Israel and among Palestinian groups suggests that
such considerations could have real-world importance.
4.2.3 Anarchy
Assumption 4.1 on the conflict technology implied an ordering from peace to
repression and conflict. In particular, we rule out an undefended insurgency,
where one social group takes over by raising a military threat against another
social group. Note that this would not correspond very well with a bloodless
coup d’e ́tat, which would be rather a transition of power between members
of the same social group, such as the military. We might instead think about
an undefended insurgency as a situation close to anarchy, perhaps like the one
we observe in today’s Somalia. In such an anarchic situation, the incumbent
government is so weak that only the opposition invests in violence. Eventually,
we would expect the incumbent to lose power. Formally, anarchy is a possibility
when we replace Assumption 4.1b with
−γI (0, 0; ξ )
γO (0, 0; ξ ) < 2 (1 − θ )
ν.
developing the model 191


This is best motivated by thinking of ν as being low and ξ as giving an advantage
to the opposition in terms of marginal return.
With this alternative assumption, the motives for insurgency and incumbent
investments remain. But one could now have a Nash equilibrium with Lˆ I = 0
and Lˆ O > 0. Moreover, increasing Z could now increase political instability by
raising Lˆ O. In this alternative model, we would generally lose our ability to
predict an ordering among repression, conflict, and peace, which is a feature
of Proposition 4.2. But in a context where undefended insurgencies would be a
major empirical phenomenon requiring explanation, our model could certainly
be adapted to include it.
4.2.4 Conflict in a Predatory State
We now show how to generalize the model to include the case where the state is
governed by a small predatory elite. As we saw in Section 3.2.4, such a predatory
state sets pI
s = pO
s = 0. The rents earned by the incumbent elite are now
ˆ0=
∑
J ∈{I ,O}
[μ (χˆ0, 0) y ̃ (0) − C (χˆ0
)]
eI , (4.13)
where χˆ0 is the corresponding predation level.
To develop the implications for violence, the key observation is that (4.10)
is now replaced by
U I (τ2, π2
) − U O (τ2, π2
) = ˆ 0 [1 − ζ ] + ω (0) 2 (1 − 2θ ) Z,
where
Z = R + τ2y(0) − E(G(α2, τ2))
ω(0) . (4.14)
There are three main implications for the results in Section 4.1.
First, Proposition 4.1 no longer holds since ˆ 0 remains and if governance
is weak, then incentives for violence remain. Similarly, the thresholds ZI and
ZO in Proposition 4.2 are all shifted down to reflect the additional motive for
using violence, namely to capture the state and the ability to extract predatory
rents.
Second, compared to a nonpredatory state, we may have an additional
wage effect since ω (0) ≤ ω (πs
). Whether the wage is strictly lower depends
on whether an outside option of working in the traditional sector is binding or
192 chapter four: political violence


not, as discussed in Section 3.2.4. To the extent that wages are indeed lower,
this raises Z and hence increases the possibility of violence.
Third, period-2 income will be lower than in a nonpredatory state: y (0) ≤
y (π2
). Since this expression appears in the numerator of (4.14), this income
effect will tend to reduce violence. All things considered, however, we expect
predatory states to be more prone to violence, since the shift of income from
public resources into the hands of elites will be the dominant effect.
Predatory states are also an interesting context in which to model within
group conflict, since some rank-and-file members of the group may wish to
stage a coup d’e ́tat to take over as the elite and hence lay their hands on the
predatory rents in ˆ 0. This means that political violence might be used on
two fronts, within groups and between groups. To capture this situation more
fully would mean extending the model with two dimensions of LI and two
separate conflict technologies, one applying within groups and the other across
groups.
4.2.5 Investing in Coercive Capacity
We have taken the parameter ξ , reflecting the relative military advantage of
the incumbent government as given. If we adopt the earlier interpretation of
public goods as defense, then spending on defense in period 1 might also have
the side-effect of being able to engage in more effective violence against an
insurgent group. Arguably, the government advantage could also be subject
to investment by the government as with other forms of state capacity. Such
investments may involve a secret police and/or surveillance, which are typical
of authoritarian regimes. We do not model these possibilities formally here,
as that would require adding additional stages to the model where ξ would
be chosen prior to the conflict stage. But such an approach would bring our
modeling closer to the analysis of civil war in Fearon (2004) and Fearon and
Laitin (2003), who focus a great deal on the military capabilities of pursuing
conflict.
If θ is low this type of extended model could entail another complementarity.
Investments by the government in coercive capacity would raise the incidence
of repression relative to peace and conflict. They would therefore tend to move
an economy toward a redistributive regime, which could make investments
in coercive capacity complementary with investments in other forms of state
capacity in redistributive regimes.
developing the model 193


4.3 From Theory to Empirical Testing
We now discuss how the theory in this chapter can inform the empirical study
of the incidence of political violence. Although our model in Section 4.1 is
extremely simple, it does provide a transparent set of predictions as to how
parameters of the economy and the polity shape the incidence of conflict. A
clear advantage of beginning from a well-defined theory is that we can clarify
and evaluate the assumptions made on the way to empirical testing. Specifically,
we must decide which variables and parameters to treat as measurable in the
data and which to treat as fixed (at the country level) rather than time-varying.
We argue that more reliable inference requires time-varying measures of the
determinants suggested by the theory.
Measurement and Observability Our data are in panel form for countries and
years from 1950 onward. Hence, consider a particular country at date s. As long
as we take state capacity as given, there are no endogenous dynamics and time
independent shocks to wages, resource rents or aid, and public-goods demands
are the only sources of time variation. We can thus treat period s as a typical
period in a sequence of periods.
Later, we discuss how we can use readily available sources of data to decide
whether that country-year is characterized by peace, repression, or civil war. As
in previous chapters, we are able to rely on decent proxies for θ , the cohesiveness
of political institutions. When it comes to the components of the latent index
variable Zs , we argue that for each country, we can find some time-varying
correlates of ωs , as well as R. With a slight abuse of notation, we label the
observations of resource rents or aid by the outside analyst by Rs .
But we find it difficult to measure the demand for public goods, φ, which
enters into the expression of Zs , or variation in the realized value of public goods
over time. Thus, we give up the possibility of testing the prediction in Corollary
4.3.12 Moreover, we maintain that it is impossible to measure the returns to
12. It might be argued that we could test this corollary indirectly through observing the provision of public goods over time. Although we might be able to find variables such as government expenditures or government consumption, these include an important component of redistribution. Credible time-varying measures of public-goods provision do not exist for a sufficiently large number of countries for a sufficiently long time period. In previous chapters, we used the prevalence of external war in the past as a (time-invariant) measure of past demand for public goods. For a variety of reasons, it would not be suitable to use realized external wars as a time-varying contemporaneous measure of the demand for public goods.
194 chapter four: political violence


violence, γO(0, 0, ξ ) and γI (0, 0, ξ ), and the marginal cost components ν and
λs , which enter into the expressions for ZI
s and ZO
s.
Treating the state-capacity levels as given, we thus have several unobserved
sources of randomness in the model’s determinants of violence. For example,
from the viewpoint of an outside analyst, Zs − ZI
s becomes a random variable
that satisfies
Zs − ZI
s = Rs
ωs
− ZI − εI
s
ωs
,
where ZI is a constant and εI
s an “error term” with c.d.f. F I (ε). Similarly, we
can write
Zs − ZO
s = Rs
ωs
− ZO − εO
s
ωs
,
where ZO is another constant and εO
s another error term with c.d.f. F O(ε).
Conditional Probabilities of Observing Violence Transposing Proposition 4.2
to the current notation, we will observe civil war at date s if
Zs − ZO
s ≥ 0 ⇔ εO
s ≤ Rs − ωsZO .
Given the information available to us as analysts, the conditional probability,
i.e., the likelihood, of observing civil war is
F O(Rs − ωsZO). (4.15)
As predicted by the theory in Corollaries 4.1 and 4.2 , a higher value of R or a
lower value of ω both raise the likelihood of observing civil war, provided that
θ is not close to 1/2.13
By similar reasoning, the likelihood of observing peace is
1 − F I (Rs − ωsZI ), (4.16)
whereas the likelihood of observing repression is
F I (Rs − ωsZI ) − F O(Rs − ωsZO). (4.17)
13. Formally, as θ approaches 1/2, ZI and hence ZO > ZI approach infinity. Given the finite support for the distributions of ω and R, the maximum of F O , namely F O(RH − ωL(π )ZO), is thus equal to 0.
from theory to empirical testing 195


As explained in Section 4.1, the theory gives us distinct predictions about how
changes in R and ω shift the distribution of index variable Z and thereby the
likelihood of observing peace. We now see clearly, however, that the predictions
regarding the conditional probability of observing repression hinge on the
relative densities of F I and F O . In other words, we have specific predictions
about two types of transitions: between civil war and non–civil war (peace cum
repression) and between peace and political violence (repression cum civil war).
Another informative way of interpreting expressions (4.15)–(4.17) is that
they define the relative probabilities of the three ordered states of political vio
lence. This strongly suggests that the most straightforward way of confronting
the theory with data would be to estimate an ordered logit driven by vari
ables that shift the country-specific distribution of Zs given the country-specific
thresholds ZI
s and ZO
s.
Cross-Country versus Within-Country Variation What kind of variation in the
data should we use to test the model predictions? A good deal of the empir
ical civil-war literature and virtually all of the empirical repression literature
estimate the probability of observing violence from cross-sectional data sets.
Expressions (4.15)–(4.17) illustrate clearly why this may not be such a good
idea. Cross-sectional data replace time-varying variables of interest—such as
Rs+1 and ωs in the present context—with their cross-sectional means over some
time period. But this makes statistical inference a hazardous exercise, since we
run a large risk of confounding the cross-country variation in these variables
with cross-country variation in unobserved parameters—such as ξ or φ in the
present context—something that could seriously bias and invalidate the esti
mates. We return to this point later.
It is more rewarding to exploit within-country variation in panel data, as in
the cross-country panel studies of civil war in Africa by Bruckner and Ciccone
(2008) or Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) and the within-country panel
studies of civil war by Deininger (2003) for Uganda or Dube and Vargas (2008)
for Colombia.14 For instance, estimating a specification for the likelihood of
observing civil war with country fixed effects is equivalent to evaluating
F O(Rs − ωsZO) − E{F O(Rs − ωsZO)}, (4.18)
14. Both Collier and Hoeffler (2004) and Fearon and Laitin (2003) do present some fixedeffects estimates in their cross-country studies, although they appear as a robustness check rather than as the main specification.
196 chapter four: political violence


i.e., the difference between the conditional and the unconditional probability of
civil war. Proceeding in this way identifies the effect of resource rents/aid flows
Rs and wages ωs on the incidence of civil war exclusively from the within
country variation of these variables. Any impact of their average values and
time-invariant parameters in each country is absorbed by the country fixed
effect.
As we saw earlier in Figure 1.10, the worldwide prevalence of civil war and
repression has important and irregular time trends. Thus, it is also essential to
allow for global shocks, which hit all countries in a common way, through year
fixed effects (binary year-indicator variables). The trends in violence are then
picked up in a flexible (nonparametric) fashion, and we only use the country
specific yearly variation relative to world-year averages for identification.
Given the theory developed earlier, our specification should also take into
account that the predictions about shocks are conditional on the value of θ . Let
c = 1 if political institutions have strong checks and balances (i.e., θc close to
1/2) in country c in the period of our data and equal to zero otherwise. We then
model the index function in (4.18) for country c in period s as
Rc,s − ZO
c ωc,s = ac
(
c
) + as
(
c
)+b(
c
) Z ̃c,s , (4.19)
where ac
(
c
) is a country fixed effect, at
(
c
) are year dummies, and Z ̃c,s
are time-varying regressors that reflect changes in Rc,s and ωc,s. The theory
predicts that the parameter of interest, b (
c
) , is heterogeneous with respect
to c, and in particular that b(0) > b(1) = 0. To test this prediction, we estimate
a model that allows for separate slope coefficients for countries with cohesive
and noncohesive institutions.15
Concretely, the discussion in this section points clearly toward two strategies
by which we may confront the theoretical predictions from Section 4.1 with
data. One strategy would be to estimate the time variation across the three
violence states by way of an ordered logit specification including country and
year fixed effects. An alternative would be to estimate the transition between
nonviolence and violence or the transition between non–civil war and civil war
by way of a conditional (country and year fixed effects) logit specification.
Section 4.4 presents results from both of these econometric strategies.
15. In the specifications reported in Section 4.4, we impose ac (1) = ac (0) and at (1) = at (0). However, the results hold up when we allow for separate country and time effects by estimating the model on separate subsamples, i.e., with c = 1 and c = 0.
from theory to empirical testing 197


4.4 Data and Results
In this section, we first describe our data. Then, we take a look at some cross
sectional correlations. Finally, we present our econometric estimates based on
the empirical strategy discussed at the end of the last subsection.
4.4.1 Data
Political Violence A large body of literature looks at the determinants of civil
war. Much of the empirical work deals with the onset and duration of civil
war, concepts that are not as closely related to our theory as the incidence of
civil war.16 To define civil war empirically, we use the ACD produced by the
peace research institutes in Oslo and Uppsala. More precisely, we use the civil
war incidence measure in this data set, starting in 1950.17 It takes a value of
1 if—in a given country and year—the government and a domestic adversary
are involved in a conflict that claims a death toll of more than 1000 people.
As noted earlier, more than 10% of all country-years between 1950 and 2005
are classified as civil war in our sample.18 Since we want to focus on large
scale political violence, we do not exploit the alternative oft-used incidence
of civil conflict (also from the ACD), which only requires a death toll of 25
people.
To measure repression, we use data from Banks (2005), which counts up
purges: systematic murders and eliminations of political opponents by incum
bent regimes. We create a binary indicator that is equal to one in any year when
purges exceed zero. In the 1950–2005 period, on average 7% of all country
years are classified as being in a state of repression, but not in civil war.19
16. There are a number of issues involved in the coding of conflicts into civil wars. See Sambanis (2004) for a thorough discussion about different definitions that appear in the empirical literature. 17. Specifically, we use the variable “incidence of intrastate war” in the UCDP/PRIO ACD v.4-2007, covering the years 1946–2006. 18. An alternative measure is available in the Correlates of War (COW) database, but this only runs up to 1997. Given that one of our independent variables relies on Cold-War and post-Cold-War experience, the COW variable would only allow for eight, as opposed to sixteen, observations in the post-Cold-War era. See Sambanis (2004) for a discussion of issues in the empirical measurement of civil war. 19. An alternative would be to exploit the commonly used Political Terror Scale based on the reports on human-rights violations by the U.S. State Department and Amnesty International [see Gibney, Cornett, and Wood (2007)]. This variable is only available from 1976, however, which cuts short the Cold-War period that we can exploit. Moreover, as shown by
198 chapter four: political violence


Based on these two measures, we construct an ordered variable of political
violence that follows the theory in Section 4.1. Specifically—and w.l.o.g., as
only the ordinal ranking matters—we assign a value of 0 to peace, a value of 1
to repression in the absence of civil war, and a value of 2 to civil war.20
Political Institutions We construct two indicator variables to capture strong
political institutions, corresponding to c in Section 4.3. As in previous chap
ters, our main measure is based on the assessment of executive constraints in
the Polity IV data set. We believe that this variable best captures the thrust of
θ in our theory. Executive constraints are coded annually from 1800 or from
the year of independence. We do not exploit the high-frequency time variation
in this variable, however, as we are concerned that its changes are likely to be
correlated with the incidence of political violence. This means that we must
leave a test of Corollary 4.4 to future work. The model in Section 7.2.4 treats
both political violence and political institutions as endogenous.
To construct a time-independent measure of c, we adopt quite a con
servative approach. First, we evaluate the presample evidence, measuring the
fraction of years for which a country had the highest score (of 7) for executive
constraints before 1950. Then, we compute the fraction of years for which a
country had the top score over the sample period. A country is deemed to have
cohesive political institutions, c = 1, if two conditions are fulfilled. First, the
fraction in the presample period is above zero (a country that did not exist
before 1950 is assigned a value of zero). Second, the fraction in the sample per
iod is greater than 0.6. This definition implies that just fewer than one-fifth of all
countries have cohesive institutions (see further Table 4.3). Marginal changes
in the classification criteria have little effect on the results.
As a robustness check, we consider an alternative classification of politi
cal institutions, namely the prevalence of parliamentary democracy. Although
Qian and Yanagizawa (2009), Security Council membership during the Cold-War period may have influenced the way the U.S. State department reported on human rights in U.S. allied and nonallied countries. 20. To be precise, we begin from two underlying variables: civil wars as coded in the ACD and the purges variable in Banks (2005). We construct a binary variable based on the latter depending on whether there were any purges in a country at a given date. Since 1950, we have 4841 country-year observations with neither civil war nor government purges. There are 90 observations that entail both a civil war and some purges, 714 observations where there are civil wars but no purges, and 425 observations where there are purges but no civil war. This yields 1229 observations with some violence and 804 with civil war.
data and results 199


high executive constraints are associated with stiffer checks and balances on
the government, the alternative measure is intended to capture larger repre
sentativeness.21 We define it analogously, namely as the result of having had a
positive prevalence of parliamentary democracy before 1950 and a minimum
prevalence of 0.6 in between 1950 and 2005.
Exogenous Z ̃-Shocks To test the specific model predictions with the specifica
tion in (4.19), we still need credibly exogenous variation in the time-varying
regressors Z ̃c,s. We use two variables for this purpose. The first is a measure
of natural disasters, constructed from the EM-DAT data set.22 Specifically, we
define a variable that adds together the number of extreme temperature events,
floods, slides, and tidal waves in a given country and year.23 Then, we create
a binary indicator variable, set equal to one if a country experiences any such
event. We expect such a natural disaster to negatively affect the current real
wage ωc,s (and the effect on the current real wage to be larger than the effect
on the future tax base that also appears in the expression for Z). Consistent
with this hypothesis, a country-year with at least one natural disaster is asso
ciated with a 2.5% reduction in income per worker. But part of this could be a
productivity effect working through capital.24 Of course, a natural disaster is
also likely to trigger international aid flows of some duration. In terms of our
theory, this corresponds to a positive shock to Rc,s, which affects the likelihood
of violence in the same direction as a negative shock to ωc,s.
As a second source of exogenous variation, we use the revolving member
ships in the U.N. Security Council (for the nonpermanent members). We expect
membership to raise a country’s geopolitical importance and therefore its likeli
hood of receiving international aid from important countries, corresponding to
positive shocks to Rc,s. Indeed, Kuziemko and Werker (2006) find that U.S. aid
flows depend on Security Council membership. Similar incentives are likely to
21. See Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi (2004) or Persson, Roland, and Tabellini (2000) for theoretical arguments and Persson and Tabellini (2003) for empirical evidence. 22. Nel and Righarts (2008) recently used this data set to study civil war. 23. Specifically, we added together the variables “flood,” “etemp,” “slides,” and “wave.” Some other EM-DAT coded diaster events, such as epidemics, are not used since they may be endogenous to civil wars. 24. In a more elaborate model, a lower return to capital may also cut the opportunity cost for engaging in conflict and thus have a similar effect on conflict propensity as a lower return to labor.
200 chapter four: political violence


have applied to other permanent Security Council members. Of course, Secu
rity Council membership may change a country’s international accountability,
reducing the likelihood that its government engages in violence. Membership
may also reflect a country’s past propensity for violence. Therefore, we pay
little attention to the effect of membership per se and instead mainly exploit
the interaction between membership and time, allowing for a different effect
before and after the fall of the Berlin Wall. In particular, we expect the strategic
aid motives to be considerably stronger in the period before 1990 because of
the stronger geopolitical tensions during the Cold War.25
To sort out the importance of these possible channels, we use data on total
international aid disbursements from OECD countries and on GDP per capita
from the Penn World Tables (PWT).26
4.4.2 Cross-Sectional Correlations
Let us briefly look at the correlations in the raw data among the three violence
states and some determinants suggested by the theory in this chapter.
According to the theory, the lower a country’s wages, the more likely it is to
experience political violence, with a greater likelihood of civil war rather than
repression at the lowest levels of wages. Suppose we take income per capita
(from the 6.3 PWT, 2005 constant international prices) as a proxy for wages
(ωc,s in the model). Are the three violence states naturally ordered in the data,
as in the theory? For income per capita, the answer is a fairly clear-cut “yes.”
Peaceful country-years in our panel data have an average income per capita of
$9,412, repressing countries are poorer with $5,625 per capita, and those in
civil war are the poorest with average incomes of $3,612.
25. See Bates (2008) for a discussion of how the Cold War affected governments in Africa. Cold-War Security Council membership may have impacted on conflict through a different channel, namely the provision of military aid raising the government’s capability of fighting. In the simple semilinear conflict model referred to in Section 4.1, a higher value of ξ2 can readily be interpreted as the incumbent’s advantage in fighting. It can be shown that ZI (the incumbent’s trigger point) is decreasing in ξ2, whereas ZO (the opposition’s trigger point) is increasing in ξ2. Adding this channel to the effect of a higher Z via regular aid would mean that Cold-War Security Council membership should definitely raise the likelihood of political violence, whereas it might raise or cut the likelihood of civil war. 26. More precisely, for aid we use the variable “Official Development Assistance, Excl Debt (Constant Prices, 2007 USD millions)” from the OECD Development Database on Aid from DAC Members (subset 2a). For GDP per capita we use the variable “Real GDP per capita (2005 constant price, Chain series)” from PWT 6.3.
data and results 201


Table 4.2 illustrates the unconditional correlation between income and vio
lence in a different way. The table reproduces the two-by-two tabulation of
different violence states in Table 4.1, except that countries with the highest
25% of income (from the same PWT data) are now set in italics. Evidently,
richer countries are overrepresented in the peaceful upper-right quadrant of
the table.
As another example, we would expect a monotonic ranking of violence
states, similar to the ranking in income, in our variable for cohesive political
institutions based on high executive constraints (θc in the model). Using the
two-way variable defined earlier, we indeed uncover a striking regularity across
political regimes. For the one-fifth of all countries with cohesive institutions,
93% of the annual observations are peaceful, with 3.7% in repression and
2.8% in civil war. For countries with noncohesive institutions, these figures are
77%, 8%, and 15%, respectively.
Table 4.3 illustrates the association between political institutions and vio
lence in an analogous way to Table 4.2: the one-fifth of countries classified as
having cohesive political institutions are set in boldface. As with high income,
cohesive political institutions are clearly overrepresented in the peaceful upper
right quadrant.
These differences in the unconditional probability of observing political
violence are entirely in line with our theory. It is tempting to investigate whether
they and other correlations implied by the theory—such as a correlation with
ethnic heterogeneity as a proxy for polarization—would hold up, not only
in the raw data but also as partial correlations. That is, are they robust to
controlling for a number of other prospective determinants of violence? As
noted in the introduction to this chapter, this is indeed the approach in most
existing empirical research on repression and civil war, which relies on the cross
sectional variation—or the cross-sectional cum time-series variation—in the
data. However, as discussed in Section 4.3, such an approach is endangered
by statistical pitfalls, so it is not pursued here. Instead, we turn to the more
rewarding (time-series) variation within countries.
4.4.3 Econometric Estimates
Basic Results—Ordered Logit Table 4.4 presents the core results when we
follow the empirical strategies outlined at the end of Section 4.3 for statistical
inference based on the within-country variation in the data.
In column (1), we follow the approach suggested by the theory of estimating
a fixed-effect ordered logit. This is not a standard estimation method, but we
202 chapter four: political violence


Table 4.2 Repression and civil war by country and high income
Some civil war No civil war
Less than 5%
repression
Bosnia Australia Cyprus Jamaica New Zealand Switzerland
Cameroon Bahamas Czech Republic Kuwait Norway Tanzania
Guinea-Bissau Bahrain Denmark Lesotho Oman Togo
Liberia Barbados Djibouti Luxembourg Panama Trinidad-Tobago
Nepal Belize Equatorial Guinea Madagascar New Guinea Tunisia
Rwanda Benin Fiji Malawi Qatar United Kingdom
Sierra Leone Bhutan Gabon Malaysia Saudi Arabia Uzbekistan
Yemen Botswana Gambia Maldives Senegal
Brunei Guinea Mali Singapore
Burkina Faso Guyana Malta Slovak Republic
Canada Honduras Mauritania Slovenia
Cape Verde Iceland Mauritius Solomon Islands
Central African Republic Ireland Mongolia Suriname
Costa Rica Israel Namibia Swaziland
Croatia Ivory Coast Netherlands Sweden
More than 5%
repression
Afghanistan India South Korea Albania Ghana Taiwan
Algeria Indonesia Sri Lanka Austria Greece Thailand
Angola Iran Sudan Bangladesh Haiti Uruguay
Argentina Iraq Syria Belgium Hungary Venezuela
Burundi Laos Turkey Bolivia Italy Zambia
Cambodia Lebanon Uganda Brazil Japan
Chad Libya United States Bulgaria Jordan
China Morocco Vietnam Chile Kenya
Colombia Mozambique Zimbabwe Comoros Mexico
Congo Nicaragua Dominican Republic Niger
Cuba Nigeria Ecuador Paraguay
El Salvador Pakistan Egypt Poland
Ethiopia Russia Estonia Portugal
France Somalia Finland Romania
Guatemala South Africa Germany Spain
Note: Countries with per capita income above the 75th percentile in 1990, by PWT 6.3, Real GDP per capita (2005 international prices), are printed in
italics.


Table 4.3 Repression and civil war by country and cohesive political institutions
Some civil war No civil war
Less than 5%
repression
Bosnia Australia Cyprus Jamaica New Zealand Switzerland
Cameroon Bahamas Czech Republic Kuwait Norway Tanzania
Guinea-Bissau Bahrain Denmark Lesotho Oman Togo
Liberia Barbados Djibouti Luxembourg Panama Trinidad-Tobago
Nepal Belize Equatorial Guinea Madagascar New Guinea Tunisia
Rwanda Benin Fiji Malawi Qatar United Kingdom
Sierra Leone Bhutan Gabon Malaysia Saudi Arabia Uzbekistan
Yemen Botswana Gambia Maldives Senegal
Brunei Guinea Mali Singapore
Burkina Faso Guyana Malta Slovak Republic
Canada Honduras Mauritania Slovenia
Cape Verde Iceland Mauritius Solomon Islands
Central African Republic Ireland Mongolia Suriname
Costa Rica Israel Namibia Swaziland
Croatia Ivory Coast Netherlands Sweden
More than 5%
repression
Afghanistan India South Korea Albania Ghana Taiwan
Algeria Indonesia Sri Lanka Austria Greece Thailand
Angola Iran Sudan Bangladesh Haiti Uruguay
Argentina Iraq Syria Belgium Hungary Venezuela
Burundi Laos Turkey Bolivia Italy Zambia
Cambodia Lebanon Uganda Brazil Japan
Chad Libya United States Bulgaria Jordan
China Morocco Vietnam Chile Kenya
Colombia Mozambique Zimbabwe Comoros Mexico
Congo Nicaragua Dominican Republic Niger
Cuba Nigeria Ecuador Paraguay
El Salvador Pakistan Egypt Poland
Ethiopia Russia Estonia Portugal
France Somalia Finland Romania
Guatemala South Africa Germany Spain
Note: Countries with predominantly cohesive political institutions, according to the definition described in the text, are printed in boldface.


Table 4.4 Basic econometric results
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) Dependent variable
Ordered Ordered Ordered Political Political Civil Civil Ordered variable variable variable violence violence war war variable
Natural disaster
0.263** 0.317*** 0.299*** 0.278** 0.327*** 0.370** 0.431*** 0.263** (0.107) (0.110) (0.111) (0.109) (0.112) (0.152) (0.155) (0.111)
Security Council member
−1.048*** −1.194*** −1.382*** −1.110*** −1.269*** −1.360** −1.383** −1.048** (0.399) (0.417) (0.456) (0.412) (0.430) (0.545) (0.547) (0.413)
Security Council member in Cold War
1.275*** 1.461*** 1.657*** 1.267*** 1.465*** 1.074* 1.105* 1.275** (0.439) (0.458) (0.495) (0.453) (0.472) (0.633) (0.635) (0.504)
Natural disaster × strong institutions
−0.701* −0.333 −0.618* −1.233** (0.374) (0.318) (0.376) (0.595)
Security Council member × strong institutions
1.975* 2.940*** 2.186* (1.173) (1.123) (1.178)
Security Council member in Cold War × strong institutions
−2.577* −3.379*** −2.746** (1.375) (1.247) (1.381)
Strong institutions measure
High Parliamentary High High executive Democracy executive executive constraints 1950–2005 constraints constraints 1950–2005 1950–2005 1950–2005
Estimation method
FE ordered FE ordered FE ordered FE logit FE logit FE logit FE logit FE ordered logit logit logit logit
Significance of interactions (p-value)
0.61 0.49 0.66 0.17
Observations 4251 4251 4251 4251 4251 2061 2061 4251
Number of countries
97 97 97 97 97 49 49 97
Notes: The time period covered is 1950–2006. For definitions of variables refer to the text. Standard errors are in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Robust standard errors are in columns (1)–(7) with bootstrapped standard errors in column (8). The p-value refers to the significance of a test of the hypothesis that coeff_[natural disaster × strong institutions] = −coeff_[natural distaster] and coeff_[Security Council member × strong institutions]= −coeff_[Security Council member] and coeff_ [Security Council member in the Cold War × strong institutions] = −coeff_[Security Council member in the Cold War], where coeff_ is the estimated coefficient on the variable in question. The reduced sample size in columns (6) and (7) is due to all countries that never had a civil war during this period being dropped.


implement it in a way proposed by Ferrer-i-Carbonell and Frijters (2004).27 In
addition to the (country and year) fixed effects, the specification includes our
exogenous shock variables. The panel for estimation includes the 97 countries
that have experienced some kind of political violence since 1950 (for the
others, the fixed effect perfectly predicts the absence of violence). All three
variables of interest are statistically significant: having a natural disaster is
positively correlated with political violence, whereas being a member of the
U.N. Security Council is negatively correlated with violence, except during the
Cold War when the correlation turns positive. The effect of a natural disaster
is nontrivial: the point estimate corresponds to just above a 4-percentage-point
higher probability of observing violence, given a sample average of about 17%.
The effect of Security Council membership is also around a 4-percentage-point
lower probability of political violence.
In general, we are agnostic about the “right” sign for Security Council
membership. We expect this variable to perhaps reflect an accountability effect
of being temporarily in the international spotlight. Our main interest lies in the
interaction of membership with the Cold-War period (in the third row).28 As
stated above, we hypothesize that the strategic geopolitical motives for giving
aid (in the form of cash or military assistance) to Security Council members
would have been much stronger in the Cold-War period than after 1990. This
is indeed what the data suggest.29
In columns (2) and (3), we show that these effects are only present in coun
tries with noncohesive political institutions. To do so, we interact our three
variables of interest with an indicator for cohesive political institutions, mea
sured either by a high incidence of strong executive constraints or parliamentary
democracy (as detailed above). If our exogenous variables have no effect under
cohesive institutions, the coefficients for the interacted variables should be
opposite in sign and equal in absolute value to the coefficients on the non
27. The method relies on three steps. First, we compute an average of the ordered violence variable for each country. Second, we define a new binary variable as observations of the ordered variable above or below the country-specific averages computed in step one. Third, we estimate a conditional logit for the binary variable defined in step two. Building on Chamberlain (1980), Ferrer-i-Carbonell and Frijters (2004) show that this three-step procedure implements—in our context—an ordered logit with fixed country effects and country-specific thresholds. 28. We do not include a separate Cold-War indicator in the regression, since any systematic differences between the Cold-War and non-Cold-War periods are captured by the year effects. 29. Two recent studies of the relation between aid and civil conflict are de Ree and Nillesen (2009) and Nunn and Qian (2010).
206 chapter four: political violence


interacted variables. As shown by the table, the interaction and noninteraction
coefficients do have the opposite sign in every case. Moreover, for both our
measures of cohesive institutions, we cannot reject the hypothesis of a zero
correlation between the exogenous variables and political violence in countries
with cohesive institutions: p-values for these tests are reported at the bottom of
the table. The results in these columns corroborate an important and nontrivial
prediction of the theory.
It is reasonable to ask if these interaction effects really capture the impact
of political institutions rather than just that of high income. To investigate this
point, we use a dummy variable, which is equal to one if a country is in the
top quarter (or top half) of the income per capita distribution in 1980. The
correlations between this indicator of high income and the executive-constraints
and parliamentary democracy measures of good institutions turn out not to be
particularly high: 0.35 and 0.28, respectively (0.28 and 0.19, for the top half
of income). When we add interactions of high income and shocks to the earlier
specifications, all results on the interactions with political institutions—both
those above and those below—hold up qualitatively.
Basic Results—Margins of Violence In columns (4) through (7), we consider
separately each of the margins where our theory has a clear prediction, namely
peace versus some violence (repression or civil war) and non–civil war (peace
or repression) versus civil war. In each case, we estimate conditional logits that
allow for country (and year) fixed effects. We report two specifications—one
without and one with interaction terms for our executive-constraints measure
of strong institutions. Columns (4) and (5) show that the earlier results are
robust, with signs and magnitudes of the coefficients from the conditional
logits being similar to those from the ordered logits. Once more, we cannot
reject the hypothesis that political violence in the cohesive-institutions countries
displays no significant correlation with the exogenous variables. For the civil
war margin, only 49 countries have some time variation in the left-hand-side
variable. We are unable to estimate an interaction effect with Security Council
membership, since none of the cohesive-institutions countries that have been
(nonpermanent) members of the Security Council ever had a civil war. However,
we cannot reject a zero effect for natural disasters on civil war in countries with
cohesive political institutions.
These estimates square well with the predictions of our theory. The civil-war
result is also consistent with the findings of Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti
(2004) based on rainfall shocks rather than natural disasters, although here we
data and results 207


extend the sample from Africa to the world and widen the scope to include one
sided, in addition to two-sided, political violence. This is also consistent with
the findings of Nel and Righarts (2008) who, building on Drury and Olson
(1998), argue that natural disasters increase the risk of civil conflict, although
our results are based exclusively on the within-country variation in the data
(rather than the cross-sectional cum time-series variation).
Columns (1) through (7) all show nonadjusted standard errors. Since the esti
mation procedures are somewhat involved, the best alternative is probably to
bootstrap (by country block) the standard errors. Whenever our bootstrapping
procedure converges, it yields standard errors very similar to the nonadjusted
standard errors.30 Column (8) shows this by reporting bootstrapped standard
errors for the same specification as in column (1). It is reassuring that the linear
probability estimates in Table 4.5 rely entirely on standard errors that are robust
to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and serial correlation (Huber-White
standard errors clustered at the country level).
Extended Results—Alternative Estimation Table 4.5 relies on an alternative
estimation method and also explores the mechanism at work in more detail.
The first four columns establish that we obtain similar results when running
the specifications in columns (4) to (7) of Table 4.4 with a conventional fixed
effect estimator, corresponding to a linear probability model. (Since we do
not want to impose a strong cardinality assumption, we focus on the binary
variables corresponding to the two margins investigated in Table 4.4.) The
standard errors in column (1), as in the whole of Table 4.5, are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the country level.
It is easy to give a direct quantitative interpretation of these estimates: having
(at least) one natural disaster raises the probability of political violence by about
2.4 percentage points and the probability of civil war by 2.9 percentage points.
Security Council membership during the Cold War raises the probability of
political violence by a whopping 9 percentage points, compared to the post
Cold-War period. All these effects appear quite large and consistent with the
findings in Table 4.4. The terms that interact these variables with cohesive
institutions as measured by executive constraints also display the same sign
pattern as in Table 4.4.
30. Performing the bootstrapping is nontrivial owing to the stepwise estimation (see the previous footnote) and the unbalanced panel, especially when the interaction effects in columns (2), (3), (5), and (7) are included.
208 chapter four: political violence


Table 4.5 Extended econometric results
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) Dependent variable
Political Political Civil Civil Log GDP Log aid Political Civil violence violence war war per capita disbursements violence war
Natural disaster 0.024* 0.029* 0.029** 0.043*** −0.005 0.105** (0.013) (0.017) (0.013) (0.016) (0.003) (0.043)
Security Council member
−0.066** −0.092*** −0.051** −0.053** 0.009 −0.269*** (0.027) (0.029) (0.023) (0.023) (0.008) (0.092)
Security Council member in Cold War
0.090** 0.129*** 0.034 0.036 −0.004 0.434*** (0.040) (0.045) (0.029) (0.029) (0.010) (0.113)
Natural disaster × strong institutions
−0.024 −0.079*** (0.037) (0.024)
Security Council member × strong institutions
0.148*** (0.054)
Security Council member in Cold War × strong institutions
−0.205*** (0.068)
Two-year lagged log GDP per capita
0.905*** (0.013)
Log GDP per capita
0.062 0.046 (0.039) (0.040)
Log aid disbursements
0.191*** 0.161*** (0.046) (0.050)
Observations 5880 5880 5880 5880 6300 5067 3914 3914 Number of countries
158 158 158 158 178 150
R-squared 0.030 0.031 0.056 0.059 0.914 0.136
Notes: The time period covered is 1950–2006. For definitions of variables refer to the text. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by country in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The specification in columns (1)–(6) is OLS. The results in columns (7) and (8) are IV specifications in which natural disaster, Security Council member and Security Council member in the Cold War and two-year lagged log income per capita are used as instruments for log GDP per capita and log aid disbursements.
data and results 209


Extended Results—Inspecting the Mechanism In columns (5) and (6), we
look at the mechanisms behind the reduced-form results. Specifically, we ask
how our three exogenous variables affect two intermediate variables that the
theory suggests could shape political violence: income per capita (for real
wages) and aid disbursements. In column (5), we allow natural disasters and
Security Council membership to affect income per capita (allowing for income
convergence by including the two-year lag of income per capita). The results
show no significant correlation with income per capita, although we cannot
reject a negative effect. On the basis of this result, we would not wish to argue
that the real wage is the main channel by which natural disasters affect the
probability of conflict. In column (6), the dependent variable is (the log of)
aid disbursements. The estimates show that aid flows increase with natural
disasters, are higher during the Cold War when a country is on the U.N.
Security Council, and are lower in the post-Cold-War period. This sign pattern
is identical to the effects of these variables on political violence.31
It is simple to compute the implied (semi)elasticity of political violence, p,
with respect to aid, by observing that
∂p
∂ log(aid) = ∂p/∂x
∂ log(aid)/∂x .
Through this formula, the estimated coefficients in columns (1) and (6) give us
three estimates of the elasticity of political violence to aid, which are remarkably
similar—all in the range between 0.20 to 0.24. Quantitatively, a 10% increase
in aid is associated with an increase in the probability of violence by about 2
percentage points. These results are consistent with the recent results on aid
and civil conflict presented by Nunn and Qian (2010).32
31. We have also interacted these shocks with our institutional measure (available from the authors upon request). For natural resource shocks, we find that they (significantly) increase aid to countries with noncohesive institutions, but (significantly) reduce aid to countries with cohesive institutions. However, Security Council membership has a (significantly) much stronger effect on aid, both during and after the Cold War in countries with cohesive institutions than in countries with noncohesive institutions. The latter result suggests that it is really the difference in institutions that drives the results in Table 4.4, rather than a different response to shocks. 32. Nunn and Qian (2010) use weather shocks in the U.S. wheat belt to instrument for food aid across the world. Their results and those in this chapter are at odds with de Ree and Nillesen (2009), who study civil conflicts in Sub-Saharan Africa. Ree and Nillesen (2009) use shocks to GDP per capita in the United States and a few other donor countries to instrument for ODA in Sub-Saharan Africa. Their dependent variable is also different and they find significant effects only when they study the persistence and onset of civil war.
210 chapter four: political violence


In light of these results, it is tempting to look further into the mechanism
behind the reduced-form results by estimating a two-stage model, where income
per capita and aid are instrumented with our exogenous variables and two-year
lagged income. The results from this exercise are reported in columns (7) and
(8). Not surprisingly, given the results in columns (5) and (6), we find a positive
and significant effect of aid disbursements on political violence as well as civil
war, but no significant effect of income per capita. Moreover, the effects of aid
estimated by the two-stage model are very close to the aid to violence elasticities
computed from our earlier estimates.
We do not want to push these IV results, however, since the required identi
fying assumption is quite strong. For example, and as noted earlier, Cold-War
Security Council membership might have affected violence not only through
regular aid but also through military assistance (which we cannot measure),
thus violating the exclusion restriction.
Taken together, the empirical estimates presented in Tables 4.4 and 4.5 are
quite consistent with the theoretical predictions derived in Section 4.1 and
operationalized in Section 4.3.
4.5 Final Remarks
The analysis in this chapter has taken some steps toward integrating two differ
ent strands of research on political violence, developing a theoretical model to
analyze the common roots of repression and civil war. Under specific assump
tions about the conflict technology, we show that peace, repression (one-sided
violence), and civil war (two-sided violence) become ordered states depending
on a common underlying latent variable, which is shifted by shocks to the value
of public goods, wages, aid, and resource rents. But these effects only emerge
when political institutions do not provide sufficient checks and balances on the
ruling group or adequate protection for those excluded from power.
The chapter also shows how we can start bridging the gap between theo
retical modeling and econometric testing. Under specific assumptions on what
can be observed, the predictions from our model can be taken to the data by
estimating either an ordered logit or the conditional probability of transition
from peace to violence or from non–civil war to civil war. The empirical strat
egy here is much sharper than in earlier chapters and shows that the kind of
theory we are building can help us approach the data in a specific way.
final remarks 211


Our identification relies on two sources of, arguably, exogenous variation
affecting violence that are part of the mechanism isolated by the theory: natural
disasters (affecting real wages and aid flows) and membership on the U.N.
Security Council (affecting aid flows). The empirical results are consistent with
the theoretical predictions as real wages and aid flows affect the latent variable
Z in the model. These exogenous shocks do indeed alter the likelihood of
government repression as well as civil war in line with the theoretical priors, but
only if political institutions have weak checks and balances or weak minority
representation. Inspecting the mechanism, we find that variations in foreign aid
seem to drive the bulk of the within-country variation in political violence that
we explain.
These findings resonate with previous work that emphasizes the role of
institutions, economic development, and natural resources in shaping civil
conflict or political violence more generally. However, much work remains to
complete the agenda of interpreting empirical results on violence through the
lens of well-specified theoretical models. One helpful, but limiting, feature of
the current model is the symmetry between incumbent and opposition groups.
As discussed in Section 2.2, the general model framework can be extended to
incorporate income inequality via heterogeneity in incomes or asymmetry in
group size. In Section 4.2, we highlighted how groups might differ in their
weighting of national interests (national public goods) against group-specific
interests (transfers), which is a way of modeling ethnic, cultural, or religious
tensions and how this offers a way to introduce a grievance motive for conflict
in addition to the greed motive stressed in Section 4.1.
Our empirical analysis of the incidence of violence has not really engaged
with the distinction between onset and duration of violence, which plays an
important role in the empirical civil-war literature. Further theoretical progress
on this issue requires an underlying source of state dependence. State capacity,
to be endogenized in the next chapter, is one obvious source of state depen
dence and is also emphasized by Fearon (2004) and Fearon and Laitin (2003).
We could also get a more dynamic model by introducing asymmetry between
groups, along the lines discussed in Section 4.2. The state variable would then
be the group in power, making the equilibrium in any given period state depen
dent. This would naturally lead to an empirical model where political violence
and political turnover are jointly determined. Another possibility would be
to introduce an economic state variable such as land or capital, with con
flict in one period destroying part of this state variable in the next period.
The implied dynamics of the real wage would naturally imply some dura
212 chapter four: political violence


tion dependence in conflict. We take a preliminary look at such a model in
Section 5.2.
Studying the joint determination of state capacity and political violence in the
next chapter allows us to make further predictions about the links between con
flict risk and state capacity. This way, we find a predicted link between conflict
risk and income, which is intermediated by investments either in state capacity
or in private capital. Altogether, this extended analysis helps improve our under
standing of the observed clustering among income, institutions, and violence.
4.6 Notes on the Literature
Classic theoretical models of conflict, such as those in Grossman (1991) and
Skaperdas (1992), have been applied to understanding civil war. In common
with the model developed in this chapter, these authors see conflict as the
outcome of an equilibrium process in which the incentives of the various
parties are modeled explicitly. Those incentives arise from the technology of
conflict, the preferences of the protagonists, and the underlying economic
constraints. Grossman (1992) makes the point that foreign aid may increase
the propensity of civil conflict for the same reason as the one stressed in this
chapter. For excellent reviews of the theoretical literature, see Blattman and
Miguel (2009) on general issues and Garfinkel and Skaperdas (2007) on the
research that uses contest functions. Dixit (1987) and Skaperdas (1996) survey
the use of contest functions more generally, and Aslaksen and Torvik (2006),
Azam (2002), Caselli (2006), and Chassang and Padro i Miquel (2009) are
more recent theoretical contributions that take somewhat different approaches.
Azam (2005) discusses state types in Africa, where the distinction between one
sided and two-sided political violence is important. Parker (1988) is a classic
reference on the role of military technology and its historical impact on the
organization of the state.
Much progress has been made in this theoretical research, but most of it
has been pursued separately from the empirical literature and the models have
not generally been formulated with empirical testing in mind. Fearon (2008) is
an exception, but he follows a somewhat different modeling approach to the
one adopted in this chapter. Another exception is the literature on polarization
and conflict, where the theory by Esteban and Ray (1999, 2008a) has both
been informing and been informed by empirical work such as Montalvo and
Reynal-Querol (2005) and Reynal-Querol (2002).
notes on the literature 213


In recent years, a large empirical literature has emerged that looks at the
determinants of civil war, and is reviewed by Blattman and Miguel (2009) and
Elbadawi and Sambanis (2002). A robust finding in this body of work is that
poor countries are disproportionately involved in civil war, even though the
direction of causation may be difficult to establish. But the interpretation of
this correlation is open to debate. Fearon and Laitin (2003) see it as reflecting
limited state capacity to put down rebellions, whereas Collier and Hoeffler
(2004) see it as a reflection of the lower opportunity cost of fighting when
incomes are low.
There is also considerable debate about other prospective drivers of civil
war, such as ethnic divisions and political institutions. When it comes to natural
resources, results diverge as well. Although some researchers have found natural
resources to significantly raise the probability of onset and/or duration of civil
war, others have failed to find such an effect (see Ross, 2004 for a review
of the research on this topic). However, most empirical researchers would
probably agree that there is a significant cross-sectional correlation between oil
dependence and civil war. A few papers, such as Drury and Olson (1998) and
Nel and Righarts (2008), look at the empirical links between natural disasters
and civil conflict and very recent studies by de Ree and Nillesen (2009) and
Nunn and Qian (2010) explore the links between aid and civil war.
A smaller set of studies focuses on variation in conflict within countries. For
example, Deininger (2003) uses community-level data from Uganda, finding
that scarcity of economic opportunities (proxied by infrastructure) and the
presence of cash crops are correlated with the civil strife. Another within
country study by Dube and Vargas (2008) builds on the theoretical framework
developed by Dal B  ́o and Dal B  ́o (2006) to explain the incidence of conflict
within Colombian municipalities, exploiting the time-series variation in coffee
and oil prices.
There is also a considerable literature in political science that aims at finding
economic, political, and social variables to explain government repression and
violations of human rights. This literature, surveyed in Davenport (2007),
is almost exclusively empirical. The literatures on civil war and government
repression have been developed largely in parallel, without too much contact
with each other, even though civil war sometimes appears as a “right-hand
side” variable in empirical studies of repression. Azam and Hoeffler (2002)
show how violence against civilians (repression) can be effective at deterring
rebellion and apply this to data on refugees.
214 chapter four: political violence


CHAPTER 5
State Spaces
All happy families resemble each other; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina, 1873–1877
In the previous chapter we expanded our core state-capacity model from Chap
ter 3 to include investments in violence. We used this model to explore the
theoretical determinants of repression and civil war and demonstrated that the
predictions are consistent with the within-country variation in violence over
time. Prior to the empirical detour in the last half of Chapter 4, we observed that
political violence and state-capacity investments had several common determi
nants. Specifically, investments in the state and investments in violence appeared
to be substitutes for one another; among the common determinants, every vari
able that increased investments in violence decreased those in state capacity.
The theoretical analysis in Chapter 4 was incomplete, however, in that we
treated the levels of legal and fiscal capacity as given. We now complete the
analysis by making them endogenous. Thus, we derive the optimal invest
ments in state capacity by a period-1 incumbent when political (in)stability is
endogenous—rather than exogenous, as in Chapters 2 and 3—and driven by the
equilibrium investments in violence. This exercise results in a new pair of Euler
equations for legal and fiscal capacity, through which state capacity, income,
and political violence are jointly determined. Moreover, we take a further step
toward endogenizing income by reintroducing private capital formation into
the analysis. This suggests a natural negative relation between conflict risk and
investment (and thereby income).
Once these remaining tasks have been resolved, we can put the pieces
together to obtain a more complete picture of development clusters. As we
shall see, our comprehensive core model further helps us in isolating possible
explanations for the observed correlations among income, institutions, and
violence. In particular, we can combine our findings in Chapters 2 and 3 of
215


a typology with common-interest, redistributive, and weak states with our
findings in Chapter 4 of a typology with peaceful, repressive, and civil-war
states. This gives us a general state space in the form of a matrix. A country’s
precise location in this matrix at a given time depends on the parameter values
that describe its polity and economy.
Plan of the Chapter In the next section, we summarize the lessons from
Chapter 4 in the form of a function that describes endogenous political turnover.
This preliminary allows us to study equilibrium investments in fiscal and legal
capacity in the comprehensive core model. Section 5.2 develops the model
by adding private capital formation along the same lines as in Section 3.2.3,
but in a setting where the risk of civil war affects the expected return to
private investment. In Section 5.3, we discuss the empirical implications of
our comprehensive framework and how it can be used to interpret observed
patterns in the data.
Section 5.4 puts the typologies of investment states and violence states
together into an Anna Karenina principle of development, an allusion to the
Tolstoy quote at the beginning of the chapter. We also briefly revisit the possi
bility of a predatory state and observe how this enriches our understanding of
nonprosperity. As usual, the chapter ends with final remarks and notes on the
literature.
5.1 State Capacity in the Comprehensive Core Model
Let us return to the core model formulated in Section 4.1, where we conducted
the analysis of violence taking fiscal and legal capacities as givens.
5.1.1 Equilibrium Political Turnover
Analyzing the equilibrium investments in state capacity is considerably simpli
fied by the model’s recursive structure. Recursivity implies that violence shapes
investments only via the equilibrium rate of political turnover, γ (Lˆ I , Lˆ O; ξ ).
Preliminaries Let us first recall that the latent variable driving conflict is
Z = (1 − φ) [R + τ2y(π2)]
ω(π1) .
216 chapter five: state spaces


Let us also replace the general vector ξ in the conflict technology by a scalar
parameter ξ . We make the following assumption on how this parameter affects
the marginal returns to fighting of the incumbent and opposition:
Assumption 5.1: −γIξ
(LO , LI ; ξ ) > 0 and γOξ
(LO , LI ; ξ ) < 0.
This says that ξ indexes the advantage of the incumbent: raising ξ increases
the incumbent’s marginal return to fighting while reducing the opposition’s
marginal return to fighting (in terms of each group’s probability of holding
power in period 2).
Drawing on the results in Propositions 4.1 and 4.2 and plugging the Nash
equilibrium values {̂LI , ̂LO} into the conflict technology, we find the equilibrium
turnover rate:
(Z, ν , ξ ) =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
γ
(Lˆ O , Lˆ I ; ξ
)
Z > ZO(θ , ν , ξ )
γ
(
0, Lˆ I ; ξ
)
ZO(θ ; ν , ξ ) ≥ Z > ZI (θ , λ1, ξ )
γ (0, 0; ξ ) ZI (θ , λ1, ξ ) ≥ Z.
(5.1)
Comparative Statics We can easily do comparative statics on the (Z, ν , ξ )
function, which are summarized in the following result:
Proposition 5.1: If Assumptions 4.1 and 5.1 hold, the probability that the
incumbent loses office at the end of period 1 varies with (Z, ν , ξ ) as follows:
1. An increase in Z reduces the probability that the incumbent loses office
when there is either repression or civil war.
2. An increase in ν reduces the probability that the incumbent loses office
when there is civil war.
3. An increase in ξ reduces the probability that the incumbent loses office
when there is either repression or civil war.
Proof: Part 1 is proved as follows. First, suppose that there is repression. Then,
the result follows, since Assumption 4.1 implies that the incumbent’s payoff
state capacity in the comprehensive core model 217


is concave in LI and that Z increases the marginal benefit to fighting. Now,
suppose that there is civil war. Differentiating (5.1) with respect to Z yields
Z (Z, ν , ξ ) = γI
d LI
dZ + γO
d LO
dZ
=
[(γI
)2 γOO + (γO
)2 γI I − 2γI γOγI O
]
[
−γI I γOO + (γI O
)2]
Z
< 0,
where we have used the comparative static result in (4.12) and Assumption 4.1c.
To prove Part 2 of the proposition, observe that under repression, changing
ν has no effect on Lˆ I since LO = 0. Under civil war, a higher ν affects violence
according to
[ −γII xZ −γIOxZ
γI OxZ γOOxZ
] [ dLI
d LO
]
=
[0
dν
]
. (5.2)
Differentiating (5.1) with respect to ν and using Cramer’s rule, we have
ν(Z, ν , ξ ) = γI
d LI
dν +γ O
d LO
dν
=
[−γI I γO + γI γI O
]
[
−γI I γOO + (γI O
)2]
2 (1 − 2θ ) Z2
< 0,
where the sign follows from Assumption 4.1c.
Finally, turn to Part 3. First, suppose that there is repression. Then, the result
follows because Assumption 4.1 implies that the incumbent’s payoff is concave
in LI and because of the assumption that ξ increases the marginal benefit to
fighting. Next, suppose there is civil war. Then, as ξ increases, the effect on
violence is given by
[ −γII xZ −γIOxZ
γI OxZ γOOxZ
] [ dLI
d LO
]
=
[ γI ξ
(LO , LI ; ξ ) xZdξ
−γOξ
(LO , LI ; ξ ) xZdξ
]
, (5.3)
where x = (1 − 2θ )2. Differentiating (5.1) with respect to ν and using Cramer’s
rule, we have
218 chapter five: state spaces


ξ (Z, ν , ξ ) = γI
d LI
dξ +γ O
d LO
dξ
= γOξ
[γI I γO − γI γI O
] + γI ξ
[γOOγI − γI OγO
]
[
−γI I γOO + (γI O
)2]
Z
< 0,
where the sign follows from Assumption 4.1c. This proves the result.
Proposition 5.1 is an important result when it comes to studying the impact
of violence on state-capacity investments since the likelihood that the incumbent
holds on to power affects these decisions when θ is low.
The first part follows from the fact that the incumbent fights relatively
harder than the opposition when more is at stake. This is so because, by
Assumption 4.1c, γI rises faster than γO. This comparative-statics prediction is
consistent with the results in Smith (2004), who finds that oil-rich states have
longer leadership durations than others, ceteris paribus.
The second part of the proposition follows from the fact that it becomes more
costly for the opposition to use violence as ν goes up. This reduces turnover
when there is a civil war, as the opposition fights less intensively. It is also shifts
up the threshold ZO at which civil war breaks out.
As for the third part, the range of Z associated with repression becomes wider
as ξ increases. This is because, by Assumption 5.1, a higher value of ξ cuts the
incumbent’s trigger point for violence and raises that of the opposition. Within
the repression and civil war regimes, a higher value of ξ makes the incumbent
invest more in violence, whereas the opposition invests less. Hence, it raises the
probability that the incumbent group stays in power.
5.1.2 Investments in State Capacity Revisited
Armed with these preliminaries, let us now consider investments in state capac
ities {π2, τ2
} in the comprehensive core model of Chapter 4. These investments
are determined by the period-1 incumbent at the same time that she invests
in violence LI and, thus, simultaneously with the period-1 opposition group’s
decision on LO , which the incumbent takes as given. This simultaneity, together
with the linear structure of the model, permits us to analyze the investments in
state capacity separately from policy. Moreover, the only connection with the
investments in violence runs through the equilibrium turnover rate (Z, ν , ξ ).
state capacity in the comprehensive core model 219


Although different in its details, our analysis is related to the work of Caselli
(2006), who considers how the availability of natural resources shapes the
discount factor of an incumbent government via the probability of a future
coup and how this, in turn, affects the investments made by the incumbent to
develop the economy.
The Investment Objective The period-1 incumbent chooses investment levels
at stage 2 so as to maximize its two-period utility. As before, let
W (αs , τs , πs , ms , βJ ) = αsG (αs , τs
) + (1 − τs)y (πs
) + (5.4)
βJ [R + τsy (πs
) − G (αs , τs
) − ms]
be the indirect payoff function within each period.
Replacing the conflict technology γ (LO , LI , ξ ) with the equilibrium turnover
rate (Z, ν , ξ ) in the incumbent’s payoff function from the previous chapter,
we can express the investment objective as
W (α1, τ1, π1, m1, βJ ) (5.5)
+ (1 − (Z, ν , ξ ))U I (τ2, π2
) + (Z, ν , ξ ) U O (τ2, π2
),
where
U I (τ2, π2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, 0, βI )
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, 0, βI )]
and
U O (τ2, π2
)=
[
φW
(
αH , τ2, π2, 0, βO)
+ (1 − φ) W
(
αL, τ2, π2, 0, βO)]
are the period-2 value functions.
Optimality Conditions Maximizing (5.5) with respect to π2 and τ2 and applying
the envelope theorem, we obtain the following Euler equations (first-order
conditions) for legal and fiscal capacity
yπ (π2)[1 + (E(λ2; Z, ν , ξ , θ ) − 1)τ2] ≤ λ1Lπ
(π2 − π1
)
c.s. π2 − π1 ≥ 0
y(π2)[(E(λ2; Z, ν , ξ , θ ) − 1] ≤ λ1Fτ
(τ2 − τ1
)
c.s. τ2 − τ1 ≥ 0,
220 chapter five: state spaces


where
E(λ2; Z, ν , ξ , θ ) = φαH + (1 − φ)E(λ2|αL; Z, ν , ξ , θ )
is the expected value of public funds with
E(λ2|αL; Z, ν , ξ , θ )
=
{ αL if αL ≥ 2(1 − θ )
2[(1 − θ)(1 − (Z, ν , ξ )) + θ (Z, ν , ξ ) otherwise.
The form of these optimality conditions should be familiar from the core models
in Sections 2.1 and 3.1.
In the absence of a corner solution, each condition equates the marginal
cost with the marginal benefit of investment, which depends on the expected
marginal value of public funds. The only new aspect is that the endogenous
turnover rate appears in place of exogenous parameter γ in the expression
for E(λ2; Z, ν , ξ , θ ), where we have replaced our earlier notation λL
2 to empha
size the fact that (Z, ν , ξ ) is now endogenously determined. As before, the
equilibrium entails a complementarity between the two types of investment,
provided that
E(λ2|αL; Z, ν , ξ , θ ) − 1 ≥ 0.
We do not repeat all of the comparative statics from Chapter 3. Instead, we
focus on the new insights and implications we can draw from this extended
model.
Characterizing the Equilibrium Once again, we have a three-way classification
of possible states, depending on two conditions, which we label as in the simpler
model. The first of these is identical to its predecessor:
Cohesiveness: αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ ) .
The second condition is similar to its predecessor, but reflects the endogenous
turnover rate:
Stability: φαH + (1 − φ) 2 [(1 − (Z, ν , ξ )) (1 − θ ) + (Z, ν , ξ ) θ ] ≥ 1.
state capacity in the comprehensive core model 221


This modified stability condition is more likely to hold if (Z, ν , ξ ) is low. Our
characterization of how this turnover rate depends on the parameters (Z, ν , ξ )
in Proposition 5.1 will therefore be useful whenever the stability condition
determines investments.
The conceptual meaning as well as the consequences of the two conditions
are exactly the same as in Chapters 2 and 3. For completeness, we restate how
they map into the three possible types of states.
Proposition 5.2: Suppose that Cohesiveness holds or φ → 1. Then, we have a
common-interest state, where
1. There are investments in both kinds of state capacity.
2. An increase in φ increases both fiscal and legal capacity investments,
whereas changes in R, ν, or ξ have no effect on investments.
For this result to hold, we require that θ be close enough to one-half
that marginal public revenues are allocated to public goods. In this case, the
incumbent in period 1 is reassured that the state will use public resources for
common interests, i.e., public goods, regardless of who is in power in period
2. This makes her confident that the state can be developed. Observe that by
Proposition 4.1, common-interest states are always peaceful, since there is no
redistribution to fight about. A higher value of φ raises investments in both
aspects of the state by making future government revenue more valuable.
The second possibility is as follows:
Proposition 5.3: Suppose that Cohesiveness fails and φ < 1, but that Stability
holds. Then, we have a redistributive state, where
1. There are investments in both kinds of state capacity.
2. A higher value of φ increases both fiscal- and legal-capacity invest
ments, as do (weakly) higher values of R, ν, or ξ .
In a redistributive state, the incumbent government uses available funds to
redistribute when αs = αL, and it invests in the state as the group is likely enough
to stay in power. If the incumbent government finds itself in repression or civil
war—i.e., Z is above one or both of the trigger points ZI and ZO—parameter
changes that raise the intensity of repression or civil war, hence increasing the
chances that the incumbent survives, promote higher investments in the state.
222 chapter five: state spaces


A stronger redistributive state may thus go hand in hand with higher levels of
repression. Note that, unlike in Chapters 2 and 3, the local comparative statics
in common-interest and redistributive states are now different when it comes
to changes in R, ν, or ξ .
The following result summarizes the third possibility.
Proposition 5.4: When both Cohesiveness and Stability fail, the state is weak.
There is no incentive at all to invest in fiscal capacity, and legal-capacity
investment is lower than in a common-interest or redistributive state, all else
being equal.
As the stability condition fails, the marginal benefit of investing in fiscal
capacity is negative. The noncohesiveness of political institutions and the high
rate of political turnover mean that any fiscal capacity is likely to be used by the
opposition group to redistribute away from the current incumbent. This deters
investment in the state and we see a weak state together with high political
instability driven by political violence.
5.2 Developing the Model
So far, our comprehensive model has been developed without any private
capital accumulation decisions. However, the model still generates an indirect
link between political violence and income, since investments in legal capacity
directly raise income and the risk of conflict affects investments in the state.
Suppose that θ is low enough to generate a weak or redistributive state. Then,
if we have shocks to Z, the correlation between violence and income will be
positive. But if we have shocks to ν , the correlation will be negative.
Either way, this is a restrictive perspective on the link between violence and
income, as it leaves out the most obvious possibility, namely a reduction in
private investment. For example, Goldin and Lewis (1975) estimate that the
largest economic cost of the American Civil War in the U.S. South was due
to destruction of physical capital. Under that circumstance, any anticipation of
conflict will surely lead to less investment. We now show how such a mechanism
can be introduced into our model.
Reintroducing Private Investment To model the effect of conflict risk on
investment, we augment the model to include a decision to invest in physical
developing the model 223


capital along the same lines as in Section 3.2.3. However, we do so in the context
of our comprehensive core model, which includes investments in political
violence. Specifically, we model the individual decisions to invest in the period-2
capital stock, K2.
To home in on the effect of conflict, we proceed as in Chapter 4 by keeping
investments in state capacity fixed. We leave the analysis of the full comprehen
sive model with both private and public investment in the wake of prospective
conflict to further work.
We augment the model with the realistic assumption, confirmed by the
analyses in Collier (1999) and Goldin and Lewis (1975), that a realized civil war
has a lasting effect on the economy’s productive capacity by destroying some
outstanding private capital. Since destruction is most likely a by-product of all
out conflict, we assume that no such destruction occurs in a state of repression.
Formally, we make the following assumption:
Assumption 5.2: If a civil war takes place then a share δ < 1 of period-2 capital
is destroyed.
Given the timing assumptions to follow, this means that destruction occurs
after the savings decision but before production has taken place in period 2.
Effectively, private capital will thus be subject to stochastic depreciation.
Timing The timing of the modified model is now:
1. We begin with initial stocks of state capacities {τ1, π1
}, a capital stock
per capita of K1, and an incumbent group I1.
2. All citizens decide how much capital to accumulate for period 2, K.
3. Nature determines α1 and R.
4. I1 chooses a set of period-1 policies {t1, rI
1, rO
1 , pI
1, pO
1 , g1} and deter
mines (through investments) the period-2 stocks of fiscal and legal
capacity {τ2, π2
}. I1 and O1 simultaneously invest in violence levels
LI and LO. If a civil war erupts, there is capital destruction.
5. I1 remains in power with probability 1 − (Z, ν , ξ ), and nature deter
mines α2.
6. I2 chooses period-2 policies {t2, rI
2, rO
2 , pI
2, pO
2 , g2}.
224 chapter five: state spaces


Since private accumulation decisions are made ahead of the realization of R
(and α), the probability of conflict can affect the decision to accumulate.
Expected Return to Capital We study the equilibrium in a similar way as in
Section 3.2.3. In the notation of Chapter 3, we assume that κ (1 + πs
) < 1 so
that the institutional constraint is binding and capital is incompletely deployed
in the advanced sector. Period-2 expected private income for an individual who
saves K is
Y (π2; K) = (κ (1 + π2
) K)η .
Suppose that the country is prone to civil conflict. Then, we can write the
probability that civil war will break out after the realization of wages and
natural resource rents, R, as
F O(R − ω1ZO) = Prob
[
Z > ZO]
using the same notation as in Section 4.3. For a country that always has
high realizations of R and noncohesive institutions, F O(R − ω1ZO) = 1 − φ.
Furthermore, as we discussed in Chapter 4, F O(R − ω1ZO) is equal to zero
only in a common-interest state.
The expected net-of-tax marginal return to capital is now
(1 − τ2
) η [κ (1 + π2
)]η (K)η−1 [
1 − F O(R − ω1ZO) . δ
] .
The final term represents the lower return to capital with [1 − F O(R − ω1ZO) .
δ] < 1 owing to the destruction of capital in a civil conflict.
Optimal Private Investments Following steps analogous to those that led to
Proposition 3.7, we can derive an implicit solution for the optimal level of
private capital:
1 = (1 − τ2
) η [κ (1 + π2
)]η (
KJ )η−1 [
1 − F O(R − ω1ZO) . δ
] ,
for J ∈ {I , O} . (5.6)
This just says that the marginal product of capital is equal to the value of
foregone consumption. The level of accumulation is the same for members
developing the model 225


of the incumbent and opposition groups because we have assumed that both
groups are equally susceptible to capital destruction in the event of a civil
war.
The final term in (5.6) is like a stochastic tax on accumulation. Since investors
know that their investment returns will be lower if civil war breaks out, they
invest less than they would if they were certain of peace.
Taking Stock Several insights follow from the private-investment optimum.
First, any factor that raises the risk of civil war—i.e., any factor that raises
F O(R − ω1ZO) in expression (5.6)—must cut private investment. Thus, a lower
expected probability of high public-goods demand weakens the incentive for
private accumulation.
Second, because period-2 income, Y (π2; K), is increasing in capital, higher
civil-war risk also means lower (future) income, as it reduces private invest
ment. This mechanism will thus contribute to the observed negative correlation
between the incidence of conflict and income per capita, as will the direct
destructive effect of realized war on capital.
Third, a first-order stochastic shift of the distribution for R induces a higher
risk of civil war in redistributive or weak states. Together with the two previous
observations, this means that higher expected resource rents increase the risk
of civil war as well as reduce private income.
These findings are interesting in view of the two largely separate literatures
on the resource curse that we discussed in the introduction to Chapter 4. One
of these literatures emphasizes the possibility that higher resource rents may
cause low income, whereas the other emphasizes that natural resource rents
can provoke civil war. The results in this section show how both of these effects
can be present simultaneously.
Our analysis also provides insight into the preconditions for these effects
in terms of weak common interests, i.e., low φ and low θ (or low ethnic
homogeneity, high ι). It is these auxiliary parameters, rather than the resources
per se, that give rise to both of the resource curses. Although a society such as
Nigeria faces a threat from high R, a society with cohesive institutions such as
Norway does not.
Our model in this section has focused on the private accumulation of physical
capital. Similar arguments could also be developed for other kinds of invest
ments, such as education decisions, and infrastructure could be destroyed.
226 chapter five: state spaces


However, we leave a more complete treatment of this wider range of possi
bilities for future work.
5.3 Empirical Implications
We have modeled the links between political violence and investments in state
capacity in Section 5.1 and the links between violent conflict and private capital
formation and income in Section 5.2. How can we draw on the theoretical
insights to interpret the development clusters observed in the data and discussed
at various points in the book?
Links between Income and Violence Recall first the negative correlation
between income per capita and the two forms of violence in the raw data from
1950 until today, which we first reported in Figure 1.10 and then discussed
at the beginning of Chapter 4. Figure 5.1 reproduces those correlations. The
analysis in Chapter 4 showed that low income and, in particular, low wages
might cause repression and civil war by decreasing the costs of investing in
violence.
However, in light of our theory, this is only one of several possible expla
nations for the association between low income and violence. Our analysis in
Section 5.2 suggested why circumstances with a high risk of civil war might
lead to lower income via curtailed incentives for private investment. The analy
sis in that section built on a direct negative effect of civil war on the productive
capacity of the economy. In Section 5.1, on the other hand, we suggested an
indirect link, where the risk of conflict is associated with less investment in the
state’s legal capacity, and hence lower income. The correlations illustrated in
Figure 5.1 may thus reflect causation in both directions, as well as common
direct or indirect determinants.
Links between State Capacity and Violence What about the negative correlation
between political violence and state capacity? Figure 5.2 reproduces the familiar
scatterplot of fiscal and legal capacity in the raw data that we highlighted in
Chapter 1. The figure classifies the observations into three groups based on
the average value from 1950 and onward of the ordered variable analyzed
empirically in Section 4.4 (i.e., with 0 for peace, 1 for repression, and 2 for
civil war). In particular, gray dots represent little violence (in fact, none at all),
empirical implications 227


1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
Prevalence of Civil War over Countries
Prevalence of Civil War
5 6 7 8 9 10 Log GDP per capita
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
Prevalence of Repression over Countries
Prevalence of Repression
5 6 7 8 9 10 Log GDP per capita
Figure 5.1 Prevalence of civil war and repression by income.
hollow dots represent middle levels of violence, and black dots high levels of
violence. Although the correlation is not perfect, the scatter in the uppermost
right part of the graph is dominated by countries with high state capacity in
both dimensions that have not experienced any political violence. In contrast,
no country among the weak states in the lowermost-left part of the graph has
been violence free.
228 chapter five: state spaces


50
40
30
20
10
0
.4 .6 .8 1 Property-Rights Protection Index
Low (no) political violence High political violence
Fiscal and Legal Capacity
Tax Share of GDP
Middle political violence Fitted values
Figure 5.2 State capacity conditional on violence.
The theoretical analysis in Section 5.1 gives us a clear way to interpret these
patterns in the data. On the one hand, it suggests some common determinants
of state-capacity investments and violence. In particular, these determinants
include the strength of common interests and the cohesiveness of political
institutions, captured in the core model by parameters φ and θ (and in the
extended polarization model described in Sections 2.2.4 and 4.2.2 by parameter
ι). Countries with high values of φ and θ (low values of ι) become common
interest states, which invest in both forms of state capacity and have peaceful
outcomes. Countries with low values of φ and θ (high values of ι) become
redistributive or weak states, with repression or civil war depending on these
and other parameter values. These global comparative statics, by determining
which type of states we observe, can clearly produce a negative correlation
between state capacities and violence.
On the other hand, conditional on being outside the common-interest state,
the model also suggests several other determinants of conflict, which shape
state capacity indirectly through the risk of political turnover. Examples of such
determinants are resource rents or aid and the efficiency and costs involved
empirical implications 229


in organizing and conducting conflict, represented in the model by parame
ters R, ν, and ξ . Some countries with low ν (cost of organizing insurgency)
become more prone to civil war and others with low ξ (efficiency of government
investments in violence) become less prone to repression. As a result, expected
political turnover is higher, which decreases investments in state capacity, con
ditional on being outside a common-interest state. Similarly, higher R (resource
rents or aid) may increase the risk of civil war. These local comparative statics
can also produce a negative correlation between state capacity and political
violence, at least in the form of civil war.
Figure 5.3—which reproduces part of Figure 1.13—gives a further perspec
tive by showing the partial correlations between the two types of state capacity
and the prevalence of civil war. Recall that these correlations were produced by
holding other observed determinants of state capacity constant, including exter
nal wars and ethnic homogeneity as measures of common interests and high
executive constraints as a measure of cohesive political institutions. In terms of
the model, we are thus partialing out the effects of parameters φ, ι, and θ , i.e.,
the global comparative statics. But Figure 5.3 shows that a negative correlation
between state capacities and civil war remains even when we hold (empirical
proxies for) parameters φ, ι, and θ constant. This negative correlation suggests
that the remaining parameters, ν , ξ , and R, might explain part of the negative
correlation in the raw data by increasing (decreasing) political instability, which
in turn lowers (raises) investment in both forms of state capacity.
The discussion in this section reveals a major problem with the standard
practice in the civil-war literature of treating the level of income as a given. As
noted in the introduction to Chapter 4, there are two leading interpretations of
the fact that civil wars generally break out in poor countries: these have (1) a
low opportunity cost of fighting (Collier and Hoeffler, 2004) or (2) low state
capacities (Fearon and Laitin, 2003). Obviously, both interpretations become
tenuous if income, state capacity, and the propensity for violence are indeed
jointly determined.
To be fair, however, the discussion in Fearon and Laitin (2003) does not really
revolve around the fiscal and legal capacities emphasized here, but around the
costs and capacities for military action for governments and insurgents and the
links of these costs and capabilities to income. In terms of our model, their
discussion is thus not about τ and π , which we treat as endogenous variables,
but about ν and ξ , which we treat as exogenous parameters. Further research
might try to turn these parameters into endogenous variables, theoretically
230 chapter five: state spaces


Share of Years in Civil War
Civil War and Fiscal Capacity
–.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
20
10
0
–10
–20
Tax Share of GDP
.2
0
–.2
–.4
Share of Years in Civil War
Civil War and Legal Capacity
Property-Rights Protection Index
–.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Figure 5.3 State capacity and civil war.
modeling purposeful investments in military capabilities and finding empirical
measures for them.
5.4 Putting the Pieces Together
Up to this point, we have gradually developed a more complete model of
investments in state capacity and violence, which provides us with a framework
putting the pieces together 231


for analyzing state fragility. As noted in Chapter 1, fragility is a concept that is
commonly used in the aid community to describe a range of problems.
Our model focuses on two main pathologies of the state that make it fragile:
political violence and low state capacity. For the reasons that we have just
discussed, both of these are likely to be seen alongside low income. But one
should be cautious in creating chains of causality between state pathologies and
income. It is more important to recognize their common roots. Our modeling
approach is particularly useful in exploring these common roots, since the
various model parameters can be mapped into specific outcomes.
Mapping the State Space We have already discussed the central role played by
cohesive institutions, high θ , and common interests, high φ (and low ι). These
result in high investments in fiscal and legal capacity as well as a peaceful reso
lution of conflicts. Moreover, in the case of a well-functioning and prosperous
state, a variety of forces that encourage private accumulation will complement
state building.
If θ and φ are low, then we have more fragile states. But the details of the
state pathologies are important, leaving open the possibility of low or zero
investments in fiscal and legal capacity as well as repression or outright conflict.
Parameters affecting conflict (ξ , ν , R) then become relevant to understanding
the outcome.
Whether repression is associated with a weak or redistributive state depends
on the extent of political instability. When fighting is costly (high ν), the advan
tage to the incumbent is large (high ξ ), but the redistributive prize is not too
great (intermediate values of R), so we would expect a redistributive state and
repression to go together. This is the case of a state where effective repression
keeps an incumbent in power under noncohesive political institutions.
Civil war erupts only in weak or redistributive states. A weak state and civil
war may reflect a case where the insurgency is relatively easy to organize (low
ν), the government is not effective in fighting it (low ξ ), and the economy is
highly resource or aid dependent (high R).
We can summarize these global comparative statics indicating the type of
state regime that is observed in a two-way table that combines the three
possible investment states with the three possible violence states. Table 5.1
and the previous discussion suggest a clear pattern that we can label the
Anna Karenina principle of development, by analogy with the first line of Leo
232 chapter five: state spaces


Table 5.1 Our state space
Weak Redistributive Common interest
Peace Low θ , φ, ξ , R High φ High θ , φ High ν Low θ
Repression Low θ , φ, ξ , R Low θ , φ, R n/a High ν High ν, ξ
Civil war Low θ , φ, ξ , ν Low θ , φ, ν n/a High R High ξ , R
Tolstoy’s famous novel quoted at the beginning of this chapter.1 “All prosperous
countries resemble each other; every nonprosperous country is nonprosperous
in its own way.” To reflect this observation, we refer to Table 5.1 in what follows
as the Anna Karenina matrix.
The Predatory State Redux In Chapter 3, we defined a predatory state as one
in which the incumbent does not invest in legal capacity at all, leaving private
producers open to predation by elites. The persistence of such states is a function
of weak governance—a low value of parameter ζ introduced in Section 3.2.4.
In Section 4.2.4, we noted that a predatory state is also likely to be prone to
repression and civil war by increasing the benefits and lowering the cost of
violence.
As we discussed in Chapter 3, a predatory state can arise (in principle)
alongside any kind of state in Table 5.1. Thus, it is an additional dimension
of state classification. Visually, this would mean turning our 3 × 3 matrix
into a 3 × 3 × 2 box, where the added dimension would exposit whether
governance—as represented by parameter ζ —is good or bad. Bad governance
would become a further source of nonprosperity, with a direct negative effect
on income and an indirect negative effect on violence and state building.
In practice, we would not expect common-interest states to be predatory,
mainly because institutions that create high θ also create high ζ . The mileage
1. Diamond (1997) also refers to an Anna Karenina principle, although with a slightly different meaning. In his version, a certain property (failed domestication of animals) arises whenever any one out of several (necessary) conditions fails. In our version, there is also only one way to succeed, but different kinds of failure lead to (predictably) different outcomes.
putting the pieces together 233


offered in terms of state classifications would likely reside in further enriching
the description of state pathologies. A state that is both predatory and weak
is in the very worst situation, with no incentives for state building and very
poor incentives for peace. Political institutions that generate low equilibrium
turnover [low (Z, ν , ξ )] and little cohesiveness (low θ) may subdivide into
predatory and nonpredatory states depending on how well political elites are
kept under control.
An exciting challenge for future empirical work would be to see to what
extent these different pathologies can be identified empirically and to
what extent their implications for government behavior can be understood.
5.5 Final Remarks
The overarching theoretical approach in this chapter sheds some light on the
problems of weak and fragile states. We have shown that the pathologies
of fragile states are rooted in low common interests, noncohesive political
institutions, resource or aid dependence, and technologies that favor the use
of violence. Phenomena such as civil war, repression, low income per capita,
low spending on common-interest goods, low taxation, and weak enforcement
of property rights are all symptoms, rather than determinants, of fragile states.
Most existing approaches to fragile states in the development policy com
munity are not derived from an underlying theory, which explains why they
tend to conflate symptoms with causes. For example, low income per capita is
frequently used as a criterion in fragility indexes. Although it is true that low
income may increase the incentives for violence, everything else being equal, it
is only an intermediate factor.
The real challenge posed by the Anna Karenina matrix is twofold. The first
challenge concerns foreign intervention. What if anything can the international
community do to improve the situation of weak and fragile states? To discuss
this challenge, we have to use our framework to study development assistance.
The advantage of relying on a specific theoretical structure is that it provides a
clear sense of the margins where we might see an equilibrium response should
a bilateral or multilateral actor intervene. The framework summarized in the
Anna Karenina matrix will thus help us analyze the pros and cons of various
234 chapter five: state spaces


forms of development assistance in different types of states. This is the topic of
Chapter 6.
The second challenge concerns political institutions. Why do we not see more
political reforms taking place to move states out of the lower left-hand part of
the matrix? This is a natural question, given the apparent benefits of escaping
from the different dimensions of nonprosperity into the prosperous uppermost
right corner. Clearly, any attempt to say something about this challenge must
rely on an analysis that starts to endogenize political institutions. This is the
topic of Chapter 7.
5.6 Notes on the Literature
Weingast (2005) provides a classification of state types that shares features
in common with our approach. These ideas are further refined and developed
in North, Weingast, and Wallis (2009), whose work most closely shares the
ambition in this chapter of understanding the development of a state where
political violence is a possibility. Bates (2001) discusses the links between
establishing peace and prosperity in contemporary Africa.
However, to the best of our knowledge, the joint determination of state
capacity, political violence, and income in an integrated formal framework
is new. Although many authors have analyzed some of the partial relations
in the data, theoretically and empirically, the comprehensive analysis pursued
in this chapter does not have any counterpart in earlier research. The closest
antecedent known to us is the paper by Caselli (2006) referenced in the text of
Section 5.1.2.
The various empirical classifications of countries into weak or fragile states
do employ multidimensional criteria, including the main state pathologies we
have emphasized here, but often do not distinguish clearly between determi
nants and outcomes. Rice and Patrick (2008) give an overview of different
attempts to measure state weakness or fragility. The heterogeneity of state
pathologies and the link to political institutions are discussed by Vallings and
Moreno-Torres (2005).
This chapter is related to the large literature on the resource curse. Mehlum,
Moene, and Torvik (2006) offer an approach that is intellectually related to
the one taken here, linking these arguments to the quality of institutions,
notes on the literature 235


theoretically and empirically. The seminal empirical paper on the resource
curse, as a problem for income, is Sachs and Warner (2001) [see also Sachs
and Warner (1995)]. Torvik (2002) formalizes this argument using a rent
seeking framework and Robinson, Torvik, and Verdier (2006) take a political
economics approach. Torvik (2009) and van der Ploeg (2011) provide useful
overviews of the state of knowledge, and the volume edited by Humphreys,
Sachs, and Stiglitz (2007) contains a recent collection of essays on the resource
curse.
Our discussion in Section 5.2 of how conflict affects investment is linked
to the literature on the impact of civil conflict on incomes. Evidence on the
negative impact of conflict on economic activity and well-being in various
contexts can be found, e.g., in Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003); Besley and
Mueller (2010); Blomberg and Hess (2002); Collier (1999); Coyne, Dempster,
and Isaacs (2010); Goldin and Lewis (1975); Skaperdas (2010); and Zussman,
Zussman, and Orregaard Nielsen (2008).
236 chapter five: state spaces


CHAPTER 6
Development Assistance
In Africa today, we recognize that trade and investment, and not aid, are pillars of development.
Paul Kagame, president of Rwanda, speech in Kigali, 2004
In Chapter 5 we used our framework to focus on the common determinants
of state pathologies, particularly those owing to noncohesive political insti
tutions and weak common interests. The findings were summarized in the
Anna Karenina matrix of Table 5.1. But the rest of the world does not, for
the most part, stand idly by leaving countries in conflict and with poorly func
tioning states to their own devices. A whole development industry—comprising
international organizations, donor governments, and nongovernmental orga
nizations (NGOs)—tries to influence the paths of developing countries and are
intent on offering a helping hand. In this chapter, we look at such efforts through
the lens of our approach as developed in the first five chapters of the book.1
We approach development assistance by supposing that an external agency,
such as a donor government or multilateral organization, is considering some
form of intervention. The conventional intervention has been foreign assistance
in the form of a transfer to increase the recipient government’s budget. In the
context of our comprehensive core model, such an infusion of resources can be
modeled like an increase in natural resource rents. The analysis of cash aid in
our core model is novel because it considers the equilibrium responses to larger
aid flows on a number of margins: policy choices, investments in state capacity,
and investments in political violence. We develop a cost-benefit calculus for
additional budgetary support viewed from the donor’s perspective when the
recipient country’s responses are taken into account. This illustrates how the
benefits depend on the recipient country’s circumstances and institutions.
1. This chapter is closely related to Besley and Persson (2011).
237


Unrestricted budgetary support is beholden the recipient country’s whims.
Aid agencies and international organizations typically try to influence policy
in such countries. Whether such conditionality is feasible in practice has been
widely debated. Our model illustrates the potential benefits of making cash
aid conditional on decisions made by the recipient government, It does so by
identifying specific pathologies that might be solved by such conditionality.
However, given the incentive-compatibility problems involved, we are not able
to address whether such conditionality is likely to be effective in practice.
Our framework can also be used to consider the impact of different forms
of noncash aid. Some of these are extremely controversial, as in the case of
foreign military intervention or supply of weapons to governments or rebels.
As our comprehensive core model allows for a margin of behavioral change
affecting political violence, we are able to address these issues, in theory at
least. We also consider the less controversial area of technical assistance, i.e.,
foreign interventions aimed directly at increasing the capabilities of the state.
Finally, we briefly consider governance reforms. Such interventions tend to arise
in postconflict situations in an attempt to reconcile group differences and hence
to make peace credible.
Throughout this chapter, we take the nature of political institutions as given,
as we have done in the book thus far. In the next chapter, however, we analyze
endogenous political reform, and then we again address the question of whether
development assistance may have beneficial or harmful effects on political
institutions.
Some Basic Facts A large amount of aid is given by rich countries to nations in
the developing world. Official Development Assistance (ODA) comes mainly
from the 23 members of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC).
According to the OECD, the total figure in 2009 was around $123 billion
(this figure, as all those that follow, is in fixed 2008 prices), which is the highest
number ever recorded. Although the amount of aid kept increasing in the post
war period, it started falling immediately after the end of the Cold War, but
then picked up again. In 2002 it surpassed its previous peak of $86 billion from
1992, and has been increasing ever since. Aid targets for rich countries have
been set at 0.7% of Gross National Income, but very few countries meet these
targets and, in fact, the trend is declining over time. The amount of aid from
the DAC countries today stands at about 0.31 of their total GDP, as opposed
to 0.54 in 1961.
238 chapter six: development assistance


40
30
20
10
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 Aid Share of GDP (1962–2006)
Fiscal Capacity and Aid
Tax Share in GDP
Figure 6.1 Tax share in GDP versus aid share in GDP.
Out of the $120 billion of total ODA given in 2008, some 30% was
given indirectly through contributions to multilateral institutions such as the
European Union and the World Bank. About one-sixth came in the form of
technical cooperation (plus additional indirect amounts through multilateral
institutions). On top of ODA, additional aid is given through the private and
institutional sector, with more than $20 billion channeled by NGOs. The largest
regional recipient of aid is Sub-Saharan Africa, which received 33% of all ODA
in 2007–2008, followed by 21% to Middle East–North Africa, about 15% each
to South-Central Asia and the rest of Asia, 9% to Latin America, and 4% to
Europe.2
How does received aid at the country level correlate with the variables
of greatest interest in our theory? We saw in Chapter 4 that receiving aid
appears to be positively partially correlated with political violence. How does
aid correlate with other central outcomes in the raw data? Figure 6.1 plots
received aid against fiscal capacity. The vertical axis shows a measure of the
average level of aid per capita since the 1990s (based on data from the World
2. See OECD (2010b) for these background figures. Gupta, Pattillo, and Wagh (2006) give an overview of trends in overall aid flows during 1960–2004.
development assistance 239


1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 Aid Share of GDP (1962–2006)
Legal Capacity and Aid
Property-Rights Protection Index
Figure 6.2 Property-rights protection versus aid share in GDP.
Development Indicators). The horizontal axis shows one of our core measures
of fiscal capacity—the share of income taxes in total taxes. As expected, these
variables are negatively correlated.
Figure 6.2 plots the same aid measure against one of our key measures of
legal capacity—from the ICRG data on government antidiversion policy. This
also shows a negative correlation with the aid share.
The Context and Different Views on Aid Exactly what can be done to improve
the well-being of citizens in poor nations has been a controversial topic through
out the postwar period.3 As we just discussed, foreign aid flows from rich to
poor countries have been the main vehicle for improving the situation of poor
countries. But the efficacy of such development assistance remains contested.
A shining example, which buoyed interest and enthusiasm for aid, was the
experience of the Marshall Plan for rebuilding post–World War II Germany and
other parts of Europe. Between 1948 and 1951, the United States transferred
some $13 billion to European economies. This episode created a sense that
large-scale resource transfers could make a significant difference to economic
3. See Riddell (2007) for a review. Temple (2010) provides an excellent review of many of the economic debates.
240 chapter six: development assistance


development, a sense that was further underpinned by the so-called Truman
Doctrine, which called for a global focus on the plight of the developing world.
Traditionalists The Marshall Plan fueled the belief that lack of resources is
the key impediment to economic development and that aid flows are necessary
to build public institutions and stocks of capital. A country might eventually
achieve a successful development path if left to itself, but a helping hand of inter
national transfers would speed up that progress. This view was institutionalized
in a network of development banks, such as the International Bank for Recon
struction and Development (IBRD), known simply as the World Bank; the Asian
Development Bank; the Inter-American Development Bank; and the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Chenery and Strout (1966) is a key
exposition of the underlying ideas, and Sachs (2005) is a modern statement of
a similar view.
This “gap-oriented” traditional view of aid is one of the crucial underpin
nings of the huge aid flows from developed countries. Cost-benefit analysis is
the handmaiden of the traditional view, and the notion is that aid should be
spent on the projects with the highest social returns. Whether such analyses are
conducted in practice—by donors or recipients of aid—is questionable. More
over, even if it is, the question remains as to whether all margins relevant to the
impact of projects can be captured.
Pessimists The real-world experience has not fulfilled the rather romantic vision
of aid traditionalists. Aid pessimists point to the fact that much of the aid
advanced would not survive any reasonable cost-benefit test. Domestic polit
ical agendas of governments in poor countries have frequently not supported
economic development, and these governments often lack the technical com
petence to spend resources wisely. The result, it is argued, is that much aid is
wasted and does not contribute to developmental ends. Bauer (1972, 1975)
was an early aid pessimist, and a more modern aid critique is stated strongly
in Easterly (2006).4
Just what to make of this view of aid is moot. A drastic response would be
simply to cut off all aid, in the belief that the long-run prospects for countries
would be better in the absence of international transfers. This response is closely
4. Djankov, Montalvo, and Reynal-Querol (2008) argue that aid leads to a deterioration in the quality of institutions.
development assistance 241


linked to the resource-curse view, which identifies natural resources with slow
development and possibly with decline rather than progress.
Another response to a failure of aid would be to argue in favor of greater
conditionality, trying to condition the receipt of aid on specific policies or
institutional reforms. But the real aid pessimists are skeptical. Conditionality
frequently creates soft conditions and there is overwhelming pressure from the
development community to disperse funds allocated to development assistance.
Far from being an indication of problems in recipient countries, a failure to
disperse ODA is thought of as a failure of the donor countries. Thus committing
to aid conditionality is hard or infeasible.
Conditional Optimists More recently, some observers have attempted to recon
cile the two views by being more optimistic on conditionality and the ability of
analysts to identify the underlying pathologies. Certainly, traditionalists have
had a naive view of the workings of political institutions or the ability of
aid agencies to navigate around political constraints and allocate resources to
high-return projects. Without a more forthright analysis of the institutional
environment, it is hard to make progress. Collier (2007) can be seen as an
exponent of this revisionist view.
In terms of the Anna Karenina matrix in Table 5.1, a state away from the
top right-hand corner may have a variety of potential symptoms and these have
a variety of causes. Moreover, the problems may change in response to shocks,
such as resource prices and natural disasters. Effective development assistance
has to tailor the right form of intervention to circumstances and institutional
context. This opens up the menu of possibilities to include the right mix of
budgetary, project, military, and technical assistance and to make the right
degree of conditionality credible.
Plan of the Chapter The chapter is organized as follows. In Section 6.1, we use
the comprehensive core model to analyze aid. We start by taking a close look
at cash aid, followed by a brief discussion of conditionality. Then, we go on
to various forms of noncash aid, including military intervention. Concluding
comments are offered in Section 6.2, followed by notes on the literature.
6.1 The Core Model with Aid
We use our comprehensive core model, formulated in Section 4.1 and solved
in Sections 4.1 and 5.1. In the analysis, we assume that the primary objective
242 chapter six: development assistance


of the international community is the ex ante welfare of citizens in a country
where it intervenes. This neglects the role of strategic objectives, which could
explain the willingness of countries to donate.5 We also assume away coordi
nation problems by analyzing a single intervention rather than the plethora of
sometimes uncoordinated actions that characterize the aid industry. Our per
spective thus supposes that a foreign government or multilateral organization
makes a cash transfer to a developing country. The question is how this affects
the behavior of the recipient government, opposition groups, and, ultimately,
the welfare of citizens.
Our model suggests a number of natural margins to focus on. First, the pol
icy dimension: (gs , rI
s , rO
s
). Does development assistance increase or decrease
spending on public goods at the expense of redistributive transfers? Second, the
state-capacity dimension: (πs , τs
). In what way do different forms of develop
ment assistance influence the incentive to build fiscal or legal capacity? Third,
the political-violence dimension: (LI , LO). How does development assistance
affect incentives of both the incumbent and opposition to use violence as a
means of winning or securing power?
6.1.1 Cash Aid
We begin by applying a cost-benefit style analysis of cash aid. Suppose that
an aid agency considers disbursing some budgetary resources to a particular
country at date 2. Let the shadow price of this aid in the donor country be ˆλ,
where we assume that ˆλ ≥ 1. This means that aid that is transferred to pure
private consumption is not worthwhile (or just barely worthwhile). But some
readers may think that the donor’s shadow price should be set lower than that
because of distributional concerns or exigencies of donor aid agencies to expend
allocated funds at all cost. Such readers can easily convert the propositions in
this chapter from a set of decisionmaking criteria to a ranking of the payoffs
to different varieties of aid in different types of countries.
Depending on circumstances and institutions, the additional resources might
affect public-goods spending, state-capacity investments, and transfers (or, in a
more general model, tax levels). We model cash aid as an increase in the recipient
government’s budget, which we denote by !R. This acts like an increase in Z
in the previous model. In the benchmark case, we use the formulation where
V (g) = g, i.e., utility is linear in public goods. But sometimes we refer to the
case studied in Section 2.2.2, with quasi-linear preferences and a concave utility
5. See the discussion in Alesina and Dollar (2000) and OECD (2010a).
the core model with aid 243


function V (g). This is because some additional and interesting margins of
behavior are captured in this latter case.
The timing of the model is now modified as follows:
1. We begin with initial stocks of state capacities {τ1, π1
} and an incum
bent group I1. Nature determines α1 and R.
2. The development assistance agency now considers whether to offer
!R to be paid in period 2.
3. I1 chooses a set of period-1 policies {t1, rI
1, rO
1 , pI
1, pO
1 , g1}, and deter
mines (through investments) the period-2 stocks of fiscal and legal
capacity {τ2, π2
}. I1 and O1 simultaneously invest in violence levels
LI and LO.
4. I1 remains in power with probability 1 − (Z, ν , ξ ), and nature deter
mines α2.
5. I2 chooses period-2 policies {t2, rI
2, rO
2 , pI
2, pO
2 , g2}.
We are interested in the impact of !R determined at stage 2 of the model. In
deciding whether to offer aid, we assume that the aid agency can see through
the government’s subsequent equilibrium choices and takes the policy responses
into account. In effect, the aid agency is applying backward induction to the
moves outlined earlier. Thus, our aid agency is both farsighted and rational,
the best possible scenario for effective policymaking.
Aid Effects in the Absence of Violence We start by analyzing the situation when
the parameters governing violence outcomes outside of the common-interest
state, namely R, ν, and ξ , are such that there is no risk of either repression or
civil war (we are essentially in the upper row of the Anna Karenina matrix).
We then have the following benchmark result:
Proposition 6.1: In a common-interest state with linear demand for public
goods, cash aid is worthwhile if and only if φαH + (1 − φ) αL > ˆλ.
The logic of this result is clear. If 2 (1 − θ ) ≥ αL, all future spending is devoted
to public goods regardless of the realization of α2. Furthermore, by definition
there is also no conflict risk in this case (as showed in Proposition 4.1). In
ex ante terms, !R will therefore be spent on public goods, with a value of
244 chapter six: development assistance


φαH + (1 − φ) αL. This benefit to the receiving society is compared to the cost
of ˆλ ≥ 1.
In the common-interest state, it would actually not make any difference
whether development assistance comes as budgetary aid or as direct support
for specific projects. There is complete congruence of interest between the aid
donor and the recipient government.
Suppose instead that the cohesiveness condition fails, but that there is no
propensity to political violence. When α2 = αL, the additional resources are
spent on transfers rather than on public goods. Then, Proposition 6.1 is modi
fied to the following:
Proposition 6.2: In a weak or redistributive state with linear demand for public
goods, cash aid is worthwhile if and only if φαH + (1 − φ) > ˆλ.
In this case, the value of aid is lower than in the benchmark case of Proposi
tion 6.1 because with some probability it will just be spent on transfers with
an ex ante welfare effect of unity. It is even possible that aid does not yield
a gross return above unity, as φ → 0. This result concurs with the frequently
made observation, discussed in Collier and Dollar (2004), inter alia, that the
impact of aid is more favorable when institutions are stronger.
The Bauer Paradox Propositions 6.1 and 6.2 allow us to reflect upon an
observation made by Peter Bauer, which Temple (2010) has christened the Bauer
paradox. His view is succinctly stated in the following quote: “A government
unable to identify . . . projects or collect taxes is unlikely to be able to use aid
productively” (Bauer, 1975, p. 400). Being able to identify projects is like having
high αH and/or high φ. As emphasized in earlier chapters, it is countries with
more cohesive political institutions (high θ ) that are likely to be able to collect
taxes (have a high fiscal capacity, τ ). Hence, these are the governments where
Proposition 6.1 applies. But when θ and φ are low, aid is less likely to be used
productively and the government is less likely to build fiscal capacity.
Crowding Out of Fiscal Capacity? In the benchmark model, granting cash aid
in a common-interest state makes no difference to investments in state capacity.
But this is due to the fact that utility is linear in public goods. In the case where
V (g) is increasing and concave, this aspect of the model is changed in interesting
ways and captures some aspects of the more skeptical view of aid and its impact.
the core model with aid 245


To illustrate this, let us study the case of quasi-linear preferences from
Section 2.2.2, where there is only a fiscal-capacity investment. Aid can now yield
a resource-curse-style result, in the sense that it does not lead to any increase
in investment in fiscal capacity or to additional spending on public goods. In
that setting, as we saw in Section 2.2.2,6 where αs is not stochastic, optimal
fiscal-capacity investment is given by τˆ2 defined from
αVg
(R + !R + τˆ2ω) = 1 + Fτ
(τˆ2 − τ1
)
ω . (6.1)
It should be clear from (6.1) that the optimal level of fiscal capacity now depends
on aid. Using the implicit-function theorem, we have that
∂ τˆ2
∂!R = αVgg
(R + !R + τˆ2ω)
Fτ τ (τˆ2−τ1)
ω − αωVgg
(R + !R + τˆ2ω) < 0.
In other words, more aid means a reduction in fiscal-capacity investments.
From Section 2.2.2, we also recall that the cohesiveness condition now has
to be rewritten as αVg
(R + !R + τˆ2ω) ≥ 2 (1 − θ ). For a large enough !R, this
condition could fail, leading to a transition to a weak or redistributive state.
Thus aid dependence (like resource dependence) can undermine investments in
the state. This argument has quite commonly been made in the literature on aid
and taxation and is consistent with the pattern displayed earlier in Figure 6.1.
Crowding Out of Public Goods? As long as the cohesiveness condition con
tinues to hold, all period-2 spending is on public goods. With curvature in the
utility function, the effect of an increase in aid on public-goods provision in
period 2 becomes
dg2
d!R =
[
1 + ∂τˆ2
∂!R ω
]
=
⎡
⎣
Fτ τ (τˆ2−τ1) ω Fτ τ (τˆ2−τ1)
ω − αωVgg
(R + !R + τˆ2ω)
⎤
⎦ ∈ [0, 1] .
6. Observe that, unlike in Section 2.2.2, we are not assuming any depreciation in fiscal capacity between periods, i.e., δ = 0.
246 chapter six: development assistance


The fact that the derivative is less than one represents a “crowding out” effect,
whereby higher aid reduces the investment in fiscal capacity and thus dilutes
the aid effect on public goods provision.
When the cohesiveness condition does not hold, spending on public goods
is given by
αVg
(g2
) = 2 (1 − θ) .
This means that the marginal utility of public goods in period 2 is fixed. Thus,
the provision of public goods is also fixed and not affected by aid at the
margin. As αVg
(g2
) is fixed, so is the equilibrium investment in fiscal capacity,
independently of !R, given that we are in a redistributive state. (As before,
the weak state does not invest in fiscal capacity at all.) Any aid in period 2 is
therefore entirely spent on transfers.
We can summarize the cost-benefit result on aid as follows:
Proposition 6.3: Suppose that the government is investing only in fiscal capacity
and that there is curvature in the demand for public goods. Then
1. In a common-interest state, cash aid is worthwhile if and only if
αVg
(R + !R + τˆ2ω) > ˆλ.
2. In a redistributive or weak state, aid has no impact on the provision of
public goods and state-capacity investments, so that cash aid is never
worthwhile.
In the common-interest state, the result follows from the crowding-out effects
and the fact that the direct effects of the induced change in fiscal-capacity
investment drop out of welfare owing to the envelope theorem. The model
would be somewhat more complicated if we allowed for investment in both
fiscal and legal capacity. However, the essence of the point made here would be
the same—aid dependence can show up in lower investment in fiscal capacity.
In the redistributive or weak state, the ex ante welfare effect of aid is equal
to one, i.e., the marginal utility of redistributive transfers summed over the two
groups, which is no higher than the shadow cost of funds given by ˆλ.
Aid would, of course, be worthwhile if there were a pure redistributive
motive for aid captured by ˆλ < 1. But in the redistributive or weak state such aid
would be transferred predominantly to the ruling group. In a model where the
donor had preferences over distribution within the recipient country, it would
the core model with aid 247


care about which groups receive the cash transfer made possible by aid. For
example, “maximin” preferences between groups would mean that the donor
cared only about the 2θ per unit of transfers going to the opposition group. In
this case, cash aid is worthwhile only if ˆλ < 2θ.
Proposition 6.3 illustrates clearly why donors have to understand the politi
cal equilibrium of the country receiving aid. Assistance that appears worthwhile
under naive assumptions, e.g., that all policy will remain the same, is no longer
welfare improving when changes in policy are taken into account. But it is also
clear that second-guessing such equilibrium responses is extremely difficult, and
it would be hard to point to any settled body of empirical knowledge that makes
this feasible. Moreover, there would not be any point in looking at the average
relationship between aid provision and fiscal-capacity building, as any concrete
case very much reflects the specific environment of the recipient country. But
the fact that we have little evidence is not the same as saying that we know such
effects to be unimportant in practice.
Aid Effects in the Presence of Violence We now revert to the model with linear
demand for public goods and consider the case where θ is low enough that the
cohesiveness condition does not hold and φ is low enough that the state is prone
to political violence. This adds two considerations to the comparative statics
when we assess the effect of cash aid on welfare. There is an impact on the use
of political violence, and there is also a new effect, through political stability,
on investments in state capacity.
In terms of our earlier analysis, the effect of higher cash aid is an increase
in Z, which, as we know from Proposition 4.2, may, in theory, increase
the occurrence of political violence. The empirical results in Section 4.4 also
give a hint that this dismal prediction may indeed be borne out in practice.
In the current framework, a higher value of Z has two effects on welfare.
First, it leads to more resources being allocated to violence, a measure that
is directly unproductive. Second, when deciding on violence, one group does
not internalize this effect on the welfare of the other group, thus leading to a
strategic inefficiency. We summarize this as follows:
Proposition 6.4: In a weak or redistributive state, which is prone to political
violence, a small increase in cash aid is welfare improving if
φαH + (1 − φ) − ω (π1
) dL
dZ > ˆλ
248 chapter six: development assistance


where
dL
dZ =
⎧⎨
⎩
[
λ1 dLI
dZ + ν dLO
dZ
]
if Z > ZO(θ ; ν , ξ )
λ1 dLI
dZ if ZO(θ ; ν , ξ ) ≥ Z > ZI (θ , λ1; ξ ).
As before, with α2 = αH resources are spent on public goods, whereas with
α2 = αL resources are spent on transfers. The key point is that aid now also
has an impact on the equilibrium level of violence.7 This is reflected in the
third term, which is deducted from the value of any public goods and transfers
generated by aid. Compared to Proposition 6.2, it is less likely that cash aid is
worthwhile, owing to the additional welfare cost of the resources wasted on
violence. Indeed, cash aid may very well lower ex ante welfare, especially when
φ is low and a great deal of the expected aid is dissipated through investments
in violence. To get tighter results, we would have to be more specific about the
conflict technology.
But more violence affects political stability as directly stated in Proposi
tion 5.1:
Proposition 6.5: In a redistributive state, which is prone to political violence,
cash aid can increase political stability and increase the investments in fiscal
and legal capacity.
This effect comes through the fact that when institutions are not cohesive
foreign aid allows incumbents to entrench themselves and cement their control
on power. 8 The most clear-cut example is the case of a repressive regime. If aid
is given to such a regime, then the incentive to hang on to power is enhanced.
Greater repression induces more political stability, which results in more state
capacity investment all else being equal. But the benefits are partly allocated to
increased use of military force and accrue disproportionately to the incumbent
group.
Conditionality The assumption so far in this analysis is that the donor and
the recipient government cannot contract directly over the policy and invest
ment decisions when aid is granted. Conditionality should be thought of as a
7. We showed in Chapter 4 that, under Assumption 4.1, the level of violence used by both groups is increasing in Z. 8. Formally, the result follows from using the state-capacity Euler equations in Chapter 5 and recalling from Proposition 5.1 that (.) is decreasing in Z.
the core model with aid 249


contracting problem, where the donor specifies an array of observable and ver
ifiable decisions by the recipient government in exchange for !R. As with any
interesting contracting problem, the real issue is what can reasonably be sup
posed to be observed and verified and thus potentially enforced. Enforcement
is a particular issue in this context, given that the world has nothing equiva
lent to an international court that can enforce agreements. Indeed, this is often
thought of as a major obstacle to effective aid conditionality.9
Nonetheless, it is interesting to see how the results we have derived may help
us think about conditionality. Propositions 6.2 and 6.4 highlight the possibility
that conditionality that ensures that aid is spent on public goods could be
valuable to a donor. In the case of Proposition 6.2, successful conditionality
would raise the return to giving aid.
In the case of Proposition 6.4, conditionality might ensure that fewer
resources are spent on violence. However, to achieve the desired effect, condi
tionality would have to be binding on both the incumbent and the opposition.
Proposition 6.3 opens up the door for other forms of conditionality, where
an attempt is made to influence the decisions on investments in the state. In this
case the giving of aid would have to be dependent on such investments taking
place.
Again, these prospective benefits require that conditionality can be credibly
enforced. An interesting agenda for future research would be to combine aspects
of our framework with explicit modeling of mechanisms that might help achieve
credible enforcement, as in Svensson (2003). External players potentially have
several prospective instruments, whereby they can give a future prize in return
for present and continued good behavior. This could include membership in or
association with desirable clubs like the European Union (something used by
the European Union to influence political and economic reform in Turkey and
earlier in Eastern Europe). Another possibility might involve debt concessions
(or free-trade agreements) such as the ones currently negotiated by the European
Union with Pakistan and some African countries as well as by the United States
with several countries in Latin America.
6.1.2 Technical Assistance
Although budgetary aid is certainly very important, foreign interventions also
come in a variety of other forms. In the following subsections, we consider the
9. See Svensson (2000b, 2003) for early analyses of the credibility problems with conditionality.
250 chapter six: development assistance


possibility of development assistance in forms other than cash aid. As we shall
see, it is possible to represent these forms of assistance as efforts by donors to
influence parameters other than R in the comprehensive core model. We begin
by considering technical assistance.
Technical assistance refers to the transfers of skills and knowledge that can
be useful in improving the operations of the recipient government. Gupta,
Pattillo, and Wagh (2006) discuss the changing composition of aid flows and
show that technical assistance has been increasing, both in real terms and as
a share of total ODA, since the 1960s. Estimates from the OECD (2010b)
suggest that at least one-sixth of direct official aid in 2008 is given in this form.
However, some people refer to technical assistance as phantom aid, as it is
often rendererd by international consultants who reside in the donor country.
The evaluation of returns to technical assistance is notoriously difficult. But the
returns are likely to be specific to the context and the nature of the intervention
under consideration. Technical assistance can come in many forms. Our model
suggests a focus on two of these: (1) efforts to increase the benefits or reduce
the costs of providing public goods, and (2) efforts to cut the cost of investing
in state capacity. We discuss these two cases here and demonstrate how their
impact can be thought of in the model framework of this book.
Identifying Good Projects Assistance that helps to identify good projects can
be thought of as raising α or φ (the value of public goods or the probability of
a high-value state). An important line of development research in recent years
has been the use of Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs) to identify the value
of public interventions. These can be thought of as trying to find ways of better
allocating resources to public goods by identifying high-benefit interventions.
[See Duflo et al. (2007) for a discussion of the methodology.]
In our framework, we can think about an RCT as a particular form of
experiment to evaluate project effectiveness. Instead of the common two-point
distribution of αs, let us return to the continuous distribution on [1, αH
], where
αH > 2 with distribution H (α) that we introduced in Section 2.2.2. Suppose
that αs represents a public project drawn at random from the H distribution
in each period. If αs ≥ 2 (1 − θ ) , the project will go ahead, and if not the
government will spend on transfers. Further, suppose that before choosing the
project, the government conducts N trials of possible interventions, perhaps
with the help of J-PAL at MIT. A well-meaning government will then pick the
best project based on these trials. Now αs = max
{
α1, . . . , αN
}
, where αn is the
nth independent draw from H (α). In technical terms, αs becomes the Nth-order
the core model with aid 251


statistic (the maximum) of the sample. It follows that an increase in N leads to a
first-order stochastically dominating shift in the ex ante value of public goods.
The analyses in Chapters 2 and 3 imply that such an increase in the value
of public goods will lead to higher investments in both fiscal and legal capac
ity, at least in common-interest and redistributive states. Given the results in
Chapter 4, the higher value of αs also makes conflict less likely (for given θ ).
Proposition 6.6: Technical assistance that increases αH or φ increases welfare
and investment in state capacity. It also reduces the likelihood of political
violence.
Technical assistance can also be directed toward raising αL. In our frame
work, this could even lead to the creation of a common-interest state, with its
virtuous consequences. In the case describe here, the cost of the intervention
should thus be weighed against the larger amounts of public goods that will be
provided because of both a higher direct return and higher investments in fiscal
and legal capacity.
Although these observations are useful, they sweep a host of important
problems under the rug. First, there is a scaling-up issue. Can the conditions
in small controlled trials really be replicated when they are implemented in
a large program by a government? This question is particularly acute since
many RCTs are implemented directly by NGOs, with limited contact with the
recipient government. Second, in assuming that the government budget will be
spent either on public goods or transfers, depending on the value of α, we have
not considered any of the issues discussed in Sections 3.2.4 and 4.2.4 associated
with a corrupt state run by a small elite.
Improving State Capabilities Another type of technical assistance would be
to reduce investment costs—improving state capabilities. Interventions in this
spirit are quite common in development assistance and can crudely be repre
sented in the model as shifts in the functions F (.) and L (.). Applying Propo
sition 3.4 to this interpretation, we have the following:
Proposition 6.7: Technical assistance that reduces the cost of investing in state
capacity, F (.) and L (.), increases welfare and investment in state capacity. Such
assistance will raise the likelihood of political violence, all else being equal.
252 chapter six: development assistance


Our framework makes sense of these types of interventions. Examples include
giving advice on tax collection and the creation of specialized courts to expedite
the resolution of business disputes. Interventions could even mean advice about
fundamental changes in the nature of the legal code. The (perhaps surprising)
effect on political violence comes from the fact that Z goes up when state
capacity investments increase, which, by Proposition 5.1, may lead to an
increase in political violence in redistributive or weak states, as the redistributive
value of holding office is now higher.
Taking Stock When it comes to technical assistance, our model shows the same
complementarity between the value of aid and cohesive institutions that we saw
in the case of cash aid. Technical assistance is more powerful in countries where
public resources are more likely to be allocated for the common good. Thus,
the return to RCTs might be lower in weak or redistributive states if they are
intended to inform the government about the value of good policies.
In the aid community there is indeed considerable debate about the effective
ness of technical assistance. Observers such as Berg (1993), Gupta, Pattillo, and
Wagh (2006), and the contributors to UNDP (2002) point to problems where
donor-funded institutional capacity building is generally considered less effec
tive than cooperation around hard technical projects. These evaluations confirm
that recipient-country governments often do not have much involvement in or
control over technical assistance programs.
This critique rhymes well with the challenges we have already mentioned
in transposing the results of successful RCTs to the macro level, with a view
to generating a self-sustaining effect on overall public-goods provision and
investments in state capacity. Nevertheless, this is an important instance where
microeconomic and macroeconomic research on development might meet pro
ductively. An important issue for further research is thus to analyze how suc
cessful interventions can be designed and scaled up, in practice, given the kind of
systematic incentive problems that we have emphasized throughout this book.
6.1.3 Military Assistance
We now turn to military assistance, as it is represented in the comprehensive
core model. Specifically, think about the recipient government receiving assis
tance in regard to military technology or strategy as a change in ξ (the marginal
return at zero investments in violence for the government relative to the opposi
tion). Such assistance could involve training or provision of weapon systems or
the core model with aid 253


intelligence.10 In principle, this could be offered to opposition groups as well,
and external governments could also intervene directly by providing manpower
to rebels. Such cases have often occurred in practice, e.g., the U.S. support for
the Mujahideen in their insurgency against the Soviets in Afghanistan during
the 1980s and the deployment of Cuban troops to support the MPLA rebels
in Angola during the 1970s. But here we focus on the case where support is
offered to the government.
Our core result, which follows directly from Propositions 4.2 and 5.2, is as
follows:
Proposition 6.8: Military assistance that increases ξ , augmenting the military
capacity of the incumbent government, increases the parameter range in which
there is repression. This increases political stability and investments in fiscal
and legal capacity.
If institutions are weak, the higher political stability owing to greater repression
increases political stability and thereby state-capacity investments. But this
comes at the price of increasing the entrenchment of the incumbent. In effect,
this can create a rentier state, where the opposition group is frozen out of power.
Military intervention to help any incumbent will therefore tend to increase
the incentives for the incumbent to invest. But it is not a substitute for more
consensual institutions (higher θ ). This story seems relevant, perhaps especially
for the Cold War, but also for modern-day fragile states with ongoing or latent
conflicts.
6.1.4 Postconflict Assistance
Finally, we briefly consider attempts by external actors to assist in the process
of promoting peace in postconflict situations. Our model allows us to represent
this in a very stylized fashion.
Peace-keeping or disarming the rebels can be thought of as raising ν (the
cost for the opposition group of investing in a given level of violence). By
Proposition 5.2, this reduces the parameter range in which there is conflict and
increases political stability. Many postconflict settlements can also be thought
10. We have in mind forms of assistance that would not ordinarily be available in world markets.
254 chapter six: development assistance


of as efforts to raise θ (diminishing the gain to the winner of the conflict). By
Propositions 4.1 and 4.2, this will reduce the risk of violence. However, the
latter effect requires that interventions are expected and credible ex ante. A
recent example of setting up such a mechanism was attempted after the 2010
Haiti earthquake, where the high influx of aid to the country was disbursed
outside of the government structures with former U.S. President Bill Clinton
playing a key role. We summarize this in the following:
Proposition 6.9: Postconflict assistance that raises ν or θ will lead to greater
investments in state capacities and reduce the parameter range in which there
is violence.
Naturally, postconflict reconstruction may have a wider remit, part of which
could involve direct efforts to increase (or rebuild destroyed) τ and π. However,
postconflict assistance generally also comes with a good deal of cash aid. In view
of Propositions 6.4 and 6.5, this makes complementary attempts to raise θ and
lower ν doubly important.
A related question is whether we can think about a window of opportunity
in weak or collapsed states. The issue here is whether—and, if so, under
what conditions—external players can be of any help. Can external players
as key internal players like founding fathers at historical moments—assist in
designing a political mechanism and/or institutions capable of changing the
internal political equilibria in countries such as Iraq, Afghanistan, and Somalia?
Historical experience cautions us that a simple export or duplication of existing
institutions often does not work. In the nineteenth century almost all of the
Latin American states modeled their constitutions on the U.S. document, but
with very different results. The Commonwealth countries of India and Pakistan
started off with the same constitutional framework, provided by the 1935
Government of India Act, but with very different outcomes.
Changing political mechanisms and institutions would be like changing θ ,
and thereby potentially altering the type of state. To even pose that question, we
obviously have to think about the mapping of concrete rules for the political
game into abstract macro parameters such as θ and γ . Moreover, we have
to think carefully about the incentives for undertaking endogenous political
reform. We make a start on these difficult, but important, questions in the next
chapter.
the core model with aid 255


6.2 Final Remarks
This chapter has explored the implications of our analytical approach for the
design of development assistance. Our model suggests a number of margins
on which we would expect such assistance to have an effect. Although we
are offering a very stylized picture, the results illustrate the difficulties faced
by external donors and actors who are trying to improve the situation in
developing countries, particularly in weak and fragile states. Some of the issues
are well known, particularly the problem that development support might
crowd out rather than crowd in government. It is clear that a great deal
more has to be understood about the political equilibrium before any reasoned
assessment on aid can be reached. Absent this understanding, the triumph
of hope over expectation, so characteristic of more than 50 years of policy
experience, is likely to continue.
Some of the aspects suggested by our framework are perhaps more novel.
The analysis highlights the oft-discussed trade-off between providing resources
through aid and developing domestic fiscal capacity. We have shown how this
margin would indeed have to figure in a cost-benefit calculation. We have
also considered the violence margin. As noted in Chapter 4, researchers are
becoming increasingly aware of the possibility that aid can exacerbate problems
of political violence. This is a potentially sobering consequence of international
aid, which goes beyond what even the most ardent aid pessimists have tended
to suggest.
On a more optimistic note, the value of technical assistance looks promising
in our framework. RCTs can help identify more valuable outlets for public
resources, which can foster investments in state capacities and reductions in
violence. But for this to be the case, it is essential not only that the evidence base
acquired by NGOs supporting RCTs be transferred to public projects, but also
that these projects can indeed be implemented on a large scale. Inevitably, this
will require state cooperation, so the policymaking and investment incentives
we have dealt with in this book re-enter into the fray.
Our suggested Anna Karenina principle underlines the importance of hetero
geneity. This may, to some degree, reconcile the different positions in the debate
on development policy. Our model suggests that some advantageous develop
ment policy may always exist. But identifying that policy requires a great deal
of knowledge about circumstances and institutions. One might then be an aid
256 chapter six: development assistance


pessimist or an aid optimist depending on the form of aid and the ability of aid
agencies to understand its impact in specific contexts.
6.3 Notes on the Literature
There is an extensive literature on aid in general. Collier (2007), Easterly (2006),
and Sachs (2005) all have discussions on the role of the international community
in promoting development and offer their own perspectives on both the history
of intervention and the prospects for future success. Riddell (2007) surveys the
extensive policy literature. For an excellent recent survey of the literature on
foreign aid, see Temple (2010), who also coined the term “Bauer paradox” that
we used in this chapter.
Chauvet and Collier (2006) put forward a conceptual framework for think
ing through the impact of aid in failing states. As we do in this chapter, they
emphasize the importance of understanding heterogeneity in responses depend
ing on state pathologies. Political institutions are also at the heart of the analyses
of fragility in Vallings and Moreno-Torres (2005), who emphasize the need to
build institutions to overcome fragility. McGillivray (2006) surveys the litera
ture on aid to fragile states. He discusses the factors that determine whether
states become aid orphans (i.e., cut off from aid) or aid darlings (get extra aid)
in response to fragility and the dilemmas faced by the policy community.
Much has been written on the relationship between aid and growth using
cross-country comparisons. Reviews emphasizing different aspects of this liter
ature are Collier and Dollar (2004), Easterly (2003), Hansen and Tarp (2001),
and Rajan and Subramanian (2008). A meta study can be found in Doucou
liagos and Paldam (2008). A more recent literature, following Boone (1996)
and Burnside and Dollar (2000), has stressed the heterogeneity in the impact of
aid according to the institutional and policy environment in place in a country.
Aid conditionality is discussed and modeled in Azam and Laffont (2003) and
Svensson (2000b, 2003).
Frey and Schneider (1986), among others, have studied the determinants
of multilateral aid. Alesina and Dollar (2000) study the determinants of bi
lateral aid and find that a significant proportion of the variation in aid-flow
disbursements is explained by colonial history and political and strategic inter
ests of donors. Gstoettner and Jensen (2010) study the relationship between
notes on the literature 257


multilateral foreign aid flows and the quality of recipient countries’ public
finance institutions and argue that higher aid flows lead to a significant deteri
oration in the quality of public finances.
The idea that aid can lead to a deterioration in institutions is an important
theme in Bauer (1972). His critique has been taken up and endorsed more
recently in Leeson (2008) and Shleifer (2009), and is explored theoretically in
Smith (2006) and Svensson (2000a). Djankov, Montalvo, and Reynal-Querol
(2008) and Knack (2001) observe negative correlations between changes in the
quality of governance and foreign aid using cross-country data.
Collier et al. (2003) review the issues surrounding aid and conflict. Addi
son (2003) emphasizes the importance of institutional change in sustaining
peace postconflict and discusses the role that international organizations and
donors can play postconflict. Coyne (2008a,b) and Coyne and Boettke (2009)
discuss postconflict reconstruction and efforts to create democracy after con
flict based on foreign intervention. Coyne and Pellillo (2011) discuss lessons
from Afghanistan and Iraq.
We have focused on the carrot of aid and development assistance. But
whether aid or sanctions is the best policy is an interesting issue in many
contexts and is studied in Azam and Saadi-Sedik (2003) and Kletzer (2005).
Banerjee and Duflo (2009) and Duflo, Glennerster, and Kremer (2007)
provide comprehensive overviews of the role of RCTs in general and the way
such trials can provide an evidence base to guide policy interventions. Banerjee
and He (2008) discuss more generally whether evidence-based policymaking
shapes the aid agenda and lament the fact that many aid and multilateral
organizations pay so little attention to policy evaluation.
258 chapter six: development assistance


CHAPTER 7
Political Reform
What is government itself but the greatest of all reflections on human nature? If men were angels, no government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary.
James Madison, The Federalist No. 51, 1788
One of the main themes of the book thus far has been that cohesive political
institutions are vital for cultivating peace as well as investments in state capac
ity. But our analysis has kept the details of politics in the background—the
exception being strategic decisions on violence to affect political turnover. In
this chapter, we peek into this black box and examine the role of political insti
tutions and political reform in our framework more closely. This exercise can
help us to understand why some countries end up with cohesive institutions,
whereas others fail to do so.
We begin the chapter in a macropolitical mode, by extending the core model
of the book to include choice of institutions as reflected in the parameter θ .
Our analysis treats this as a problem of constitution design. The closest real
world example where this is relevant is the inception of a new state. The end
of colonialism and the fall of the Berlin Wall led to many such instances in the
period after World War II.
At first, we take the perspective of a constitutional convention behind the veil
of ignorance, where vested interests are kept outside the picture. Here, the case
for cohesive institutions becomes quite compelling, and we provide a formal
statement of this point. Next, we consider real-time strategic political reform,
studying the choice of political institutions made by a period-1 incumbent in
our core model. This simulates the experience of older and more established
polities such as Sweden or the United Kingdom, where political reform has been
an evolutionary process. However, the analysis is relevant to any polity where
the incumbent can propose a change in the constitution. We explore the forces
259


that shape the choice of θ in this setting and point out how incumbency bias
creates forces that move the state away from cohesiveness.
This chapter affords an opportunity to make contact, albeit superficially,
with large literatures in the fields of political economics and comparative poli
tics that look at the detailed workings of political institutions, theoretically and
empirically. Representing political institutions through reduced-form parame
ters such as θ and γ is crude at best and remote from the detailed modeling
of alternative rules for elections, legislative processes, and forms of govern
ment. We start the second part of the chapter by sketching out micropolitical
foundations for parameters θ and γ .
Up to that point in the chapter, we simply assume that any changes in the
rules for rulemaking can be enforced. In practice, constitutions are typically
enforced by rules that impose costs of change, such as requiring decisions by
supermajorities and/or popular referenda. We next explore how such rules
create institutional inertia, which can either help or inhibit the creation of
cohesive institutions. A more ambitious step is to revisit the implications of
political violence in this new setting. The threat of political violence enters the
analysis in two ways. Since incumbents can use violence to reduce the chances of
political turnover, they become more likely to opt for noncohesive institutions.
But the costs of realized violence under noncohesive institutions tend to pull in
the opposite direction.
It is relatively straightforward to measure de jure cohesiveness of political
institutions. However, informal institutions and norms may be important deter
minants of de facto political cohesiveness. Some countries appear to have robust
democratic cultures based on a generalized trust in the system. We also discuss
such issues in the context of our framework to motivate how history may be
an important force behind cohesive political institutions.
Some Basic Facts The Polity IV data suggest that reform toward more cohesive
political institutions is a general feature of the data. This can be seen quite
clearly in Figure 7.1, based on a sample of all of the 51 countries that appear
continuously in this data set since the year 1900. For each of the 100 years
from 1900 to 2000, the figure plots the proportion of these countries that is
classified as having the highest score for executive constraints, namely a score
of 7, a variable we used earlier as a measure of cohesiveness.
Based on this definition, a little less than 30% of the sample is classified as
having cohesive institutions in 1900. Prevalence rises at first as more countries
adopt the principles of parliamentary democracy. But it falls back in the 1930s
260 chapter seven: political reform


.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 Year
Prevalence of High Executive Constraints
Percent Countries with High Executive Constraints
Figure 7.1 Prevalence of high executive constraints among 51 countries.
and 1940s with a pronounced descent into authoritarianism, which, to some
extent, is maintained in the early days of the Cold War. However, the period
from 1980 on sees a significant move toward strong executive constraint, as a
number of countries in Latin America and Asia turn from military autocracy
toward political democracy. This is cemented by the fall of the Berlin Wall, such
that the prevalence of cohesive institutions has almost doubled by the end of
the century. The figure reinforces the point that the twentieth century has seen
a great deal of political change. To the extent that high executive constraint
is a good measure of θ in our model, we should expect that these political
dynamics led to significant changes in the motives for investing in state capacity
and political violence.
However, Figure 7.1 is only relevant to older established nations. It is
interesting to look at the picture for nations that were created more recently.
We thus look at all of the 113 countries that were created in the 50 years
between 1945 and 1995, mostly former colonies in Africa and Asia and previous
members of the Soviet Bloc. For each of these countries, we take note whether
its first year of independence is associated with the highest score for executive
constraints. If so, we list it in the leftmost column of Table 7.1. Only 22
countries, thus about one-fifth of the new countries, appear in that column.
political reform 261


Table 7.1 Persistence of high executive constraints
At independence Five years after Ten years after Fifteen years after Twenty years after Thirty years after
Belarus (1991)* Botswana (1966) Botswana Botswana Botswana Botswana
Cyprus (1960) Czech Republic | Fiji Cyprus Cyprus Cyprus
Czech Republic (1993) Estonia | India Fiji* India India
Estonia (1991) Fiji Israel India Israel Israel
Fiji (1970) India (1947) Jamaica Israel Jamaica Jamaica
Guyana (1966)* Israel Myanmar* Jamaica Mauritius Lesotho
Israel (1948) Jamaica Mauritius Mauritius Nigeria Mauritius
Jamaica (1962) Latvia | Malaysia* Papua New Guinea Papua New Guinea* Sudan
Latvia (1991) Lithuania | Pakistan (1947)* Sri Lanka Sri Lanka* Trinidad and Tobago
Lesotho (1966) Moldova (1991) | Papua New Guinea Trinidad and Tobago Trinidad and Tobago
Lithuania ( 1991) Myanmar Sri Lanka
Myanmar (1948) Mauritius Sudan
Mauritius (1968) Malaysia Syria
Malaysia (1957) Nigeria Trinidad and Tobago
Nigeria (1960) Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea (1975) Somalia*
Sudan (1956) Slovak Republic (1993) |
Somalia (1960) Slovenia |
Slovenia (1991) Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka (1948) Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and Tobago (1962)
Uganda (1962)*
Notes: The table lists all countries coming into existence as independent states after 1945, if they score the highest value of 7 for the Polity
score on executive constraints at one of the time horizons listed in the table. The independence year is given (in parentheses) for the first
entry in the table. Countries are marked with "|" in the last column in which they can appear, owing to the right censoring of the data (last
entries in the Polity IV data for 2000). Countries are marked with "*" the last time they appear in the table (except in the last column).
Countries are printed in italics if they re-enter the table after a period with less than the highest score on executive constraints. Countries
are printed in bold in the last column of the table if they have a full 30-year history of high executive constraints.


The following five columns of the table list the states that have cohesive
political institutions after 5, 10, 15, 20, and 30 years of independence.1 We
see that there is a gradual movement away from cohesive political institu
tions. Six African countries—Lesotho, Mauritius, Nigeria, Somalia, Sudan, and
Uganda—start out with cohesive institutions in the sense of high executive con
straints. But these are generally lost over time, although some countries such as
Nigeria and Sudan enter and exit the table. The same pattern applies to Belarus,
Fiji, Guyana, Malaysia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, and Sri Lanka.
In fact, only four countries—Israel, Jamaica, Mauritius, and Trinidad and
Tobago—have continuous histories of cohesive political institutions from their
inception up to 30 years after independence. Naturally, it is too early to tell if
some of the initial adopters in Eastern Europe after 1990 that have maintained
cohesive institutions in the first 10 years of their existence will maintain them
for 30 years.
The table also shows that some countries undertook reform toward cohesive
institutions at a later point in time than independence. However, after some
time with high executive constraints most of those late adopters or readopters
tend to bounce back. Interestingly, among the late adopters only Botswana and
India—which both had cohesive institutions after 5 years of independence
have maintained their cohesive institutions continuously 30 years after in
dependence.
All in all, Table 7.1 illustrates that by this measure of θ , only a small minority
of newly independent states, 27 out of 112, ever acquired cohesive political
institutions. Among those that did, the predominant tendency is for θ to decline.
This table and Figure 7.1 underscore how important it is to analyze what drives
reform of political institutions in theory and practice. We explore this question
through the lens of our modeling approach.
Plan of the Chapter The next section of the chapter discusses incentives to
reform θ in our core model from earlier chapters, assuming at first that political
transitions are peaceful. In the benchmark approach, we allow θ to be chosen
costlessly. This choice is made either once and for all under a veil of ignorance
about who will hold power or strategically by the period-1 incumbent.
Section 7.2 turns from macro to micro, laying some micropolitical foun
dations for parameters θ and γ . This allows us to discuss the mapping from
1. We take the Polity IV assessments of this at face value.
political reform 263


common institutional arrangements to abstract notions of political cohesive
ness and political stability. In two extensions of the core model, we consider
costs of constitutional change owing to supermajority rules for rule changes or
to endogenous political violence. We also consider the role of trust in maintain
ing political cohesion. Finally, we pick up a theme from Chapter 3 and consider
what set of governance institutions might emerge in the wake of a small elite
that is strongly motivated to seek rents through predation.
In Section 7.3, we briefly discuss how one might analyze real-world political
reform in view of the preceding theoretical discussion. This section makes some
methodological points that can be used to interpret existing econometric and
case study evidence. We provide three examples and discuss how the ideas can
be tested. Section 7.4 concludes the chapter, before we turn to notes on the
literature.
7.1 The Core Model and Political Reform
We now expand the choices in our baseline model to include the parameter
θ, the degree to which institutions are cohesive. To fix ideas, we begin as
simply as possible. Specifically, we assume that θ can be chosen from its
permissible interval θ ∈ [0, 1/2] and that (peaceful) political turnover, γ , is given
exogenously and independently of θ . Thus for the moment, we are ignoring the
implications for political violence. Further on in Section 7.2 we explore the
micropolitical foundations for the decision on θ , as well as the possibility of
endogenous interactions with γ when there is political violence.
In each period, there can be a choice of political institutions. We suppose
that these are chosen one period ahead, as were the state capacity and violence
investments in earlier chapters. For the moment, we also suppose that such
investments are costless. In practice, of course, there are time and effort costs
when rules are changed. More interesting still, there may be efforts by citizens to
preserve their political rights, which can make for endogenous costs of change.
The discussion of these issues is also postponed to Section 7.2.
Preliminaries We contrast two main cases of institutional choice: constitutional
choice and strategic choice. Therefore, we allow choices to be made at two
points in time; one point is prior to any economic or policy decisions and
264 chapter seven: political reform


the other decision point coincides with the time when period-1 state-capacity
investments are made.
To be precise, the new timing of decisions is as follows:
1. We begin with initial stocks of state capacities {τ1, π1
}.
2. Period–1 political institutions, θ1, are chosen.
3. Nature determines the incumbent group I1, α1, and R.
4. I1 chooses a set of period-1 policies {t1, rI
1, rO
1 , pI
1, pO
1 , g1} and deter
mines (through investments) the period-2 stocks of fiscal and legal
capacity {τ2, π2
}. (If political violence is modeled, I1 and O1 simul
taneously invest in violence levels LI and LO.) If permitted, I1 also
chooses period-2 political institutions, θ2.
5. I1 remains in power with probability 1 − γ (or 1 − (Z, ν , ξ ) if
political violence is modeled), and nature determines α2.
6. I2 chooses period-2 policies {t2, rI
2, rO
2 , pI
2, pO
2 , g2}.
One feature of this approach is that state-capacity investments and policy
decisions are always left in the hands of incumbents given the choice of θ . We
consider two possibilities. First, we consider the design of a binding constitution
at stage 2 when there is no option to alter that choice at stage 4. Second, we
study the decision about θ2 when the incumbent can change the constitution at
stage 4.
As in earlier chapters, we look for a subgame perfect equilibrium in policy
and state-capacity investments. To find the value of changing θ2, we have to
solve the model backward.
7.1.1 Political Reform under a Veil of Ignorance
Let us begin with a one-off decision over political institutions, θ1, at stage 2 that
is binding for the entire two-period setting. Hence, we set θ1 = θ2 at stage 4. In
particular, we have in mind the outcome of a constitutional convention in which
(representatives of) all citizens get together to choose political institutions. They
do so behind a veil of ignorance without knowing which group they belong to
(or equivalently which group will be the incumbent in period 1). We assume
that all citizens are equally likely to belong to either group (or that both groups
are equally likely to hold power) and hence that the criterion is Utilitarian.
the core model and political reform 265


As we noted earlier, policy and state-capacity choices are made by subsequent
incumbents, with the latter summarized by the functions
τ2 = T (τ1, π1; θ , α1
) and π2 = P (τ1, π1; θ , α1
).
These are the outcomes determined in Section 3.1, where γ is exogenous.
Indirect Payoffs Let U J
s
(τs , πs; θ ) for J ∈ {I , O} be the value of entering
period s with state-capacity vector {τs , πs
} and institutions θ. Now observe
that for fixed {τ2, π2
},
U I (τ2, π2; θ ) + U O (τ2, π2; θ )
2 = (1 + τ2
[E(λ2; θ ) − 1]) y (π2
) + E(λ2; θ )R,
where
E (λ2; θ ) =
{ φαH + (1 − φ) αL if αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ )
φαH + (1 − φ) otherwise
is the expected value of future public funds. Since we have linear utility and
the groups have equal weights, expected redistribution nets out of the plan
ner’s payoff. Hence, the payoff function is the same as the one adopted by a
Utilitarian planner:
Uˆ (α1, θ ; τ2, π2
) = (1 + τ1
[λ1 − 1]) y (π1
) − λ1m1 + λ1R
+ (1 + τ2
[E(λ2; θ ) − 1]) y (π2
) + E(λ2; θ )R, (7.1)
where λ1 = max {α1, 2 (1 − θ )} and m1 = F (τ2 − τ1) + L(π2 − π1).
Optimal Constitutional Choice Now, the optimal institution, θ , maximizes
φUˆ (αH , θ ; T (τ1, π1; θ , αH
) , P (τ1, π1; θ , αH
))
+ (1 − φ) Uˆ (αL, θ ; T (τ1, π1; θ , αL
) , P (τ1, π1; θ , αL
)) .
We now have the following:
Proposition 7.1: Under a veil of ignorance, citizens choose cohesive institutions
with αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ ).
To see this, observe that (by the results in Sections 2.1 and 3.1) if αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ ),
state-capacity investments {τ2, π2
} will be exactly the same as those that would
266 chapter seven: political reform


be chosen by a Utilitarian planner. Since the unknowing citizens share the plan
ner’s objective, cohesive institutional rules implement their preferred choice.2
One way to think of this result is that cohesive institutions provide a form of
commitment, guaranteeing that all spending will be on public goods. Thus the
constitutional choice of high θ creates that credible commitment by assumption.
Proposition 7.1 describes the sense in which a common-interest state is a
natural situation in our framework. This sense rhymes well with the many
benefits we have identified for such states throughout this book. However, the
result supposes that political institutions are chosen to maximize welfare and
that they are credibly binding on all incumbents at all times—two strong and
unrealistic assumptions. The fragility of these assumptions can be explored by
studying stage 4 of the model and allowing the period-1 incumbent to change
θ2 by implementing a constitutional change. This will allow us to assess how
robust the demand for a cohesive constitution might be in practice under the
maintained assumption that the necessary institutions can be credibly put in
place.
Before looking at strategic institutional choice, it is worth noting that con
stitution designers in our model would be indifferent about the way that
institutions affected γ . This is because the choice of cohesive institutions cre
ates common interests, making all the rules that regulate turnover irrelevant.
Clearly, this is a stark view and in richer models—e.g., models that include
private risk aversion—full cohesiveness may not be feasible. In such cases, a
Pigouvian planner with a preference for equality may wish to choose institu
tional arrangements that prevent too much entrenchment in power to even out
any distributional gains from incumbency.
7.1.2 Strategic Political Reform
Consider now the decision at stage 4 when, along with decisions on state
capacity, the incumbent can also choose θ2. Our explicit assumption (which
is common in the literature on endogenous institutions) is that the incumbent
government can bind its successor one period ahead. This is weaker than in
the previous subsection, where institutions were chosen once-and-for-all. But
it could still be regarded as too strong an assumption and we revisit it later.
2. How can we rule out an optimum where αL < 2 (1 − θ ) and θ is chosen so that 2 [(1 − γ ) (1 − θ ) + γ θ ] = 1? This condition can hold for all γ ∈ [0, 1] only if θ = 1/2, which is a contradiction (except in the nongeneric case of γ = 1/2, where θ is irrelevant).
the core model and political reform 267


Payoff and Equilibrium The forward-looking period-2 payoff of the period-1
incumbent is
W I = (1 − γ ) U I (τ2, π2; θ ) + γ U O (τ2, π2; θ ) (7.2)
= (1 + τ2
[E(λ2) − 1]) y (π2
) + E(λ2)R, (7.3)
where, as in Section 3.1,
E(λ2) = φαH + (1 − φ)λL
2 (7.4)
is the expected value of period-2 public funds with
λL
2=
{ αL if αL ≥ 2(1 − θ )
2[(1 − θ )(1 − γ ) + γ θ ] otherwise.
(7.5)
We are interested in understanding the choice of θ ∈ [0, 1/2] that maximizes
(7.2).
To study this problem, we observe that the effect of a change in θ on this
payoff is
∂WI
∂θ =
{
(1 − φ) 2(2γ − 1)[τ2y (π2
) + R] if 2 (1 − θ ) > αL
0 otherwise.
(7.6)
Clearly, if γ < 1/2, this expression is everywhere decreasing in θ and if γ > 1/2,
it is everywhere increasing. This proves the following proposition:
Proposition 7.2: A period-1 incumbent chooses cohesive institutions with αL ≥
2 (1 − θ) when the prospect of replacement is high (γ ≥ 1/2) and noncohesive
institutions with θ = 0 when the prospect of replacement is low (γ < 1/2).
This result makes sense, even if it is somewhat stark in our framework. When
γ ≥ 1/2, the incumbent does not want to gamble on being out of office in the
next period so she chooses cohesive political institutions to protect herself from
being in opposition. The opposite is true when γ < 1/2.3
3. Since everyone is risk-neutral, there is no risk-reduction benefit associated with cohesive institutions. If we added risk aversion to the framework, we would expect such benefits to pull down the critical replacement rate at which it would be worthwhile for the incumbent to choose cohesive institutions.
268 chapter seven: political reform


Discussion Proposition 7.2 implies that an entrenched incumbent does not
invest in cohesive institutions, whereas an incumbent that faces a serious threat
of replacement may well choose to do so. Thus, if a constitutional convention
initially endows a country with cohesive institutions, an incumbent will try to
reform the constitution away from cohesive institutions if she does not expect
to be replaced. So far, we are taking γ as exogenous, but this result will become
particularly interesting once γ is endogenous, as we discuss later.
Although the setting is very different, the argument is somewhat related to
the work by Lagunoff (2001), which shows how constitutionally guaranteed
rights of civil liberties can become part of a self-enforcing equilibrium in a
dynamic game with underlying social conflict. The reason is essentially that
members of an incumbent’s group may find themselves in opposition at a later
point, so that more entrenched incumbents tend to choose less tolerant constitu
tionally granted rights. A similar intuition underlies the result in de Figueiredo
(2002) that electorally weak groups may be more likely than electorally strong
groups to put institutional structures that limit future bureaucratic discretion
in place.
One feature of Proposition 7.2 that gives pause for thought is that we will
never observe a weak state being strategically chosen for period 2. This is
because the condition for θ = 0 to be chosen is that γ < 1/2, which implies that
the state is redistributive rather than weak. Hence, to explain the persistence of
weak states, we have to look elsewhere. We return to this issue in Section 7.2,
as well.
It is interesting to compare the incumbent’s choice with a Pigouvian plan
ner’s preference. As observed in Subsection 7.1.1., if the Pigouvian planner is
Utilitarian, he will maximize
U I (τ2, π2; θ ) + U O (τ2, π2; θ )
2.
Changing θ has no effect on average utility since it has a purely redistributive
effect. As utility is linear in money, the planner does not care about distribution.
Note, however, that any preference for equality would generate a preference for
consensual institutions, even without curvature in the utility function.
To see this, take the case where the Pigouvian planner is Rawlsian. Then, θ
is chosen to maximize
min
{
U I (τ2, π2; θ ) , U O (τ2, π2; θ )}
.
It is straightforward to see that this objective is maximized when αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ ).
the core model and political reform 269


Endogenous Entrenchment We now consider the possibility that, as well as
choosing θ2, an incumbent could also affect her prospects of remaining in power,
i.e., the extent of her entrenchment in office. What would happen at stage 4 of
the model if the incumbent could also choose γ2, which denotes the institutional
choices determining the probability of an incumbent’s survival? In Section 7.2
we discuss how to derive this parameter from specific institutional choices.
The following observation is immediate:
Proposition 7.3: The period-1 incumbent’s preferred combination of period-2
institutions is θ2 = γ2 = 0.
Thus, a period-1 incumbent would like maximal entrenchment with the weakest
possible constraints on her power. This result follows by observing that (7.2)
is decreasing in γ whenever U I (τ2, π2; θ ) > U O (τ2, π2; θ ), i.e., when there is
any kind of incumbency advantage. This advantage is reinforced by having a
low θ2.
The result is not particularly surprising in the context of our setup. But a
similar result would hold in any model in which incumbents enjoy holding
power, directly or indirectly. This is the essential reason why almost every
system of government takes the decision over the rules for governing political
institutions as far from the hands of incumbents as possible. Note that if θ2
is specified in a binding constitution, as in the prior subsection, there is no
incentive to lower γ2. Hence, a binding constitution mitigates the entrenchment
incentives.
Taking Stock This section has introduced some building blocks needed for
understanding endogenous institutional choice in the core model of this book.
There is a strong ex ante case for a constitutional convention to pick cohesive
institutions. However, this prescription is vulnerable to manipulation without
any safeguards against incumbents reducing institutional cohesiveness and
increasing entrenchment. Based on the analysis in this section, we would thus
expect countries to gravitate toward redistributive states without appropriate
safeguards to prevent constitutional manipulation. Our brief review of the
evidence at the beginning of this chapter, to which we return in Section 7.3,
certainly suggests that this expectation has some resonance with practical
experience.
Our analysis so far has been somewhat optimistic when describing the forces
that may motivate countries to engineer their checks and balances. If these
270 chapter seven: political reform


forces were the complete story, it would be quite difficult to explain why weak
states of the kind that we have described would persist. There would always be
strong pressures toward reforms that increase the cohesiveness of institutions.
In the next section, we show how an extended analysis may suggest a story that
is less rosy.
7.2 Developing the Model
Arguably, the last section may have exaggerated the likelihood of institutional
change by making it very easy to change the rules of the political game. In some
countries, it is striking how difficult it is to change these rules, even for very
determined incumbents. To understand these hurdles to change, we have to
consider how the microstructure of institutional choice might work and what
might be the costs of trying to manipulate and change institutions for strategic,
self-interested reasons.
7.2.1 Micropolitical Foundations for θ
We have assumed that institutional designers are capable of choosing θ directly.
But this parameter imposes a direct restriction on policy. More realistically,
institutional choice involves a design of the rules under which political decisions
are made. Thus, it is most natural to think of θ (i , ") and γ ("), where " ∈ L are
constitutional rules, and where i is defined below. The core variables θ (i , ")
and γ (") now become endogenous outcomes that describe how the rules of the
game affect who holds office and her equilibrium policy choices.
To illustrate this way of thinking and to tie it to modern political economics,
we consider two examples. This subsection concerns the forces that shape
θ (i , ") and the next looks at the forces that shape γ (") .
Bargaining over Transfers Suppose that policymaking is delegated to a subset
of citizens, the policymaking set. In a democracy, this set most naturally cor
responds to a legislature whose members are chosen in an election. However,
in other contexts, the policymaking set could be an elite with a particular eth
nic composition, a group of generals who form a military junta, the politburo
in a communist dictatorship, or members of a clan. We assume that policy
proposal power is in the hands of the majority group within the set of decision
makers. Let i ≥ 1/2 be the size of the incumbent group’s representation among
developing the model 271


the decisionmakers.4 We assume a two-stage decision making procedure,
where:
1. The (majority) incumbent group in the policymaking set unilaterally
chooses {pJ
s , pO
s , gs , ts
} in period s and {τ2, π2
} in period 1.
2. The incumbent group and the opposition in the policymaking set
bargain over the allocation of {rI
s , rO
s
}.
The second stage corresponds to a classic “divide-the-dollar” transfer game
where the size of the redistributive cake per capita is
(R + tsy (πs
) − ms − gs
) = zs.
Any transfer allocation must satisfy rO
s + rI
s ≤ 2zs.
Clearly, this is a very partial perspective on bargaining, since the opposition
has no decisionmaking rights at all with respect to policies other than transfers.
This is perhaps less of an issue here, since there will tend to be agreement in
the choices over other policies. However, a more complete treatment of the
bargaining structure would also have to include at least ts and state-capacity
choices as part of the bargaining process. This would be somewhat more
complex.
Bargaining Protocol We specify a very simple bargaining rule, which is one
round and closed-rule in the jargon of the legislative-bargaining literature
rooted in Baron and Ferejohn (1989). Thus, the incumbent group in the policy
making set offers a level of transfers rO
s ≤ 2zs and the comparable opposition
group chooses whether or not to accept this offer. If the opposition members
accept, the transfers are implemented.
If they reject the offer, then there will be one of two outcomes. With proba
bility (i , "), the opposition group receives a default transfer of rO
s = # (") 2zs,
where parameter # (") ≤ 1/2 can be interpreted as the share of revenues that
accrues to the opposition in the default case. But with probability 1 − (i , "),
the opposition group gets nothing, i.e., rO
s = 0. As a higher i denotes a larger
share of the incumbent group in the policymaking set, it is natural to assume
that (i , ") is decreasing in i.
4. In the knife-edge case where i = 1/2, we assume that the proposer is chosen at random.
272 chapter seven: political reform


The rules of the decisionmaking process are embedded in the institutional
rules ", which influence (i , ") and # ("). An extensive literature on legislative
bargaining procedures emphasizes how the rules for recognizing proposal and
counterproposal power can influence bargaining power. For example, some
rules such as the filibuster or amendment rules are created to enhance minority
rights. Moreover, some legislatures have supermajority provisions for some
legislative choices.
Bargaining Outcomes at Stage 2 Working backward, it is easy to see that
the opposition group in the policymaking set can always guarantee itself an
expected transfer of (i , ") # (") 2zs by saying no to an offer made by the
incumbent group. Consequently, the opposition will accept an offer of rO
s at
stage 2 only as long as
rO
s ≥ (i , ") # (") 2zs.
Under the given bargaining protocol, it is always optimal for the incumbent
group to offer the opposition the minimum needed to get the offer accepted.
(If the incumbent is offered rO
s = 0, the opposition can still guarantee itself
(i , ") # (") 2zs by saying no.)
It follows that this very simple microfoundation has
rO
s = 2 (i , ") # (") zs = 2θ (i , ") zs ,
where θ (i , ") = (i , ") # (") becomes the key parameter that we have used
throughout the book. In our simple model, this is the product of the bargaining
power of the opposition, as represented by (i; ") , and the opposition’s status
quo outcome, as represented by # ("). Fully cohesive institutions would corre
spond to the case where (i , ") = 1 and # (") = 1/2. Noncohesive institutions
would arise where either (i , ") = 0 or # (") = 0, i.e., the opposition group
has no outside option owing to neglible bargaining power or a complete lack
of protection in the status quo.
Policy Outcomes at Stage 1 Turning now to stage 1, other policies will be
determined exactly as we have specified in earlier chapters, as they reflect the
forward-looking payoffs of the incumbent, where he gains 2 (1 − θ (i , ")) of any
residual tax revenues as transfers. In other words, this specification is indeed
a microfoundation for the model that we have been studying throughout the
book.
developing the model 273


It is clear that things can and should be complicated in many ways. For
example, it would be interesting to take seriously the idea of # (") as a status
quo allocation of transfers. Then, # (") would reflect the transfer policies
inherited from the past, analogously to the setup in Baron (1996). This would
introduce strategic aspects into today’s transfer policy because of the way
it would influence tomorrow’s choice. It would be interesting to understand
whether a cohesive status quo where # (") is likely to be self-enforcing given
the ability of future opposition groups to invoke it.
Checks and Balances and Forms of Government We can now think about
changing θ (i , ") by changing the bargaining rules to influence policy outcomes.
Cohesive institutions are now defined by LC such that αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ (i , ")) for
all " ∈ LC. Recall that we defined the opposition’s equilibrium share of transfers
by θ (i , ") = (i , ") # ("). Higher bargaining power (i , ") or more “minority
protection” # (") for the opposition thus increases its equilibrium share of
transfers. Hence, it is reasonable to interpret (i , ") as greater checks and
balances on the executive.
This is also what we have done in the empirical sections of the previous
chapters, where we have used the Polity IV measure of executive constraints
as a measure of θ . In practice, this measure gives a high weight to parlia
mentary democracy, since an operating parliamentary form of government
keeps the executive constantly accountable to the legislative assembly through
a confidence requirement. Diermeier and Feddersen (1998), Huber (1996), and
Persson, Roland, and Tabellini (2000) discuss how the bargaining outcomes
in legislatures depend on the confidence requirement. One of the results in the
last paper is that governments in parliamentary regimes internalize the prefer
ences for a larger share of the population than do governments in presidential
regimes, which comes close to a higher value of θ and has similar effects on the
incentives to provide public goods rather than redistribution.
Centralization The interpretation of the default allocation # (") to the opposi
tion is harder to interpret in a straightforward way, but perhaps we could think
about it as reflecting the vertical, rather than the horizontal, separation of pow
ers in a setting where the groups are geographically concentrated. Concretely,
this would mean that federal states would have a higher θ , all else being equal,
than unitary states. But such a claim would need further theoretical work to
be substantiated, in particular since we would expect the vertical allocation of
274 chapter seven: political reform


policy responsibility to spill over onto the incentives for policymaking both at
the central and regional level [see, e.g., Besley and Coate (2003) and Persson
and Tabellini (1996a,b)].
Electoral Systems Another aspect of political arrangements is the selection
of the policymaking set. To the extent that this occurs through elections, the
electoral system also comes into play, indirectly, in the preceding political
bargaining model because of the presence of parameter i in the function (i , ") .
Recall that i represents the majority of the incumbent group in the policymaking
set. Clearly, then, i ought to reflect the electoral rule. Indeed, the political
science literature deals with the electoral rule precisely as the mapping from
vote shares to seat shares, with a much steeper seat-vote curve for plurality
systems than for proportional representation (PR) systems [see Taagepera and
Shugart (1989)].
Based on this insight and the fact that (i , ") is declining in i , we would
expect the higher representation for the opposition under PR to imply a higher
value of θ (i , ") than plurality rule, all else being equal. Of course, this is but
one of many possibilities of how electoral rules help shape the political game.
Taking Stock As the preceding discussion implies, there may not be a unique
set of institutional arrangements that implement cohesive outcomes. This is
an interesting observation in view of the diverse political arrangements that
are associated with high executive constraints, according to the Polity IV data
discussed in the introduction to this chapter. Our macro approach would say
that these details may not matter, as long as there is sufficient cohesiveness for
the state to be run along common-interest lines. Moreover, as we discuss at
a later point in this section, traditions and history may help achieve political
cohesiveness. But the mapping between micro and macro is clearly interesting
in its own right. Furthermore, such knowledge is, of course, vital if one is
interested in the design of real-world country-specific reform.
7.2.2 Micropolitical Foundations for γ
In this subsection, we provide alternative interpretations of γ , our second
crucial macropolitical parameter, in terms of underlying institutional arrange
ments. We do so in a simple model for determining the composition of the
policymaking set. This allows us to analyze how γ is determined with peaceful
political transitions and how this depends on institutional choice. The simple
developing the model 275


model allows us to think about the way institutions can shape political stability,
even if the groups are of equal size.
Constituencies Suppose that representation in the policymaking set is organized
by constituencies. In a democracy, it is natural to treat these constituencies
as electoral districts. But they could also represent ethnic groups, units in
the army, or regional communist-party organizations. Parameter i in the last
subsection, the size of the majority in the policymaking set, is now the outcome
of a representation process across a large number of such constituencies. In
particular, there is a continuum of constituencies indexed by d ∈ [0, 1] , where
the fraction of individuals from group J in constituency d is βJ (d; ") , where
selection rules " may affect, for instance, who is able to express an opinion.
We order the constituencies from the most to least favorable for group J .
Thus βJ (d; ") is decreasing in d. To “win” a constituency, we suppose that there
is a threshold of numerical dominance, denoted by 1
2 + n ("). In an electoral
democracy that threshold is at nJ (") = 0, whereas nJ (") < 0 represents an
institution favorable to group J , i.e., this group needs fewer than half of the
supporters to represent a particular constituency.
In the electoral interpretation, we are implicitly assuming that the electoral
system operates by plurality rule. To address explicitly how θ (i , ") depends on
electoral rule—as discussed at the end of the previous subsection—it would then
be interesting to contrast the outcomes under plurality rule and proportional
representation, along the lines of Lizzeri and Persico (2001), Milesi-Ferretti,
Perotti, and Rostagno (2002), or Persson and Tabellini (1999). We leave such
an analysis for further research. Given the analysis to follow in this subsection,
however, a reasonable conjecture is that the choice of electoral rule would not
only affect equilibrium cohesiveness, θ (i , "), but also equilibrium turnover,
γ (").
Popularity Shocks We also allow for an aggregate random shock u ̃J
s toward
group J in period s, which reflects its “popularity.”5 This could be due to bias
in media reporting in favor of group J or perhaps that group J is genuinely
more popular on noneconomic issues. This setup will ring a bell among readers
who are familiar with probabilistic voting models, which are widely used in
political economics [see, e.g., Persson and Tabellini (2000) for an overview].
5. The shock for the other group is clearly −u ̃J
s.
276 chapter seven: political reform


Specifically, we start period 1 with some initial value of the shock, u ̃J
1 . We
then suppose that the period-2 value is
u ̃ J
2 = φ (") u ̃J
1 + (1 − φ (")) η,
where η is symmetrically distributed with mean zero on
[
−1
2$ , 1
2$
]
. Parameter
φ (") allows for serial correlation in the realization of shocks, which could
depend on institutional rules in a wide sense, to represent such things as
incumbent control of the media.
Preliminaries In this setting, group J will win constituency d if
βJ (d; ") −
(
1 − βJ (d; ")
)
+ u ̃J
s ≥ nJ (").
Now, define the pivotal constituency for group J , d ̃J
s implicitly from
βJ (d ̃J
s ;"
)
= 1 + (nJ (") − u ̃J
s
)
2.
This variable gives us the fraction of the policymaking set that supports group
J , given a shock of u ̃J
s . Then, group J becomes the incumbent group if
iJ
s = (βJ )−1
( 1 + (nJ (") − u ̃J
s
)
2 ;"
)
≥ 1/2.
It follows that group J is more likely to be the incumbent when, all else being
equal: (1) it has a large popularity shock u ̃J
s ; (2) it faces a weaker selection
threshold, i.e., nJ (") is lower; and (3) the distribution of support, represented
by d , across constituencies favors group J .
Endogenous Political Stability Group J , which makes up half of the population,
will receive support commensurate with its population size only if n (") = u ̃J
s =0
and βJ ( 1
2; "
)
= 1/2. In this case, iJ = 1/2. We refer to this as the unbiased case,
in which the incumbent is replaced with probability 1/2.
Our simple framework can now be used to determine the probability that
incumbent group I1 loses political control in period 2. With the assumptions
regarding the distribution of the popularity shock, this probability is given by
developing the model 277


γ (") = Prob
⎧⎪⎨
⎪⎩(βI )−1
⎛
⎜⎝
1+
(
nI (") − φ (") u ̃J
1 − (1 − φ (")) η
)
2 ;"
⎞
⎟⎠ < 1/2
⎫⎪⎬
⎪⎭ ,
where the randomness is due to the uncertainty about η, conditional on u ̃I
1. Per
sistence in shocks, a higher value of φ (") , generates stability as a proincumbent
bias, i.e., γ (") < 1/2, even in the unbiased case because an incumbent group
carries its current popularity shock into the next period.
To illustrate this for a simple case, suppose that βI (d; ") = 1 − d and that η
is uniformly distributed. Then
γ (") =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
0 if $
[
nI (") − φ (") u ̃I
1 1 − φ (")
]
≤ −1
2
1
2 +$
[1
2 − nI (") − φ (") u ̃I
1 1 − φ (")
]
1 if $
[
nI (") − φ (") u ̃I
1 1 − φ (")
]
≥1
2.
Thus persistence of power comes through φ (") > 0, assuming that u ̃I
1 > 0, i.e.,
the initial condition favors the incumbent and/or nI (") > 0.
This way, our simple model gives a micropolitical foundation for γ (") .
As simple as the model is, it provides a basis for discussing how political
institutions matter for peaceful political transitions. But, of course, to exploit
theoretical predictions in practice would require further work in terms of
empirical measurement
Structure of Representation One of the key issues in any system of repre
sentative government is who is chosen to be a policymaker. This depends on
the structure of representation, which is captured by function βJ (d; ") in our
model. This function describes how supporters for each group are distributed
among the citizens who are allowed to participate in the selection of the pol
icymaking set. The possibility that βJ ( 1
2; "
)
= 1/2 can reflect a number of
institutional restrictions that would keep incumbent groups in power.
For example, a large literature in political science discusses how institu
tional arrangements can be manipulated to favor one group by the strategic
drawing up of district boundaries, other forms of gerrymandering such as over
representation of certain geographical areas with many prospective supporters,
278 chapter seven: political reform


or electoral thresholds for representation. Such restrictions serve to keep down
γ (") , i.e., to give incumbents a more secure hold on power [see, e.g., Erikson
(1972), Grofman (1985), and Grofman, Koetzle, and Brunell (1997)].
Franchise Restrictions A second issue concerns which citizens are allowed to
express an opinion about who should be in the policymaking set—i.e., who
among the citizenry are enfranchised. Even with two groups of equal size in the
population, voting restrictions could maintain an electoral advantage for one
group. It could even be that the function βJ (d; ") is such that βJ (d; ") > 1/2
for all d ∈ [0, 1], i.e., one group is totally dominant. This might correspond
to selection methods, where members of a certain income, racial, or ethnic
group are seriously disadvantaged by facing much higher costs of participating
in politics, or—in the worst case—by being entirely disenfranchised. History
is full of examples of such restrictions. To take just a few, many European
countries in the nineteenth century had weighted voting schemes, where high
income earners or high-wealth holders had more votes than others and/or
there were outright income restrictions on the franchise. Blacks were effectively
disenfranchised in the U.S. South by the selective use of poll taxes, reading and
writing tests, and a host of other means from the 1880s to the passage of the
Voting Right’s Act in the mid-1960s [see Alt (1994) for a discussion].
Regulation of the franchise is thus another important aspect of political
institutions that can be used by incumbents to decrease γ (") , the probability
of opposition takeover. This is a rationale for using the Polity IV measure of
competitiveness in executive recruitment as one part of our empirical measure
of γ .
Bias in Representation Another burning issue in the politics of many countries
is that every group does not have the same chance of being represented in
the policymaking process. In the preceding model, this would correspond to
a group-specific bias in the threshold of representation for the policymaking
set, such that nI (") > 0. In the limiting case, the incumbent group can set
nI (") = −1/2 to ensure that only its own candidates can be selected. For
example, in the U.S. race example, the number of blacks elected to hold political
office in the southern states went quickly to zero after the restrictions imposed
in the 1880s and did not start rising again until after the political reforms 80
years later.
developing the model 279


Such restrictions constitute another route for incumbents strategically to
keep down the threat of replacement γ (") . This is a rationale for using the
Polity IV measures of openness in executive recruitment as the other part of
our empirical measure of γ .
Media and Openness Yet another dimension of institutional choice, which
affects the peaceful rate of political turnover, concerns the extent to which
one group can isolate itself from public scrutiny in office. In the preceding
model, a crude way of capturing such institutions of nonaccountability and
entrenchment is to think about the incumbent group making itself immune
to popularity shocks u ̃I
s . The most important interpretation is that a group
may maintain a persistent positive u ̃I
s owing to an inflation of positive news or
repression of bad news by the media, as in the media-capture model of Besley
and Prat (2006). In reality, most autocratic regimes maintain more or less strict
controls on the media for political purposes [see, e.g., the overview by Prat and
Str  ̈omberg (2010)].
Taking Stock In this subsection and the previous one we have suggested ways
in which our second macropolitical parametrization of political institutions
{θ , γ } can be mapped into features of the rules that affect policy choice and
political selection. Obviously, we have done so in a very simple and stylized way.
However, we hope that it illustrates where a bridge could potentially be built
between the earlier material in the book and the burgeoning political-economics
literature on pre-election and postelection politics as surveyed, e.g., by Persson
and Tabellini (2000). As with the microeconomic foundations before, there is
a trade-off between specifying the detailed workings of micro models and the
broad patterns coming out of a macro approach. But pinpointing where the
join can be made is important, especially since the literature tends to bifurcate
into one strand of studies that focuses on details of rules and another that looks
at broad patterns. These two agendas should be viewed as complements rather
than substitutes.
7.2.3 Constitutional Rules
We now study the possibility that changing the constitution is not a unilateral
decision by the incumbent. In some countries, constitutional provision is delib
erately established to increase the cost of political change, especially when it
comes to rules for rulemaking. Such changes often require citizen approval and
280 chapter seven: political reform


may even require a supermajority. For example, the Indian constitution requires
a supermajority of two-thirds of members present and voting in both houses of
the Indian Parliament to amend the constitution. The U.S. constitution requires
a supermajority of two-thirds in both houses of Congress to propose a constitu
tional amendment, and—on top of that—three-quarters of the state legislatures
have to approve the proposed amendment. In these and other cases, it is clear
that the strict rules are intended to raise the cost of political reform.
However, the United States and, to some extent, India rely on a tradition
of strong checks and balances. In other countries, similar supermajority provi
sions may have less bite. For example, Uganda’s 1995 constitution stated that
any amendment to the constitution would require a two-thirds majority in Par
liament and a referendum. But this did not prevent President Yoweri Museveni
from changing the rules, permitting him to run beyond the term limits laid down
in the constitution.
At the end of the day, the existence of rules for institutional change begs the
question of how such rules are enforced. To be binding, the rules require an
overarching legal framework to ensure that the incumbent acts in accordance
with them. Why people respect such authority is an interesting question. In the
end, it may come down to social norms or some kind of dynamic punishment
to enforce compliance that cannot easily be captured in our simple two-period
setting.
Supermajority Requirement If constitutional rules can be not only created
but also enforced, it may crucially impact on the behavior of the period
1 incumbent. To illustrate this, let us assume that there is a supermajority
requirement for any change in θ , which is adhered to by the incumbent. In
our two-group model, this amounts to a Wicksellian arrangement, requiring
unanimous support for any change in θ .
Quite simply, this implies that any proposed change in θ1 will only be
accepted if it makes the opposition better off. The period-2 payoff of the opposi
tion is γ U I (τ2, π2; θ ) + (1 − γ ) U O (τ2, π2; θ ). Differentiating this expression
with respect to θ yields
∂ [γ U I (τ2, π2; θ ) + (1 − γ ) U O (τ2, π2; θ )]
∂θ
=
{
(1 − φ) 2(1 − 2γ )[τ2y (π2
) + R] if 2 (1 − θ ) > αL
0 otherwise.
developing the model 281


Comparing this expression to (7.6) in Section 7.1, we see immediately that
the opposition group has a diametrically opposite preference to the incumbent
group. Hence, the opposition prefers θ2 = 0 if γ ≥ 1/2 and αL ≥ 2(1 − θ2) if
γ < 1/2. This implies that when αL < 2 (1 − θ1
), there will be no change in the
constitution, and if αL ≥ 2 (1 − θ1
) , there can be no move away from cohesive
institutions.
Thus, we have the following:
Proposition 7.4: If changing θ requires a supermajority, then θ2 = θ1.
A supermajority requirement only guarantees that cohesive institutions pre
vail if they are the starting point, i.e., when θ1 = 1/2. If a polity begins with
θ1 = 0, then an entrenched group will effectively acquire veto power, which pre
vents any improvement in institutions. Thus creating costs of change through
supermajorities does not guarantee cohesive political institutions. It merely
guarantees a status quo bias.
This simple argument illustrates that a commitment to a constitution, which
limits the ability to change institutions, can become a powerful means of
preserving institutions. Normatively speaking, one would only want to move
to such a constitutional arrangement once cohesive institutions have been
established. Indeed, it would be dangerous to create such provisions when
institutions are not cohesive.
This creates a first insight into why a weak state may persist. Suppose that
a state is created where an entrenched ruler (i.e., a ruler with a low value of
γ ) manages to set θ = 0 and offers some constitutional protection that makes
changing institutions costly or difficult. Then, even in the wake of weaker
political control, so that γ increases, it may be impossible to galvanize political
support to change the political institutions toward something more cohesive.
This way, the weak state persists.
7.2.4 Political Violence
We now reintroduce political violence into the model, following the approach
that we developed in Chapter 4. The effect of constitutional change is now to
affect γ (LI , LO; ξ ), the equilibrium rate of turnover, by changing LI and LO.
To home in on the effect of the choice of θ2, we hold state capacities {τ2, π2
}
fixed, as we did in Chapter 4.
282 chapter seven: political reform


The period-1 incumbent optimizes by choosing {LI , θ } to maximize
(
1− γ
(
LI , LO; ξ
))
U I (τ2, π2; θ ) + γ
(
LI , LO; ξ
)
U O (τ2, π2; θ )
− ω (π1
) λ1LI .
As in Section 4.1, the opposition chooses LO to maximize
γ
(
LI , LO; ξ
)
U I (τ2, π2; θ ) +
[
1− γ
(
LI , LO; ξ
)]
U O (τ2, π2; θ )
− ω (π1
) νLO .
We are interested in decisions that form a Nash equilibrium. The conditions
for political violence are essentially unchanged from those that we derived in
Chapter 4.
Choice of Cohesiveness—Preliminaries The new condition that we have to
study is for the choice of θ. As we saw earlier in the model with an exogenous
turnover rate, whether an increase in θ is desirable from the incumbent’s point of
view depends critically on γ >−< 1/2. However, now the expected rate of turnover
depends on the investments in violence (LI , LO) at the Nash equilibrium.
Studying the choice of θ is somewhat complicated by the fact that the payoff
function is not concave and is discontinuous at θ = 1 − αL
2 . As in Proposi
tion 7.2, we find that the optimal θ is at a corner solution, either with fully
cohesive institutions or fully noncohesive institutions. The cost of noncohesive
institutions is that the incumbent has to spend resources on violence. If these
costs are large enough, it will help cement the creation of cohesive institutions.
Cohesiveness under the Threat of Violence We now study formally the choice of
θ . Let {Lˆ I
0, Lˆ O
0 } denote the equilibrium investments in violence by the incumbent
and the opposition under maximally noncohesive institutions, i.e., when θ = 0,
and let
γ0 = γ
(Lˆ I
0, Lˆ O
0;ξ
)
be the corresponding turnover probability at this Nash equilibrium.
We now have the following:
Proposition 7.5: Suppose that φ < 1. Then, if γ0 ≥ 1/2, the period-1 incumbent
chooses cohesive institutions. If γ0 < 1/2, the period-1 incumbent chooses
cohesive institutions if and only if
[R + τ2y (π2
)] (1 − φ) [2 (1 − γ0
) − αL
] − ω (π1
) λ1Lˆ I
0 ≤ 0.
developing the model 283


Proof: It is useful to define
Uˆ (θ) =
[(
1− γ
(
LI , LO; ξ
))
U I (τ2, π2; θ ) + γ
(
LI , LO; ξ
)
U O (τ2, π2; θ )]
.
Observe that from Proposition 5.1, dγ
(Lˆ I , Lˆ O; ξ
)
/dθ > 0. This implies that
if γ0 ≥ 1/2, then γ
(Lˆ I
0, Lˆ O
0;ξ
)
> 1/2 for all θ ∈ [0, 1 − αL
2
). It follows that
Uˆθ (θ ) = (1 − φ) 2
[
2γ
(Lˆ I
0, Lˆ O
0;ξ
)
−1
] [R + τ2y (π2
)] > 0
for all θ ∈ [0, 1 − αL
2
) when evaluated at the Nash equilibrium for violence.
Since this derivative is everywhere increasing, cohesive institutions will be
chosen. The payoff is discontinuous, but increasing, at θ = 1 − αL
2 since
[R + τ2y (π2
)] (1 − φ) [αL − 2 (1 − γ )] > 0
when γ ≥ 1/2.
Now suppose that γ0 < 1/2. If γ (0, 0; ξ ) < 1/2 then
Uˆθ (θ ) = (1 − φ) 2
[
2γ
(Lˆ I
0, Lˆ O
0;ξ
)
−1
] [R + τ2y (π2
)] < 0
for all θ ∈ [0, 1 − αL
2
). Since the payoff of the incumbent is discontinuous, either
θ = 0 will be chosen or θ ≥ 1 − αL
2 . Comparing the payoffs with θ = 0 and
θ ≥ 1 − αL
2 yields the condition stated in the proposition.
Finally, consider the case where γ (0, 0; ξ ) ≥ 1/2 ≥ γ0. Observe that by
Proposition 5.3, limθ→1− αL
2
γ
(Lˆ I , Lˆ O; ξ
)
→ γ (0, 0; ξ ). Define θˆ as the value
of θ such that
γ
(Lˆ I
0, Lˆ O
0;ξ
)
= 1/2.
Now observe that Uˆ (θ ) is strictly convex on [0, 1 − αL
2
) since
Uˆθθ (θ ) = (1 − φ) 4
dγ
(Lˆ I
0, Lˆ O
0;ξ
)
dθ
[R + τ2y (π2
)] > 0.
Thus, Uˆ (θ) is decreasing in θ as θ ∈
[
0, θˆ
)
and increasing as θ ∈
(θˆ, 1 − αL
2
) .
Maximizing a strictly convex function yields a corner solution with either
284 chapter seven: political reform


θ = 0 or θ ≥ 1 − αL
2 . To see that the latter is indeed the solution, note that
the incumbent’s payoff is discontinuous, but increasing, at θ = 1 − αL
2 since
[R + τ2y (π2
)] (1 − φ) [αL − 2 (1 − γ (0, 0; ξ ))] > 0
when γ (0, 0; ξ ) ≥ 1/2. Comparing the payoffs at θ = 0 and θ ≥ 1 − αL
2 gives
the condition stated in the proposition.
The first part of Proposition 7.5 says that an incumbent unable to reduce
turnover sufficiently when θ = 0 will find it optimal to go for cohesive institu
tions. The second part says that if the incumbent can indeed create low turnover
by making institutions noncohesive, it will be worthwhile if the benefits of
securing access to redistribution outweigh the costs of violence.
Interpretation Comparing the result in this proposition with Proposition 7.2,
we see that latent violence has two distinct effects on the choice of cohesive
institutions. One goes against choosing cohesive institutions and the other
in favor. For institutions to be cohesive with certainty, the incumbent has to
feel enough of a threat of replacement, i.e., a high enough rate of turnover,
when θ = 0. Since γ0 < γ (0, 0; ξ ), this condition is more demanding than the
condition in the absence of violence. Absent violence, the incumbent cares only
about the peaceful turnover rate, which is higher than the turnover rate in the
presence of violence. This effect makes cohesive institutions less likely.
But there is also a cost associated with maintaining noncohesive institutions.
Noncohesive institutions lead to political violence, which constitutes a drain on
public resources. The incumbent has to trade off this resource cost against the
benefits of higher expected transfers. The costs of using political violence may
make it more likely that an incumbent will pick cohesive institutions. In effect,
the prospect of violence acts as a check on the incumbent. In other words,
any factor that reduces the cost of having the opposition invest in political
violence may actually make it more likely that the government will decide to
choose cohesive institutions. The discussion here further reinforces the point
made in Chapter 5 that it would be important to extend the analysis so as
to endogenize parameters such as ν and ξ into endogenous variables, e.g., by
explicitly studying investments in military technology.
The argument in this subsection is related to the work by Acemoglu and
Robinson (2000) on the extension of the franchise. They argue that an elite may
want to extend the franchise to the rest of society, even though this implies a
developing the model 285


redistributive cost in the future. The reason is that an extended franchise avoids
the potential cost to the elite of a mass revolution. Such franchise extension is
similar to an increase in θ , in terms of the interpretation in Subsection 7.2.2,
where we argued that θ(i , ") could be a reflection of the representation or
bargaining power of the opposition. The cost of a revolution in Acemoglu and
Robinson’s argument is similar to the latent cost of political violence discussed
in this subsection.
Our argument is also related to recent work by Fearon (2010), who shows
that the threat of a rebellion against a ruling government if it tries to rig elections
may serve to make democratic rule a self-enforcing equilibrium.
Development Assistance and Resource Rents Revisited The model with polit
ical violence allows us to extend our earlier analyses in Chapters 4 and 6. In
particular, we can now predict the effect of aid or natural resource rents on
the choice of political institutions. This effect depends upon whether there is
repression or civil war at θ = 0.
Proposition 7.6: An increase in aid or natural resources, R, increases the
likelihood that the period-1 incumbent chooses noncohesive institutions in
repression but has an ambiguous effect on this choice in civil war.
To see this, first observe that γ0 is decreasing in R from Proposition 5.1. This
means that a higher value of R makes the second case of Proposition 7.5 more
likely.
Now suppose that γ0 < 1/2 and ask how the incumbent’s objective U I =
[R + τ2y (π2
)] (1 − φ) [2 (1 − γ0
) − αL] − ω (π1
) λ1Lˆ I
0 depends on R. Under
repression, we have
dUI
dR = [2 (1 − γ0
) − αL
] > 0,
using the envelope condition for Lˆ I . This makes it less likely that cohesive
institutions will be chosen. Intuitively, higher R makes being in a redistributive
regime more attractive given that the survival probability is higher.
However, with civil war,
dUI
dR = [2 (1 − γ0
) − αL
] − ω (π1
) ν dLˆ O
dZ ,
286 chapter seven: political reform


using the first-order condition for the choice of Lˆ O. The sign of the derivative is
now ambiguous, since an increase in R increases the intensity of fighting by the
opposition. This additional effect lowers the incumbent’s prospect of political
survival and encourages the incumbent to choose cohesive institutions.
Based on their evidence Djankov, Montalvo, and Reynal-Querol (2008) have
argued that aid reduces the probability that a regime will become democratic.
This is certainly consistent with Proposition 7.6 and in line with arguments
frequently made by opponents of aid. Proposition 7.6 provides yet another
example—beyond those in Chapter 6—of the need carefully to consider the
details of a recipient country’s political equilibrium before assessing the impact
of aid. It also highlights the need to unpack regime heterogeneity to understand
the effect of aid on political institutions.
7.2.5 Trust
Next, we explore the implications of informal mechanisms for sustaining cohe
sive institutions, which we place under the broad heading of “trust.” Our
discussion of micropolitical foundations in Section 7.2.1 described a world
where institutional rules map uniquely into policy outcomes. This is also the
traditional view of institutions as shaping the rules of the game. But this tra
ditional view leaves no room for trust or social norms. At the other extreme,
we have a world entirely without formal institutions, where the norms of co
operation evolve to determine resource allocation. Many primitive societies can
evolve complex social and political orders, which are built on few formal rules
but seem to operate on a fairly cooperative basis. Moreover, societies with many
formal rules may see these rules ignored in practice. Even though the world of
trust is often viewed as somewhat murky by economists, our understanding of
how political reform works and how cohesiveness becomes established has to
encompass these ideas.
Our discussion of these issues is deliberately superficial. We still wish to
flag a very important area for further exploration, given our observations
throughout this book that building cohesive institutions is essential for effective
and peaceful states. The material in this subsection should be seen as a signpost
to indicate where such modeling might go.
Trust as Behavior There are two broad approaches to studying trust in eco
nomics. The first sees trust as established through some form of repeated play,
where private or collective punishments are invoked to increase trustworthy
developing the model 287


behavior.6 In our context, such an approach would seek a foundation for θ
from repeated interaction of the two groups in office when the members of the
group are strategic and forward-looking. A world where the incumbent does
not take all of the residual public revenues as transfers θ = 0 would then be
part of a long-term strategy, given some alternation in power. A nice feature
of such reputational models is their potential to explain something we have
simply assumed, namely that the choice of θ2 is binding. We have also taken
for granted that the period-1 incumbent can choose period-2 institutions, even
though the short-term interests of the period-2 incumbent may very well call
for a reversion to θ2 = 0. In a setting with repeated interactions, such behavior
could be punished, thus creating the possibility of sustaining cohesiveness.
Models along these lines have been developed in Alesina (1988) and Dixit,
Grossman, and Gul (2000). Such models are good news and bad news in the
search for micropolitical foundations of cohesive institutions. The good news
is that even weak formal institutions can sustain strong norms of cooperation.
The bad news is that there are typically multiple equilibria, such that a polity
could end up in a bad outcome (corresponding to θ = 0) owing to pessimistic,
self-fulfilling beliefs. History can condition these beliefs and make it difficult
to change the cohesiveness of institutions. This is the view, for instance, that
underpins the interpretation by Nunn (2008) of the persistent effects of slavery
on economic performance. It may be possible to change expectations through
the reform of rules, but the weight of history may strongly condition beliefs.
In terms of our model framework, this could mean that establishing cohesive
institutions might be hard or impossible regardless of γ . Thus, the absence of
trust could explain why some countries are locked into weak states, even if
political instability is high.
Trust as a Trait The class of work discussed so far models trust as behavior.
Individuals are actually not trustworthy in any well-defined sense. They are
really self-interested, but they cooperate because their self-interest dictates
that cooperation is a sensible strategy. If intertemporal links are broken for
some reason, the trust may break down suddenly and forcefully. An alternative
approach is to see trust as a product of individual “types.” Some people keep
their word, find cheating distasteful, and are willing to share what they have
6. The standard model is described in Fudenberg and Maskin (1986) and the model with community enforcement is due to Kandori (1989).
288 chapter seven: political reform


with complete strangers—even with those they will never interact with again.
Experimental evidence on so-called “divide-the-dollar” games overwhelmingly
supports the idea that some people are naturally cooperative. Moreover, such
traits are more prevalent in some societies than in others. Cohesive societies are
often described as having cooperative norms of behavior, but these norms do
not have any strategic underpinnings. Social capital as popularized by Putnam
(1993) is often described in these terms.
When it comes to politics, the parameter θ could reflect such societal traits.
The traits may also reflect political selection, if some polities are better able to
promote individuals with cooperative traits to public office. This second view
of the origins of cohesive institutions also brings good and bad news. The good
news is that we expect societal traits to be slow moving. As a result, cohesiveness
might stick because it is really embedded in people’s preferences. Thus, we may
not see θ changing much in response to changes in γ . A cohesive set of political
institutions will tend to be maintained. The bad news is that the same argument
applies to societies whose ethics entrench low θ . Changing institutions may
then have only a limited impact on increased cohesiveness. Improving political
selection by trying to find trustworthy politicians may help. But if there are few
moral people around, this may be difficult.
For this second interpretation of trust and cohesiveness, the way to change
cohesiveness is to change society. This opens up an interesting line of work,
following recent contributions, such as the one by Tabellini (2008). Suppose
that parents can choose to endow their children with preferences for political
cohesiveness so they behave as if θ = 1/2 when selected for political office or
with low cohesiveness so they behave as if θ = 0. Moreover, suppose that the
equilibrium policy outcome depends on the composition of the legislature. Now,
the setup involves a game between parents who try to anticipate what other
parents will be doing. If the children are happier when society adopts their own
preferred norm, there will be a tendency for the equilibrium to have conformity,
but this could be conformity with either θ = 1/2 or θ = 0. On this basis alone,
whether a society ends up with a common-interest state could also be an issue of
coordinating on the cohesive norm. Here, we would expect a complementarity
with state capacity since the part of utility that is affected by preferences over
θ is the public domain. Larger collective consumption makes the payoff to the
bequeathed norm more important.
Taking Stock Two interesting and related themes emerge from the brief discus
sion in this subsection.
developing the model 289


If trust is indeed important in building cohesiveness, history matters. The
choice of institutions and/or the working of institutions can depend on slow
moving factors. This is consistent with the recent empirical findings of Persson
and Tabellini (2009) that a long history of being democratic (or many democ
racies in the geographic neighborhood) endows a country with “democratic
capital,” which lowers the probability of transitions out of democracy.
Following from this, societies may have natural costs in adopting more
or less cohesive institutions. For any country, we could write a reduced-form
cost function C (θ; X), where X is a vector of relevant country characteristics,
including its political history. Exactly who pays this cost of regime change is not
clear—it could be paid privately or through interactions in the public budget.
An explicit model with micropolitical foundations would be needed to open
this black box. But the idea captures the possibility that raising θ could be very
costly in some societies. In such societies, the real choice might be between a
weak state and a redistributive state. If so, greater security of political power
might become a (second-best) device for improving the working of the state.
But the international community might also have a role in raising the cost of
θ = 0 and reducing the cost of θ = 1/2 by whatever means it has at its disposal.
7.2.6 Governance
Thus far, our discussion in this chapter has highlighted the role of political
institutions in allocating the public budget fairly between groups. Intergroup
resource allocation is indeed important and lies at the heart of the way that
many political institutions work in practice. But there are also important issues
associated with intragroup resource allocation. We now turn to these issues and
their dependence on political institutions. As we discussed in Section 3.2.4, a
predatory ruler who is able to extract resources through private expropriation
will not wish to invest in legal capacity since this would limit his power. As
a result, the economy may end up in a legal-capacity trap. In Chapter 3, we
introduced the governance parameter ζ ∈ [0, 1] to denote the transaction costs
an incumbent incurs when trying to extract resources via expropriation and
predation. We now analyze a reform aimed at increasing ζ and the incentive
that a period-1 incumbent might have to undertake such a reform.
What Transaction Costs? In a search for micropolitical foundations, the
governance parameter ζ can be thought of primarily as representing inducing
transparency and individual accountability. To what extent will a public official
be able to make a private gain from public office that goes unmonitored and
290 chapter seven: political reform


unpunished? In practice, we expect the answer to this question to be strongly
correlated with constraints on the executive, our core empirical measure of θ .
However, governance is wider than these constraints and might reflect such
things as government openness and freedom of the press. To home in on
incentives to reform, we follow the same approach as in our discussion about
θ and assume that raising ζ carries no direct cost. Obviously, then, any costs
of reform would just serve to further diminish the incentive to pursue good
governance.
A Simple Binary Case We focus on a binary case where ζ ∈ {0, 1} such that
governance is either bad ζ = 0 or good ζ = 1. The task is to understand the
incentive of a period-1 incumbent to implement good governance. As in Chap
ter 3, we look at the case when an elite eI controls power within the group
and earns all the returns from predation, if any. An increase in pJ
s will increase
the cost of predation and, hence, reduce the likelihood that the state will be
predatory. We focus on the case when, under bad governance, it is optimal not
to extend formal legal protection to either group, pI
s = pO
s = 0. Let y (0) be the
income per capita in each group in the bad-governance case.
To home in on governance, suppose as well that θ = 1/2, i.e., the institutions
used to allocate resources through the public budget are fully cohesive. This
assumption is clearly unrealistic in situations where governance can be bad,
but it will serve cleanly to isolate this separate dimension of political reform.
With good governance, we have pI
s = pO
s = πs, full extension of legal protection
within the confines of available legal capacity.
In terms of Proposition 3.9, we are thus dealing with parameters such that
ζH < 1 and ζL > 0. Adopting the same notation as in Section 3.2.4, we let
ˆ0=
∑
J ∈{I ,O}
[μ (χˆ0, 0) y ̃ (0) − C (χˆ0
)]
eI (7.7)
be the level of rents for each member of the elite when there is bad governance.
Recall that χˆ0 is the associated predation level defined in equation (3.28).
Now let
U I (τ2, π2; ζ ) = (1 − ζ ) ˆ 0+
[1 + τ2
([φαH + (1 − φ) αL
] − 1)] [ζy (π2
) + (1 − ζ ) y (0)]
and
U O (τ2, π2; ζ ) = [1 + τ2
([φαH + (1 − φ) αL
] − 1)] [ζy (π2
) + (1 − ζ ) y (0)]
developing the model 291


be the payoff to the period-1 incumbent elite if their group is the incumbent or
the opposition in period 2. With good governance, ζ = 1, U I = U O, i.e., there
is no incumbency advantage in period 2 because we have assumed that θ = 1/2.
Equilibrium Governance The optimal choice of governance by the period-1
incumbent maximizes
(1 − γ ) U I (τ2, π2; ζ ) + γ U O (τ2, π2; ζ ) .
There will also be investments in state capacities, where the usual investment
costs, λ1
[F (τ2 − τ1
) + L (π2 − π1
)], are taken into account.
Our core result on governance reform is as follows:
Proposition 7.7: The period-1 incumbent prefers good governance (ζ2 = 1) in
period 2 if and only if
(1 − γ ) ˆ 0 − [1 + τ2
([φαH + (1 − φ) αL
] − 1)] (y (π2
) − y (0)) ≤ 0.
A good governance reform is less likely the smaller the elite and the lower the
state capacity.
The condition in the proposition just says that the expected value of the rents
to the incumbent elite is smaller than the income gains (direct and through the
public budget) of eliminating them.
As in our discussion of cohesiveness in Section 7.2.2, good governance is
most likely to be chosen when expected political turnover is high. However,
there is no guarantee that γ ≥ 1/2 suffices to improve governance. In particular,
the higher the gains from predation, ˆ 0, the weaker the motives for reform. As
shown clearly by (7.7), the smaller the elite the higher the per-member predation
gains.
Taking Stock Proposition 7.7 reveals another complementarity between state
capacity and governance reforms. If π2 is high, the prospective income gains
from improving governance and hence better exploiting the legal system are
greater. If τ2 is high, this additional income has a higher value because of the
public goods that can be provided. These complementarities suggest a further
source of clustering in that weak state capacities and poor governance tend to
reinforce each other. This suggests the possibility of a governance trap, where
owing to the absence of fiscal and legal capacity the elite have weak incentives
292 chapter seven: political reform


to create good governance institutions. As indicated by the proposition, the risk
of such a governance trap is particularly acute when politics is dominated by
small powerful elites.
The condition in Proposition 7.7 can fail to hold even if political instability
is high. This fact suggests that states that are weak owing to high predation
may be especially resistant to political reform. To the extent that it is hard to
raise θ without raising ζ —since both may involve increased accountability on
the part of the executive—this may have a knock-on effect on the resistance
to reform toward cohesive institutions. If this is correct, we should rarely find
cohesive institutions together with bad governance.
We can combine the insights from this subsection with those from Subsection
7.2.4 regarding political reform and political violence. As violence brings about
a lower value of γ , it will further retard governance reform. Moreover, as
argued in Chapter 4, weak governance encourages political violence. Thus, a
further vicious circle of violence and bad governance may be unleashed with
additional implications for clustered misery. On a more positive note, our
analysis underlines the dynamic gains from conquering poor governance and
creating incentives for stronger and more peaceful states. The only question is
how far small and unwilling political elites can be expected to swallow that
bitter pill. Sadly, the experience of postwar development does not give us much
ground for optimism.
7.3 Political Reform in Practice
The analysis in this chapter has touched upon a number of issues regarding
endogenous political reform, relying on models of macropolitics as well as
models with micropolitical foundations. As the analysis has been preliminary
and exploratory, it is not so easy to come down with a clear bottom line
in terms of empirical predictions. In this section, we nevertheless try to use
specific insights from the theory to sketch a few examples of how one can
think systematically about how to approach the data. Thus we emphasize
methodology more than substance.
Political Stability and Political Reform A common theme in Sections 7.1
and 7.2.4 on strategic reforms, with and without the threat of violence, is
that reform toward more cohesive political institutions is more likely, when
political reform in practice 293


incumbents perceive a higher probability that they will be replaced in the future.
This theme is reflected in Proposition 7.2 as well as Proposition 7.5. How can
we test this prediction in the data?
By way of illustration consider the simpler case in Proposition 7.2. This
proposition implies a simple condition for reform toward cohesive political
institutions, i.e., θ ≥ 1−αL
2 , to be undertaken, namely
1
2 − γ ≤ 0. (7.8)
Suppose we have measures of the θ and γ , such as the proxies we have used from
the Polity IV data. The problem with using these in an empirical study is clearly
illustrated by the analyses in Sections 7.2.2 and 7.2.3. Summary measures
of θ and γ , like our empirical proxies in earlier chapters, are most likely
correlated with each other, e.g., because the political rules of the game—called
" in the chapter—reflect some common underlying socioeconomic variables.
Thus, putting θ (i , ") on the right-hand side and γ (") on the left-hand side may
give us a correlation, but it says little about the causal relation from political
stability to cohesiveness because of an omitted-variable problem.
The Likelihood of Reform To drive home that point and see possible ways
out of the conundrum, consider an empirical approach similar to the one we
outlined in Section 4.3. Specifically, suppose that we can write peaceful expected
political turnover by the incumbent in country c at date s as the following sum:
γc,s = γ ("c,s) + γ ̃c,s . (7.9)
In this expression, γ ("c,s) is an observable empirical proxy of the “endogenous”
part of stability, whereas γ ̃c,s is an observable measure of an “exogenous”
stability component, where endogenous and exogenous refer to being correlated
and uncorrelated with θ (ic,s , "c,s).
Suppose now that there is a stochastic net cost of cohesive political reform in
country c at date s , which is additive (with a minus sign) to γc,s and is denoted
by ηc,s. Let ηc,s have a country-specific distribution function Qc(η). Using (7.9),
we can then rewrite the condition for reform toward cohesive institutions in
(7.8) as
ηc,s ≤ γ ("c,s) + γ ̃c,s − 1
2.
294 chapter seven: political reform


Given the model in Section 7.1 and the result in Proposition 7.2, the conditional
likelihood of observing reform can now be expressed as
Prob[θ (ic,s+1, "c,s+1) ≥ 1 − αL
2 | θ (ic,s , "c,s) = 0] = Qc(γ ("c,s) + γ ̃c,s − 1
2 ).
(7.10)
The expression in (7.10) gives us a stepping stone for discussing alternative
approaches to confronting the theory with data.
We now suggest three examples of how the theory can be applied. First,
we consider an existing econometric study. We then discuss two possible cases
studies built around specific instances of institutional change. In each instance,
we discuss a prospective source of exogenous variation in γc,s to be exploited.
The point of the ensuing discussion is to illustrate the value of interpreting the
data armed with an explicit theory, which links prospective political turnover
and political reform together.
Example 1: Political Assassinations and Institutional Change The expression
in (7.10) suggests a way of looking at the link between political turnover and
the move toward cohesive institutions. To make this operational requires a
measurable exogenous stability component γ ̃c,s. A recent paper by Jones and
Olken (2009) offers a potential way out via an ingenious identification strategy.
Specifically, they use successful and unsuccessful assassination attempts against
political leaders, over a period of 130 years, to predict within-country political
regime changes. The identifying assumption is that the difference between
success and failure creates comparable treatment and control groups, since
the success of an assassination attempt can be considered as good as random.
Jones and Olken (2009) find that successful assassinations result in a higher
probability of democratic transitions compared to unsuccessful ones. For this
purpose, democracy is coded as a binary variable based on an overall democracy
score in the Polity IV data. They show, moreover, that these regime changes are
durable 10 years after the event.
This empirical strategy fits neatly into the framework that we have sketched
in this subsection and Section 7.1, if we assume that: (1) democracy is a
more cohesive political system compared to autocracy, i.e., θ is higher, and
(2) successful assassinations (exogenously) induce more political instability γ ̃
compared to unsuccessful ones. Assumption (1) is certainly plausible a priori.
Assumption (2) is not only plausible a priori, but also receives support from
political reform in practice 295


Jones and Olken’s auxiliary results, which show that successful assassinations
raise the intensity of civil conflicts.
Thus, the theoretical framework that we have developed in this section offers
an interpretation of the results from Jones and Olken’s (2009) empirical study.
A similar approach could be used to analyze reforms for alternative measures
of cohesive political institutions and alternative measures of within-country
time variation in political instability. The aim should be to look for credibly
exogenous time-series variation in γ within countries alongside changes in the
adoption or abandonment of strong executive constraints.
Example 2: The Switch toward Proportional Representation in Western Europe
When the data required for a panel-data econometric study is not available,
there is still the possibility of using case studies. Even though this is not the
typical description adopted by authors, interpreting such studies in terms of a
theory requires clarity about the source of exogenous variation that is being
appealed to.
In this vein, we look at a second example based on a famous hypothesis,
formulated in Rokkan (1970) and further extended (and tested) by others,
including Boix (1999). The hypothesis concerns causes of the switch from
plurality to PR elections in many countries, such as Denmark, Sweden, Belgium,
and the Netherlands. These switches occurred under incumbent governments
dominated by right-of-center parties around the turn of the twentieth century, in
connection with the introduction of universal suffrage, and was then followed
by several other countries in the wake of World War I.
Rokkan’s hypothesis is that the switch to PR was made to limit the electoral
losses of left-wing parties, which had grown stronger owing to industrialization
and the rise of the labor movement. But a similar switch did not occur in several
other countries such as the United Kingdom and Canada. According to the
hypothesis, this depended on cross-cutting cleavages in other dimensions, which
made the established rural and urban elites based on land and capital more or
less united in their interests. It was only where established elites and parties were
politically divided that the rising labor movement imposed a more formidable
threat and the switch to PR occurred.
These ideas can be placed in our framework as follows. Suppose we
consider—as Section 7.2 argued we might—a move from plurality rule to
PR as an increase in cohesiveness, i.e., a higher θ . The political threat to the
incumbent governments of the rising labor movements is then interpreted as
an upward shift in γ . At first sight then, the Rokkan hypothesis appears to
296 chapter seven: political reform


fit neatly into the framework of this chapter. The discussion around equa
tion (7.10) should give us some cause for concern, however. Was the threat
to the incumbent right-center parties really an exogenous change in politi
cal stability, i.e., a change in γ ̃? It may plausibly be argued that the rise of
organized labor was tied to structural change, which was, in turn, driven by
technological innovation. But can we really claim that the different coalitions
between urban and rural elites, which were assumed to distinguish the cases
of, say, Sweden and the United Kingdom, were exogenous to other forces that
may have pushed more or less in the direction of PR, such as the ethnic com
position of the population or the geographical preconditions for agriculture
and industry? Perhaps. It would seem that this is best not judged a pri
ori, though, but rather through a careful comparative historical case study,
with the aim of verifying or rejecting the exogeneity requirement. However,
putting things in terms of our framework certainly sharpens the nature of this
debate.
Example 3: Institutional Deterioration in Africa Finally, we return to the
empirical observations in Table 7.1, which showed that many of the indepen
dent countries founded in the last 50 or so years have never adopted cohe
sive institutions as measured by the highest score on the Polity IV executive
constraints variable. Further, among the few countries that started out with
cohesive institutions, very few retained them. The African case is particularly
noteworthy. Mauritius and Botswana maintained their initial (or early adopted)
cohesive institutions, whereas Lesotho, Nigeria, Somalia, Sudan and Uganda
lost their initially cohesive institutions—sooner rather than later. Moreover,
other African states have never introduced cohesive institutions.
It is possible to look at these failures to implement cohesiveness reforms
through the lens of the theory in Sections 7.1, 7.2.4, and 7.2.6. The theory
suggests that the reversions away from cohesiveness would likely reflect the
desire of long-lived rulers to take advantage of a relatively secure hold on power,
i.e., a low value of γ , to destroy (or never create) any existing checks and
balances. By doing so, they would be able to extend favors to broad groups of
supporters and/or enrich themselves or the members of a small elite. Moreover,
such motives are strengthened by having significant natural-resource rents or
aid (recall Proposition 7.6). In addition, leaders may also have been supported
by military aid from abroad, especially as a concomitant of strategic alignments
during the Cold War (recall parameter ξ and its effect on violent turnover in
Chapters 4 and 5).
political reform in practice 297


As in the case study of the Rokkan hypothesis, a few detailed comparative
case studies would be a rewarding way to check out whether these hypotheses
hold water empirically. Once again, the challenge would be to explain not only
cases of reform away from cohesive institutions but also those in the direction of
cohesiveness. This may not be completely straightforward. On the surface there
appear to be some anomalies. Botswana has considerable natural resources and
has had more-or-less uninterrupted rule by the same incumbent party, while
retaining cohesive institutions. Mauritius is ethnically and culturally diverse,
but has also retained cohesive political institutions since independence. But the
principle is clear. A successful case study in terms of the theory would involve a
credible argument about differences across time and countries in the exogenous
component of political stability γ ̃.
7.4 Final Remarks
In this chapter, we have taken some steps toward integrating endogenous
political reform into the core model. A general finding is that forces that lead
to political stability generally reduce the motives of ruling groups to undertake
political reforms toward greater cohesiveness.
We have also sketched some micropolitical foundations for the main macro
political parameters in the core model, political cohesiveness, and (peaceful)
political turnover, and tried to relate them to real-world tangible political
institutional rules and regulations. As in the case of tax compliance in Chapter 2,
we have noted that cohesiveness in political life may reflect not only formal
institutions, but also informal rules of behavior, trust, and social norms. This is
in line with studies that focus on the role of social capital. Consonant with one
of our recurrent themes, we have also considered political reform in a predatory
state and given reasons for resistance toward reforms that promote common
interest politics. This discussion reinforces the observation that reform may be
particularly problematic in such states.
We have tried to develop the theory in a manner that is mindful of the
need to match theoretical progress with empirical explanation. Toward this
end, we sketched a theoretical interpretation of Jones and Olken’s (2009)
empirical study of democratic reform following successful assassinations of
political leaders. We have also argued that historical case studies could usefully
be informed by the theory. The central idea is that comparative case studies have
298 chapter seven: political reform


to begin from a proper discussion of exogenous variation across time and/or
across countries. There are already some case studies based explicitly on theory
in the development literature. A notable example is Lucas (1993), who uses the
neoclassical growth model to look at why South Korea, but not the Philippines,
“made a miracle.” Similarly, the four country cases considered in Acemoglu and
Robinson (2005) are clearly related to an explicit theoretical structure.7
The discussion around the Anna Karenina matrix at the end of Chapter 5
gave pride of place to cohesive institutions in promoting peace and prosperity.
There, we argued that to understand development clusters, theoretical and
empirical knowledge about the interactions among economic, social, cultural,
and political variables that might create cohesiveness is of first importance. This
chapter has merely scratched the surface of this question in the context of our
framework, and much more work remains to be done.
7.5 Notes on the Literature
There is a large literature in political science on the choice of constitutional
arrangements, such as electoral systems and forms of government and their
consequences within the political system. Classics in this literature include Pow
ell (1989, 2000), who poses the choice between plurality and PR elections
as a trade-off between accountability and representation; Shugart and Carey
(1992), who study the choice between presidential and parliamentary systems;
and Diermeier and Feddersen (1998), who lay the micropolitical foundations
for these alternative forms of government based on the presence or absence of
the confidence procedure. Cox (1997) and Taagepera and Shugart (1989) dis
cuss different features of electoral systems and Myerson (1999) summarizes the
theoretical literature on the consequences of different electoral rules. Lijphart
(1977, 1984, 1999) discusses democratic institutions in terms of their cohesive
features—his notion of consociational democracy being similar to our concept
of cohesiveness.
The study of policy choice in multiple dimensions as political equilibrium
was impeded for a long time by negative results in the field of social choice, ema
nating from the nonexistence results in Arrow (1951). Various ways around the
7. This is in the spirit of the analytic narratives approach of Bates, Greif, Levi, Rosenthal, and Weingast (1998).
notes on the literature 299


Arrow paradox have since been followed in the literature. One is to specify the
agenda-setting procedure with a view to real-world political arrangements as in
the agenda-setting approach in Romer and Rosenthal (1979) and the legislative
bargaining approach in Baron and Ferejohn (1989). Another way to convexify
voter preferences is the probabilistic-voting model with roots in Hinich, Led
yard, and Ordeshook (1972) and adapted to redistributive policymaking by
Lindbeck and Weibull (1987). More recently, the citizen-candidate models of
Besley and Coate (1997) and Osborne and Slivinsky (1996) solve the problem
by restricting attention to ex post optimal choices. Overviews of the resulting
literatures can be found in Austen-Smith and Banks (2005) and Persson and
Tabellini (2000).
A more recent literature in political economics has discussed the economic
consequences of alternative constitutional arrangements. An accessible over
view of this work can be found in Persson and Tabellini (2004). Persson and
Tabellini (2003) provide a broad empirical investigation of the economic con
sequences of constitutional arrangements for spending and other policies using
cross-country data. Besley and Case (2003) survey the empirical literature on
the consequences of different political institutions at the U.S. subnational level,
with an emphasis on institutional differences across states.
Another body of work has examined incentives to change political institu
tions. Brennan and Buchanan (1985) and Buchanan (1987) emphasize the role
of constitutional rules to constrain incumbent discretion. Frey (1983) offers a
parallel approach. Aghion and Bolton (2003) study the design of constitutions
as the choice of an incomplete social contract, where society chooses political
decisionmaking procedures behind a veil of ignorance. This analysis is extended
by Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi (2004), who analyze the costs and benefits of
insulating political leaders from changes in voters preferences or from aggre
gate shocks. Ticchi and Vindigni (2010) study the endogenous choice of a
constitution.
There is now a literature in political economics on the reasons behind
extension of the franchise, beginning with the theoretical paper by Acemoglu
and Robinson (2000) with supportive evidence. More systematic evidence on
the hypothesis from Western Europe is provided in Aidt and Jensen (2010). A
classic paper on the consequences of the franchise extension on the amount
of redistributive policies in various U.S. states is Husted and Kenny (1997).
Aidt and Jensen (2009b) study how the extensions of the franchise in Western
Europe from the middle of the nineteenth century and onward affected levels
of taxation and the size of government.
300 chapter seven: political reform


Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) study the dynamics between autocracies
and democracies in theory. Persson and Tabellini (2009) propose a theoretical
and empirical model based on the idea of democratic capital. Boettke, Coyne,
and Leeson (2008) offer a general discussion of institutional stickiness based
on cultural factors, motivated especially by the heterogeneous experiences of
the former Eastern Bloc countries. Political culture and its importance is also a
theme in Hillman and Ursprung (2000). Moore (1966) is a classic reference
emphasizing the economic and social structures that support democracies,
putting weight on the rise of the middle class. Boix (2003) and Przeworski,
Alvarez, Cheibub, and Limongi (2000) study the effects of democracy and
discuss its sustainability more generally.
How political institutions lead to less corrupt behavior in government has
been a central theme in models of elections and political institutions. In gen
eral, such models must deal with the agency problem that arises between the
government and the governed. Barro (1973) and Ferejohn (1986) are early con
tributions, whereas Persson, Roland, and Tabellini (1997) extend the model to
include separation of powers among various policymakers. Besley (2006) offers
an overview of political-agency models and emphasizes that a blend of incentive
and selection effects has to be studied in order to appreciate how accountability
effects play out. Accountability models lead naturally to thinking about the role
of the media in promoting good governance. This topic is examined by Besley
and Prat (2006). Coyne and Leeson (2009) and Prat and Str  ̈omberg (2010)
survey the emerging literature on media, politics, and economic development.
notes on the literature 301


CHAPTER 8
Lessons Learned
By development I mean the movement upward of the entire social system, and I believe this is the only logically tenable definition. This social system encloses, besides the so-called economic factors . . . the distribution of power in society; and more generally economic, social, and political stratification; broadly speaking, institutions and attitudes. . . . The dynamics of the system are determined by the fact that among all the endogenous conditions there is circular causation, implying that if one changes, others will change in response, and those secondary changes in their turn cause new changes all around, and so forth.
Gunnar Myrdal, “What Is Development?,” Journal of Economic
Issues, 1974 pp. 729–730
We started out in Chapter 1 by noting that development clusters. Thus, income
per capita, strong state institutions, and peaceful resolution of differences
tend to go hand in hand. Understanding the causes and consequences of this
clustering is an important end for a curious social scientist trying to explain
the process of development. But a better understanding is also an important
means for a concerned policymaker trying to design bilateral or multilateral
development assistance.
We have taken a few steps toward a better understanding of why develop
ment clusters. This effort has involved gradually building a core theoretical
model, adding more and more dimensions to obtain a richer story. The core
model helps us think about the forces behind purposeful investments by gov
ernments in the extractive and productive capabilities of the state. These invest
ments enable taxes on broad bases to be used for public-goods provision or
income redistribution; they also enable support for private markets by remov
ing frictions that are due to imperfectly enforced contracts or poorly protected
property rights. The core model also helps us understand the forces behind
purposeful investments in political violence by governments and prospective
302


insurgents, in order to raise their probabilities to maintain or seize political
authority.
Against the background of these theoretical predictions, we have explored
empirically the worldwide patterns of different state capacities, different forms
of violence, and their prospective determinants. Most of our empirical work has
involved computing an array of partial correlations suggested by the theory. In
Chapter 4, however, we have shown how our theory can be used to design a
more structural empirical strategy to address the data.
Plan of the Chapter In this final chapter, we sum up and take stock of our
findings. The first section discusses the lessons we have learned. Returning to
the three main questions formulated in Chapter 1, we summarize the answers
suggested in the various chapters. We also relate our approach to various
strands of thinking about economic development.
In Section 8.2, we attempt to crystallize the main thrust of our argument
in simple empirical fashion. Specifically, we define and compute a Pillars of
Prosperity Index, based on empirical counterparts to the central outcomes
emphasized by our theory. We also use the theory—as summarized in the Anna
Karenina matrix of Chapter 5—to predict the values of this index, based on
empirical counterparts of the central determinants uncovered by our theory.
Comparing the actual and predicted values of the Pillars of Prosperity Index
for 150 countries, we learn about successes as well as failures of the theory.
This book marks much more of a start than an end of a research program.
In line with that fact, Section 8.3 highlights the provisional character of our
findings by enumerating some important omissions and suggesting theoretical
and empirical issues for further research,
8.1 What We Have Learned
8.1.1 Answers to the Three Main Questions
Having demonstrated the dramatic clustering of different development out
comes in Chapter 1, we posed three central questions as main themes of the
book. These are closely related to the sufficient conditions for prosperity set
forth by Adam Smith in the mid-1700s, namely “peace, easy taxes and a toler
able administration of justice.”
what we have learned 303


Specifically, our three questions were:
1. What forces shape the building of different state capacities and why
do these capacities vary together?
2. What factors drive political violence in its different forms?
3. What explains the clustering of state institutions, violence, and
income?
1. State Capacities According to our analysis, one important answer to the
first question is that investments in different parts of the state are often com
plements to one another. We derived such a complementary relationship for
fiscal and legal capacity in the core model of Chapter 3. The specialized micro
economic models described later in the same chapter suggest additional reasons
for complementarities to arise. Another side of state-capacity complementarity
is that many determinants of fiscal and legal capacity will be common. There
fore, countries and times in which incumbents have strong motives to invest
e.g., owing to strong common interests or cohesive political institutions—will
see a joint expansion of the two dimensions of the state, whereas those where
incumbents have feeble investment motives will see stagnant state institutions.
These possibilities come out clearly in our typology of common-interest, re
distributive, and weak states.
Extending the analysis to include predation and elite control, we also identi
fied how poor governance results in a predatory state. Such states do not invest
in legal capacity. Since poor-governance institutions and low-cohesiveness insti
tutions are likely to go together, we would expect predatory states to cluster
among redistributive and weak states.
2. Political Violence An important answer to the second question is that
one-sided political violence—repression by incumbent governments against
oppositional elements—and two-sided political violence—outright civil war
between the government and insurgent forces—have common roots. What are
these roots? Our analysis in Chapter 4 revealed that some of them are exactly
the same as the roots underlying the weak motives for investing in the state.
The theoretical and empirical analyses in that chapter also emphasized how
nontax government revenues, provided by large resource rents or flows of cash
aid, can trigger violence. But these results came with an important proviso:
304 chapter eight: lessons learned


getting the predicted effect on violence requires weak common interests and/or
noncohesive political institutions. These predictions come out clearly in our
typology of peace, repression, and civil war.
Revisiting the recurring theme of predatory states in this context, we found
that the elites in such states generally have stronger motives to invest in violence
than incumbents in nonpredatory states.
3. Development Clusters As for the forces behind clustering of high (low)
state capacity and peaceful (nonpeaceful) outcomes, the common roots are one
important answer. But the analysis in Chapter 5 identified another possibility.
Factors that facilitate the organization and conduct of an insurgency—such as
geography or foreign intervention—will increase the risk of civil war, and this
can feed back to weaker collective motives for building the state.
The negative relation between income and (risk of) violence goes two ways,
which helps us understand the clustering of income and violence. We saw in
Chapter 4 how higher (wage) incomes decrease the likelihood of repression and
civil war by raising the opportunity cost of investing in violence. In Chapter 5,
we illustrated an effect in the other direction: a higher risk of civil war and the
ensuing destruction of capital or land decrease the expected returns to private
investments and therefore the growth of income.
Analogous two-way forces between income and state-capacity investments
were discussed in Chapter 3 as a possible cause behind the clustering of income
and state capacity. Exogenous growth of market incomes strengthens the
motives for incumbents to invest in fiscal as well as legal capacity, provided that
institutions are not too noncohesive and political instability is not too much
of a problem. But the growth of state capacity also feeds back to income as
endogenous growth. Higher legal capacity reduces frictions and raises incomes
by making markets work better. Also, higher fiscal capacity can raise incomes
by reducing the motives for incumbents to earn rents by inefficient regulation
of markets or by distorting predation on producers.
It is now easy to see how income, institutions, and violence may cluster. First,
they have some determinants in common. Second, there exists a set of positive
feedback loops among the central variables that raise the possibility of virtuous
and vicious circles that make all outcomes move together. This possibility of
mutually reinforcing dynamic feedbacks is a close analog to Gunnar Myrdal’s
conception of development as a process of cumulative effects and circular
causation in the quote at the beginning of this chapter. Our approach to
what we have learned 305


analyzing development is also reminiscent of the one taken by Myrdal in its
emphasis on institutions and the interplay between economic and political
forces [see e.g., Myrdal (1968)].
Development Assistance Our framework has allowed us to discuss problems
and pitfalls in the allocation of development assistance. The main thrust of our
analysis in Chapter 6 was that a one-size-fits-all approach to aid is bound to
be misguided. Although this insight is certainly not new to the aid community,
our approach suggests a consistent way of thinking about different forms of
development assistance in different types of recipient countries.
One hallmark of that analysis is that various important decisions in recipient
countries will be responsive to the nature of aid flows, including policies such as
public-goods provision, investments in the state, investments in violence, and
perhaps—as discussed in Chapter 7—the design of political institutions. Our
results show that these responses may be crucially different, depending on the
strength of the recipient country’s state institutions, as well as its propensity for
violence—in short, its location in the Anna Karenina matrix of Chapter 5.
Another hallmark of the analysis is that alternative forms of aid are likely to
generate quite different responses even in a country with given state institutions
and propensity for violence. One example comes from our recurring theme of
resource dependence, which suggests different propensities across countries for
resorting to political violence.
Common Interests A few specific determinants of state capacity stand out. In
particular, the theory pinpoints common interests in society, as manifested in
fiscal capacity being used to provide public goods to the broad population rather
than to redistribute in favor of incumbent groups. This can come about because
of circumstances, such as an external threat against the nation (parameter φ in
the modeling). It can also come about because cross-cutting cleavages in society
are weak enough not to result in polarization (parameter ι in the modeling).
But common interests can also emanate because existing political institutions
constrain the policies of incumbent governments, either by checks and balances
on executives or by representation of opposition groups in the policymaking
process (parameter θ in the modeling).
Strong common interests for either of these reasons promote a common
interest state (recall Chapters 2 and 3) and a peaceful resolution of conflicts
(recall Chapter 4), bringing the overall outcome into the blissful upper-right
306 chapter eight: lessons learned


corner of the Anna Karenina matrix (recall Chapter 5). Out of that corner,
the picture is more complex, and outcomes for state building and violence
are determined by the interaction of specific circumstances and institutions.
According to our Anna Karenina principle of development: “all nonprosperous
countries are nonprosperous in their own way.”
Persistence of Weak States This raises the question of why not all countries
choose to be prosperous by reforming political institutions toward those pro
moting common interests. Clearly, the simple core model paints too rosy a
picture of prospects for institutional reform. For example, Section 3.4 shows
how entrenched elites from either group may have strong incentives to abuse
their temporary hold on power for their own enrichment.
Further, our provisional analysis of endogenous reform in Chapter 7 suggests
that strong forces—in particular, perceived security in power for incumbent
groups—may, in fact, bring about reform in the other direction, toward non
cohesive institutions. Moreover, such institutions may be kept in place once
they have been created, with political opponents in redistributive or weak states
being kept in check by government repression.
Persistence of Predatory States Adding the possibility of predation and elite
control, another of the recurring subthemes of the book, we can also ask why
predatory states survive. Based on the analyses in Chapters 3 and 4, Chapter 7
shows that low expectations of political turnover and a small elite are possible
answers. A small elite group with a strong hold on power will not wish to
undertake reforms that reduce the scope for them to maintain power and exploit
it for their private gain. There is a clear connection between this argument and
the general thrust of the analysis in Acemoglu and Robinson (2010).
Predatory states are weak from the perspective of legal capacity and tend to
have low incomes. Since institutions that improve governance also bring about
greater cohesiveness, this gives a further reason to expect predatory states to
be either redistributive or weak in terms of our basic definitions.
8.1.2 Our Analysis and Traditional Development Research
Our analysis relates to a number of currents in development research.
The 1960s and 1970s—Developmental States Rule Traditional research in
development economics, such as Chenery and Elkington (1979) or Chenery
what we have learned 307


and Strout (1966), placed little emphasis on the issues studied in our book.
In particular, the role of institutional change took a back seat relative to tra
ditional themes such as capital accumulation and technological change. The
developmental state stood at the heart of this approach. However, the view of
the government tended to be technocratic, with little or no attention paid to
the incentives or ability of government to put the economic institutions that
would make policy effective in place. There was a strong focus on planning.
Cost-benefit analysis was supposed of be an essential tool for identifying public
interventions. But how such policies would be implemented, or whether gov
ernments would even follow the prescribed interventions, was not really a part
of that analysis.
In some places, this vision materialized as emphasized by Amsden (1992)
and Wade (1990) in their commentaries on the East Asian experience. But the
experience of state-led development was much less successful elsewhere. Many
countries failed to grow and some even regressed. Further, as we discussed in
Chapter 7, the quality of political institutions deteriorated with poor executive
constraints and high levels of corruption.
The 1980s: Policy Recommendations Rule As these aspects of poor government
became apparent, the 1980s were dominated by the so-called Washington
Consensus. This was a program of reform advocated by the IMF and the
World Bank, which aimed at improving macroeconomic stability, increasing
openness, and reducing public intervention, in the hope that growth would
follow. However, little attention was paid to fixing the institutional and political
failures that fostered the resource misallocation to which these very policy
recommendations were a response.
The 1990s: Institutions Rule During the following decade, debates about
institutional reform and issues of governance became increasingly central in
mainstream economics as well as in the policy sphere. These debates gained
a boost from the fall of the Berlin Wall and the economic transitions that
followed. The idea that development is about “getting the institutions right”
is now a widely accepted dictum. There is nothing particularly new in the idea
that development and institutional change are closely linked. This insight was
central in Myrdal’s work that we cited earlier in this chapter. It was also very
much at the heart of Douglass North’s work, based on a diagnosis of the factors
behind the industrial revolution.
308 chapter eight: lessons learned


The preoccupation with good institutions in contemporary development
thinking builds on North’s insights. The institutional approach shifts the devel
opment debate away from the specific policies making up the Washington
Consensus onto the incentives to pursue good policy in practice. Our approach
is very much in the spirit of this institutional approach. Although it provides a
guide for identifying good institutions—those promoting cohesiveness in pub
lic decisions and making rent extraction by incumbents costly—we would also
argue that any precise prescriptions should be sensitive to the history and culture
of a particular country, in line with the discussions of development assistance
in Chapter 6 and political reform in Chapter 7.
Research on institutions has uncovered strong correlations between con
temporary income levels and historical factors such as slavery, inequality, and
settler mortality [see Nunn (2009) for a broad review of this work]. Much of the
recent interest stems from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson’s (2001) seminal
paper on colonial institutions. Although most of this work looks at the broad
macro picture, an earlier literature in development emphasizes the richness of
long-lived and highly persistent institutions [see Besley and Jayaraman (2010)].
This theme resurfaces in our approach when we stress that the cost of creating
cohesive institutions can be higher in some societies than others.
The 2000s: Experiments Rule Microeconomic research on the effectiveness
of specific policy interventions, using randomized-controlled trials (or natu
ral experiments), currently dominates the research frontier at the expense of
theoretical and macroeconomic research on development. At first sight, such
microeconomic research might seem to be quite remote from the big-picture
concerns in this book. However, our approach does in fact connect with this
important and innovative line of research.
The connections are twofold. Increasing common interests is a key message
throughout our analysis. Thus with a critical mass of microeconomically effec
tive interventions, we could expect a macroeconomic effect. At best, this might
put in motion a virtuous circle of reduced violence and investment in state
capacities. This possibility was mentioned in Chapter 6.
Moreover, the experimental approach is being developed to look for some
forms of interventions to improve governance or enhance cohesiveness. Such
micropolitical insights can contribute to the process of political reform that we
discussed in Chapter 7. As we have stressed, this could lead to fundamental
shifts in fortune.
what we have learned 309


8.2 The Pillars of Prosperity Index
Thus far, the summary of our argument has been theoretical and abstract.
A more concrete way of summarizing our main message is via an empirical
measurement of development clusters. In this section, we define and compute
our own Pillars of Prosperity Index, which is based on the principal outcome
variables in the theory. We also show how well one can predict the values of
this index by the main determinants that appear in our theory.
This exercise can be seen as an alternative to the various existing indexes of
fragile and weak states that were discussed in Chapters 1 and 6, as we make a
clear—and theory-based—distinction between outcomes and determinants of
fragility. Comparing the actual and predicted values of the index also teaches
us something about the strengths and weaknesses of our framework and the
validity of our measurements. We caution the reader, however, that the index
defined in this section and the predictions of it should be taken for what they are,
namely simple empirical illustrations of the development clusters we observe in
the data and some political and economic variables that correlate systematically
with these clusters.
8.2.1 Defining the Index
Our theory has highlighted the extractive and productive capabilities of the
state—labeled fiscal and legal capacity—as critical outcome variables. Thus,
it is natural to include empirical counterparts to these variables in our index.
The theory has also focused on political violence—in the form of government
repression and civil war—as a central outcome. We therefore use empirical
counterparts of these variables as well—or rather the absence of them—in our
index. Finally, income has also been a central outcome variable in our modeling.
Even though it appears more like a by-product of government and private
investment, we still include income per capita as an additional component of
our index.
How State Capacity Is Measured We have mainly modeled fiscal capacity as
a constraint on the government’s ability to levy an income tax. The closest
empirical measure in the IMF data we used in Chapters 1–3 is probably the share
of the income tax in total government revenue. In the theory, fiscal capacity is
a stock variable, which is the cumulative result of previous investments. Thus,
310 chapter eight: lessons learned


it makes sense to measure the income-tax share as late as possible. Given that
we also want to include as many countries as possible, we use the wide-ranging
IMF data from Baunsgaard and Keen (2005) and extract the revenue share of
the income tax in the year 1999 (the data set goes one year further, but the
last year has quite a bit of attrition). This measure of the income tax share is
available for 129 countries. We scale it between 0 and 1 by first subtracting
from each country’s income tax share the minimum in the sample and then
dividing by the sample range. Following the model notation, we refer to the
resulting variable for country i as τi.
When it comes to legal capacity, we have mainly modeled it as a constraint on
the government’s ability to enforce contracts in financial markets. The closest
empirical measure in the World Bank data we used in Chapter 3 is probably
the index of contract enforcement in the Doing Business survey. This measure is
from 2006, so it gauges the stock of legal capacity quite close to the present. As
in Chapter 3, we use the rank of this index, with high values corresponding to
high legal capacity. As for fiscal capacity, we scale the measure to lie between 0
and 1 by dividing each country’s rank (minus 1) with the number of countries
(minus 1) for which the index is available, namely 173. We refer to the resulting
variable as πi.
How Political Violence Is Measured For peaceful outcomes, we want to gauge
the absence of repression and civil war. In this case, it is hard to think of a current
measure with the dimension of a stock. In the theory, the violence outcome
depends on the investments made by incumbent and opposition groups in each
given period. Thus, it makes sense to measure these investments by the violence
outcomes over some time up to the present.
For civil war, we use the Armed Conflict Dataset discussed in Chapter 4.
Specifically, we look at the last 30 years of available data, i.e., from 1976 to
2006, computing the share of years between 1976 (or since independence if that
is later) and 2006 that a country has been involved in civil war. The underlying
civil-war variable is available for 170 countries. When it comes to repression, we
use the purges data from Banks (2005), which was also introduced in Chapter 4.
Here, too, we look at data from 1976 to the last year available (2005). We
gauge the share of these years each country has nonzero purges, given that it
does not have a civil war in the same year. The data for purges is available for
195 countries. By definition, the civil-war and repression measures are scaled
between 0 and 1. We refer to their values for country i as ci and ri.
the pillars of prosperity index 311


How Income Is Measured As the other outcome variables, we measure income
as late as possible for as many countries as possible. As in earlier chapters, we
use the logarithm of GDP per capita (in 2005 constant international prices)
in the last year of the 6.3 Penn World Tables, namely 2006. This gives us
income per capita for 186 countries. As for our other measures, we scale income
between 0 and 1 by deducting the minimum in the sample from each country’s
income level and then dividing by the full sample range. We refer to income per
capita as yi.
Weighting The next practical question is how to aggregate the five variables
we have just defined. Since they span very different outcomes, any weighting
scheme has a certain degree of arbitrariness. For lack of a better principle, we
assign equal weights to the three central concepts of state capacity, peaceful
outcomes, and income.
To define the index, we first construct a combined state-capacity index, si ,
by adding our fiscal- and legal-capacity variables together. If both of them are
available for country i, we give them equal weight, i.e., we set si = τi+πi
2 . But we
also allow one of them to be missing, in which case we just use the one available
variable, i.e., we set si = τi or si = πi. By construction, this state-capacity index
lies between 0 and 1.
We then construct an index of peaceful outcomes, pi. To reflect the fact
that civil war is a more serious form of violence, we give it twice the weight
compared to repression. Thus, we define the peacefulness index for country i as pi = 1 − ri
2 − ci. As ri + ci ≤ 1 because we have defined civil war and repression
as mutually exclusive events, the peacefulness index lies between 0 and 1 by
construction.
Finally, we define the Pillars of Prosperity Index for country i as
popi = si + pi + yi
3,
assuming that all three subindexes are available. We allow one of the compo
nents to be absent, however, in which case we add the two available subindexes
together with equal weights, although this is the case only for 10 out of the 150
countries. By construction, the final index lies between 0 and 1 (as all its compo
nents are scaled between 0 and 1). Naturally, several judgmental assumptions
go into the construction of the index. But experiments with different weight
ing schemes and alternative measures of the central variables do not yield very
different results.
312 chapter eight: lessons learned


The Resulting Index With these preliminaries in hand, we are ready to go.
Given the definitions and the availability of the underlying variables, we can
compute the Pillars of Prosperity Index for a total of 184 countries. Table 8.1
shows the value of the index and its three components for 150 countries. This
is the entire set, where, given the determinants discussed in the next subsection,
we can also predict the index. Most of the 34 excluded countries are small
island states in the Caribbean or the Pacific that do not meet the criterion of at
least one-half million inhabitants used in the Polity IV data set.
Table 8.1 orders the 150 countries from low to high values. The index assigns
the two lowest values to Zaire and Afghanistan. Other countries among the bot
tom ten include Myanmar, Somalia, and Sudan. Generally, these countries score
uniformly low on all three dimensions of the index. The most surprising entry
among the bottom ten is India. Although its recent growth has brought income
per capita above the very lowest in 2006, India still has an underdeveloped tax
system and many remaining market frictions, as well as a history of internal
political violence. We get back to the case of India in the next subsection. In
the next ten from the bottom, we find countries such as Chad and Iraq, with
quite bad outcomes on all three subindexes. We also find Colombia, however,
a richer country with a history of permanent civil war in the last three decades,
and hence a 0 score on the peacefulness index.
At the other end of the table, the top two performers are Sweden and
Switzerland, with scores near the top on all three subindexes. Others in the top
ten include United States, Japan, Canada, and the remaining two Scandinavian
countries. Among the top twenty, we find another set of European nations, but
also Singapore and South Korea (Iceland, Luxembourg, and Hong Kong are
not included in the table, as they do not enter the Polity IV data, but would
otherwise rank in the top ten or twenty).
Evidently, the Pillars of Prosperity Index captures some intuitive aspects of
development clusters. Figure 8.1 presents the information in Table 8.1 in a
graphic format, which is somewhat cruder, but also more digestible. This Pillars
of Prosperity Atlas indicates the scores of all countries among the 150, as these
are partitioned into deciles. The bottom decile of the index—i.e., the bottom
15 countries—is indicated by black, the top decile by white, and the deciles in
between marked on a gradual gray scale.
Figure 8.1 has clear similarities with the maps showing the Brookings and
Polity IV indexes of weak and fragile states at the beginning of Chapter 1. That
is, we see a concentration of bad outcomes in Africa and South Asia, owing to a
combination of low income, low state capacity, and frequent internal conflicts.
the pillars of prosperity index 313


Table 8.1 Pillars of Prosperity Index and components
Country Index value Peacefulness State capacity Income
Zaire 0.011 n/a 0.017 0.004 Afghanistan 0.084 0.081 0.052 0.118 Sudan 0.204 0.194 0.092 0.326 India 0.236 0.065 0.216 0.426 Myanmar 0.240 0.032 0.447 n/a
Uganda 0.261 0.145 0.422 0.216 Somalia 0.263 0.484 n/a 0.042 Ethiopia 0.267 0.129 0.479 0.194 Angola 0.275 0.129 0.237 0.460 Burundi 0.298 0.516 0.278 0.100
Chad 0.303 0.323 0.232 0.354 Colombia 0.304 0 0.350 0.563 Mozambique 0.308 0.484 0.114 0.326 Liberia 0.315 0.629 n/a 0 Iraq 0.320 0.226 0.249 0.485
Cambodia 0.340 0.323 0.324 0.372 Guatemala 0.341 0.339 0.164 0.520 Philippines 0.356 0 0.603 0.464 Guinea-Bissau 0.375 0.919 0.116 0.089 Sri Lanka 0.386 0.290 0.351 0.516
Sierra Leone 0.386 0.677 0.189 0.293 Indonesia 0.403 0.226 0.495 0.490 Lebanon 0.412 0.516 0.150 0.569 Nepal 0.427 0.645 0.327 0.308 Peru 0.428 0.371 0.389 0.525
Central African Republic 0.440 0.982 0.182 0.155 Rwanda 0.441 0.645 0.470 0.208 Vietnam 0.441 0 0.462 0.420 Morocco 0.450 0.548 0.299 0.504 Mali 0.465 0.968 0.192 0.234
Turkey 0.469 0.242 0.601 0.564 Bangladesh 0.472 0.984 0.094 0.339 El Salvador 0.476 0.565 0.361 0.504 Benin 0.480 1 0.192 0.248 Madagascar 0.485 1 0.295 0.159
Laos 0.487 0.968 0.162 0.331 Niger 0.495 1 0.325 0.159 Algeria 0.496 0.484 0.473 0.532 Togo 0.496 1 0.327 0.162 Cameroon 0.501 1 0.137 0.367
314 chapter eight: lessons learned


Table 8.1 (continued)
Country Index value Peacefulness State capacity Income
Burkina Faso 0.502 1 0.263 0.242 Pakistan 0.508 0.903 0.205 0.416 Haiti 0.510 0.952 0.314 0.266 Congo 0.511 0.903 0.205 0.425 Senegal 0.516 1 0.243 0.304
Lesotho 0.530 0.989 0.269 0.337 Djibouti 0.537 1 0.146 0.465 Malawi 0.541 0.984 0.408 0.230 Syria 0.543 0.871 0.369 0.389 Guinea 0.555 1 0.236 0.428
Paraguay 0.556 0.984 0.209 0.474 Tanzania 0.557 1 0.504 0.166 Honduras 0.562 0.984 0.279 0.423 Eritrea 0.563 0.929 0.671 0.090 Nicaragua 0.566 0.645 0.723 0.329
Macedonia 0.566 n/a 0.590 0.543 Iran 0.566 0.532 0.549 0.617 Zimbabwe 0.582 0.855 0.574 0.318 Ivory Coast 0.584 1 0.416 0.337 Gambia 0.587 1 0.516 0.246
Tajikistan 0.590 0.625 0.780 0.366 Bolivia 0.592 1 0.345 0.432 Guyana 0.595 1 0.408 0.377 Ghana 0.595 0.968 0.550 0.269 Mauritania 0.600 1 0.457 0.344
Egypt 0.603 1 0.308 0.503 China 0.607 0.823 0.435 0.563 Kenya 0.612 0.984 0.531 0.321 Albania 0.623 0.968 0.434 0.467 Swaziland 0.623 1 0.309 0.560
Zambia 0.626 0.984 0.587 0.307 Jordan 0.628 1 0.396 0.486 Panama 0.628 1 0.296 0.589 Ecuador 0.629 0.952 0.417 0.519 Uruguay 0.635 0.984 0.266 0.654
Dominican Republic 0.638 1 0.315 0.598 Brazil 0.639 1 0.312 0.605 Nigeria 0.640 0.968 0.620 0.333 South Africa 0.646 0.581 0.738 0.618 Venezuela 0.650 1 0.304 0.646
the pillars of prosperity index 315


Table 8.1 (continued)
Country Index value Peacefulness State capacity Income
Papua New Guinea 0.657 1 0.642 0.330 Fiji 0.663 1 0.461 0.527 Costa Rica 0.665 1 0.353 0.643 Poland 0.667 0.968 0.358 0.675 Bahrain 0.667 1 0.201 0.800
Mauritius 0.672 1 0.276 0.739 Russia 0.673 0.498 0.861 0.659 Argentina 0.682 0.935 0.422 0.688 Namibia 0.691 1 0.541 0.530 Gabon 0.691 1 0.502 0.571
Chile 0.700 0.952 0.424 0.725 Azerbaijan 0.702 0.717 0.809 0.581 Moldova 0.703 1 0.688 0.421 Mongolia 0.704 0.984 0.769 0.359 Mexico 0.713 1 0.503 0.636
Uzbekistan 0.715 1 0.832 0.311 Israel 0.715 1 0.370 0.776 Bhutan 0.715 1 0.682 0.464 Trinidad and Tobago 0.721 1 0.378 0.784 Thailand 0.724 0.984 0.588 0.600
Jamaica 0.728 0.984 0.616 0.584 Georgia 0.729 0.813 0.821 0.554 Saudi Arabia 0.732 1 0.445 0.752 Kyrgyzstan 0.736 1 0.786 0.423 Kuwait 0.738 1 0.327 0.888
Tunisia 0.755 1 0.654 0.611 Bulgaria 0.758 0.968 0.705 0.602 Italy 0.762 1 0.472 0.815 Romania 0.764 0.952 0.746 0.595 Slovenia 0.769 1 0.520 0.785
Malaysia 0.777 1 0.612 0.720 Botswana 0.785 1 0.759 0.595 Slovak Republic 0.790 1 0.665 0.706 Oman 0.803 1 0.631 0.777 Cuba 0.804 0.984 n/a 0.624
Czech Republic 0.810 1 0.676 0.755 Taiwan 0.814 1 0.647 0.795 Ukraine 0.819 1 0.855 0.603 Portugal 0.831 1 0.747 0.746 Armenia 0.832 1 0.902 0.593
316 chapter eight: lessons learned


Table 8.1 (continued)
Country Index value Peacefulness State capacity Income
Croatia 0.838 1 0.844 0.670 Germany 0.844 n/a 0.859 0.828 Kazakhstan 0.845 1 0.850 0.684 Greece 0.845 1 0.732 0.803 Belarus 0.849 1 0.798 0.750
Libya 0.859 0.984 n/a 0.734 Spain 0.870 1 0.782 0.827 Estonia 0.870 1 0.890 0.721 Latvia 0.873 1 0.942 0.675 South Korea 0.873 0.935 0.908 0.775
New Zealand 0.873 1 0.829 0.789 Hungary 0.874 0.968 0.936 0.717 Singapore 0.874 1 0.738 0.884 United Kingdom 0.877 1 0.798 0.832 Austria 0.878 n/a 0.904 0.852
Lithuania 0.886 1 0.983 0.674 France 0.889 1 0.844 0.820 Ireland 0.889 1 0.787 0.881 Netherlands 0.891 1 0.829 0.845 Cyprus 0.892 1 n/a 0.784
United States 0.893 0.839 0.950 0.891 Belgium 0.905 0.984 0.890 0.842 Finland 0.907 1 0.888 0.831 Canada 0.908 1 0.869 0.856 Denmark 0.917 1 0.906 0.846
Japan 0.918 1 0.926 0.828 Australia 0.918 1 0.901 0.854 Norway 0.929 1 0.878 0.908 Switzerland 0.932 1 0.934 0.862 Sweden 0.936 1 0.972 0.837
We also find a few malperforming states in Latin America, mostly due to a long
history of internal conflicts. By contrast, most of Europe and the other OECD
democracies enter into the top decile, with high scores on all three components
of the index.
the pillars of prosperity index 317


Figure 8.1 The Pillars of Prosperity Atlas.


8.2.2 Predicting the Index
Our theory in the preceding chapters suggested a number of variables that
determine state capacity (and thus, indirectly, income) as well as political
violence. We now ask how well the Pillars of Prosperity Index can be predicted
by the variables that our theory has pinpointed. Make no mistake, however;
the econometric exercise we are about to undertake should be seen just as an
exercise in prediction. That is, we make no claims whatsoever about isolating
a causal relation.
The Determinants Included in the Prediction At the end of Chapters 2 and 3,
we saw that a number of variables proxying for some of the main determinants
of state-capacity investments were systematically correlated with alternative
measures of fiscal as well as legal capacity in the data. Specifically, we used
the historical prevalence of wars from the Correlates of War data set and a
measure of ethnic homogeneity from Fearon (2003) as proxies for common
interests (parameters φ and ι in the theory). We constructed two variables from
the scores in the Polity IV data set: the historical prevalence of constraints on the
executive as a proxy for cohesive institutions (parameter θ in the theory) and the
historical prevalence of nonopen and noncompetitive executive recruitment as
a proxy for political stability (parameter γ in the theory). Finally, we used four
legal-origin indicators from La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998) as a proxy for different costs of legal-capacity investments (function L
in the theory). In Chapter 4, we argued that the same variables in the theory
(except γ , which was then endogenous) would also help predict investment in
political violence although with the opposite sign.
As we would like a very parsimonious specification when predicting the
index, we stay with this small set of variables. As the Pillars of Prosperity Index
is in the nature of a stock variable dated 2006, we would like to capture the
conditions for investment—captured by the preceding parameter proxies—in
earlier periods. Therefore, we measure any historical average up to the year
2000, as we did in Chapters 2 and 3. In the interest of transparency, we do
not rely on any of the nonlinearities suggested by the theory. In particular, we
carry out the prediction by a simple linear regression of the Pillars of Prosperity
Index on the eight variables we just enumerated.
The Predicted Index Estimation results from this linear specification are dis
played in the first column of Table 8.2. All of the eight variables enter with
the pillars of prosperity index 319


Table 8.2 Predicting the Pillars of Prosperity Index
(1) (2) (3) (4) Index State-capacity Income per Peacefulness value subindex capita subindex
Prevalence of external war before 2000
0.249* 0.714*** 0.390** −0.223 (0.136) (0.237) (0.155) (0.272)
Average executive constraints before 2000
0.288*** 0.304*** 0.402*** 0.113 (0.064) (0.086) (0.064) (0.101)
Average nonopen executive recruitment before 2000
0.150* 0.159* 0.239*** 0.024 (0.078) (0.086) (0.089) (0.129)
Ethnic homogeneity 0.230*** 0.091 0.312*** 0.202** (0.058) (0.073) (0.062) (0.099)
English legal origin 0.042 0.085** −0.171 0.055 (0.032) (0.041) (0,037) (0.058)
Scandinavian legal origin 0.166*** 0.377*** 0.094** 0.077 (0.040) (0.058) (0.042) (0.061)
German legal origin 0.173*** 0.362*** 0.133** 0.100* (0.039) (0.052) (0.052) (0.054)
Socialist legal origin 0.087** 0.026*** 0.006 0.048 (0.036) (0.047) (0.033) (0.058)
Observations 150 145 150 147 R-squared 0.470 0.540 0.539 0.076
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. French legal origin is the omitted category.
the expected positive sign (from the theory or earlier empirical specifications).
Almost all of the predictors are statistically significant, although a couple of
them only marginally so. The parsimonious linear specification accounts for
about half of the variance in the index across countries. The next three col
umns inspect the sources of the prediction by running an identical specification
for the three components that make up the Pillars of Prosperity Index. It is
easy to see that the included variables do quite well in predicting the state
capacity index and income per capita. But the prediction is considerably worse
for peacefulness, where only ethnic homogeneity and German legal origin are
statistically significant predictors of the index.
320 chapter eight: lessons learned


The Predicted Pillars of Prosperity Index Atlas in Figure 8.2 shows the
predicted values graphically, i.e., the coloring of each individual country on the
map reflects its predicted index. The coloring scheme is completely analogous
with that in our atlas for the actual index. That is, countries predicted to be
in the lowermost decile are black, countries predicted to be in the uppermost
decile are white, and countries in the other deciles are marked on a gradually
changing gray scale.
Comparing Actual and Predicted Indexes The general picture is quite similar to
Figure 8.1, with Africa clearly overrepresented in the dark part of the spectrum
and Europe clearly overrepresented in the light part. Interestingly, countries in
South Asia are generally predicted to have a higher prosperity score than their
actual one, whereas the opposite is true for countries in Latin America.
Clearly, our prediction of the Pillars of the Prosperity Index captures the
major variation in the data. Interestingly, the prediction not only picks up the
variation across major regions, but also some variation within these regions.
For example, two of the success cases in Sub-Saharan Africa—Botswana and
Mauritius—are doing well both in terms of actual and predicted outcomes.
Botswana has an actual rank of 112 (from the bottom, out of 150) and a
predicted rank of 123, and Mauritius has an actual rank of 86 and a predicted
rank of 90.
But some countries have quite different colors in the maps of Figures 8.1
and 8.2. These represent cases where the main thrust of our theory does not
fit very well. It is of particular interest to take a closer look at these instances,
in order to figure out what we may be missing. To home in on the failures,
Table 8.3 lists the largest deviations between predicted and actual index values.
Specifically, the table includes all those countries where the predicted index is
off the actual index by at least 50 steps in the ranking. For each country, the
table displays the ranks of each country on the actual and predicted index, as
well as the difference between its actual and predicted values of the index.
Underperformers Panel A of Table 8.3 shows the largest underperformers, a
total of ten countries according to our 50-step definition. India is the country
with the largest difference in both rank and index value. As already noted, India
suffers from a low value of state capacity as well as a great deal of political
violence. In terms of the predictors, however, India has quite cohesive political
institutions, being one of the oldest democracies in the developing world (recall
the pillars of prosperity index 321


Figure 8.2 The predicted Pillars of Prosperity Index Atlas.


Table 8.3 Prediction errors on the Pillars of Prosperity Index
Actual minus predicted Country Actual rank Predicted rank index value
Panel A: Largest underperformers (more than 50 steps off in ranking)
India 4 93 −0.35 Myanmar 5 81 −0.31 Ethiopia 8 62 −0.32 Burundi 10 64 −0.28 Cambodia 16 88 −0.31
Philippines 18 87 −0.29 Sri Lanka 20 105 −0.31 Vietnam 28 115 −0.28 Turkey 31 96 −0.21 China 67 120 −0.13
Panel B: Largest overperformers (more than 50 steps off in ranking)
Ivory Coast 59 6 0.17 Ghana 64 13 0.15 Nigeria 78 18 0.17 Gabon 90 4 0.29 Mexico 95 37 0.19
Kuwait 105 45 0.20 Oman 114 56 0.26 Kazakhstan 123 65 0.26 Singapore 133 74 0.27
Table 7.1). It is ethnically fragmented, which works against common interests
in the state, but it has a history with threats of external conflict, which works
in favor of common interests. For these reasons, India is predicted to be quite
prosperous in terms of our index. One interpretation of the country’s recent
growth spurt and reforms to improve the way its markets work is that India is
now catching up with its “institutional possibility frontier,” to borrow a phrase
from Djankov et al. (2003).
Interestingly, China is also among the ten countries with an index farthest
away from its predicted value. In terms of the variables highlighted by the
theory, China’s relative ethnic homogeneity does promote common interests in
the state. Chinese political institutions are not very cohesive, however, which
draws down its predicted index. On the other hand, it has a great deal of
the pillars of prosperity index 323


political stability according to our measure. Thus, China fits the conception of
a strongly redistributive and repressive state (low θ and low γ ) relatively well.
We could view its growth miracle as another instance of a country catching
up with its own potential. The smaller distance between China’s actual and
predicted index for 2006, compared to India, can then be seen as reflecting the
fact that China has had 15 more years of rapid growth than India.
Several other countries in Panel A, notably Sri Lanka, the Philippines, and
Turkey, have endured civil war and/or repression during most or all of the
last 30 years. In these cases, the large difference between the actual and the
predicted indexes is largely explained by the fact that we are unable to predict
(the absence of) political violence very precisely with the parsimonious sets of
variables used here—recall the estimates in column (4) of Table 8.2.
Overperformers Panel B of Table 8.3 shows the opposite type of failure—the
nine countries that overperform their predicted indexes by at least 50 steps in the
ranking. Four of these are located in Sub-Saharan Africa—Ivory Coast, Ghana,
Nigeria, and Gabon. These African countries have on the whole avoided large
scale political violence, despite quite bad institutions (at least until recently,
in the case of the Ivory Coast). In analogy with the Philippines, Sri Lanka,
and Turkey among the underperformers, the difference between the actual and
the predicted indexes in these countries mostly reflects our lack of success in
predicting political violence or its absence.
Three other overperformers in Panel B, with higher actual and predicted
indexes, are Singapore, Kuwait, and Mexico. These countries score better
on most of the three subindexes than their parameters suggest. Singapore
and Kuwait are not democracies, and stable democracy is relatively recent in
Mexico. One interpretation is that those autocracies have had the benefit of
relatively benign and growth-oriented leaders. It has to be acknowledged that
we have not allowed the personal quality of leaders to play any role in our
theory and measurement, even though common sense and research by authors
such has Jones and Olken (2005, 2009) and O’Donnell and Schmitter (1986)
suggest otherwise when it comes to both political reform and income.
Taking Stock By and large, the Pillars of Prosperity Index that we have defined
and computed captures important aspects of the development clusters that
motivate the present book. We selected a parsimonious set of variables, to
represent main determinants of state capacity and political violence in our
324 chapter eight: lessons learned


theory, and showed how these help predict quite a bit of the variation in
the index. The largest differences between actual and predicted values of the
index can partly be attributed to some countries approaching their institutional
potential. But the differences also reflect the fact that our simple theory and
measurement do a lackluster job of predicting the cross-country variation in
violence and do not assign any significant role to the quality of leaders in
countries with weak political institutions.
These deficiencies certainly suggest roads for improvement of the theory.
But they also suggest an important role for case studies of the countries where
predictions fail, namely to find new mechanisms that go beyond our existing
theory. This is not the usual role for case studies, which rather tend to be selected
in order to provide illustration and support for some particular theory.
8.3 Where Next?
Our analysis in this book has been preliminary in many important respects.
This section serves as a reminder of the many things that are missing. At the
same time, the omissions suggest a number of topics where future research
efforts might be directed. Such efforts would involve a deepening as well as a
broadening of the research in this book.
Model More Carefully The core model we have put forward is very simple and
relies on many special assumptions. Simplicity has the advantage of keeping the
theoretical analyses managable and transparent, allowing us to come up with
some clean insights. But it is important to go further and test the theoretical
robustness of our findings, asking whether our insights hold under more realistic
conditions. We have taken some steps in that direction in the Developing the
Model section in previous chapters.
An important task in this endeavor is to link our analysis in a better way to
traditional models of growth and development. One specific question is how
well the results that we have derived in simple two-period models survive in
truly dynamic multiperiod models of economic growth. Our analysis in Sec
tion 2.2.8 took some steps in that direction, but it is very much a first attempt.
The analysis there could be extended further, e.g., by studying non-Markov
perfect equilibria. This would be an important extension because it would
allow for reputational forces, which could potentially alleviate the underlying
where next? 325


commitment problem that drives many of our results, namely that groups can
not credibly promise—beyond parameter θ—not to use their political power to
redistribute in favor of their own members.
As another example, the microfounded model in Section 3.2.1 is a close
cousin of the traditional/advanced-sector model of Lewis (1954). The links with
that earlier literature, in particular the role of different institutions, could be
much more thoroughly investigated.
Consider Human Capital Another point where we have failed to make contact
with other research on development is the importance of human capital. There is
an ongoing debate in the literature about the relative importance of institutions
and human capital in driving development [see Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson,
and Yared (2005) and Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer (2004)].
Although we do not take a firm stand in this debate, it is clear that human capital
could be introduced into our framework in at least two ways.
One way would highlight the standard role of human capital as an engine of
growth in parallel with other forms of accumulation. This would be relatively
easy to do, along lines similar to the way we added private capital accumulation
in Chapters 3 and 5. Most probably this would lead to conclusions similar to
those for physical capital, namely a magnification of the effects on income via
government investments in state capacity and collective investments in violence.
Another interesting possibility would be to explore the suggestion made
by Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer (2007) regarding a more nonstandard role
for human capital, namely as a driver of democratic institutions by fostering
nonviolent conflict resolution, an idea that goes back to Lipset (1959). This is
an interesting notion, but it is not completely clear how it could be integrated
with the models of violent conflict and political reform in Chapters 4 and 7.
Perhaps human capital is one of the channels whereby countries with long
term democratic experience become more resistant to relapses into noncohesive
institutions, as in the theory and evidence on democratic capital in Persson and
Tabellini (2009). Building human capital may also foster common interests,
which would effectively work like a higher value of parameter φ.
Disaggregate More The core model framework carried through the book is
an aggregate reduced-form model of the interaction between economic and
political forces. To reach a better understanding of structures and institutions,
it is necessary to further disaggregate these models. On the economic side,
326 chapter eight: lessons learned


we provided some examples in Chapters 2 and 3 of how one can formulate
economic microfoundations to better understand the nuts and bolts of legal
and fiscal capacity. More such work is needed, e.g., to better understand the
interaction between corruption and state building.
On the political side, we provided some examples in Chapter 7 of how one
can formulate political microfoundations to better understand the details of
what might drive reform toward or away from cohesive institutions in the
context of development. More structural work on the political side is needed
to understand the role of other political institutions, such as federalism.
But microfoundations are also needed on the violence side, where we have
black-boxed many issues by working with an aggregate conflict technology
(contest function). As stressed by Blattman and Miguel (2009) in their survey
of civil war, we know almost nothing about what drives individual participa
tion in violence. Building such empirical knowledge would be facilitated by
microfounded models of violence [see Yanagizawa (2010) for an interesting
attempt]. This would be an input in modeling the links noted earlier between
human capital and peaceful conflict resolution. But microfoundations for vio
lence may also be vital for understanding such phenomena as coups, which
are essentially transitions of power within the same general group or elite. To
make progress here, we have to unpack the group and carefully consider the
incentives for its individual members, perhaps along the lines of our modeling
of predatory states in Chapters 3, 4, and 7.
Bridge Micro and Macro The approach in the book is inherently macro
economic and macropolitical, in that we try to understand the big picture in the
data. Yet, as we have just stressed, microeconomic and micropolitical studies
are vital if we are to reach further in this understanding. How does our approach
come together with the recent wave in development research, with its stress on
randomized-controlled trials and natural experiments at a very disaggregated
level? As noted in Chapter 6, we can think about this research as providing
information about socially profitable projects and thus raising the prospective
return to public-goods provision. Similar work on the micropolitics of village
decisionmaking, which is just getting off the ground, can inform us about useful
mechanisms for peacefully resolving conflicts of interest.
But to ultimately become useful in assisting development and not only help
alleviate poverty or disease in a small and well-controlled testing ground,
the empirical small-scale insights have to face up to the hurdles of large
where next? 327


scale implementation. This means confronting the kind of macroeconomic
and macropolitical issues that form the subject matter of this book. This way,
micro- and macro-oriented approaches to development are complements, not
substitutes.
Understand State Legitimacy Our models of state-capacity formation have
focused on top-down administrative reforms, and the incentives for incumbent
governments to undertake such reforms depending on circumstances and insti
tutions. Although this is a significan piece, it is by no means the entire puzzle. An
important reason why some states function so well is that their citizens have
come to expect them to. Consider Sweden and Argentina. Most Swedes pay
their taxes because they expect other citizens to do the same and they expect
the government not to squander the money. These expectations, in turn, work
as a bottom-up accountability mechanism that keeps alternative governments
and bureaucrats reasonably careful and honest when handling the public purse.
In Argentina, by contrast, individuals do not expect other citizens to pay their
taxes and might expect that a good part of the budget will be squandered in var
ious corrupt activities. Thus, the accountability mechanism on public officials
from the trust and legitimacy of the state is gone and the citizens’ pessimistic
expectations tend to become self-fulfilling.
How are such norms of tax compliance and similar norms of obedience
to the law built and maintained? Above all, how do they interact with the
building of administrative capacities such as those we have stressed in the book?
These are important issues for further research. We hinted at a preliminary
answer in our short discussion of the microfoundations of fiscal capacity in
Section 2.4.1, and the potential interaction between deterrence and social
norms. In Section 7.2.6, we also gave some hints regarding the role of trust in
fostering political cohesion. But the reality is certainly much more complicated
and probably involves the formation of social and behavioral norms at the
individual as well as the social levels [see, e.g., Benabou and Tirole (2010) for
a recent formal analysis of the interactions between laws and norms].
There are other closely related issues about the legitimacy of the state. An
important research strand in political science and political sociology stresses
that legitimate political institutions, which give citizens a true say on how
the money is spent, might be a necessary quid pro quo for them to go along
with increased collection of taxes. It is argued that such “fiscal contracts” may
explain the historical joint building of tax capacity and representative political
328 chapter eight: lessons learned


institutions in many developed countries [see, e.g., Levi (1988)] and that a
similar mechanism might be operating in developing countries today [see, e.g.,
the contributions in Bra ̈ utigam, Fjeldstad, and Moore (2008)]. In the language
of this book, this argument suggests a complementarity between the building
of state capacity and cohesive political institutions.
Bring in Social Capital and Identity Our analysis has focused exclusively on
formal state institutions and investments to improve these. We have not paid
attention to private governance and institutional arrangements that support and
sustain markets. In effect, we have assumed throughout that no private enforce
ment technology or institutions are available in the absence of legal capacity
created by government. Private governance has been studied extensively in its
own right [see, e.g., Dixit (2004), Greif (2006), Ostrom (1990), and Platteau
(2000)]. But the links between private governance and the formation of effec
tive states has not been resolved in either theory or practice. There are two
broadly contrasting views.
Some authors, mostly in the Hayekian tradition, emphasize the value of
spontaneous order as a substitute for state action [see, e.g., Hayek (1979)]. In
this spirit, Benson (1989) and Leeson (2006) have argued that private law and
institutional enforcement can function in some contexts without the need for
coercive authorities. Leeson (2007) even argues that Somalia functions better
without a state.
Others, especially authors in the literature on social capital, have stressed
the complementarity between state institutions and private networks. This line
is taken, for instance, in the classic study of social capital by Putnam (1993),
which argues that government works more effectively in parts of Italy where
social capital is strong.
A related issue concerns how a sense of identity and belonging to a polity is
created, leading people to set aside sectional interests and support the common
interest. Recent work on identity and the way that it matters in economic
settings by Akerlof and Kranton (2010) is relevant here. Shayo (2009) is an
interesting exploration of how (endogenous) national and group identities
interact in fostering redistribution. A key issue is how far a sense of national
identity that creates common interests can be actively fostered. In Chapter 1,
we mentioned the work on nationalism by authors such as Gellner (1983) and
Posen (1993), which is also a natural starting point.
where next? 329


Viewed from the perspective of the themes in this book, the preceding com
ments suggest the need to study how identity, social capital, and state capacities
evolve together in a dynamic process with feedbacks in both directions.
Deal with Multiple Countries Our approach has focused on a single-country
context. A host of new issues arises in a multicountry world. We have appealed
to the role of external warfare in shaping common interests. Threats of war
have to come from other societies, however, and this creates interesting sources
of interdependence across countries with the possibility of geographic institu
tional clusters.
We have also taken the countries in our analysis as given. However, it would
be interesting to study a broader process of state formation in our framework,
as one country tries to seize the territory of another and extend its institutions.
One could also explore the incentives for colonialism using the tools we have
constructed and potentially look for underlying structural determinants of the
so-called “democratic peace” [see Maoz and Russett (1993)].
Interesting issues also arise when we allow for open markets for goods and
factors. The first of these would be particularly relevant if we were to consider
the decision of a country to open up to trade when, owing to low fiscal capacity,
it is dependent on trade taxes. Mobile people and capital may exercise discipline
on governments that perform poorly.
Distinguish between Centralized and Decentralized States In our core and
extended models, we have focused exclusively on the incentives faced by a
unitary state with all taxing and spending decisions being made centrally. But
many countries operate on a decentralized basis and have some important state
capacities at the local level. Political violence may also play a part in specific
territories.
One frequent role of decentralization is to improve government perfor
mance. This could be because political cohesiveness and good governance are
easier to achieve when government is decentralized. But if performance means
heterogeneous performance, there may be winners and losers compared to hav
ing a central state. Either way, it would be interesting to extend the models
developed here to consider such issues. Furthermore, from an empirical point of
view, studying heterogeneous performance of governments exploiting within
country variation opens up new possibilities.
Bridge Theory and Empirical Work While working on the book, we were
strongly motivated by the broad patterns in the data. We have also kept
330 chapter eight: lessons learned


revisiting the data throughout the preceding chapters. But most of our empirical
analyses have revolved around simple partial correlations in a large cross
section of countries. Although these correlations were informed by our theory,
they were not properly derived from that theory. Moreover, the well-known
pitfalls in cross-sectional empirical analysis cast serious doubts on any causal
interpretation of the results.
The one exception to this rule is our analysis in Chapter 4, where we show
how our simple model of political violence can be used to guide an empirical
strategy, seeking out the more rewarding results on the basis of within-country
variation. We believe that future empirical work in the field should follow this
example. In particular, one might conduct more convincing tests of theoretical
predictions on state-capacity formation relying on historical data. For example,
one could use a theory-based empirical strategy to analyze whether important
reforms of fiscal capacity over time are indeed systematically related to events
such as wars and reform of political institutions. This kind of research would
require collecting new panel data, say, about the introduction of the income
tax [as in Aidt and Jensen (2009a)] or the VAT or important reforms of these
tax systems, say, about the introduction of income-tax withholding.
Use Theory and Data to Design Case Studies Although econometric studies are
valuable, much can also be said for careful case studies. In the latter part of the
book, we presented two somewhat unconventional arguments regarding how
such case studies might be selected and conducted. One appeared in Section 7.3
on political reform in practice, where we argued that one should use a well
specified theoretical model to search for exogenous variables in comparative
case studies. In Section 8.2.2 we discussed how theoretical anomalies identified
by a systematic statistical approach can serve as a stepping stone for case studies
that search for new mechanisms to enrich the theory.
Understand the Persistence of Weak States One of the major problems is to
acquire an understanding of the mechanisms behind the persistence of poor,
weak, and violence-stricken states. Our theory has provided some clues as to
what circumstances and institutions might enmesh a country in such a combi
nation of unhappy outcomes. But we have only been able to give a few hints on
pathways out of the unhappy downward left part of our Anna Karenina matrix.
Under what circumstances can we expect countries to commit themselves to
economic and political reforms that allow them to break out of a weak-fiscal
state trap or a predatory-legal-state trap? Can foreign assistance in any form
where next? 331


assist countries in this difficult task? In light of the development clusters that
motivate this book, these may be the most important questions of all.
8.4 Concluding Remarks
Nearly 250 years ago, Adam Smith identified peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable
administration of justice as key drivers of the wealth of nations. Our pillars
of prosperity are closely related to those identified by Smith all those years
ago. That said, we have reached this conclusion by a rather different route,
using the tools of modern economics and benefiting from an additional quarter
of a millennium of experience. Unlike Smith, who wrote before the advent of
democracy and the industrial revolution, we can learn from the diversity of sub
sequent country experiences. Our conception of easy taxes has more to do with
the ease of extracting taxes than with the level of taxes. Peace refers to domestic
peace, whereas we have seen that a hostile external neighborhood can be a key
force behind state building. We have also put far more weight than Smith did
on the role of political institutions in constructing the pillars of prosperity.
Our entire project is theory-driven with a core model at the heart of the
approach. It ties together three different, but related, facets of development:
breaking out of poverty, building a state strong enough to support markets and
provide public goods, and putting an end to violent political conflicts. Although
the modeling is deliberately simple, we have been able to explore many different
dimensions of the key ideas.
We have used this theoretical approach to argue that it is essential to under
stand the pillars of prosperity in terms of their common roots. Long-run
progress requires tackling the underlying problems, such that stronger institu
tional cohesiveness and better governance can set in motion a process of positive
feedbacks between the central outcomes.
We make no claim to have delivered any definitive insights and much of
our analysis is synthetic, building on the contributions of prior research. In
this area, there is more unexplored territory than settled ground. Our hope is
that this book will help open up a whole new research program, and we invite
development researchers and graduate students to join us in pursuing these
issues. Whether or not this happens is the metric of success on which we would
like to be judged.
332 chapter eight: lessons learned


References
Abadie, Alberto, and Javier Gardeazabal (2003), “The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the Basque Country,” American Economic Review, vol. 93, 113–132. Acemoglu, Daron (2003), “Why Not a Political Coase Theorem: Social Conflict, Commitment, and Politics,” Journal of Comparative Economics, vol. 31, 620652. ——— (2005), “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52, 1199–1226.
——— (2006), “Modeling Inefficient Institutions,” in Blundell, Richard, Whitney Newey, and Torsten Persson (eds.), Advances in Economic Theory and Econometrics: Proceedings of the Ninth World Congress of the Econometric Society, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. Acemoglu, Daron, Mikhail Golosov, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2008), “Political Economy of Mechanisms,” Econometrica, vol. 76, 619–641. ——— (2009), “Power Fluctuations and Political Economy,” NBER Working Paper 15400. Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson (2005), “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 113, 949–995.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, vol. 91, 1369–1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2005), “From Education to Democracy,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 95, 44–49.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2000), “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115, 1167–1199.
333


——— (2006),Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——— (2010), Why Nations Fail, book manuscript. Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni (2011), “Emergence and Persistence of Inefficient States,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 9, 177–208. Addison, Tony (2003), “Africa’s Recovery from Conflict: Making Peace Work for the Poor—A Policy Brief,” WIDER, Helsinki. Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi (2004), “Endogenous Political Institutions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119, 565–612. Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton (1990), “Government Debt and the Risk of Default: A Politico-Economic Model of the Strategic Role of Debt,” in Dornbusch, R  ̈udiger, and Mario Draghi (eds.), Public Debt Management: Theory and History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——— (2003), “Incomplete Social Contracts,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1, 38–67.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt, and David Mayer-Foulkes (2005), “The Effect of Financial Development on Convergence: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 120, 173–222.
Aidt, Toke S., and Peter S. Jensen (2009a), “The Taxman Tools Up: An Event History Study of the Introduction of the Personal Income Tax,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 93, 160–175.
——— (2009b), “Tax Structure, Size of Government, and the Extension of the Voting Franchise in Western Europe, 1860–1938,” International Tax Public Finance, vol. 16, 362–394. ——— (2010), “Workers of the World, Unite! Franchise Extensions and the Threat of Revolution in Europe, 1820–1938,” mimeo, Cambridge University. Aizenman, Joshua, and Yothin Jinjarak (2008), “The Collection Efficiency of the Value Added Tax: Theory and International Evidence,” Journal of International Trade and Economic Development, vol. 17, 391–410.
Akerlof, George, and Rachel Kranton (2010), Identity Economics: How Our Identities Shape Our Work, Wages, and Well-Being, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Alesina, Alberto (1988), “Credibility and Political Convergence in a Two-party System with Rational Voters,” American Economic Review, vol. 78, 796–805. Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly (1999), “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, 1243–1284. Alesina, Alberto, and David Dollar (2000), “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 5, 33–63.
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti (1996), “Income Distribution, Political Instability and Investment,” European Economic Review, vol. 40, 1203–1228.
334 references


Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik (1994), “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, 465–490.
Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini (1990), “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government Debt,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 57, 403414. Allingham, Michael G., and Agnar Sandmo (1972), “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 1, 323–338. Alt, James E. (1994), “The Impact of the Voting Rights Act on Black and White Voter Registration in the South,” in Davidson, Chandler and Bernard Grofman (eds), Quiet Revolution in the South: The Impact of the Voting Rights Act, 19651990, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Amsden, Alice H. (1992), Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization, New York: Oxford University Press.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1951), Social Choice and Individual Values, New Haven: Cowles Comission. Aslaksen, Silje, and Ragnar Torvik (2006), “A Theory of Civil Conflict and Democracy in Rentier States,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 108, 571–585. Atkinson, Anthony, and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), Lectures on Public Economics, London: McGraw-Hill. Austen-Smith, David, and Jeffrey S. Banks (2005), Positive Political Theory II Strategy & Structure, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Azam, Jean-Paul (2002), “Looting and Conflict between Ethno-regional Groups: Lessons for State Formation in Africa,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 46, 131–153. ——— (2005), “The Paradox of Power Reconsidered: A Theory of Political Regimes in Africa,” Journal of African Economies, vol. 15, 26–58. Azam, Jean-Paul, Robert H. Bates, and Biais Bruno (2009), “Political Predation and Economic Development,” Economics and Politics, vol. 21, 255–277. Azam, Jean-Paul, and Anke Hoeffler (2002), “Violence against Civilians in Civil Wars: Looting or Terror?,” Journal of Peace Research, vol. 39, 461–485. Azam, Jean-Paul, and Jean-Jacques Laffont (2003), “Contracting for Aid,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 70, 25–58.
Azam, Jean-Paul, and Tahsin Saadi-Sedik (2003), “Aid v. Sanctions for Taming Oppressors: Theory and Application to the Iraqi Kurds,” Defence and Peace Economics, vol. 15, 311–334. Azzimonti, Marina (2009), “Barriers to Investment in Polarized Societies,” mimeo, forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Bai, Jinhui B., and Roger Lagunoff (2011), “On the ‘Faustian’ Dynamics of Policy and Political Power,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 78, 17–48. Banerjee, Abhijit (2003), “Contracting Constraints, Credit Markets and Economic Development,” in Dewatripont, Mathias, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen Turnovsky (eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory
references 335


and Applications: Eighth World Conference of the Econometric Society, Vol. III, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo (2005), “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development Economics,” in Aghion, Philippe, and Stephen Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1a, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
——— (2009), “The Experimental Approach to Development Economics,” NBER Working Paper No. 14467. ——— (2010), “Giving Credit Where Credit is Due,” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 10-3, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/ abstract=1572913. Banerjee, Abhijit V., Paul J. Gertler, and Maitreesh Ghatak [2002), “Empowerment and Efficiency: Tenancy Reform in West Bengal,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 110, 239–280. Banerjee, Abhijit, and Ruimin He (2008), “Making Aid Work,” in Easterly, William (ed.), Reinventing Foreign Aid, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Banks, Arthur (2005), Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive, Databanks International. Baron, David (1996), “A Dynamic Theory of Collective Goods Programs,” American Political Science Review, vol. 90, 316–330.
Baron, David, and John Ferejohn (1989), “Bargaining in Legislatures,” American Political Science Review, vol. 83, 1181–1206.
Barro, Robert J. (1973), “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model,” Public Choice, vol. 14, 19–42.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992), “Public Finance in Models of Economic Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 59, 645–661.
Bates, Robert H. (1981), Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Political Basis of Agricultural Policies, Berkeley: University of California Press.
——— (2001), Prosperity and Violence: The Political Economy of Development. New York: Cambridge University Press. ——— (2008), “The Logic of State Failure: Learning from Late-Century Africa,” Conflict Management and Peace Science, vol. 25, 297–314. ——— (2009), The Logic of State Failure: Learning from Late-Century Africa. Dealing with Failed States, London: Routledge.
Bates, Robert H., Avner Greif, Margaret Levi, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, and Barry Weingast, (1998), Analytic Narratives, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Battaglini, Marco, and Stephen Coate (2007), “Inefficiency in Legislative PolicyMaking: A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, vol. 97, 118–149. ——— (2008), “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation, and Debt,” American Economic Review, vol. 98, 201–236.
Bauer, Peter (1972), Dissent on Development, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ——— (1975), “N.H. Stern on Substance and Method in Development Economics,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 2, 387–405.
336 references


Baumol, William, J. (1967), “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis,” American Economic Review, vol. 57, 415–426. Baunsgaard, Thomas, and Michael Keen (2005), “Tax Revenue and (or?) Trade Liberalization,” mimeo, IMF. Beck, Thorsten (2010), “Legal Institutions and Economic Development,” forthcoming in the Oxford Handbook of Capitalism.
Benabou, Roland (1997), “Inequality and Growth,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole (2010), “Laws and Norms,” mimeo, Princeton University. Benson, Bruce (1989), “The Spontaneous Evolution of Commercial Law,” Southern Economic Journal, vol. 55, 644–661. Berg, Elliot (1993), Rethinking Technical Cooperation: Reforms for Capacity Building in Africa, New York: United Nations Development Program. Berry, Francis Stokes, and William D. Berry (1992), “Tax Innovation in the States: Capitalizing on Political Opportunity,” American Journal of Political Science, vol. 36, 715–742. Besley, Timothy (1995), “Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 103, 903–937.
——— (2006), Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case (2003), “Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence from the United States,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 41, 773. Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate (1997), “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112, 85–114. ——— (1998), “Sources of Inefficiency in a Representative Democracy: A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, vol. 88, 139–156. ——— (2003), “Centralized versus Decentralized Provision of Local Public Goods: A Political Economy Approach,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 87, 2611–2637. Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak (2009), “Property Rights and Economic Development,” in Rodrik, Dani and Mark Rosenzweig (eds.), Handbook of Development Economics, vol. V, Amsterdam: Elsevier. Besley, Timothy, and Rajshri Jayaraman (eds.) (2010), Institutional Microeconomics of Development, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Besley, Timothy, Ethan Ilzetzki, and Torsten Persson (2010), “Weak States, Strong States and Steady States: The Dynamics of Fiscal Capacity,” mimeo, London School of Economics. Besley, Timothy, and Hannes Mueller (2010), “Estimating the Peace Dividend: Evidence from House Prices in Northern Ireland,” forthcoming in the American Economic Review.
Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson (2008), “Wars and State Capacity,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 6, 522–530.
references 337


——— (2009a), “Repression or Civil War?,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 99, 292–297.
——— (2009b), “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation and Politics,” American Economic Review, vol. 99, 1218–1244. ——— (2010a), “State Capacity, Conflict and Development,” Econometrica, vol. 78, 1–34. ——— (2010b), “The Logic of Political Violence,” forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics.
——— (2010c), “From Trade Taxes to Income Taxes: Theory and Evidence on Economic Development and State Capacity,” mimeo, London School of Economics. ——— (2011), “Fragile States and Development Policy,” paper underlying the 2010 EEA Presidential Address, forthcoming in the Journal of the European Economic Association.
Besley, Timothy, and Andrea Prat (2006), “Handcuffs for the Grabbing Hand? Media Capture and Government Accountability,” American Economic Review, vol. 96, 720–736. Bird, Richard, and Oliver Oldman (eds.) (1980), Readings on Taxation in Developing Countries, 3rd Edition, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Blackstone, William (1765–1766), Commentaries on the Law of England, Oxford: Clarendon Press. Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel (2009), “Civil War,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 48, 3–57.
Blomberg, S. Brock, and Gregory D. Hess (2002), “The Temporal Links between Conflict and Economic Activity,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 46, 7490. Bloom, David E., and Jeffrey D. Sachs (1998), “Geography, Demography and Economic Growth in Africa,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no 2, 207–272. Bockstette, Valerie, Areendam Chanda, and Louis Putterman (2002), “States and Markets: The Advantage of an Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 7, 347–369. Boettke, Peter, Christopher Coyne, and Peter Leeson (2008), “Institutional Stickiness and the New Development Economics,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, vol. 67, 331–358. Bohlken, Anjali Thomas, and Ernest Sergenti (2010), “Ethnic Violence and Economic Growth: An Empirical Investigation of Hindu-Muslim Riots in India,” Journal of Peace Research, vol. 47, 589–600.
Boix, Carles (1999), “Setting the Rules of the Game: The Choice of Electoral Systems in Advanced Democracies,” American Political Science Review, vol. 93, 609–624. ——— (2003), Democracy and Redistribution, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
338 references


Bonney, Richard (ed.) (1999), The Rise of the Fiscal State in Europe c1200–1815, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Boone, Peter (1996), “Politics and the Effectiveness of Foreign Aid,” European Economic Review, vol. 40, 289–329.
Br  ̈autigam, Deborah, Odd-Helge Fjeldstad, and Mick Moore [2008), Taxation and State-Building in Developing Countries, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Brennan, Geoffrey, and James M. Buchanan (1985), The Reason of Rules: Constitutional Political Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brewer, John (1989), The Sinews of Power: War, Money and the English State, 1688–1783, New York: Knopf. Bruckner, Markus, and Antonio Ciccone (2008), “Growth, Democracy, and Civil War,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6568.
Buchanan, James M. (1967), Public Finance in Democratic Process: Fiscal Institutions and Individual Choice, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ——— (1987), “The Constitution of Economic Policy,” Nobel Prize Lecture, American Economic Review, vol. 77, 243–250.
Buchanan, James M., and Gordon Tullock (1962), The Calculus of Consent, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph Siverson, and James Morrow (2003),The Logic of Political Survival, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Burgess, Robin, and Nicholas Stern (1993), “Taxation and Development,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 31, 762–830.
Burnside, Craig, and David Dollar (2000), “Aid, Policies and Growth,” American Economic Review, vol. 90, 847–868.
Cantoni, Davide, and Noam Yuchtman (2009), “Medieval Universities, Legal Institutions and the Commercial Revolution,” mimeo, Harvard University. C  ́ardenas, Mauricio (2010), “State Capacity in Latin America,” Economı ́a, vol. 10, 1–45. C  ́ardenas, Mauricio, and Didem Tuzemen (2010), “Under-Investment in State Capacity: The Role of Inequality and Political Instability,” mimeo, The Brookings Institution. Caselli, Francesco (2006), “Power Struggles and the Natural Resource Curse,” mimeo, London School of Economics. Caselli, Francesco, and Nicola Gennaioli (2008), “Economics and Politics of Alternative Institutional Reforms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123, 1197–1250 Centeno, Miguel A (1997), “Blood and Debt: War and Taxation in Latin America,” American Journal of Sociology, vol. 102, 1565–1605.
Chamberlain, Gary (1980), “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 47, 225–238.
Chanda, Areendam, and Louis Putterman (2004), “The Quest for Growth: What Role Does History Play?,” World Economics, vol. 5, 1–28.
references 339


Chassang, Sylvain, and Gerard Padr  ́o i Miquel (2009), “Economic Shocks and Civil War,” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, vol. 4, 211–228.
Chauvet, Lisa, and Paul Collier (2006), “Helping Hand? Aid to Failing States,” DIAL - Document de Travail DT/2006-14. Chenery, Hollis B. (1975), “The Structuralist Approach to Development Policy,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 65, 310–316.
Chenery, Hollis B., and Hazel Elkington (1979), Structural Change and Development Policy, New York: Oxford University Press. Chenery, Hollis B., and Alan M. Strout (1966), “Foreign Assistance and Economic Development,” American Economic Review, vol. 56, 679–733. Chong, Alberto, and Mark Gradstein (2007), “Inequality and Institutions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 89, 454–465. Clark, Gregory (2008), A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Coase, Ronald H. (1960), “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 3, 1–44.
Collier, Paul (1999), “On the Economic Consequences of Civil War,” Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 51, 168–183.
——— (2007), The Bottom Billion, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——— (2008), Wars, Guns and Votes: Democracy in Dangerous Places, London: Bodley Head. Collier, Paul, and David Dollar (2004), “Development Effectiveness: What Have We Learnt?,” Economic Journal, vol. 114, F244–F271. Collier, Paul, V. L. Elliott, H  ̊avard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Marta Reynol-Querol, and Nicolas Sambanis (2003), Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy, New York: Oxford University Press, for the World Bank. Collier, Paul, and Jan Willem Gunning (1999), “Explaining African Economic Performance,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37, 64–111.
Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler (2004), “Greed and Grievance in Civil War,” Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 56, 563–595.
Collier, Paul, and Dominic Rohner (2008), “Democracy, Development and Conflict,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 6, 531–540.
Cowell, Frank (1990), Cheating the Government, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Coyne, Christopher J. (2008a), After War: The Political Economy of Exporting Democracy, Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. ——— (2008b), “The Politics of Bureaucracy and the Failure of Post-War Reconstruction,” Public Choice, vol. 135, 11–22. Coyne, Christopher J., and Peter J. Boettke (2009), “The Problem of Credible Commitment in Reconstruction,” Journal of Institutional Economics, vol. 5, 1–23. Coyne, Christopher J., Gregory M. Dempster, and Justin P. Isaacs [2010), “Asset Values and the Sustainability of Peace Prospects,” The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, vol. 50, 146–156.
340 references


Coyne, Christopher J., and Peter Leeson (2009), Media, Development, and Institutional Change, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Coyne, Christopher J., and Adam Pellillo (2011), “Economic Reconstruction Amidst Conflict: Insights from Afghanistan and Iraq,” forthcoming in Defence and Peace Economics.
Cox, Gary (1997), Making Votes Count, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. Cukierman, Alex, Sebastian Edwards, and Guido Tabellini (1992), “Seignorage and Political Instability,” American Economic Review, vol. 82, 537–555. Dal B  ́o, Ernesto, and Pedro Dal B  ́o (2006), “Workers, Warriors and Criminals: Social Conflict in General Equilibrium,” forthcoming in the Journal of the European Economic Association.
Davenport, Christian (2007), “State Repression and Political Order,” Annual Review of Political Science, vol. 10, 1–23.
Deininger, Klaus (2003), “Causes and Consequences of Civil Strife: Micro-Level Evidence from Uganda,” Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 55, 579–606. Deininger, Klaus, and Lyn Squire (1996), “A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality,” The World Bank Economic Review, vol. 10, 565–591.
de Figueiredo, Rui J. P. Jr. (2002), “Electoral Competition, Political Uncertainty, and Policy Insulation,” American Political Science Review, vol. 96, 321–333 De Long, J. Bradford (2000), “Overstrong Against Thyself: War, the State, and Growth in Europe on the Eve of the Industrial Revolution,” in Olson, Mancur, and Satu Kahkohnen (eds.), A Not-So-Dismal Science: A Broader View of Economies and Societies, Oxford: Oxford University Press. De Long, J. Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer (1993), “Princes and Merchants: European City Growth Before the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 36, 671–702. de Ree, Joppe, and Eleonora Nillesen (2009), “Aiding Violence or Peace? The Impact of Foreign Aid on the Risk of Civil Conflict in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 88, 301–313. Diamond, Jared (1997), Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, W.W. Norton & Company. Diamond, Peter, and James Mirrlees (1971), “Optimal Taxation and Public Production: I. Production Efficiency,” American Economic Review, vol. 61, 8–27. Diermeier, Daniel, and Tim Feddersen (1998), “Cohesion in Legislatures and the Vote of Confidence Procedure,” American Political Science Review, vol. 92, 611–621.
Dincecco, Mark (2011), Political Transformations and Public Finances: Europe, 1650–1913, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press forthcoming. Dincecco, Mark, and Jos ́e Mauricio Prado Jr. (2010), “Warfare, Fiscal Capacity, and Performance,” mimeo, IMT Lucca Institute for Advanced Studies. Dixit, Avinash (1987), “Strategic Behavior in Contests,” American Economic Review, vol. 77, 891–898.
references 341


——— (2004), Lawlessness and Economics: Alternative Modes of Governance (Gorman Lectures in Economics, University College London), Princeton: Princeton University Press. ——— (2009), “Governance Institutions and Economic Activity,” American Economic Review, vol. 99, 5–24.
Dixit, Avinash, Gene M. Grossman, and Faruk Gul (2000), “The Dynamics of Political Compromise,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 108, 531–568. Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2003), “The New Comparative Economics,” Journal of Comparative Economics, vol. 31, 595–619.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2002), “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 117, 1–37. Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer (2007), “Private Credit in 129 Countries,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 84, 299–329. Djankov, Simeon, Jose G. Montalvo, and Marta Reynal-Querol (2008), “The Curse of Aid,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 13, 1835–1865. Doucouliagos, Hristos, and Martin Paldam (2008), “Aid Effectiveness on Growth: A Meta Study,” European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 24, 1–24. Drury, Cooper, and Richard Olson (1998), “Disasters and Political Unrest: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, vol. 6, 153–161. Dube, Oeindrila, and Juan Vargas (2008), “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from Colombia,” mimeo, Harvard University. Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Michael Kremer (2007), “Using Randomization in Development Economics Research: A Toolkit,” CEPR Discussion Paper No 6059. Dunning Thad, (2010), “Endogenous Oil Rents,” Comparative Political Studies, vol. 43, no. 3, 379–410. Easterly, William (2003), “Can Foreign Aid Buy Growth?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 17, 23–48.
——— (2006), The White Man’s Burden: Why the West’s Efforts to Aid the Rest Have Done So Much Ill and So Little Good, New York: Penguin Books.
Elbadawi, Ibrahim, and Nicholas Sambanis (2002), “How Much Civil War Will We See? Explaining the Prevalence of Civil War,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 46, 307–334. Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (2002), “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development among New World Economies,” Economia, vol. 3, 41–88
ERD (2009), Overcoming Fragility in Africa. Forging a New European Approach, European Report on Development, San Domenico de Fiesole: EUI.
342 references


Erikson, Robert S. (1972), “Malapportionment, Gerrymandering, and Party Fortunes in Congressional Elections,” American Political Science Review, vol. 66, 1234–1245. Esteban, Joan, and Debraj Ray (1994), “On the Measurement of Polarization,” Econometrica, vol. 62, 819–851. ——— (1999), “Conflict and Distribution,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 87, 379–415. ——— (2008a), “On the Salience of Ethnic Conflict,” American Economic Review, vol. 98, 2185–2202. ——— (2008b), “Polarization, Fractionalization and Conflict,” Journal of Peace Research, vol. 45, 163–182. Esteban, Juan, Debraj Ray, and Jean-Yves Duclos (2004), “Polarization: Concepts, Measurement, Estimation,” Econometrica, vol. 72, 1737–1772. Fearon, James (2003), “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 8, 195–222.
——— (2004), “Why Do Some Civil Wars Last so Much Longer than Others?,” Journal of Peace Research, vol. 41, 275–301.
——— (2008), “Economic Development, Insurgency and Civil War,” in Helpman, Elhanan (ed.), Institutions and Economic Performance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ——— (2010), “Coordinating on Democracy,” forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Fearon, James, and David Laitin (2003), “Ethnicity, Insurgency and Civil War,” American Political Science Review, vol. 97, 75–90. Fei, John, and Gustav Ranis (1964), Development of the Labor Surplus Economy, Homewood, IL. Feld, Lars P., and Stefan Voigt (2003), “Economic Growth and Judicial Independence: Cross-country Evidence Using a New Set of Indicators,” European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 19, 497–527.
Ferejohn, John (1986), “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control,” Public Choice, vol. 50, 5–25. Ferrer-i-Carbonell, Ada, and Paul Frijters (2004), “How Important is Methodology for the Estimates of the Determinants of Happiness?,” Economic Journal, vol. 114, 641–659. Field, Erica (2007), “Entitled to Work: Urban Property Rights and Labor Supply in Peru,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 122, 1561–1602. Frey, Bruno S. (1983), Democratic Economic Policy: A Theoretical Introduction, Oxford: Blackwell. Frey, Bruno S., and Friedrich Schneider (1986), “Competing Models of International Lending Activity,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 20, 225245. Fudenberg, D., and Eric Maskin (1986), “The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games with Discounting or with Incomplete Information,” Econometrica, vol. 54, 533–554.
references 343


Gallup, John Luke, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Andrew Mellinger (1999), “Geography and Economic Development,” International Regional Science Review, vol. 22, 179–232. Garfinkel, Michelle R., and Stergios Skaperdas (2007), “Economics of Conflict: An Overview,” in Sandler, Todd, and Keith Hartley (eds.), Handbook of Defense Economics, Vol. II, Amsterdam: Elsevier. Gellner, Ernest, (1983), Nations and Nationalism, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Gerschenkron, Alexander (1962), “Agricultural Backwardness in Historical Perspective,” chapter 1 in Gerschenkron, Alexander, Agricultural Backwardness in Historical Perspective, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Gibney, Mark, Linda Cornett, and Reed Wood (2007), Political Terror Scale 1976 to 2006, available at www.politicalterrorscale.org. Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2004), “Do Institutions Cause Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 9, 271–303. Glaeser, Edward, L., Giacomo A. Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer [2007), “Why Democracy Needs Education,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 12, 77–99. Goldin, Claudia D., and Frank D. Lewis (1975), “The Economic Cost of the American Civil War: Estimates and Implications,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 35, 299–326. Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Ivan Werning (2006), “New Dynamic Public Finance: A User’s Guide,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, Roger (ed.) (2010), Taxation in Developing Countries: Six Case Studies and Policy Implications, New York: Columbia University Press. Gordon, Roger, and Wei Li (2009), “Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a Possible Explanation,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 93, 855–866 Gradstein, Mark (2008), “Institutional Traps and Economic Growth,” International Economic Review, vol. 49, 1043–1066.
Greif, Avner (2005), “Commitment, Coercion and Markets: The Nature and Dynamics of Institutions Supporting Exchange,” in M ́enard, Claude and Mary M. Shirley (eds.), Handbook of New Institutional Economics, Dordrecht: Springer.
——— (2006), Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Grofman, Bernard N. (1985), “Criteria for Districting: A Social Science Perspective,” UCLA Law Review, vol. 33, 77–184. Grofman, Bernard N., William Koetzle, and Thomas Brunell (1997), “An Integrated Perspective on the Three Potential Sources of Partisan Bias: Malapportionment, Turnout Differences, and the Geographic Distribution of Party Vote Shares,” Electoral Studies, vol. 16, 457–470. Grossman, Herschel (1991), “A General Equilibrium Model of Insurrection,” American Economic Review, vol. 81, 912–921.
344 references


——— (1992), “Foreign Aid and Insurrection,” Defence and Peace Economics, vol. 3, 275–288. Grossman, Herschel I., and Minseong Kim (1995), “Swords or Plowshares? A Theory of the Security of Claims to Property,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 103, 1275–1288. Grossman, Herschel I., and Suk Jae Noh (1994), “Proprietary Public Finance and Economic Welfare,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 53, 187–204. Gstoettner, Markus, and Anders Jensen (2010), “Aid and Public Finance: A Missing Link?,” Atlantic Economic Journal, vol. 38, 217–235. Gupta, Sanjeev, Catherine Pattillo, and Smita Wagh (2006), “Are Donor Countries Giving More or Less Aid?,” Review of Development Economics, vol. 10, 535–552. Hall, Robert, and Chad Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, 83–116. Hamilton, Alexander, John Jay, and James Madison (1788), The Federalist: A Collection, New York: J. and A. McLean. Hansen, Henrik, and Finn Tarp (2001), “Aid and Growth Regressions,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 64, 547–570. Hayek, Friedrich (1979), Law, Legislation and Liberty, Vol. 3: The Political Order of a Free People, Chicago, University of Chicago Press. Herbst, Jefferey I. (1990), “War and the State in Africa,” International Security, vol. 14, 117–139.
——— (2000), States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority and Control, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Hettich, Walter, and Stanley Winer (1999), Democratic Choice and Taxation: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hillman, Arye L. (2011), “Rent Seeking,” in Reksulak, Michael, Laura Razzolini, and William F. Shughart II (eds.), The Elgar Companion to Public Choice, 2nd edition, Cheltenham, U.K: Edward Elgar. Hillman, Arye L., and Heinrich W. Ursprung (2000), “Political Culture and Economic Decline,” European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 16, 189–213. Hinich, Melvin, A., John O. Ledyard, and Peter Ordeshook (1972), “Nonvoting and the Existence of Equilibrium under Majority Rule,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 4, 144–153.
Hinrichs, Harley H. (1966), A General Theory of Tax Structure Change During Economic Development, Cambridge, MA: The Law School of Harvard University. Hintze, Otto (1906), “Military Organization and the Organization of the State,” reprinted in Gilbert, Felix (ed.) (1970), The Historical Essays of Otto Hintze, New York: Oxford University Press. Hirshleifer, Jack (1989), “Conflict and Rent-Seeking Success Functions: Ratio vs. Difference Models of Relative Success,” Public Choice, vol. 63, 101–112.
references 345


Hodgson, Geoffrey M. (2006), “Institutions, Recessions and Recovery in the Transitional Economies,” Journal of Economic Issues, vol. 40, 875–894. Hodgson, Geoffrey M., and Shuxia Jiang (2007), “The Economics of Corruption and the Corruption of Economics: An Institutionalist Perspective,” Journal of Economic Issues, vol. 41, 1043–1061. Hoffman, Philip, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal (1997), “Political Economy of Warfare and Taxation in Early Modern Europe: Historical Lessons for Economic Development,” in Drobak, John, and John Nye (eds.), The Frontiers of the New Institutional Economics, San Diego: Academic Press.
Hseih Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow (2009), “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 124, 14031448. ——— (2010), “Development Accounting,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 2, 207–223. Huber, John D. (1996), “The ’Vote of Confidence in Parliamentary Democracies,” American Political Science Review, vol. 90, 269–282.
Humphreys, Macartan (2005), “Natural Resources, Conflict, and Conflict Resolution: Uncovering the Mechanisms,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 49, 508–537. Humphreys, Macartan, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.) (2007), Escaping the Resource Curse, New York: Columbia University Press. Husted, Thomas, and Lawrence Kenny (1997), “The Effect of the Expansion of the Voting Franchise on the Size of Government,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105, 54–82. Jellema, Jan, and G ́erard Roland (2010), “Institutional Clusters and Economic Performance,” forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.
Jensen, Anders (2010), “Natural Resources and Ability to Tax,” mimeo, London School of Economics. Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff (2002), “Property Rights and Finance,” American Economic Review, vol. 92, 1335–1356. Jones, Bejamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken (2005), “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth Since World War II,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 120, 835–864. ——— (2009), “Hit or Miss? The Effect of Assassinations on Institutions and War,” American Economic Journal Macroeconomics, vol. 1, 55–87.
Kaldor, Nicholas (1963), “Taxation for Economic Development,” Journal of Modern African Studies, vol. 1, 7–23.
Kandori, Michhiro (1989), “Social Norms and Community Enforcement,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 59, 63-80.
Karaman, K. Kivanc, Sevket Pamuk (2011), “Different Paths to the Modern State in Europe: The Interaction between Domestic Political Economy and Interstate Competition,” mimeo, London School of Economics. Keen, Michael (2010), “Taxation and Development Again,” mimeo, IMF.
346 references


Keen, Michael, and Ben Lockwood (2010), “The Value Added Tax: Its Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 92, 138–151. Kenny, Lawrence, and Stanley Winer (2006), “Tax Systems in the World: An Empirical Investigation into the Importance of Tax Bases, Administrative Costs, Scale and Political Regime,” International Tax and Public Finance, vol. 13, 181–215. King, Robert G., and Ross Levine (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, 717–737. Klerman, Daniel M., and Paul G. Mahoney (2005), “The Value of Judicial Independence: Evidence from 18th Century England,” American Law and Economic Review, vol. 7, 1–27.
Kletzer, Kenneth (2005), “Aid and Sanctions,” mimeo, EC Santa Cruz. Kleven, Henrik, Claus Thustrup Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez (2009), “Why Can Modern Governments Tax So Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries,” NBER Working Paper 15218. Knack, Stephen (2001), “Aid Dependence and the Quality of Governance: A Cross Country Empirical Test,” Southern Economic Journal, vol. 68, 310–329. Krueger, Anne (1974), “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society,” American Economic Review, vol. 64, 291–303.
Krusell, Per, and Jos ́e-V ́ıctor R ́ıos-Rull (1996), “Vested Interests in a Positive Theory of Stagnation and Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 63, 301329. Kuziemko, Ilyana, and Eric Werker (2006), “How Much Is a Seat on the Security Council Worth? Foreign Aid and Bribery at the United Nations,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 114, 905–930.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85, 473–492. La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998), “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, 11131155. ——— (1999), “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law Economics and Organization, vol. 15, 222–279. La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer [2008), “The Economics Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 46, 285–332. Lacina, Bethany Ann, and Nils Petter Gleditsch (2005), “Monitoring Trends in Global Combat: A New Dataset of Battle Deaths,” European Journal of Population, vol. 21, 145–165. Lagunoff, Roger (2001), “A Theory of Constitutional Standards and Civil Liberty,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 68, 109–132. Landes, David (1998), The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor, New York: W. W. Norton. Leeson, Peter (2006), “Efficient Anarchy,” Public Choice, vol. 130, 41–53.
references 347


——— (2007), “Better Off Stateless: Somalia Before and After Government Collapse,” Journal of Comparative Economics, vol. 35, 689–710.
——— (2008), “Escaping Poverty: Foreign Aid, Private Property, and Economic Development,” Journal of Private Enterprise, vol. 23, 39–64.
Levi, Margaret (1988), Of Rule and Revenue, Berkeley: University of California Press. ——— (1998), “A State of Trust,” in Braithwaite, Valerie, and Margaret Levi (eds.), Trust & Governance, New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Levine, Ross (2005), “Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence,” in Aghion, Philippe, and Steven Durlauf (eds), Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam: Elsevier. Lewis, W. Arthur (1954), “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,” The Manchester School, vol. 22, 129–191.
Lijphart, Arend (1977), Democracy in Plural Societies: A Comparative Exploration, New Haven: Yale University Press. ——— (1984), Democracies, New Haven: Yale University Press.
——— (1999), Patterns of Democracy: Government Forms and Performance in Thirty-Six Countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Lindbeck, Assar (1976), “Stabilization Policy in Open Economies with Endogenous Politicians,” Richard T. Ely Lecture, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 66, 1–19.
Lindbeck, Assar, and J  ̈orgen Weibull (1987), “Balanced-budget Redistribution as the Outcome of Political Competition,” Public Choice, vol. 52, 273–297. Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959), “Some Social Requisites for Democracy: Economic Development and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review, vol. 53, 69–105. Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico (2001), “The Provision of Public Goods under Alternative Electoral Incentives,” American Economic Review, vol. 91, 225–239. Lucas, Robert (1993), “Making a Miracle,” Econometrica, vol. 61, 251–272. Ma, Debin (2010), “Rock, Scissors, Paper: The Problem of Incentives and Information in the Traditional Chinese State and the Origin of the Great Divergence,” mimeo, London School of Economics. Mahdavy, Hossein (1970), “The Patterns and Problems of Economic Development in Rentier States: The Case of Iran,” in Cook M. A. (ed.), Studies in the Economic History of the Middle East, Oxford University Press.
Mann, Michael (1986), The Sources of Social Power, Vol. I, New York: Cambridge University Press. ——— (1993), The Sources of Social Power, Vol. II, New York: Cambridge University Press. Maoz, Zeev, and Bruce Russett (1993), “Normative and Structural Causes of Democratic Peace, 1946–1986,” American Political Science Review, vol. 87, 624–638.
348 references


Mathias, Peter, and Patrick O’Brien (1976), “Taxation in Britain and France 1715–1810: A Comparison of the Social and Economic Consequences of Taxes Collected for the Central Governments,” Journal of European Economic History, vol. 5, 601–650. Mauro, Paolo (1995), “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110, 681–712. McGillivray, Mark (2006), “Aid Allocation and Fragile States,” WIDER Discussion Paper 2006/01, Helsinki. McGuire, Martin C., and Mancur Olson (1996), “The Economics of Autocracy and Majority Rule: The Invisible Hand and the Use of Force,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 34, 72–96.
Mehlum, Halvor, Karl O. Moene, and Ragnar Torvik (2006), “Institutions and the Resource Curse,” Economic Journal, vol. 116, 1–20. Meltzer, Alan, and Scott Richards (1981), “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 89, 914–927.
Migdal, Joel S. (1988), Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State Capabilities in the Third World, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti (2004), “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112, 725–753.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, Roberto Perotti, and Marco Rostagno [2002), “Electoral Systems and the Composition of Public Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 117, 609–657.
Milgrom, Paul, and Chris Shannon (1994), “Monotone Comparative Statics,” Econometrica, vol. 62, 157–180.
Mokyr, Joel (1990), The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Montalvo, Jos ́e G., and Marta Reynal-Querol (2005), “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil Wars,” American Economic Review, vol. 95, 796816.
Moore, Barrington (1966), Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Boston: Beacon Press. Moore, Mick (2004), “Revenues, State Formation and the Quality of Governance in Developing Countries,” International Political Science Review, vol. 25, 297319. Moselle, Boaz, and Benjamin Polak (2001), “A Model of a Predatory State,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, vol. 17, 1–33.
Myerson, Roger (1999), “Theoretical Comparison of Electoral Systems: 1998 Schumpeter Lecture,” European Economic Review, vol. 43, 671–697.
Myrdal, Gunnar (1968), Asian Drama. An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations, New York: Pantheon. ——— (1974), “What Is Development?” Journal of Economic Issues, vol. 8, 729736.
references 349


Nel, Philip, and Marjolein Righarts (2008), “Natural Disasters and the Risk of Violent Civil Conflict,” International Studies Quarterly, vol. 52, 159–185. Newbery, David, and Nicholas Stern (eds) (1987), The Theory of Taxation for Developing Countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World Bank. North, Douglass C. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. North, Douglass C., and Robert Paul Thomas (1973), The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History, New York: Cambridge University Press. North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast (1989), “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutional Governing Public Choice in SeventeenthCentury England,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 44, 803–832. North, Douglass C., Barry Weingast, and John Wallis (2009), Violence and Social Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Nunn, Nathan (2008), “The Long-term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123, 139–176.
——— (2009), “The Importance of History for Economic Development,” Annual Review of Economics, vol. 1, 1–28.
Nunn, Nathan, and Nancy Qian (2010), “Aiding Conflict: The Unintended Consequences of U.S. Food Aid on Civil War, 1976–2004,” mimeo, Harvard University. O’Brien, Patrick (2001), “Fiscal Exceptionalism: Great Britain and its European Rivals from Civil War to Triumph at Trafalgar and Waterloo,” mimeo, available at http://www2.lse.ac.uk/economicHistory/pdf/WP6501.pdf. ——— (2005), “Fiscal and Financial Preconditions for the Rise of British Naval Hegemony: 1485–1815,” mimeo, London School of Economics. O’Donnell, Guillermo A., and Philippe C. Schmitter (1986), Transitions from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative Conclusions about Uncertain Democracies, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
OECD (2010a), Do No Harm: International Support for State Building, Paris: OECD publications. ——— (2010b), Development Cooperation Report, Statistical Annex, OECD, Paris. Olson, Mancur (1993), “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development,” American Political Science Review, vol. 87, 567–576.
Olsson, Ola, and Heather Congdon Fors (2004), “Congo: The Prize of Predation,” Journal of Peace Research, vol. 41, 321–336.
Osborne, Martin J., and Al Slivinsky (1996), “A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111, 65–96. Ostrom, Elinor (1990), Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin (2001), “The Political Economy of Finance,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 17, 502–519.
——— (2005), “The Political Economy of Corporate Governance,” American Economic Review, vol. 95, 1005–1030.
350 references


——— (2006), “Shareholder Protection, Stock Market Development, and Politics,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 4, 315–341.
Parente, Stephen L., and Edward C. Prescott (2000), Barriers to Riches, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Parker, Geoffrey, (1988), The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West 1500–1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Perotti, Enrico, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden (2006), “The Political Economy of Corporate Control and Labor Rents,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 114, 145–174. Perroni, Carlo, and Kimberly Scharf (2007), “Taxation and Property Rights,” mimeo, University of Warwick. Persson, Torsten, G ́erard Roland, and Guido Tabellini (1997), “Separation of Powers and Political Accountability,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112, 1163–1202. ——— (2000), “Comparative Politics and Public Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 108, 1121–1161. Persson, Torsten, and Lars E.O. Svensson (1989), “Why a Stubborn Conservative Would Run a Deficit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 104, 325–345.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (1994), “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?,” American Economic Review, vol. 84, 600–621. ——— (1996a), ”Federal Fiscal Constitutions: Risk Sharing and Moral Hazard,” Econometrica, vol. 64, 623–646. ——— (1996b), “Federal Fiscal Constitutions: Risk Sharing and Redistribution,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 104, 979–1009.
——— (1999), “The Size and Scope of Government: Comparative Politics with Rational Politicians,” 1998 Marshall Lecture, European Economic Review, vol. 43, 699–735.
——— (2000), Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ——— (2002), “Political Economics and Public Finance,” Chapter 24 in Auerbach, Alan, and Martin Feldstein (eds), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
——— (2003), The Economic Effects of Constitutions, Cambridge MA: MIT Press. ——— (2004), “Constitutions and Economic Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18, 75–98. Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2009), “Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Economic and Political Change,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 1, 88–126.
Platteau, Jean-Philippe (2000), Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development, Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers. Posen, Barry R. (1993), “Nationalism, the Mass Army, and Military Power,” International Security, vol. 18, 80–124.
references 351


Powell Jr., G. Bingham (1989), “Constitutional Design and Citizen Electoral Control,” Journal of Theoretical Politics, vol. 1, 107–130. ——— (2000), Elections as Instruments of Democracy, New Haven and London: Yale University Press. Prat, Andrea, and David Str  ̈omberg (2010), “The Political Economy of Mass Media,” paper presented at the 10th World Congress of the Econometric Society. Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, Jose Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi (2000), Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World 1950–1900, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, Robert (1993), Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Putterman, Louis (2008), “The Role of the State and Markets in Development,” in Dutt, Amitava, and Jaime Ros (eds.), International Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 2, Amsterdam: Edward Elgar. Qian, Nancy, and David Yanagizawa (2009), “Watchdog or Lapdog? Media and the U.S. Government,” mimeo, Institute for International Economic Studies. Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian (2008), “Aid and Growth: What Does the Cross Country Evidence Really Show?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 90, 643–665. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2003), “The Great Reversal: The Politics of Financial Development in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 69, 5–50. Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson (2008), “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 11, 707–720. Reynal-Querol, Marta (2002), “Ethnicity, Political Systems, and Civil Wars,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 46, 29–54.
Rice, Susan, and Stewart Patrick (2008), Index of State Weakness in the Developing World, Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution. Riddell, Roger (2007), Does Foreign Aid Really Work?, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Robinson, James A., Ragnar Torvik, and Thierry Verdier (2006), “Political Foundations of the Resource Curse,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 79, 447–468. Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2004), “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions Over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 9, 131–165. Rogoff, Kenneth (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 100, 1169–1189. Rokkan, Stein (1970), Citizens, Elections, Politics. Approaches to the Comparative Study of the Processes of Development, New York: MaKay.
Romer, Thomas, and Howard Rosenthal (1979), “Bureaucrats versus Voters: On the Political Economy of Resource Allocation by Direct Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 93, 563–587.
352 references


Rosenberg, Nathan, and L.E. Birdzell (1986), How the West Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation of the Industrial World, New York: Basic Books.
Ross, Michael (2004), “What Do We Know about Natural Resources and Civil War?,” Journal of Peace Research, vol. 41, 337–356.
Rothstein, Bo (2000), “Trust, Social Dilemmas and Collective Memories,” Journal of Theoretical Politics, vol. 12, 477–501. Sachs, Jeffrey (2005), The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time, New York: Penguin Books. Sachs, Jeffrey, John. W. McArthur, Guido Schmidt-Traub, Margaret Kruk, Chandrika Bahadur, Michael Faye, and Gordon McCord (2004), “Ending Africa’s Poverty Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no 1, 117–240.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew Warner (1995), “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 5398. ——— (2001), “The Curse of Natural Resources,” European Economic Review, vol. 45, 827–838. Sambanis, Nicholas (2004), “What is Civil War: Conceptual and Empirical Complexities of an Operational Definition,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 48, 814–858. Scheve, Ken, and David Stasavage (2010), “Democracy, War, and Wealth: Evidence of Two Centuries of Inheritance Taxation,” mimeo, New York University. Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1918), “The Crisis of the Tax State,” International Economic Papers, vol. 4, 5–38.
——— (1934), The Theory of Economic Development, (1968 edition translated by R. Opie, with an introduction by J. E. Elliott) New Brunswick and London: Transactions Books. Shayo, Moses (2009), “A Model of Social Identity with an Application to Political Economy: Nation, Class, and Redistribution,” American Political Science Review, vol. 103, 147–174. Shleifer, Andrei (2009), “Peter Bauer and the Failure of Foreign Aid,” Cato Journal, vol. 29, 355–371. Shugart, Matthew, and John Carey (1992), Presidents and Assemblies: Constitutional Design and Electoral Dynamics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Skaperdas, Stergios (1992), “Cooperation, Conflict, and Power in the Absence of Property Rights,” American Economic Review, vol. 82, 720–739. ——— (1996), “Contest Success Functions,” Economic Theory, vol. 7, 283–290. ——— (2010), “The Costs of Organized Violence: A Review of the Evidence,” forthcoming in Economic Governance.
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki (2002), “Tax Avoidance, Evasion, and Administration,” in Auerbach, Alan, and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier. Smith, Alastair (2006), “Pernicious Foreign Aid?: A Political Economy of Political Institutions and the Effect of Foreign Aid,” mimeo, New York University. Smith, Benjamin (2004), “Oil Wealth and Regime Survival in the Developing World, 1960–1999,” American Journal of Political Science, vol. 48, 232–246.
references 353


Solow, Robert (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 70, 65–94.
Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zillibotti (2011), “Growing Like China,” American Economic Review, vol. 101, 202–241. Stasavage, David (2003), Public Debt and the Birth of the Democratic State: France and Great Britain, 1688–1789, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——— (2007), “Partisan Politics and Public Debt: The Importance of the ‘Whig Supremacy’ for Britain’s Financial Revolution,” European Review of Economic History, vol. 11, 123–153. Stern, Nicholas, Jean-Jacques Dethier, and F. Halsey Rogers [2005), Growth and Empowerment: Making Development Happen, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Strayer, Joseph R. (1970), On the Medieval Origins of the Modern State, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Svensson, Jakob (1998), “Investment, Property Rights and Political Instability: Theory and Evidence,” European Economic Review, vol. 42, 1317–1341. ——— (2000a), “Foreign Aid and Rent-seeking,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 51, 437–461. ——— (2000b), “When is Foreign Aid Policy Credible? Aid Dependence and Conditionality,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 61, 61–84.
——— (2003), “Why Conditional Aid Doesn’t Work and What Can Be Done About It?,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 70, 381–402.
——— (2005), “Eight Questions about Corruption,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19, 19–42. Taagepera, Rein, and Matthew S. Shugart (1989), Seats and Votes: The Effects and Determinants of Electoral Systems, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Tabellini, Guido (2008), “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123, 905–950.
Tanzi, Vito (1987), “Quantitative Characteristics of the Tax Systems of Developing Countries,” in Newbery, David, and Nicholas Stern (eds), The Theory of Taxation for Developing Countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World Bank. ——— (1992), “Structural Factors and Tax Revenue in Developing Countries: A Decade of Evidence,” in Goldin, Ian, and L. Alan Winters (eds.), Open Economies: Structural Adjustment and Agriculture, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Temple, Jonathan (2010), “Aid and Conditionality,” in Rodrik, Dani, and Mark Rosenzweig (eds.), Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 5, Amsterdam, Elsevier. Ticchi, Davide, and Andrea Vindigni (2010), “Endogenous Constitutions,” Economic Journal, vol. 120, 1–39. Tilly, Charles (ed.) (1975), The Formation of National States in Western Europe, Princeton: Princeton University Press. ——— (1985), “Warmaking and State Making as Organized Crime,” in Evans, Peter, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol (eds.), Bringing the State Back In, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
354 references


——— (1990), Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990–1992, Oxford: Blackwell.
Torgler, Benno (2007), Tax Morale and Tax Compliance: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, Cheltenham U.K.: Edward Elgar. Torvik, Ragnar (2002), “Natural Resources, Rent Seeking and Welfare,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 67, 455–470.
——— (2009), “Why Do Some Resource-abundant Countries Succeed while Others Do Not?,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 25, 241–256.
Treisman, Daniel (2000), “The Causes of Corruption: A Cross-National Study,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 76, 399–457.
Tullock, Gordon (1967), “The Welfare Costs of Tariffs, Monopolies, and Theft,” Western Economic Journal, vol. 5, 224–232.
——— (1980), “Efficient Rent Seeking,” in Buchanan, James, Richard Tollison and Gordon Tullock (eds.), Toward a Theory of the Rent-Seeking Society, College Station: Texas A & M University Press. UNDP (2002), Development Policy Journal 2, Special Issue: Technical Cooperation. Urdal, Henrik (2008), “Population, Resources and Violent Conflict: A SubNational Study of India 1956–2002,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 52, 590–617. U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) (2005), Fragile States Strategy, available at http://www.usaid.gov/policy/2005_fragile_states_strategy.pdf. Vallings, Claire, and Mag  ̈ui Moreno-Torres (2005), “Drivers of Fragility: What Makes States Fragile?,” PRDE Working Paper No. 7. London, U.K.: DFID. van der Ploeg, Frederick, (2011), “Natural Resources: Curse or Blessing?” forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Literature. Wade, Robert (1990), Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Government in East Asian Industrialization, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Weingast, Barry R. (1997), “The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of Law,” American Political Science Review, vol. 91, 245–263.
——— (2005), “The Constitutional Dilemma of Economic Liberty,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19, 89–108.
Yanagizawa, David (2010), “Propaganda and Conflict: Theory and Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide,” mimeo, Institute for International Economic Studies. Zolt, Eric M., and Richard M. Bird (2005), “Redistribution via Taxation: The Limited Role of the Personal Income Tax in Developing Countries,” UCLA Law Review, vol. 52, 1627–1695. Zussman, Asaf, Noam Zussman, and Morten Orregaard Nielsen (2008), “Asset Market Perspectives on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict,” Economica, vol. 75, 84–115.
references 355




Name Index
Page numbers for entries occurring in notes are suffixed by an n.
Abadie, Alberto, 236 Acemoglu, Daron, 7n, 38, 39, 64, 102, 106, 128, 129, 137, 166, 167, 168, 285–86, 299, 300, 301, 307, 309, 326 Addison, Tony, 258 Aghion, Philippe, 49, 102, 103, 166, 200n, 300 Aidt, Toke S., 41n, 101, 300, 331 Aizenman, Joshua, 101 Akerlof, George, 329 Alesina, Alberto, 49, 70, 72, 72n, 73, 101–2, 167, 200n, 243n, 257, 288, 300 Allingham, Michael G., 65, 100 Alt, James E., 279 Alvarez, Michael, 301 Amsden, Alice H., 308 Arrow, Kenneth J., 299 Aslaksen, Silje, 186, 213 Atkinson, Anthony, 55 Austen-Smith, David, 300 Azam, Jean-Paul, 168, 213, 214, 257, 258 Azzimonti, Marina, 102
Bai, Jinhui B., 102
Banerjee, Abhijit, 103, 122n, 165, 167, 258 Banks, Arthur, 22, 171, 198, 199n, 311 Banks, Jeffrey S., 300 Baqir, Reza, 70, 72, 101–2 Baron, David, 272, 274, 300 Barro, Robert J., 167, 301 Bates, Robert H., 38, 39, 168, 201n, 235, 299n Battaglini, Marco, 102 Bauer, Peter, 32, 38, 241, 245, 258 Baumol, William J., 59 Baunsgaard, Thomas, 91n, 101, 311 Beck, Thorsten, 166 Benabou, Roland, 107, 117, 167, 328 Benson, Bruce, 329 Berg, Elliot, 253 Berry, Francis Stokes, 101 Berry, William D., 101 Besley, Timothy, 11, 39, 64, 69n, 73, 83n, 86n, 88, 99, 101, 117n, 133n, 138, 167, 170n, 185n, 236, 237n, 275, 280, 300, 301, 309 Biais, Bruno, 168 Bird, Richard M., 100, 101
357


Birdzell, Luther E., Jr., 39 Blackstone, William, 103 Blattman, Christopher, 172–73, 186, 213, 214, 327 Blomberg, S. Brock, 236 Bloom, David E., 168 Bockstette, Valerie, 38 Boettke, Peter J., 258, 301 Bohlken, Anjali Thomas, 171n Boix, Carles, 296, 301 Bolton, Patrick, 102, 300 Bonney, Richard, 100 Boone, Peter, 257 Br  ̈autigam, Deborah, 100, 329 Brennan, Geoffrey, 300 Brewer, John, 12, 39, 45, 100 Bruckner, Markus, 196 Brunell, Thomas, 279 Buchanan, James M., 61, 300 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, 38, 187 Burgess, Robin, 44, 100 Burnside, Craig, 257
Cantoni, Davide, 167 C  ́ardenas, Mauricio, 73, 77–78, 101 Carey, John, 299 Case, Anne, 300 Caselli, Francesco, 167, 213, 220, 235 Centeno, Miguel A, 45 Chamberlain, Gary, 206n Chanda, Areendam, 38 Chassang, Sylvain, 213 Chauvet, Lisa, 257 Cheibub, Jose, 301 Chenery, Hollis B., 38, 241, 307–8 Chong, Alberto, 101, 166 Ciccone, Antonio, 196 Clark, Gregory, 39 Coase, Ronald H., 64n Coate, Stephen, 64, 102, 167, 275, 300 Collier, Paul, 27, 38, 39, 172, 173, 173n, 186, 191, 196n, 214, 224, 230, 236, 242, 245, 257, 258
Cornett, Linda, 198n Cowell, Frank, 100–101 Cox, Gary, 299 Coyne, Christopher J., 236, 258, 301 Cukierman, Alex, 44, 100
Dal B  ́o, Ernesto, 173n, 186n, 214 Dal B  ́o, Pedro, 173n, 186n, 214 Davenport, Christian, 172–73, 214 de Figueiredo, Rui J. P., Jr., 269 Deininger, Klaus, 94, 196, 214 De Long, J. Bradford, 167–68 Dempster, Gregory M., 236 de Ree, Joppe, 206n, 210n, 214 Dethier, Jean-Jacques, 38 Diamond, Jared, 233n Diamond, Peter, 105, 110 Diermeier, Daniel, 274, 299 Dincecco, Mark, 39, 58, 100, 101, 167 Dixit, Avinash, 165, 213, 288, 329 Djankov, Simeon, 166, 167, 241n, 258, 287, 323 Dollar, David, 243n, 245, 257 Doucouliagos, Hristos, 257 Drury, Cooper, 208, 214 Dube, Oeindrila, 173n, 196, 214 Duclos, Jean-Yves, 102 Duflo, Esther, 56, 103, 122n, 165, 251, 258 Dunning Thad, 61
Easterly, William, 38, 70, 72, 101–2, 241, 257 Edwards, Sebastian, 44, 100 Elbadawi, Ibrahim, 214 Elkington, Hazel, 307 Engerman, Stanley L., 106 Erikson, Robert S., 279 Esteban, Joan, 71n, 73, 102, 190, 213
Fearon, James, 93, 166, 173, 173n, 188, 193, 196n, 212, 213, 214, 230, 286, 319
358 name index


Feddersen, Tim, 274, 299 Fei, John, 118 Feld, Lars P., 136n Ferejohn, John, 272, 300, 301 Ferrer-i-Carbonell, Ada, 206, 206n Field, Erica, 167 Fjeldstad, Odd-Helge, 100, 329 Fors, Heather Congdon, 186 Frey, Bruno S., 257, 300 Frijters, Paul, 206, 206n Fudenberg, Drew, 288n
Gallup, John Luke, 168 Gardeazabal, Javier, 236 Garfinkel, Michelle R., 213 Gellner, Ernest, 39, 329 Gennaioli, Nicola, 167 Gerschenkron, Alexander, 166 Gertler, Paul J., 167 Ghatak, Maitreesh, 167 Gibney, Mark, 198n Glaeser, Edward, L., 168, 326 Gleditsch, Nils Petter, 170n Glennerster, Rachel, 56, 251, 258 Goldin, Claudia D., 223, 224, 236 Golosov, Mikhail, 102 Gordon, Roger, 44, 100, 101 Gradstein, Mark, 101, 166 Greif, Avner, 165, 299n, 329 Grofman, Bernard N., 279 Grossman, Gene M., 288 Grossman, Herschel I., 168, 186, 213 Gstoettner, Markus, 257–58 Gul, Faruk, 288 Gunning, Jan Willem, 38 Gupta, Sanjeev, 239n, 251, 253
Hall, Robert, 7n, 107, 117, 168 Hansen, Henrik, 257 Hayek, Friedrich, 329 He, Ruimin, 258 Herbst, Jefferey I., 45 Hess, Gregory D., 236
Hettich, Walter, 102 Hillman, Arye L., 168, 301 Hinich, Melvin, A., 300 Hinrichs, Harley H., 44 Hintze, Otto, 12, 39, 45, 58, 99 Hirshleifer, Jack, 184 Hodgson, Geoffrey M., 166, 168 Hoeffler, Anke, 27, 173, 186, 191, 196n, 214, 224, 230 Hoffman, Philip, 100 Howitt, Peter, 103, 166 Hseih Chang-Tai, 165–66 Huber, John D., 274 Humphreys, Macartan, 186, 236 Husted, Thomas, 300
Ilzetzki, Ethan, 86n, 88 Isaacs, Justin P., 236
Jayaraman, Rajshri, 309 Jellema, Jan, 168 Jensen, Anders, 60, 101, 257–58 Jensen, Peter S., 41n, 101, 300, 331 Jiang, Shuxia, 168 Jinjarak, Yothin, 101 Johnson, Simon, 7n, 106, 128, 167, 168, 309, 326 Jones, Benjamin F., 295–96, 298, 324 Jones, Chad, 7n, 107, 117, 168
Kagame, Paul, 237 Kaldor, Nicholas, 100 Kandori, Michihiro, 288n Karaman, K. Kivanc, 100 Keen, Michael, 91n, 100, 101, 311 Kenny, Lawrence, 101, 300 Kim, Minseong, 168 King, Robert G., 107, 117, 158, 166 Klenow, Peter, 165–66 Klerman, Daniel M., 114 Kletzer, Kenneth, 258 Kleven, Henrik, 65, 101 Knack, Stephen, 258
name index 359


Koetzle, William, 279 Kranton, Rachel, 329 Kremer, Michael, 56, 251, 258 Krueger, Anne, 168 Krusell, Per, 167 Kuziemko, Ilyana, 200 Kydland, Finn E., 136n
Lacina, Bethany Ann, 170n Laffont, Jean-Jacques, 257 Lagunoff, Roger, 102, 269 Laitin, David, 173, 188, 193, 196n, 212, 214, 230 Landes, David, 39 La Porta, Rafael, 106, 107, 115, 166, 167, 168, 319, 326 Ledyard, John O., 300 Leeson, Peter, 258, 301, 329 Levi, Margaret, 45, 66, 100, 299n, 329 Levine, Ross, 107, 117, 158, 166 Lewis, Frank D., 223, 224, 236 Lewis, W. Arthur, 103, 118, 165, 326 Li, Wei, 44, 101 Lijphart, Arend, 299 Limongi, Fernando, 301 Lindbeck, Assar, 35n, 300 Lipset, Seymour Martin, 326 Lizzeri, Alessandro, 276 Lockwood, Ben, 101 Lopez de Silanes, Florencio, 106, 107, 115, 166, 167, 168, 319, 326 Lucas, Robert, 299
Ma, Debin, 39 Machiavelli, Niccolo, 169–70 Madison, James, 259 Mahdavy, Hossein, 21 Mahoney, Paul G., 114 Mann, Michael, 39 Maoz, Zeev, 330 Maskin, Eric, 288n Mathias, Peter, 61, 100
Mauro, Paolo, 168 Mayer-Foulkes, David, 166 McGillivray, Mark, 257 McGuire, Martin C., 168 McLiesh, Caralee, 166 McMillan, John, 167 Mehlum, Halvor, 235–36 Mellinger, Andrew, 168 Meltzer, Alan, 73 Migdal, Joel S., 12, 45 Miguel, Edward, 172–73, 173n, 186, 196, 207, 213, 214, 327 Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, 276 Milgrom, Paul, 112n Mirrlees, James, 105, 110 Moene, Karl O., 235–36 Mokyr, Joel, 39 Montalvo, Jos ́e G., 190, 213, 241n, 258, 287 Moore, Barrington, 301 Moore, Mick, 100, 329 Moreno-Torres, Mag  ̈ui, 235, 257 Morrow, James, 38, 187 Moselle, Boaz, 168 Mueller, Hannes, 236 Myerson, Roger, 299 Myrdal, Gunnar, 38, 302, 305, 306, 308
Nel, Philip, 200n, 208, 214 Newbery, David, 100 Nillesen, Eleonora, 206n, 210n, 214 Noh, Suk Jae, 168 North, Douglass C., 38, 39, 106, 128, 167, 168, 235, 308–9 Nunn, Nathan, 206n, 210, 210n, 214, 288, 309
O’Brien, Patrick, 61, 100 O’Donnell, Guillermo A., 324 Oldman, Oliver, 100 Olken, Benjamin A., 295–96, 298, 324 Olson, Mancur, 168
360 name index


Olson, Richard, 208, 214 Olsson, Ola, 186 Ordeshook, Peter, 300 Orregaard Nielsen, Morten, 236 Osborne, Martin J., 300 Ostrom, Elinor, 329
Padro ́ i Miquel, Gerard, 213 Pagano, Marco, 106, 137, 167 Paldam, Martin, 257 Pamuk, Sevket, 100 Parente, Stephen L., 167 Parker, Geoffrey, 213 Patrick, Stewart, 2n, 39, 235 Pattillo, Catherine, 239n, 251, 253 Pellillo, Adam, 258 Perotti, Enrico, 167 Perotti, Roberto, 73, 276 Perroni, Carlo, 100 Persico, Nicola, 276 Persson, Torsten, 11, 39, 49, 69n, 73, 83n, 86n, 88, 99, 101, 102, 117n, 133n, 138, 167, 170n, 185n, 200n, 237n, 274, 275, 276, 276n, 280, 290, 300, 301, 326 Platteau, Jean-Philippe, 329 Polak, Benjamin, 168 Ponzetto, Giacomo A., 326 Posen, Barry R., 18, 39, 329 Powell, G. Bingham, Jr., 299 Prado, Jos ́e Mauricio, Jr., 58, 167 Prat, Andrea, 280, 301 Prescott, Edward C., 136n, 167 Przeworski, Adam, 301 Putnam, Robert, 289, 329 Putterman, Louis, 38
Qian, Nancy, 198–99n, 206n, 210, 210n, 214
Rajan, Raghuram, 106, 137, 167, 257 Ranis, Gustav, 118
Ray, Debraj, 71n, 73, 102, 190, 213 Restuccia, Diego, 165 Reynal-Querol, Marta, 190, 213, 241n, 258, 287 Rice, Susan, 2n, 39, 235 Richards, Scott, 73 Riddell, Roger, 240n, 257 Righarts, Marjolein, 200n, 208, 214 R ́ıos-Rull, Jos ́e-V ́ıctor, 167 Robinson, James A., 7n, 38, 106, 128, 168, 236, 285–86, 299, 300, 301, 307, 309, 326 Rodrik, Dani, 38, 167 Rogers, F. Halsey, 38 Rogerson, Richard, 165 Rogoff, Kenneth, 136n Rohner, Dominic, 172 Rokkan, Stein, 296–97 Roland, Ge ́rard, 49, 168, 200n, 274, 301 Romer, Thomas, 300 Rosenberg, Nathan, 39 Rosenthal, Howard, 300 Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent, 100, 299n Ross, Michael, 186, 214 Rostagno, Marco, 276 Rothstein, Bo, 66 Russett, Bruce, 330
Saadi-Sedik, Tahsin, 258 Sachs, Jeffrey D., 38, 168, 236, 241, 257 Saez, Emmanuel, 65, 101 Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 167 Sambanis, Nicholas, 198n, 214 Sandmo, Agnar, 65, 100 Satyanath, Shanker, 173n, 196, 207 Scharf, Kimberly, 100 Scheve, Ken, 101 Schmitter, Philippe C., 324 Schneider, Friedrich, 257 Schumpeter, Joseph A., 40, 100, 166 Sergenti, Ernest, 171n, 173n, 196, 207 Shannon, Chris, 112n
name index 361


Shayo, Moses, 329 Shleifer, Andrei, 106, 107, 115, 166, 167–68, 258, 319, 326 Shugart, Matthew S., 275, 299 Siverson, Randolph, 38, 187 Skaperdas, Stergios, 173n, 184, 213, 236 Slemrod, Joel, 43, 100–101 Slivinsky, Al, 300 Smith, Adam, 1, 10, 332 Smith, Alastair, 38, 187, 258 Smith, Benjamin, 219 Sokoloff, Kenneth L., 106 Solow, Robert, 103 Song, Zheng, 166 Squire, Lyn, 94 Stasavage, David, 61, 101, 168 Stern, Nicholas, 38, 44, 100 Stiglitz, Joseph E., 55, 236 Storesletten, Kjetil, 166 Strayer, Joseph R., 12, 39 Stro ̈ mberg, David, 280, 301 Strout, Alan M., 241, 307–8 Subramanian, Arvind, 38, 257 Svensson, Jakob, 106–7, 167, 168, 250, 250n, 257, 258 Svensson, Lars E.O., 102
Taagepera, Rein, 275, 299 Tabellini, Guido, 44, 49, 72n, 100, 102, 167, 200n, 274, 275, 276, 276n, 280, 289, 290, 300, 301, 326 Tanzi, Vito, 44, 101 Tarp, Finn, 257 Temple, Jonathan, 240n, 245, 257 Thomas, Robert Paul, 39, 167 Thustrup Kreiner, Claus, 65, 101 Ticchi, Davide, 39, 300 Tilly, Charles, 12, 39, 45, 58, 100 Tirole, Jean, 328 Tolstoy, Leo, 30, 215, 232–33 Torgler, Benno, 66, 101 Torvik, Ragnar, 186, 213, 235–36
Trebbi, Francesco, 38, 49, 200n, 300 Treisman, Daniel, 168 Tsyvinski, Aleh, 102 Tullock, Gordon, 61, 168, 184 Tuzemen, Didem, 73, 77, 101
Urdal, Henrik, 171n Ursprung, Heinrich W., 301
Vallings, Claire, 235, 257 van der Ploeg, Frederick, 236 Vargas, Juan, 173n, 196, 214 Verdier, Thierry, 236 Vindigni, Andrea, 39, 300 Vishny, Robert, 106, 107, 115, 166, 319 Voigt, Stefan, 136n Volpin, Paolo, 106, 137, 167 von Thadden, Ernst-Ludwig, 167
Wade, Robert, 308 Wagh, Smita, 239n, 251, 253 Wallis, John, 38, 235 Warner, Andrew, 236 Weibull, J  ̈orgen, 300 Weingast, Barry R., 38, 106, 168, 235, 299n Werker, Eric, 200 Werning, Ivan, 102 Winer, Stanley, 101, 102 Wood, Reed, 198n Woodruff, Christopher, 167
Yanagizawa, David, 198–99n, 327 Yared, Pierre, 326 Yitzhaki, Shlomo, 43, 100–101 Yuchtman, Noam, 167
Zillibotti, Fabrizio, 166 Zingales, Luigi, 106, 137, 167 Zolt, Eric M., 101 Zussman, Asaf, 236 Zussman, Noam, 236
362 name index


Subject Index
Page numbers for entries occurring in figures are suffixed by an f; those for
entries in notes, by an n; and those for entries in tables, by a t.
Advanced production sector: development of, 118; income taxes in, 130; predatory behavior in, 144–48; production in, 119–20; productivity of, 146; wage rates in, 124, 126 Afghanistan: external players in, 255; Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313; U.S. support for Mujahideen in, 254 Africa: development assistance in, 239; institutional deterioration in, 297–98; political instability in, 33–34; weak and fragile states in, 2, 7–8, 313 Aid. See Development assistance Anarchy, 191–92 Angola, Cuban troops in, 254 Anna Karenina matrix. See State-space matrix Anna Karenina principle of development, 30, 232–33 Antidiversion policies, 7, 156, 159, 240 Argentina, state legitimacy in, 328 Asia: democratization in, 261;
development assistance in, 239; Pillars of Prosperity Index values of, 321–24; weak and fragile states in, 2, 313 Assassination attempts, 295–96 Asymmetries: in group sizes, 78–79; political violence and, 189–90. See also Income inequality
Bahrain, state capacity levels in, 8 Bargaining, 271–74 Bauer paradox, 32, 245 Belarus, political cohesiveness in, 263 Belgium, political reforms in, 296 Botswana: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 321; political cohesiveness in, 263, 297, 298; state capacity levels in, 8
Brookings Institution, Index of State Weakness, 2, 3f
Canada: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313; political reforms in, 296
363


Capital. See Private capital accumulation; Social capital Capital-market constraints, 122–26 Centralization, 274–75, 330 Chad, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313 Checks and balances, 274 China, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 323–24 Civil war: political cohesiveness and, 202, 204t, 286–87; death tolls of, 170, 198; definition of, 22; determinants of, 198, 207–8; empirical data on, 196, 198, 311; existing research on, 17273, 188, 230; incomes and, 170, 173, 185–86, 202, 203t, 227–28, 228f, 230; physical capital destruction in, 223, 224; prevalence of, 22, 23, 24f, 25, 170, 172, 174t, 196–97; risk of, 169; state capacity levels and, 8, 9f, 28, 29f, 230–31, 231f; as substitute for repression, 171, 185; in weak or redistributive states, 232. See also Political violence Civil War, U.S., 223 Coercive capacity, investments in, 193 Cohesiveness of political institutions: centralization and, 274–75; choice of, 264–65, 266–71, 283–86; in commoninterest states, 19, 57–60, 267; in core model, 48–49, 56; costs of, 290; de facto and de jure, 260; fiscal capacity and, 19, 20f, 95, 96; inequality and, 77; in an infinite-horizon model, 90; legal capacity and, 19, 20f, 114–15; measures of, 19, 93, 260–61, 274; micropolitical foundations for, 271–75; in new states, 261, 262t, 263, 29798; origins of, 289; polarization and, 71–72; political reform and, 32–34; political violence and, 26, 35, 202, 204t, 206–7, 260, 283–86; prevalence
of, 260–61; in redistributive states, 60; resource curse and, 226; state capacity levels and, 18–19, 20f; state types and, 56, 68, 222–23; strategic political reform and, 267–71; tax compliance and, 66; trust and, 287–90; in weak states, 62. See also Executive constraints Cold War: aid flows during, 201, 201n; end of, 261, 308; Security Council membership during, 201, 206, 208 Colombia, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313 Common-interest states: political cohesiveness in, 19, 57–60, 267; creating, 58–59; defense spending in, 16–18, 58; effects of development assistance in, 244–45, 247; external threats to, 58; fiscal capacity investments of, 14, 113; in an infinitehorizon model, 90; legal capacity investments in, 113; national identity in, 329; political violence in, 187; as predatory states, 154, 233; public goods spending in, 18, 58, 68, 70, 9293, 187; returns to technical assistance in, 252, 253; state capacity investments in, 222, 306–7; use of tax revenues, 14, 15–16 Complementarities: administrative, 130; of fiscal and legal capacity, 15, 112, 117, 129–30, 137–38, 304; genius of taxation effect, 131–38; of private capital and legal capacity, 142–43, 158; sources of, 164; of state development and effectiveness, 5 Constituencies, 276, 277 Constitutional conventions, 265–67, 270 Constitutional rules: for amendments, 280–81; designing, 255, 259, 265–67; enforcement of, 260, 281; policy effects of, 49; supermajority requirements,
364 subject index


281–82. See also Executive constraints; Political reform Contract enforcement: conditional foreign aid, 249–50; institutions, 130; measures of, 105, 157, 311; per capita incomes and, 105–6, 106f. See also Legal capacity Cooperation, 287–89 Core model: basic structure of, 35, 4650; comparative statics in, 62, 95–96, 113–16, 188, 217–19; correlations in, 94–95, 95t, 96–98, 98t, 159, 160t, 162, 163t; with development assistance, 3132, 31f, 237–38, 242–55; equilibrium in, 50–52, 113, 221–23; of fiscal capacity, 13–14, 40–41, 45–64; government budget constraint, 48, 108; indirect utilities in, 52; interaction effects in, 95–96, 97t, 159–62, 161t; of legal capacity, 14–15, 108–17; movement from trade to income taxes, 83–86; outcome measures, 158–59, 162, 163t; parameter measures in, 92–94, 157–58; political institutions in, 48–49; politically optimal policy in, 50–52, 109–11, 220–21; political reform in, 264–71; with political violence, 175–89; predictions of, 6364; state capacity investments and political turnover, 216–23; symmetric political actors, 35; timing in, 49–50, 109, 176–77 Core model extensions: anarchy, 191–92; asymmetries, 189–90; coercive capacity investments, 193; constitutional rules, 280–82; disaggregation, 326–27; future development of, 325–32; genius of taxation effect, 131–38; governance, 290–93; group size differences, 78–79; income inequality, 73–78; infinitehorizon setting, 86–93; microeconomic foundations, 14, 64–67, 118–30,
327; micropolitical foundations for cohesiveness, 271–75; micropolitical foundations for stability, 275–80; polarization, 70–72, 190–91; political violence analysis, 25, 27, 189–93, 28287; predation, 144–56, 192–93; private capital accumulation, 138–44, 223–27; public goods, 67–70; tax distortions, 79–83; trust, 287–90 Corruption: of elites, 79, 145; measures of, 158–59. See also Predation Cuba, troops in Angola, 254
DAC. See Development Assistance Committee Decentralization, 330 Defense: coercive capacity investments, 193; common-interest spending on, 16–18, 58; as public good, 16–18, 46–47. See also Wars Democracy: executive constraints in, 49; parliamentary, 114–15, 199–200, 206–7, 274. See also Electoral systems Democratic capital, 290 Democratization, 261, 295–96, 326. See also Political reform Denmark: political reforms in, 33, 296; state capacity levels and incomes in, 7 Developmental states, 307–8 Development assistance: after natural disasters, 210; amounts of, 238; cash aid, 237–38, 243–50; channels for, 239; competing views of, 240–42, 256–57; conditionality of, 238, 242, 249–50; core model of, 31–32, 31f, 237–38, 242–55; cost-benefit analysis of, 241, 243–49; crowding-out effects of, 245–48; dependence on, 36, 232, 246, 247; donor decisions on, 237, 243, 306; effects of, 31, 243, 244–45; efficacy of, 240–41; fiscal capacity and, 239–40, 239f, 245–46; institutional
subject index 365


Development assistance (continued) choices and, 286–87; legal capacity and, 240, 240f; military aid, 201n, 206, 210, 253–54; objectives of, 24243; optimistic view of, 242; pessimistic view of, 241–42; policy effects of, 243; political violence and, 186, 197, 21011, 243, 248–49; postconflict, 254–55; project identification, 245, 251–52; public goods provision and, 246–48; recipients of, 239, 306; responses to, 32, 306; strategic motives for, 201, 243; technical, 239, 250–53; trends in, 238, 251; to UN Security Council members, 200, 206 Development Assistance Committee (DAC), 238 Development banks, 241 Development clusters: cohesive institutions and, 299; explanations of, 37, 305–6; state capacity levels in, 6, 7–10, 105. See also Pillars of Prosperity Index Doing Business survey, 105, 156–57, 311 Dual-economy model, 118–30
Economic development: Anna Karenina principle of, 30, 232–33; data on, 117; development assistance and, 24041, 256–57; explanations of levels of, 103, 115–16; legal capacity and, 11516; Myrdal on, 305, 306, 308; state effectiveness and, 2, 6–10; structural impediments to growth and, 103; traditional research approaches to, 307–9. See also Development clusters; Incomes, per capita Economic structures, state capacity levels and, 20–21 Electoral systems: franchise extensions, 285–86, 296; proportional
representation, 275, 296–97; restrictions in, 279 Elites: corrupt rule of, 79, 145; entrenched, 34, 307; political divisions in, 296; state capacity investments by, 77. See also Predation England: fiscal capacity growth in, 12, 61; Glorious Revolution, 61, 106, 11415; legal system of, 114; parliamentary power in, 114–15; past wars of, 18n, 61, 115; political reforms in, 106, 11415, 259, 296, 297; Whig dominance, 61, 114 Entrenched groups, 34, 270, 282, 307 Entrepreneurial activity, 132–33 Ethnic divisions, 18, 72, 93. See also Polarization and heterogeneity Ethnic homogeneity, 18, 94, 159, 161–62, 230, 319, 323 Europe: ethnic homogeneity in, 18; franchise restrictions in, 279; Marshall Plan, 240–41; Pillars of Prosperity Index values, 313, 317; proportional representation in, 296–97 European Union, 239, 250 Excludability, 128–29 Executive constraints: as cohesiveness measure, 199–200, 206–7, 260, 274; in democracies, 49; fiscal capacity and, 19, 20f, 94, 96; governance and, 291; legal capacity and, 19, 20f, 159; in new states, 261, 262t; in parliamentary democracies, 199200, 274; persistence of, 262t, 263; prevalence of high, 260–62, 261f Executive recruitment, 94, 98, 159, 161–62, 279, 280 External wars. See Wars
Factor endowments: prices and, 119, 120–21; productivity of, 126
366 subject index


Fiji, political cohesiveness in, 263 Financial markets: development of, 137; institutions supporting, 106–7, 117, 137; political constraints on, 137 Fiscal capacity: civil war and, 230, 231f; cohesiveness and, 19, 20f, 95, 96; complementarity with legal capacity, 15, 112, 117, 129–30, 137–38, 304; as constraint on tax collection, 12–13, 40; core model of, 40–41, 45–64; correlations with core model parameters, 94–96, 95t; correlations with legal capacity, 7–10, 8f; definition of, 6; demand for, 138; determinants of, 13, 13f, 15, 16f, 162–63, 163t, 304; development assistance and, 23940, 239f, 245–46; in effective states, 10; empirical data on, 91–99, 310–11; existing research on, 11–12, 43–45; future research on, 328–29; HintzeTilly hypothesis on wars and, 12, 18, 45, 58, 95; historical evolution of, 41, 42f; income inequality and, 74–78, 9899; incomes and, 21, 59, 96–98, 305; legal capacity as substitute for, 137–38; legitimacy and, 328; measures of, 7, 42–43, 91–92, 93t, 310–11; past wars and, 16–18, 17f; stability and, 19, 40, 95; traps, 22; underutilized, 81–83 Fiscal capacity investments: of commoninterest states, 14, 113–14; constraints on, 40; in core model, 13–14, 13f, 40–41, 47–48, 52–54; costs of, 59; decisions on, 40–41; incentives for, 133–34; income inequality and, 7478; in an infinite-horizon model, 86–88; marginal benefits of, 54, 63, 134; negative, 86–87; by Pigouvian planner, 54–56, 63, 68, 89–90; political influences on, 40; technical assistance with, 252–53 Foreign aid. See Development assistance
Fractionalization. See Polarization and heterogeneity Fragile states: determinants of, 32, 232; existing research on, 234; foreign interventions in, 234–35; indexes of, 2, 4f; responses to foreign aid, 32; state capacity levels of, 8–10, 9f. See also Weak states France: past wars of, 8, 18n, 115; rivalry with Germany, 18; state capacity levels in, 8 Franchise: extending, 285–86, 296; restrictions on, 279. See also Electoral systems
Gabon, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324 Genius of taxation effect, 131–38 Germany: Marshall Plan aid, 240; rivalry with France, 18 Ghana, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324 Governance: equilibrium, 292; executive constraints and, 291; improving, 156; predation and, 22, 150–55, 304; private, 329; reform incentives and, 290–93; state capacity levels and, 29293; traps, 292–93. See also Political reform; Predatory states Government budget constraint, 48, 108, 177–78 Guyana, political cohesiveness in, 263
Health care, 58–59 Heterogeneity. See Ethnic divisions; Polarization and heterogeneity Hintze-Tilly hypothesis, 12, 18, 45, 58, 95, 113 Hong Kong, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313 Human capital, 326
subject index 367


Iceland, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313 ICRG. See International Country Risk Guide Identities, 329 IMF. See International Monetary Fund Income inequality: core model extension, 73–78; demand for state capacities and, 138; fiscal capacity and, 74–78, 98–99; high, moderate, and low, 74, 76–77; international, 1; measures of, 94; polarization and, 35, 73; taxation and, 73–74 Incomes: capital, 47, 226; in core model, 47, 108; labor, 47; legal capacity investments and, 112; in predatory states, 193, 307; state capacity levels and, 6. See also Wages Incomes, per capita: civil war prevalence and, 170, 173; correlations of fiscal and legal capacity, 7–10, 8f; data sources for, 94, 312; fiscal capacity and, 21, 59, 96–98, 305; geographical environments and, 116; growth of, 117, 135; legal capacity and, 105–6, 106f, 115–16, 117; in Pillars of Prosperity Index, 312; state capacity and, 21, 305; tax revenue sources and, 42–43, 43f; in weak states, 135–36 Incomes, political violence and: civil war and repression by income level, 23, 24f, 170, 171, 201–2, 203t; common determinants of, 173; empirical data on, 201–2, 203t, 210; existing research on, 173, 186, 230; in fragile states, 232; link through legal capacity investments, 223, 227; negative correlations of, 6, 26, 185–86, 201–2, 227, 228f, 305; opportunity costs of fighting, 173, 186, 305; in predatory states, 192–93; private investment and, 223–27 Income taxes: in advanced production
sector, 130; collecting, 12–13, 40, 42; compared to trade taxes, 41–43; in core model, 47–48; disincentive effects of, 79–83; income inequality and, 73–74; introduction of, 41, 42f; movement from trade taxes to, 83–86; optimal rates of, 80–81; share of total tax revenues, 42–43, 43f, 44f, 85–86, 92, 310–11; in traditional production sector, 129–30. See also Fiscal capacity; Taxation Incumbent groups: in core model, 46; entrenchment in office, 270, 282; income inequality and, 73–78; infrastructure investments by, 129; legal capacity investments by, 13133; media coverage of, 280; military assistance to, 254; polarization of, 7071; politically optimal policy of, 50–52, 109–11; political reforms by, 259–60; political violence investments by, 176, 179–81; popularity shocks and, 27677; size of, 78–79; strategic political reform by, 267–71; transfer allocations by, 48–49, 78–79 India: constitution of, 255, 281; Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313, 32123; political cohesiveness in, 263; state capacity levels of, 313 Inequality, income. See Income inequality Inequality, political, 77–78 Infinite-horizon model, 86–93; correlations in, 96; decision problem in, 87–88; equilibrium in, 88–89; fiscal capacity investments in, 8688; Pigouvian benchmark in, 89–90; political equilibria in, 90–91; time structure of, 86 Informal economy: employment in, 64, 92; size of, 92 Infrastructure investments, 129. See also Legal capacity
368 subject index


Instability. See Stability, political Institutional approach, 308–9 Institutions. See Legal capacity; Political institutions Insurgencies, 183–84, 191. See also Civil war Internal violence. See Civil war International Country Risk Guide (ICRG), 7, 156, 240 International Monetary Fund (IMF), 7, 91–92, 308, 309 Iraq: external players in, 255; Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313 Israel, political cohesiveness in, 263 Ivory Coast, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324
Jamaica, political cohesiveness in, 263 Japan, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313 Judiciary, independence of, 114, 136–37
Kuwait: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324; state capacity levels in, 8
Labor demand, 122–26 Labor income, 47 Labor movements, 296–97 Labor supply, 79–80 Latin America: democratization in, 261; development assistance in, 239; income inequality in, 78; weak and fragile states in, 313, 317 Leadership, 191 Legal capacity: civil war and, 230, 231f; cohesiveness and, 19, 20f; complementarity with fiscal capacity, 15, 112, 117, 129–30, 137–38, 304; complementarity with private capital, 142–43, 158; core model of, 14–15, 108–17; correlations among measures of, 157, 157t; correlations with fiscal
capacity, 7–10, 8f; definition of, 6; demand for, 138; determinants of, 15, 16f, 162–63, 163t, 304; development assistance and, 240, 240f; in effective states, 10; empirical data on, 15665; excludability of, 128–29; existing research on, 12, 106–7; fiscal capacity as substitute for, 137–38; genius of taxation effect and, 131–38; incomes and, 105–6, 106f, 115–16, 117, 305; institutions supporting, 130; marginal benefits of, 112; measures of, 7, 105, 156–57, 311; past wars and, 16–18, 17f; predation and, 144–53; productivity and, 126–27; as public good, 128; stability and, 19, 114–15; traps, 22; utilization of, 133, 134. See also Contract enforcement; Property rights protection Legal capacity investments: cohesiveness and, 114–15; compared to infrastructure investments, 129; costs of, 115; decisions on, 109, 110–13; incentives for, 104, 1067, 133–34, 154–55; introduction of, 121–22; political violence and, 223, 227; stability and, 114–15; technical assistance with, 252–53 Legal-capacity trap. See Predation Legal origins, 115, 158, 159, 161–62, 166–67, 319, 320 Legitimacy, 328–29 Lesotho, political cohesiveness in, 263, 297 Linguistic divisions. See Polarization and heterogeneity Luxembourg, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313
Malaysia, political cohesiveness in, 263 Mali, state capacity levels and incomes in, 7–8
subject index 369


Market imperfections, 122 Markets. See Financial markets; Legal capacity Marshall Plan, 240–41 Mauritius: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 321; political cohesiveness in, 263, 297, 298 Media, 280 Mexico, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324 Microeconomic foundations, 14, 64–67, 118–30, 327 Military aid: in core model, 253–54; forms of, 253–54; to Security Council members, 201n, 206, 210 Myanmar: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313; political cohesiveness in, 263
National identity, 329 Natural disasters, 200, 206, 207, 210 Natural resource intensity, 68–69. See also Resource curse; Resource rents Neoclassical benchmark economy, 119–22 Netherlands, political reforms in, 33, 296 Niger, state capacity levels and incomes in, 7–8 Nigeria: parliamentary regime in, 3334; Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324; political cohesiveness in, 263, 297; resource curse and, 226 Noncash aid. See Military aid; Technical assistance Norway, resource rents of, 226
Official Development Assistance (ODA), 238–39. See also Development assistance Oman, state capacity levels in, 8 Opposition groups: in core model, 46; investments in political violence by,
179–81; military assistance to, 254; polarization of, 70–71; size of, 78–79; transfers to, 48–49
Pakistan: constitution of, 255; free trade agreements of, 250 Papua New Guinea, political cohesiveness in, 263 Parliamentary democracy, 114–15, 199–200, 206–7, 274 Peace: conditional probabilities of observing, 195; as outcome, 25; Smith on, 10; wage levels and, 185–86. See also Political violence Peace keeping, 254–55 Per capita incomes. See Incomes, per capita Philippines, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324 Pigouvian planner: fiscal capacity investments by, 54–56, 63, 68, 89–90; institutional choices of, 267, 269 Pillars of prosperity, 10, 37, 332 Pillars of Prosperity Index: defining, 310–12; development clusters, 313, 317, 318f; income measures in, 312; overperformers, 323t, 324; political violence measures in, 311; predicted values of, 319–25, 320t, 322f, 323t; state capacity measures in, 310–11; underperformers, 321–24, 323t; values of, 313, 314–17t, 318f, 321–24, 323t; weighting in, 312 Polarization and heterogeneity: absence of, 18; cohesiveness and, 71–72; franchise restrictions and, 279; greed and grievances and, 191; income inequality and, 35, 73; leadership and, 191; legal capacity and, 159; measures of, 93; political violence and, 27, 19091; in preferences, 70–71, 190; public goods spending decisions and, 18, 72;
370 subject index


stability and, 72; state capacity levels and, 18, 94 Political Coase theorem, 64, 137 Political inequality, 77–78 Political institutions: choice of, 259, 26467; in core model, 48–49; designing, 32, 265–67; fiscal capacity investments and, 40; informal, 287; resource allocation by, 290; strength of, 199, 207. See also Cohesiveness; Political reform Political reform: applications of theory, 293–98; bargaining, 27174; constitutional rules for, 280–82; development assistance and, 286–87; empirical data on, 294; in England, 106, 114–15; in Europe, 33; incentives for, 290–92; likelihood of, 34, 29495; micropolitical foundations of, 34; obstacles to, 34, 271; optimal choices, 266–67; political violence and, 260, 282–87, 293; proportional representation, 275, 296–97; resistance to, 34, 293, 307; resource rents and, 286–87; stability and, 293–95; strategic, 259–60, 267–71, 293–94; under veil of ignorance, 265–67 Political stability. See Stability, political Political turnover: assassination attempts, 295; equilibrium, 216–19; levels of, 56; micropolitical foundations for, 275–80; peaceful, 264, 275; political violence and, 217–19, 229–30. See also Stability Political violence: absence of, 6, 10, 25, 172, 174t, 181, 183; asymmetries and, 189–90; cohesiveness and, 26, 34, 202, 204t, 206–7, 260, 283–86; in commoninterest states, 187; comparative statics and, 188; conditional probabilities of observing, 195–97; conflict technology, 176, 180–83; correlations of fiscal and legal capacity, 8, 9f; cross-sectional
correlations of, 201–2; data sources on, 8, 16; determinants of, 22, 25–26, 26f, 37, 229–30, 304–5; development assistance effects on, 243, 248–49; econometric estimates of, 202, 205t, 206–8, 209t, 210–11; empirical data on, 27, 172, 173, 174t, 198201; empirical implications, 185–89; empirical testing of model of, 19497; existing research on, 23; future research on, 212–13, 327; instability and, 20, 170; investments in, 26, 27, 176, 177, 179–85, 188–89; legal capacity and, 159; marginal benefits of, 26, 217–19; measures of, 194–95, 311; Nash equilibria, 179, 180; outcomes of, 25; polarization and, 27, 190–91; political reform and, 260, 282–87, 293; political turnover and, 217–19, 229–30; in predatory states, 192–93, 305; prevalence of, 22–23, 24f, 19697; private capital accumulation and, 30, 223–27; redistributive struggles, 22, 169; resource curse and, 36; returns to, 217; sources of conflict, 177, 19091; state capacity and, 8, 9f, 27, 28, 29f, 227–31, 229f; states of, 185; theoretical approach to, 25, 175–89, 211–13; transitions of power and, 176, 183; trigger points for, 182–83; variations in, 196–98; wages and, 201. See also Civil war; Incomes, political violence and; Repression
Polity IV State Fragility Index, 2, 4f, 8–10 Popularity shocks, 276–77 Postconflict assistance, 254–55 Poverty: civil war prevalence and, 173; explanations of, 103–4; state capacity investments and, 21. See also Incomes Predation: by bureaucrats, 144–45, 149; distortions created by, 155; governance and, 22, 150–55, 304; independent
subject index 371


Predation (continued)
surveillance of, 149; legal capacity and, 144–53; objectives of, 145–46; optimal rates of, 146, 147; political equilibrium and, 148–49; by private agents, 144–45; sources of, 144; as taxation, 144–45 Predatory states: common-interest states as, 154, 233; conflict in, 192–93, 305; economic production in, 155; incomes in, 193, 307; model of, 149–50, 154; origins of, 22; persistence of, 34, 307; private capital accumulation in, 155; reform incentives in, 291–92, 307; state capacity traps, 22; state-space matrix and, 233–34; tensions in, 35–36; wage rates in, 192–93; weak states as, 234, 304, 307 Presidential governments, 32, 34, 274 Prices, factor endowments and, 119, 120–21 Private capital accumulation: complementarity with legal capacity, 142–43, 158; core model extension, 36, 138–44; incentives for, 155; legal capacity and, 142–44; optimal levels of, 225–26; political violence and, 30, 223–27; returns to, 225, 226; taxes on income from, 47 Private consumption, 46 Private governance, 329 Productivity: of advanced sector, 146; differences in, 115–16; legal capacity and, 126–27; total factor, 126 Property rights protection: economic growth and, 107; in effective states, 10; enforcement institutions, 130; in England, 114; increases in, 114; measures of, 7, 157. See also Legal capacity Proportional representation, 275, 296–97 Public funds, marginal cost of, 53–54, 71
Public goods: continuous valuation of, 69–70; in core model, 46–47, 51–52, 113–14; defense as, 16–18, 46–47; demand for, 16, 18, 47, 67–68, 92–93, 132–33; development aid for, 24648; expenditures on, 15–16, 50, 58, 67–70, 72, 92–93, 187; high-return projects, 56, 58–59; legal capacity as, 128; measures of, 194n; politically optimal spending on, 50; state capacity investments and, 113–14; technical assistance with provision of, 251–52 Purges, 23, 171, 311
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 251–52, 253, 256, 309, 327 Redistributive states: bargaining over transfers in, 271–72; coercive capacity investments in, 193; cohesiveness in, 19; effects of development assistance in, 245, 247–49; fiscal capacity investments in, 60–62, 113; in an infinite-horizon model, 91; legal capacity investments in, 113; political institutions in, 62; as predatory states, 155, 304; public goods spending in, 68; state capacity investments in, 222–23; use of revenues, 14, 79 Reform. See Political reform Religious divisions. See Polarization and heterogeneity Rents. See Resource rents Representation: bias in, 279–80; of constituencies, 276; proportional, 275, 296–97; structure of, 278–79 Repression: civil war versus, 171, 185; coercive capacity investments, 193; cohesiveness and, 202, 204t, 286; data on, 195–96, 198, 311; existing research on, 172–73; incomes and, 186, 202, 203t, 227–28, 228f; military assistance and, 254; as an outcome,
372 subject index


25; prevalence of, 22, 24f, 171, 172, 174t; purges, 23, 171, 311; in weak or redistributive states, 232. See also Political violence Resource curse, 23, 36, 173, 226 Resource rents: collecting, 60; dependence on, 20–21, 36, 59–60, 173; fiscal capacity levels and, 60; institutional choices and, 286–87; political violence and, 26, 186, 190, 197, 226, 230. See also Predation Resources, misallocation of, 103–4, 290 Rule of law: excludability and, 128–29; fiscal-capacity limits to, 132; meaning of, 128n. See also Legal capacity
Seychelles, state capacity levels in, 8 Shocks: natural disasters, 200, 206, 207, 210; popularity, 276–77 Singapore, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313, 324 Social capital, 289, 329 Social norms of tax compliance, 66–67 Somalia: anarchy in, 191, 329; external players in, 255; Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313; political cohesiveness in, 263, 297 South Korea, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313 Sri Lanka: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324; political cohesiveness in, 263 Stability, political: in core model, 46, 56; effects of development assistance on, 249; fiscal capacity and, 19, 40, 94, 95; in an infinite-horizon model, 90, 91; institutional choice and, 27580; legal capacity and, 19, 114–15, 159–60; measures of, 19–20, 46, 94, 279; micropolitical foundations for, 275–80; political reform and, 34, 29395; political violence and, 20, 170; in
redistributive states, 60, 61, 62; state capacity levels and, 19–20; state types and, 56, 68, 222–23; in weak states, 62. See also Political turnover State capacity: definition of, 6; determinants of, 15, 16–21, 16f, 37, 162–63, 164–65, 304, 306–7; existing research on, 11–12; governance reforms and, 292–93; measures of, 310–11; political violence and, 8, 9f, 27, 28, 29f, 227–31, 229f; theoretical approach to, 12–13; traps, 21–22. See also Fiscal capacity; Legal capacity State capacity investments: in commoninterest states, 222, 306–7; complementarities in, 304; in core model, 219–23; costs of, 59; decisions on, 13, 110–13; determinants of, 319; impact of political violence on, 219; incomes and, 305; inequality and, 77–78; military assistance and, 254; political turnover and, 216–23, 22930; political violence investments and, 188–89, 219–23, 229; in postconflict periods, 254–55; private investment and, 36; technical assistance reducing costs of, 251, 252–53; wars and, 12, 28, 29f, 94, 113. See also Fiscal capacity investments; Legal capacity investments State effectiveness, 1, 2
State Fragility Index, 2, 4f, 8–10 State legitimacy, 328–29 State-space matrix, 30, 30f, 232–33, 233t, 234–35 State spaces, 27–30, 30f, 232–34 State types: determinants of, 56–57, 57f; legal capacity investments of, 113. See also Common-interest states; Redistributive states; Weak states Strategic political reform, 259–60, 267–71, 293–94
subject index 373


Substitutes: civil war and repression as, 171, 185; fiscal and legal capacity as, 137–38 Sudan: parliamentary regime in, 33–34; Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313; political cohesiveness in, 263, 297 Sweden: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313; political reforms in, 33, 259, 296, 297; state capacity levels and incomes in, 7; state legitimacy in, 328; tax reforms in, 12 Switzerland, Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313
Tariffs. See Trade taxes Taxation: avoidance and evasion of, 47, 64, 65–66, 92; compliance and enforcement mechanisms, 43–44, 65; “easy,” 10; equilibrium in core model, 50; genius of, 131–38; predation as, 144–45; value added tax, 41, 42f. See also Fiscal capacity; Income taxes; Trade taxes Tax cultures, 66 Tax morale, 66–67 Tax revenues: income tax share of, 4243, 43f, 44f, 85–86, 92, 310–11; labor supply and, 79–80; as share of GDP, 7, 43, 44f, 59, 91–92; trade tax share of, 42–43, 43f, 44f, 83–84, 85–86, 92; for wars, 12 Technical assistance: amounts of, 239; definition of, 251; effectiveness of, 253; increases in, 251; political violence likelihood reduced by, 252; project identification, 251–52; randomized controlled trials in, 251–52, 253, 256, 327; returns to, 251; state capacity improvements, 251, 252–53. See also Development assistance Technological change, 103, 116 Total factor productivity (TFP), 126
Trade taxes: collecting, 41–42; in developing countries, 44; movement to income taxes from, 83–86; optimal rates of, 84–85, 86; revenues from, 8384; share of total tax revenues, 42–43, 43f, 44f, 85–86, 92 Traditional production sector: income taxes in, 129–30; structure of, 118; technologies in, 119; wage rates in, 123, 126 Transaction costs, 290–92 Transfers, bargaining over, 271–72. See also Redistributive states Trinidad and Tobago, political cohesiveness in, 263 Trust: as behavior, 287–88; as trait, 288–89 Turkey: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 324; potential EU membership of, 250
Uganda: civil strife in, 214; constitutional amendment procedures of, 281; parliamentary regime in, 33–34; political cohesiveness in, 263, 297 United Kingdom. See England United Nations Security Council membership, 200–201, 201n, 206, 207, 208, 210 United States: constitutional amendment procedures of, 281; franchise restrictions in, 279; free trade agreements of, 250; Marshall Plan, 240–41; Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313; tax reforms in, 12 Utilitarian optimum, 54–55, 113, 266–67, 269
Value added tax (VAT), 41, 42f Veil of ignorance, political reform under, 265–67 Violence. See Political violence
374 subject index


Voting. See Electoral systems
Wages: in advanced production sector, 124, 126; asymmetries in, 189; political violence and, 185–86, 201; in predatory states, 192–93; in traditional production sector, 123, 126. See also Incomes Wars: fiscal capacity investments and, 12, 18, 45, 58, 95; past, 16–18, 17f, 92–93, 159; state capacity levels and, 28, 29f, 94, 113; threat of, 58, 169. See also Civil war; Defense; Political violence Washington Consensus, 308, 309 Weak states: contemporary list of, 1; effects of development assistance in, 245, 247–49; fiscal capacity
investments in, 62–63, 64, 135; foreign interventions in, 234–35, 255; incomes in, 135–36; indexes of weakness, 2, 3f, 4f, 5, 8–10; in an infinite-horizon model, 91; legal capacity investments in, 113, 135–36; persistence of, 282, 307, 331–32; as predatory states, 155, 234, 304, 307; public goods spending in, 68, 70; resistance to reform in, 293; state capacity investments in, 223; use of revenues, 14. See also Fragile states Welfare states, 47, 58–59, 113–14 World Bank: Doing Business survey, 105, 156–57, 311; establishment of, 241; Washington Consensus, 308, 309
Zaire: Pillars of Prosperity Index value of, 313
subject index 375