History of Political Economy 20:3 0 I988 by Duke University Press CCC 0018-2702/88/$1.50
How does the German Historical School fit?
H . K . Betz
Except for a limited time and confined geographical area the German Historical School was never part of any mainstream in the history of our discipline. Most textbooks, if we may take them as indicators of our profession’s accepted view regarding the genesis of economics, offer but a cursory treatment, if any, of this particular tradition, reinforcing the stylised view of it as being non-theoretical, occupied with detailed historical studies in the vain hope of creating a new, inductively-based economics. The most recent surge of methodological discussions re-evaluating and reinterpreting the history of economic thought a la Kuhn and Lakatos must have deemed the historical economists nonscientific since they were not discussed at all. The phrase the “wrong opinions of dead men” seemed to be most appropriately fitting for them. It is the purpose of this article to discuss and evaluate the fit of the German Historical School on the basis of an “extended scope of economics,” i.e., to concentrate on their contributions to the theory of economic policy and pattern modelling. A brief methodological discussion will be followed by highlighting certain relevant aspects of the German philosophical and epistemological tradition and prevailing socio-economic conditions against which the genesis, problem orientation, method and scope of the historical tradition must be understood. The main body of the article will focus on various individuals (Roscher, Hildebrand, Knies, Schmoller, Sombart, and Spiethoff) and concludes with a brief analysis of why the historical economists did not fit into the increasingly narrower scope of mainstream economics.
I
During the last fifteen years or so our discipline has experienced somewhat of a renaissance of methodological discussion. In none of the fields has this preoccupation been more intensive and extensive than in the history of economic thought. It appeared that the offerings of the philosophy of science by way of scientific research programmes and revolutionary changes in the structure of science were just too attractive to be resisted
Correspondence may be addressed to the author, Dept. of Economics, The University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive N.W., Calgary, Alberta CANADA.
1. Warren J. Samuels, ‘The scope of economics historicallyconsidered,’Land Economics 48 (1972): 248-68.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


410 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
by economists and, in a way, not unexpectedly so. After all, we have traditionally entertained a certain fascination with and envy for what the natural sciences were doing or what we thought they were doing. Applying Kuhnian or Lakatosian models to assess and evaluate the history of our discipline may be just another attempt at enhancing our scientific “maturity” or at least soothe our “inferiority complex.”2 In a multitude of articles and papers the history of mainstream economics became the object of renewed scrutiny and assessment. Have there been revolutions in the development of economic thought? If so, how many and which were they? Or has there only been one paradigm, that of the competition among maximising individuals? Have there been competing research programmes? If so, which were progressive, degenerating, etc.? The more important aspect of this literature, however, came to be the testing of the relative merits of the Kuhnian versus the Lakatosian models. In the light of the fact that both the Kuhnian and Lakatosian models have been found wanting for the purpose of assessing the history of economics even in its more narrowly defined orthodox analytical scope, they can hardly be applicable in the case of an extended scope of the discipline as represented by the German Historical School. Rather, our approach must be more eclectic in as much as we may draw on the methodological heuristics offered by the sociology of knowledge, dialectics, structuralfunctional analysis, and investigation of the relation between issues, policies and theoretical structures.3 These tools will help us appreciate the attempts of the historical economists to reconstruct economic science. Building on different epistemological premises, they were led to ask different questions searching for a meaningful explanation of economic phe
2. These observations are, of course, not novel. Within this particular debate confer C. D. Goodwin, ‘Toward a theory of the history of economics,’ History of Political Economy 12 (Winter 1980): 610-19; T. W. Hutchison, ‘On the history of philosophy of science and economics,’ in Spiro J. Latsis, ed., Method and appraisal in economics (Cambridge, 1976), 181-205; and Axel Leijonhufvud, ‘School, “revolutions,” and research programmes in economic theory,’ in Latsis, Method, 65-108; while Machlup addressed the “inferiority complex” of the social sciences almost thirty years ago. For a reprinting see Fritz Machlup, Methodology of economics and other social sciences (1978): chs. 13 and 14. Imre Lakatos [‘Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programs,’ in I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave, eds., Criticism and the growth of knowledge (Cambridge, 1970), 931, himself, of course, also makes reference to the “underdeveloped social sciences.” 3. On these particular issues see Martin Bronfenbrenner, ‘The structure of revolutions in economic thought,’ History of Political Economy 3 (Summer 1971): 136-41; Dudley Dillard, ‘Revolutions in economic theory,’ Southern Economic Journal (April 1978): 705-24; Norbert Elias, ‘Sociology of knowledge: new perspectives,’ Sociology 5 (1971): 149-68, 355-70; Elias, ‘Theory of science and history of science,’ Economy and Society I: (1972): 117-33; Siegfried G. Karsten, ‘Dialectics, and the evolution of economic thought,’ History of Political Economy 7 (Winter 1975): 399-419; Karsten, ‘Dialectics, functionalism, and structuralism in economic thought,’ American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 42 (1983): 179-92; and Robert Merton, ‘Paradigm for the sociology of knowledge,’ in Norman Storer, ed., Sociology of science (Chicago, 1973).
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz * How does the German Historical School fit? 411
nomena in lieu of the narrower concerns with verification or prediction in the orthodox sense. In this context, their particular view, analysis, and evaluation of the economic order, the relationships between economic and non-economic factors, as well as the methods of analysis used (in the pursuit of policy prescriptions) firmly established their ancestry of modern-day pattern-modelling attempts.4
I1
First, we shall have to identify the philosophical and, more specifically the epistemological, foundations of their thought as well as the specific policy questions addressed. Common to all was a belief in progress and in the perfection of man (Humanitaetsideal) by means of deliberate actions by the state, representing the Gemeinschafi of which the individual is part. Political economy or economics (the terms will be used interchangeably) was to play a central role in this endeavor; by advocating, within a certain knowledge framework, specific prescriptions for appropriate socioeconomic and political institutional arrangements, it became a policy science. The end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth centuries represented a cultural and intellectual watershed for Germany. The flow of ideas started to run strongly against the rationalist and empiricist traditions of the Enlightenment. The philosophic counter-revolution precipitated the development of long-lasting fundamental differences between German thought and the mainstream of western European ideas, a development which left its mark on the intellectual tradition in nineteenth century Germany. Even before the nineteenth century, Germany was never “‘a country of the middle’, but always the great eastern border country of occidental c ~ l t u r e . ”It~is, therefore, not surprising to note how relatively easily and thoroughly the Weltanschauung of the Enlightenment was overwhelmed; and new conceptions of state, individual, nation, and freedom took root. Historicism is perhaps the single most comprehensive concept to characterise the revolt against the generalising view of Newtonian cosmology and its rationalist and empiricist extensions. It would be difficult to disagree with Meinecke’s assertion that “the rise of historism was one of the greatest intellectual revolutions that has ever taken place in Western thought .”6 No other country became so dominated by historical thought,
4. As for the more recent literature on the relationship between economic thought and economic policy the reader is guided to W. J. Samuels’ comprehensive contributions. 5 . Hajo Holborn, ‘Der deutsche Idealismus in sozialgeschichtlicher Beleuchtung,’ in Hans-Ulrich Wehler, ed., Moderne deutsche Sozialgeschichte (Cologne, 1966), 88. 6. Friedrich Meinecke, Historism trans. J. E. Anderson (London, 1972), liv. In this article the term “historicism” shall be used for the German Historismus instead of the older version “historism.” The definition and treatment are, of course, vastly different from Popper’s use of the term.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


412 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
research, and observation as Germany where it also overlapped with and was partially reinforced by the traditions of German idealism and romanticism. Be it Leibniz’s monadology, Kant’s epistemology and practical imperative, Herder’s pathbreaking philosophy of history, the HumanitaetsideaI of Goethe and Humboldt, Fichte’s ethics, Schelling’s philosophy of nature, Schleiermacher’s philosophy of feeling, or Hegel’s idealism, they all have contributed to the creation of a mosaic of theories of knowledge as well as moral and ethical imperatives which became typically German. What is important for our purpose is the claim of historicism that any social and intellectual phenomenon can only be properly understood through knowledge of its historical development. “The essence of historism is the substitution of a process of individualisingobservation for a generalising view of human forces in hi~tory.”H~istoricism derives its importance as a method of analysis as well as a Weltanschauung from the interrelation between its three conceptually and operationally relevant components: organicism, development, and individuality. Use of the organicismic metaphor involved treating society and its constituent parts like a living, growing thing. All social phenomena are functioning inseparably from and in relation to one another as well as to the whole, and accordingly, can be understood only in terms of this essential unity. This organic conception of society requires also that the demands of the whole at all times take precedence over those of its parts; their existence, it is argued, acquires meaning only through the existence of the whole. By way of a (false?) mathematical analogy this means that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. The implications of this line of reasoning are twofold, Epistemologically, it leads to a rejection of the presumed scientific regularities underlying atomistic analysis. Secondly, in terms of the requirements of societal arrangements and the imperatives of the political decision-making process, such central concepts as freedom and the state acquire meanings essentially different from Western liberal traditions. Bound up with this comparison of society to a living organism is its perception as something growing and developing. In terms of analysis
7. Ibid., lv. In other words, the prevailing belief in scientific uniformities, Natural Law, and the stability of human nature and reason (the generalising view) was challenged by a new outlook which stressed the investigation and analysis of the unique character of different cultures, nations, and societies as revealed in their respective developmental processes (the individualising or particularising view). 8. The concept of development includes, as we shall see in our discussion of the Historical School, both its evolutionary as well as emanatistic versions. In the context of German intellectual history, evolution as a continuous change in the interaction between man and nature can be understood either in the activist (free will) Kantian version of man’s movement toward freedom based on the moral self-fulfillment of individuals with self-imposed
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz How does the German Historical School fit? 413
and methodology, this means that the dynamics of becoming are more important than the statics of being. Neither human nature nor the world in which man lives are treated as constants. There is perpetual change; accordingly, there are no eternally valid truths of the kind found in natural laws or in the doctrinaire belief in the ever-present and overwhelming powers of reason. Finally, there is the historicist concept of individuality. Conceptually, it follows almost automatically from the organic analogy and the principle of development. Nothing is ever considered the same as anything else: each individual, nation or historical era, is treated as a distinct entity. Individuality and atomistically-grounded individualism are poles apart. It is, then, the combination of these three concepts (organicism, development, and individuality) which characterise the individualising as against the generalising view mentioned before. This particular world view, as we shall see, had a far-reaching impact on the problem orientation economics took in nineteenth-century Germany. Economic activities were no longer considered just a struggle with natural and absolute necessities in the allocation of resources, but also an integral part of an historically grown and unique social entity. Economic activities and institutions, therefore, must serve the ultimate purpose of the moral and ethical education of man. “Negativelyexpressed, the rejection of the mechanistic construction of the economic whole from its individual elements, positively, the recognition of economic relations as primeval unities into which the individuals are teleologically fitted.’’9
I11
The fundamental difference of the German intellectual tradition may be understood in the context of a rather different developmentof political and socio-economic conditions. Compared to France and England, Germany at the beginning of the nineteenth century was both politically and economically an underdeveloped country. Some eighty percent of the population was agricultural. The industrial revolution had barely begun. However, abolition of guild restrictions created a freer labour market con
duties or Herder’s insistence on a historical movement characterised by a multiplicity of cultural and social organisms at different times and places, each making their own unique contributions to the development of humanity. Emanatistic development (as a combination of the temporal with an eternal order), on the other hand, perceives reality as a reflection or revelation of the intentions of the Creator or some other first cause (e.g., spirit, idea) not amenable to causal reasoning or explanation. Both development concepts, however, exhibit a strong attachment to the organic analogy.
9. Hans Freyer, Die Bewertung der Wirtschaft im Philosophischen Denken des 19. Jahrhunderts (Leipzig, 1921), 119.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


414 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
ducive to the development of larger-scale manufacturing. This led to an erosion of the smaller trades and pushed their members into what became an ever-increasing and impoverished industrial proletariat which was also augmented by labour influx from the rual areas and by population growth. In addition, Germany was neither a political nor an economic unity, rather more a geographical area than a nation. The extent of the market was rather limited. The theories of classical political economy, it was begun to be felt, had lost their congruence with reality. They could not provide satisfactory answers to the developmentsin the first few decadesof the nineteenthcentury which came to be termed the national and social questions.lO For a few decades, from about 1840 to the seventies, German economic liberalism flourished, propounded by journalists and political personalities, for example, C. Braun, H. B . Oppenheim, and Prince-Smith, the naturalised Englishman. Their policy prescriptions were more along the lines of Harriet Martineau but became extremely powerful ideas supported by the entrepreneurial class and the East Elbian Junkers and voiced in a number of influentialjournals and newspapers. The organisational heart was the Kongress deutscher Volkswirte. Their influence and opposition to state action to protect workers ultimately came to naught largely because of the active role of the professorial economists who incorporated this particular policy question into their discipline. Already the early important theoretical followers of classical political economy in Germany had been very careful in their writings and teachings to complement it with appropriate German adjustments. Ethical considerations,restraints on self-interest,and organicist political ideas can be found in the writings of outstanding theoreticians (Hermann and von Thuenen) as well as in Rau, who tried to synthesise classical and cameralist ideas and whose textbook dominated German universities for decades in the nineteenth century. The historical economists addressed specific policy problems by arguing that classical economics had failed and, given its underlying metaphysical and ethical preconceptions, had to fail. “The naive optimism of laissezfaire as well as the frivolous appeal to revolution . . . showed themselves to be ever more the twins of an unhistorical rationalism, the stale last remnant of the eudaemonistic enlightenment of the 18th century.”
10. Fichte, as early as 1800, was the first writer who concerned himself with both these questions. In his Closed commercial state he not only assigns the state the social duty of guaranteeing minimum economic rights for everybody but also, under the impact of the French Revolution and beginning of the Napoleonic wars, endows the purely political state with distinct national attributes. 1 1. Gustav Schmoller, ‘Wechselnde Theorien und feststehende Wahrheiten im Gebiete der Staats- und Sozialwissenschaften und die heutige deutsche Volkswirtschaftslehre,’ in his Ueber einige Grundfragen der Sozialpolitik und der Volkswirtschaftslehre, 2nd ed. (Leipzig, 1904), 384.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz How does the German Historical School fit? 415
IV
Roscher, Hildebrand, and Knies are usually identified as the older Historical School. They are grouped because of their attempts to supplement classical economics with historical material, to search (under influence of Hegelian metaphysics) for permanent laws of economic development, and to develop economic stage theories as well as their failure to realise their ambitions. This treatment, as will be shown, blurs significant differences in their respective approaches and intentions. The common bond between them should rather be seen in their attempts to reform economics as well as society; a re-orientation in the scope, method, and purpose of economics would promote the ethical and moral conditions of man and the social organism of which he is part. Roscher, who had attended Ranke’s historical seminar at Berlin, wanted to match for economics the achievementsof Savigny and Eichhorn in the field of jurisprudence. He is generally considered the founder and leader of the older generation of historical economists even though he remained most closely attached to the classical theoretical framework, a position which earned him the unkind comment from Wilbrandt (one of the younger generation) of having poured “historical sauce over a classical dish.”’*In many ways his major works do not read much differently from Mill’s Principles. Roscher did want to establish a new tradition, however, which led him to try to establish distinct lines of demarcation between his economics and that of the classical political economists. Above all, he wanted to stress the political aspects of the discipline as against classical chrematistics.The very first sentence of his Grundlagen reads: “Man is both the beginning and the end of our science.”13Also, since political economy is national in character and has as its purpose the establishment of laws of national economic development, it must take account of the life of a nation which consists of its language, religion, art, science, law, state, and economy. Only in this way can one come to understand and analyse economic activities within the national organism. Both Fichte’s Closed cumrnercid state and Mueller’s Elemente der Stuutskunst receive favourable mention in this regard. The “historical-physiological method” he proclaims to use contains not only empirical description and comparison but also metaphysical and abstract-logical elements. When he talks about general principles of economics, he points not only to the similarities with mathematical physics but also displays his deep appreciation for the method of abstraction as practiced by Ricardo and von Thuenen.I4Self-interest is a necessary and
12. Quoted in Alfred Kruse, Geschichte der volkswirtschafilichen Theorien, 4th ed.
13. Wilhelm Roscher, Grundlugender Nutionula?konomie,21st ed. (Stuttgart, 1894), 1 . 14. Ibid., section 22.
(Berlin, 1959), 161.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


416 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
basic economic instinct (like self-preservation in a more general sense) of natural-law-like quality but it is also properly directed by the Roscherian invisible hand, our conscience, the voice of God inside us. The metaphysical elements in this method come to the fore when Roscher discusses the organism of the Volk. In spite of his inductivehistorical discussions and use of the language of biological organology, his emanatistic development concept makes it impossible to separate cause and effect. Events are “mutually conditioned,” there is “the inexplicable background” (e.g., Volksgeist, God’s thought) before which analysis has to stop (sec. 13); since the Volksgeist is not the outgrowth of cultural phenomena and characteristics but rather the origin from which they emanate, empirical analysis is abandoned at this point of causal explanation. The economy of each Volk, however, as part of a universal historical pattern, is considered akin to a biological product which develops, blossoms, matures, and ultimately decays. Every Volk and its economy go through these same stages. In other words, as he says himself, “nothing new happens under the sun,” and the only difference between nations is that they are at different stages of a never changing scheme or life cycle.15 Whatever the epistemological problems this procedure raises, Roscher believes that economics as Staatswirtschaftslehre can and must provide appropriate norms of how each Volk (not just a conglomeration of individuals) can engage in appropriate policies (to “systematise activities”). In the preface to the nineteenth edition of his Grundlagen he specifically draws the reader’s attention to those very numerous sections of his work which are of particular relevance to the “social question.” As a matter of fact, most of the book is but economic policy advice (a “handbook and reader for businessmen and students” and therefore almost Marshallian in purpose) based on his comparative historical method highlighting the principle of relativity. Different nations at different stages of development have different ideals and, therefore, require different policies. It may be for this reason that he does not develop any one socio-economic ideal himself but switches back and forth between romantic reaction and economic liberalism with a social conscience. He warns against morally detrimental piecework and argues for legal protection of the workers (p. 87), but also cautions against the ideals of socialism which seem to attract societies once they have matured (pp. 210-1 1); he is somewhat Ricardian in his attitude towards landlords at one time (p. 560)but Aristotelian at another (p. 222); income distribution must be harmonious, with hopefully no progressive taxation, but (in agreement with Fichte) he argues for minimum levels of
15. See Knies’ criticism below, also Max Weber, Roscher and Knies: The logical problems of historical economics (New York, 1975), 74.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz How does the German Historical School fit? 417
nutrition, clothing, and lodging before any luxuries are allowed. The only external and absolute standard in all this is religious belief, Christian charity, and our sense of community (Gemeinsinn) which are to keep social discord in check. The necessary activities are not well defined; once the need for state intervention is introduced it is immediately and severely circumscribed. And even though he expresses his general agreement with Schmoller’s position against Treitschke, who had attacked the activist political and social engagements of the socialists of the chair, it seems that ultimately there is another invisible hand as the executor of Roscher’s social policy. One final word on Roscher. His religious attitude and convictions as well as his predominantly empirical preoccupations seem to have caused him to keep considerable distance from Hegelian philosophy of history and speculative thought. Bruno Hildebrand sat, as a liberal deputy, in the Frankfurt Paulskirche in 1848 when his Nationaloekonomie der Gegenwart und Zukunft (Political Economy of the Present and Future) was published in the same city. As he states in the preface, his concern was with reshaping economics so that it would become a science of the economic laws of development of the various nations. l6 This new disciplinary orientation is to be accomplished by placing equal emphasis on the history of cultural, legal, and political development with the purpose of tackling the practical problems of the day. While he is an admirer of British economic and political accomplishments, he was much more adamant in rejecting the absolutist claims of classical economics and its natural-law basis than was Roscher. He even attacks the cosmopolitanism of Kant’s politics (which ran counter to the principle of individuality, a charge also levelled by Goethe, Schiller and, more specifically, Schmoller) and the physiological analogies and natural-law categories of Roscher. He stresses the fundamental difference between the aspects of culture and nature as they have to be reflected in scientific method; for him organicist analysis has nothing to do with biological parallels. “The soul of any healthy national economic organism” is its “ethical strength” and “public morality which elevates individuals from the purely egotistical to a higher existence in the overall interest.”17 Operationally this facilitates his transition to the realm of social policy. Poverty, as we have seen, is the burning issue of the day, and the efforts of the
16. Bruno Hildebrand, Die Nationaloekonomie der Gegenwart und Zukunft und andere gesammefteSchriften, ed. Hans Gehrig (Jena, 1922), xxiv. He expressed similar thoughts when he prefaced the first volume of the Jahrbuecherfuer Nationuloekonomieund Statistik which later came to bear his name. 17. Hildebrand, ‘Die gegenwaertige Aufgabe der Wissenschaft der Nationaloekonomie ,’ Jahrbuecherfuer Nationaloekonomie und Statistik 1 (1863): 140-41.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


418 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
scientific community have to be directed towards it. The question which has to be answered is: “What social reforms will bridge the growing gap between poor and rich, and what are the obligations of property ownership?’ Hildebrand’s answer is based on a rejection of the tenets of both classical economics and socialism. Neither the destructiveness of social revolution nor the “industrial feudalism born out of the principle of free competition,’’ even though “it has economic theory on its side,”is conduciveto economic morality or social harmony.19Therefore economics must be made into an ethical science which can properly formulate appropriatepolicy principles. Hildebrand’s goal is based on the Humanitaetsideal; man’s education must be total, as species being (his character and morality) but also as citizen of a nation. The class conflict is to be resolved not by the abolition of the middle class but by assimilating the working class into it. It is in this context that his theory of stages assumes its special quality, as an attempt to provide an analytical and explanatory framework for his social philosophy. First, he seems satisfied to have discovered a law of economic development: “The definitive sequence [from natural to money to credit economy] is therefore based on the nature of economic organisation and, for this reason, is also a general economic fact.”20This development scheme differs significantly from Roscher’s in that there is no decline or decay of any one organism. Founded on the optimistic belief of the time, it is forever going upward, towards the ethical and moral perfection of man. Secondly, and this is an even more important aspect for us, this stage theory is anti-socialist, i.e., against the Communist manifesto and, even more distinctly, anti-Engels and his Condition of the working class in England. The credit economy, equivalent to the state of communism in socialist models, represents the dialectical synthesis, the remedy for whatever damage the excesses of capitalism and its money economy had inflicted. It is the future economic organisation,the social utopia, and the inevitable outcome of the laws of development. “The credit economy will join men again through spiritual and ethical bonds.”21 While this stage theory represents social theory and philosophy and despite his moralising stance against the evils of industrial feudalism, the dialectics of his model appear to make him consider poverty a necessary preliminary stage. It has been argued that he, implicitly, renounced this earlier position which implied much greater political passiveness, when he
18. Hildebrand, Nationaloekonomie, 2. 19. Hildebrand, Jahrbuecher, 16-17.
20. Hildebrand, Nationaloekonomie, 330. 21. Ibid., 355.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz - How does the German Historical School fit? 419
subsequently participated in the founding of the Vereinfuer Sozialpolitik and its active political campaigns.22 Karl Knies, among all the earlier historical economists, was the methodologist par excellence, if only in terms of basic theoretical analysis rather than practical applications; he was the “theoretical founder of historico-ethical modern German political economy.’723Since he argues that Roscher really only “complemented rather than corrected economics” he does not, as does Roscher, consider Smith or Malthus historical economists. To him the “subject matter of economics is part of the world of historical p h e n ~ r n e n a . ”E~co~nomics is history. In delineating the scope of political economy both Hegel’s metaphysical factors and Herder’s anthropological and ethnological factors become part of the analysis of the national organism and its economic life. The significance of the organic metaphor and stress on unique individuality is nowhere as strong as in Knies, a fact which leads him to strong attacks on the Roscherian development concept which, in its circularity, represented to Knies just an eternal repetition of what had already been (pp. 151, 153, 381-2). The historical uniqueness of each Volk, in typically Hegelian fashion, is also expressed in continuously upward movement in terms of moral and ethical progress (pp. 147, 239), subject to both freedom and necessity (pp. 351,485). The pressing social problems of the day can neither be analysed nor solved by reliance on classical economics. Its quantitative (i.e., materialist) approach to the processes of production, distribution?and consumption (which, according to Knies, it shares with the socialists) is both shallow and incomplete because of its disregard for ethical and moral factors, so indispensable for any policy question involving man in whose service political economy is to perform. Knies rejects the concept of self-interest (Eigennutz)as ambiguous and vague because it mixes self-love with selfishness. He approves of the former since it is compatible with a sense of community, has a positive social (i.e., policy) dimension and is conducive to the perfection of the total historical and cultural person. Selfishness, on the other hand, as he sees it stressed by Smith’s followers, represents the pursuit of purely private economic interests in a way which is detrimental to the overall welfare of the social union (pp. 223-43).25
22. Gottfried Eisermann, Die Grundlagen des Historismus in der deutschen Nationaleokonomie (Stuttgart, 1956), 184.
23. Schmoller, Zur Literaturgeschichte der Staats und Sozialwissenschaften (1888; reprint, New York, 1968), 207.
24. Karl Knies, Die Politische Oekonomie vom geschichtlichen Standpunkte (Leipzig , 1883), 35, 333,490. This is a new and revised edition of his 1853 work Politische Oekon
omie vom Standpunkte der geschichtlichen Methode .
25. Knies argues that Smith has been unjustly burdened with the principle that private
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


420 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
Knies believes in the existence of economic laws but is careful to distinguish them from those of the natural sciences. The general aspects of any social phenomenon are never present without its individualising characteristics. Therefore, strict natural-scientific causality does not apply and all social, economic, and political phenomena can only be explained by way of analogies. Economic laws, then, are “laws of analogy and not laws of an absolutely identical causal nexus” (p. 479). Economics, as a historical and cultural (geistig)science cannot demonstratethe repetition of identical phenomena;rather a set of unique variables and processes makes economic theory, institutions, and policies subject to the principle of relativity (pp.
Economics, with Knies, becomes an even more normative discipline. While Roscher’s tone was at times moralising, he nevertheless had explicitly stipulated, though not always adhered to, the separation of “what is” from “what ought to be.” This would certainly not be in the spirit of Knies. In addition to the general epistemological and methodological problems which political economy shares with all the sciences, its very “politicalmoral character” demands that theory, as its highest task, must develop policy norms (p. 458). Whatever policy it is, it must always go beyond the specificallyeconomic and ensure that its recommendationsare not only reconcilable with, but actually advance, the ethical tasks of the politically unified whole, the Volk (pp. 157, 438, 484). In addition, he cautions, however, that in order to facilitate the establishment of policy norms our studies must focus on economic realities and capabilities, the other major task of economics. This demand for historical studies of detail which had already been stressed by Hildebrand was, of course, to become the preoccupation of many an economist afterward. Finally, Knies warns us never to advocate the impossible because that would detract from the possible; and, ironically, pointing to the most natural of natural laws, he reminds his reader of the lack of success of “medicine in doing away with death even though it constantly fights against it and, with some limitations, successfully” (p. 485).
356-7). 26
egotism by necessity leads to common good. He quotes a number of passages from the Wealth ofnations to demonstrate that there is good reason to believe that Smith was considerably more equivocal on this matter than “traditional” interpretations had allowed. 26. All human development, individually and collectively, is subject to laws premised on change rather than constancy. Also, in all human life and activity there is something eternal and common, i.e., species characteristics. In spite of these uniformities, however, the conditions and processes of different nations at the same stage of development must, for the purposes of causal analysis, not be considered identical but only analogous because of the essential differences in national character and historical experience. It is for this reason that Knies speaks of laws of analogy rather than laws of an identical causal nexus. Only an advance in historical research and experience can improve on the accuracy with which such laws of analogy can be formulated.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz How does the German Historical School fit? 421
V
While the older members of the historical school, even though they campaigned against both Manchester liberalism and revolutionary socialism, did not present a detailed platform of specific social and economic policies, they extended the scope of the discipline. Based on their distinct philosophical background and epistemological principles, they (and especially Knies) laid the foundation for a theory of economic policy which was both modified and expanded by their successors, Schmoller in partic
Schmoller is, of course, still very much under the influence of the German intellectual tradition by stressing the organic, developmental, and unique; yet the Hegelian influence is largely gone (except for the role of the Prussian state) and Comtean, Darwinian, and Spencerian characteristics can be detected in his writings. For the purposes of this study Schumpeter puts Schmoller’s contributions in the proper perspective: “Schmoller wanted, first of all . . . to teach his country and his time to understand their social problems .”28 Both in opening and concluding his monumental Grundriss, Schmoller identifies the scope of economics as being inseparably tied to the various aspects concerned with the well-being of the social organism, Political economy therefore can only be a science by extending its scope to become economic sociology. In particular, he considers it a “phantasy” to imagine the economy separate from the state. There is always the primacy of the political element in his writings. His stage theory, for example, uses political units as distinguishing criteria to illustrate the difference in economic policies at different times in order to meet different socio-economic and political requirements. His study of The mercantile system is an outstanding example. As he argues, good economics must recognise the idea of development; consider the psychological-ethical forces within the social arrangement; become a moral-political science by investigating the relationships between economic life and the state, morality, and religion; and display an appropriately critical attitude toward the natural-law foundations of both individualism and socialism, Taken together these will result in a recognition of the need for social adjustment and reform, The separation of economic theory from economic policy, which had been perpetuated by the dominance of Rau’s textbook (and later Wagner’s), had to be overcome (Grundriss, I, pp. 124-5).29
uiu.27
27. The emphasis in this part will be exclusively on Schmoller as the representative of the younger Historical School. It will avoid a most complicated procedure of trying to sort out the other members of the younger generation. 28. Joseph Schumpeter, ‘Gustav v. Schmoller und die Probleme von heute,’ Schmollers Juhrbuch, 50 (1926): 339. 29. Such unlikely allies as Menger and Schmoller were united in their criticism of Rau on this point. Cf. Carl Menger, Problems of economics and sociology (Untersuchungen . . . ), ed. Louis Schneider and trans. Francis J. Nock (Urbana, 1963), 205.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


422 History of Political Economy 20:3 ( I 988)
For political economy, however, to make its positive contribution to the progressive development of mankind, it has to meet the preparatory methodological imperatives to observe and describe as well as to define and classify in order to establish the foundation for causal explanation. All economic activities, Schmoller argues, are rooted in man’s motives (Triebe), feelings, and needs, i.e., his psyche. By developing a set of customs and morals, man “builds into nature a second world, the ‘world
of culture’ . . , of which the economy is Whatever role man’s motives play, as for example the drive to accumulate, will be regulated by ethical precepts and law. To understand the structure of the economy and the relationships between its various components (families, associations, corporations, the state, etc.) and the complexity of its common purpose, questions of human motivation, law, morals, and customs, i.e. ,of a shared ethos, must be addressed. In his search for causal explanation Schmoller rejects both Rickert’s denial of typical phenomena and regularities in social, economic, and historical life and Knies’ term, “laws of analogy,” because “in the realm of psychology we must always assume the same causal nexus; while the psychological laws of motivation are different from the natural laws of the external world, the maxim of causality applies to both fields with inexorable What is changing in time and place, is the integration of the psychological into the ethical as reflected in varying economic structures and phenomena. Since Schmoller shares the belief, but also admits to the lack of proof, of a coherent development process of nature, history, and human society; he argues that a thorough investigation of “all causes of each phenomenon [is] the most important task of scientific procedures” (p. 107). While there is, of course, a need to explain physical and biological causes of economic activities, of prime importance are the psychological (and moral) elements. The general psychological elements which influence economic life appear either “directly [in the form of motives] as causes of the first order . . .[or] as the complicated results of a higher culture, as language, ethos, law, as economic and legal institutions . . . a network of psychological causation of a higher order” (p. 109). A universal law of man’s economic activities (and their development) which explains and even measures all causal connections is impossible to achieve. “The most general as the most complicated remains the most uncertain; we [must] build on the specific” (p. 110). Both deduction and induction must be combined as the investigation of economic causation becomes increasingly complex; in addition, the scholar must draw on the
30. Schmoller, ‘Ueber einige Grundfragen des Rechts und der Volkswirtschaft,’ in
31 . Schmoller, Zur Literaturgeschichte, 209.
Ueber einige Grundfragen der Sozialpolitik und der Volkswirtschaft(Leipzig, 1906),46.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz How does the German Historical School fit? 423
results of auxiliary sciences such as history, psychology, ethnology, etc. For situations where causal explanation cannot provide the answers, yet on which we entertain certain hypotheses, Schmoller falls back on Kant’s critique of judgment and the heuristic device of teleological reflection: an assumption regarding the ultimate purposes of God, history, and nature (accessible only to the will) can then provide an approximate comprehension where an explanation is i m p o ~ s i b l eI.t~d~oes appear, however, that teleology as heuristics is not always clearly delineated from its politically normative implications. When Schmoller talks about the change that had taken place in German economics, he refers to the increasing role played by the disciplines of psychology (“the key to all cultural science”) and ethics, together with the institution of the state. His ultimate goal of a Humanitaetsideal can only be achieved if man rather than the production of wealth comes to occupy the core of our discipline. In this connection he rejects the Kantian moral code as too abstract in favour of Fichte’s ethics, which says not only what must not be done but also what should be done.33 In operational terms economic progress is necessary and desirable but cannot be separated from moral-ethical progress which, in practical terms, means that an ever more complicated and active social and political organisation has to ensure that an ever growing portion of society can enjoy the fruits of progress. Once appropriate social policy (in the conservative, state-reliant version of Schmoller) will have averted the spectre of social revolution, the broadest possible participatory base for intellectual and cultural accomplishments can be achieved. While the interaction of human attributes and social and economic institutions is the engine of development, Schmoller, in the tradition of idealism, argues that wherever there has been economic progress it has been the reflection of the victory of progressive ethical ideas; and, in concluding his magnum opus, he is optimistic enough to believe that this moral-ethical progress will come through the active reconciliation of egotistical and self-centered attitudes with those of conscience and justice (Grundriss, 11, 774-5).
As to his active role as professor in the area of social policy: “The academic teacher of practical disciplines can and shall have only one guiding star: the common good and the common interest.” And as a scholar he must acquire an historical understanding of the interrelations between economy, state, and law. This would establish not only a basis for modi
32. Grundriss, I, 100-1 13, also Zur Literaturgeschichte, 34-5, and his Die Volkswirtschaft, die Volkswirtschaftslehreund ihre Methode, 1893, ed. August Skalweit (Frankfurt, 1949), 13, 29-30. For HeinrichRickert’srigid demarcation between the natural and cultural sciences see his Naturwissenschaft und Kulturwissenschaft (1899) and Die Grenzen der naturwissenschaftlichenBegrifsbildung (1902). Also Immanuel Kant, Kritik der Urteilskruft (1790).
33. Zur Literaturgeschichte, 28-101, as well as his Rektoratsrede.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


424 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
fying the principles of economic theory but also lead to more useful policy conclusions .34
VI
The concept of economic stages, which had become part of the analytical framework of the older and younger schools, began to suffer increasingly from critical attacks after the turn of the century. Nevertheless, it was an important heuristic device which subsequently led to a number of methodological and theoretical advances by the third generation of historical economists, Werner Sombart and Arthur Spiethoff. With them the emphasis shifts more explicitly to the advancement of what we now call pattern models to lay the proper scientific and empirical foundations for policy formulation and to substitute for the more ethical-telelogical approach taken by their predecessors. 35 In discussing the scope and purpose of economics, “the science of economic systems,” Sombart considers it an empirical or positive science in the sense that it has to provide generally valid knowledge of economic reality, a cultural science because its subject matter is the product of man’s mind, his intellectual activities (“economy is objective mind”), and a social science since all economic activity takes place within a social framework. It is in this context that it fuses with sociology.36The operational core of Sombart’s economic theory is the Gestaltidee of the economic system whose “constituent elements are the economic spirit or outlookthe sum total of the purposes, motives and principles which determine men’s behaviour in economic life-the form of economic life or the objective system of regulations of economic relations, and the technology employed in economic processes .”37 While Sombart’s theoretical and empirical analysis, especially in his magnum opus (Der Moderne Kapitalismus),always runs in terms of the triad of spirit, form, and technology, the
34. ‘Wechselnde Theorien,’ 391 ;Die Volkswirtschaft, 44. 35. The following selection of works by Sombart and Spiethoff are relevant in this context: Sombart, Der Moderne Kapitalismus 3 Vols. (Muechen und Leipzig, 1928); ‘Economic theory and economic history,’ Economic History Review 2 (1929a): 1-19; ‘Nationaloekonomie,’ Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 3 (1929b), 1-1 8; Die Drei Nationaloekonomien (Muenchen und Leipzig, 1930); Die Zukunft des Kapitalismus (Berlin, 1932); ‘Capitalism,’ Encyclopaedia of the social sciences (1937), 195-208; Weltanschauung, science and economy, trans. Philip Johnson (New York, 1939); Allgemeine Nationaloekonomie, ed. Walter Chemnitz (Berlin, 1960). Spiethoff, ‘Die Allgemeine Volkswirtschaftslehre als geschichtliche Theorie. Die Wirtschaftsstile,’ Schmollers Jahrbuch 56 (1932): 891-924; ‘The “Historical” character of economic theories,’ Journal of Economic History 12 (1952): 131-39; ‘Pure theory and economic gestalt theory; ideal types and real types,’ in F. C. Lane and J. C. Riemersma eds., Enterprise and secular change (Homewood, 1953): 444-63; ‘Business cycles,’ International Economic Papers 3 (1953): 75-171; Boden und Wohnung in der Marktwirtschaft (Jena, 1934).
36. Sombart, Drei Nationaloekonomien, 174-6; ‘Nationaloekonomie,’ 4-6. 37. Sombart, ‘Capitalism,’ 196.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz How does the German Historical School fit? 425
spirit becomes the central object of investigation. This is so because the spirit represents a “uniform motivational basis”-a “uniform structure of values7’-which, in turn, determines the actions of the economic agents, the prime movers of the system. Given that the objects of economic knowledge are an integral part of culture and society, Sombart argues for a “cultural-scientific” approach, the method of Verstehen (understanding). To understand economic relations is to gain insight into their meaning and essence as part of the complex of cultural phenomena both in terms of their abstract or general and their historically concrete aspects.38 What, then, are the implications for economics as a policy science? Above all, economics must abandon its natural-science orientation and its search for ever-valid rules. Its subject matter is historically and culturally conditioned and, for this reason, cannot, like the natural sciences, apply a general rule to a specific case. What needs to be developed, Sombart ar
gues, is a “scienceof practical national economy . . . a new cameralistics” which is not part of economic science proper but must rely on its findings in order to get away from the teleological orientation of the socialists of the chair whose “practical studies [were] developed without any connection at all with the science of economics” and whose influence was not founded on “their scientific ideas but [on] the weight of their ethical and political In order to lay a scientific foundation for policy decisions, economics proper cannot issue definitive answers, but it can promote a better understanding of the nature of the problems by asking the right questions and providing an analysis and explanation of prevailing socio-economic conditions. More specifically, this means for the science of economics to develop “a system of categories in terms of which all the
historical forms of economy must be considered . . . and in working out this theory I have recognised the idea of the economic system as the most appropriate idea.”40 In discussing the future of capitalism by way of policy alternatives to accommodate systemic change, he proposes that such an undertaking can be done in an appropriately scientific way as follows: “As scientists we can ascertain: 1 . The existing possibilities for goal selection; 2. The necessities, be they in the spheres of nature or mind (Geist),on which depends the realisation of the desired objectives; 3. The resulting probabilities for the choice of goals and the means selected for their reali~ation.”~~ Finally, some comments on the highly suggestive contributions by Arthur Spiethoff the long-time assistant and intellectual heir of Schmoller.
38. Sombart, Drei Nationaloekonomien, 191-233; ‘Nationaloekonomie,’8-1 1 . 39. Sombart, Weltanschauung, 52-3. 40.Ibid., 56. 41. Sombart, Zukunf, 6.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


426 History of Political Economy 20:3 ( I988)
He wanted to supplement what he called Schmoller’s “longitudinal presentation” of historical materials and Sombart’s “cross-sectional” or systemic approach with a general economic theory as an historical science. Spiethoff does recognise the importance of what he calls non-historical theory which deals, in a general manner, with such categories as need, demand, commodities, value, supply, production. As a matter of fact it is “an indispensable heuristic device . . . without which no causal explanation of economic life is possible.”42Yet a general economic theory must also include time-conditioned theories, historical theories, which deal with “unique institutions and patterns subject to change in time.”43It is in this context that he introduces his theory of economic styles. A style is a “model [which] reflects what can be characterised as a Kausalzusammenhang: it mirrors a system of elements held together by interaction, and at the same time reflects a specific set of economic institutions which are at the root of that system of interacting elements.” These styles may be of the ideal-typical or real-typical variety.44 In his categorisation of economic style models Spiethoff acknowledges the usefulness of the exaggeration involved in pure theory as a necessary heuristic. For example, he places the Ricardian version of classical economics into this category. His major objective, however, is the development of an economic gestalt theory based on real types, an attempt to introduce into Sombart’s system theory a greater degree of precision and historical realism. A real-type model reflects specific, time-conditioned institutional arrangements, both economic and non-economic; it focuses on the establishment of a meaninfgul interaction of uniform, recurring, and essential relationships , where essential means “all phenomena which appear to be causes or conditions of the one under investigation or indicative of those causes and c ~ n d i t i o n s . ”S~pi~ethoff considers this image of
42. Spiethoff, ‘Volkswirtschaftslehre,’ 53. 43. Spiethoff, “‘Historical” character,’ 134. 44. Spiethoff, ‘Pure theory,’ 450-5 1 . An ideal type, according to Max Weber, involves the exaggeration of certain aspects of reality for the purpose of understanding the meaning and essence of historical phenomena (e.g., medieval town economy) in terms of their ultimate ends (Wertrationalitaet) and means-end relationships (Zweckrationalitaet) and to which reality can be compared. He uses the concept, however, not only in the idealised historical but also a more general context of understanding and explaining social (as against natural) phenomena: “Understanding involves the interpretive grasp of the . . . meaning appropriate to a scientifically formulated pure type (ideal type) of a common phenomenon. The concepts and ‘laws’ of pure economic theory [i.e., the “pure” version of the market economy, H.B.] are examples of this kind of ideal type.” (Max Weber, The theory of social and economic organization, trans. A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons, edited with an introduction by Talcott Parsons [New York and Edinburgh, 19471, 96.) For a detailed discussion of the extensive and, at times confusing, literature on this matter see Talcott Parsons, The structure of social action (Glencoe, 1949), and Fritz Machlup, ‘Ideal types, reality, and construction,’ in Machlup, Methodology, 223-65. 45. Spiethoff, ‘Pure theory,’ 446.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz How does the German Historical School fit? 427
reality a portrait rather than a photograph but cautions the scholar to take care that whatever important disturbances intrude on prevailing uniformities are properly captured as well; otherwise the distinction from the ideal type becomes blurred. Such historical gestalt theory, he argues, is genuine theory (rather than history) because it generalises (for specific styles), abstracts (from timeconditioned singularities), isolates (the uniform and essential) and combines deduction (for the determination of causes) with induction (for purposes of ~erification).W~h~ile Spiethoff, in the course of his “explanatory-descriptive” analysis, searches for uniformities and regularities, he stresses that this does not imply the establishment of laws in the axiomatic sense of “if A then B” but rather “because A happened, B was a result.” In view of this difference in theoretical orientation and purpose, he rejects emphatically the application of the validity standards of pure theory to economic gestalt theory. As part of his system of style models Spiethoff also presents one which is to assist the investigation of the “possibilities” of different sets of economic institutions, essentially a policy-theoretical and/or applied pattern model. Such a theoretical construct may reflect, similar to Sombart’s proposal, both a “possible and desired reality.” It represents an extension of gestalt theory. In considering also such non-economic factors as the political, social, and legal frameworks it becomes an indispensable “tool for research on political possibilities, a field in which economists will have to take an interest.” While models of this kind are not part of the narrower scope of economic theory, they do represent a necessary supplement. Economic style theory, therefore, “is important not only for research in economic history but also for the formulation of economic policy.”47He actually goes so far as to maintain that “for purposes of economic policy historical theories are the only ones that This seemingly categorical statement must not be misunderstood. Spiethoffreacts here to criticism that denied historical theory any use in policy matters. The attribute ‘historical’ does not imply mere preoccupation with the past, but rather it is intended to emphasise that economic phenomena change over time, and an analysis and explanation of the nature (and possibilities) of change are indispensable for policy considerations. Finally, Spiethoff’s own studies on business cycles (which he began as
46. Spiethoff, ‘Pure theory,’ 446-50. The causal explanation of any “discrete species of phenomena” Spiethoff assigns in the first instance, to the realm of the inductive method. Only in complex situations will recourse be taken to speculativededuction (by means of an “intuitivelygrasped hypothesis”) which must subsequently, however, be verified by induction again. 47. Spiethoff, ‘Pure theory,’ 463. He identifies Schumpeter’s Capitalism, socialism and democracy as a model of this type. 48. Spiethoff, “‘Historical” character,’ 134.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


428 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
his earliest scholarly endeavour and which led him to a preoccupationwith economic style theory), urban land prices, and credit policy are not only outstanding examples of the application of economic gestalt theory, but also significant contributions to a general theory of economic policy.
VII
All the members of the German Historical School shared a common intellectual heritage, even though the individual components of that heritage exercised varying influences on different scholars, making, for example, for different historical methods. Their one common bond, their common purpose, was to develop a more realistic theoretical framework to analyse and explain the changing patterns of socio-economic arrangements and, thereby, make the discipline more accessible to policy deliberation. While the first two generations, in addressing the social question, were more teleologically oriented, the theoretical constructs of Sombart and Spiethoff represented definite advances towards a time when, as Schumpeter said, “The social preferences are going to be uniform enough in order to enable in any given situation, the establishment of goals by way of science.”49When, however, he also wishfully exclaimed, “If one could only mix Sombart and Edgew~rth!’’an~d~expressed the conviction that the future would do this for us, he was sadly mistaken. And in the light of the emergence of such fields as comparative economic systems and economic developmentthe thoroughnesswith which the contributions of the German Historical School (all generations)have been cleansed from our discipline (including its history) is all the more deplorable. A major reason, perhaps, why the tradition of Edgeworth rather than a combination with Sombart won out was that, following the Methodenstreit, the scope of mainstream economics was narrowed to an extent which certainly Menger, if his Untersuchungen (Problems of Economics and Sociology) can be taken as an indication, would have deplored. Also, concomitant with the increasing professionalisationof the discipline,there developed an emphasis on pure theory and accompanyingefforts to elevate economics to the standards of the natural sciences, a predilection for the precision and rigour of mechanical analysis, equilibrium systems, and prediction. Economics progressed into a positive science which tended to eschew as non-scientificany efforts, however serious, to deal with norms, values, or interpretative explanations (e.g., Verstehen). Organic analogies and methodological collectivism, dealing with social conceptions and categories, were alien to the atomistic methodological paradigm. The frequent intemperate attacks by the historical economists as well as the
49. Schumpeter, ‘Schmoller,’351. 50. Schumpeter, ‘SombartsDritter Band,’ Schrnollers Juhrbuch 51 (1927): 17.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


Betz - How does the German Historical School fit? 429
sometimes too rigidly defined essential differences, in German epistemology, between the natural and cultural sciences did, of course, not help the cause. Eucken’s pronouncement of the “great antinomy” between theory and history, given his impact on postwar economics in Germany, also did its share, unfortunately, to discredit the contributions of those who essentially were his predeces~ors.~~ We would do well to heed Lionel Robbins’s caution that modern economics “has been too much influenced by excessive focus on its power to predict to the neglect of its wider power to explain,” and his advice to “attempt description in general terms of how economic systems work or may work and put our conjectures . . . to the present observation and past record . . .[to] throw light on the solution of wider problems of social and political choice.”52Pattern models (including those of the past) and their implications for policy deserve to be studied more rigorously as a legitimate part of economic analysis, and it is within this extended scope of economics that the German Historical School fits or at least should fit. In view of this it is gratifying to note that recently some of the causes pursued by the German Historical School have been taken up in the context of ever stronger attackson the excessive formalism of standardeconomics, its incongruence with reality, and obsession with prediction. A considerable body of promising literature has emerged stressing the importance of historical elements, process analysis, and the need for analysing the interdependence of the social and cultural with the economic realms by means of less rigid models, while cautioning against the uncritical acceptance of natural-science methods and reliance on mechanical equilibrium analysis for causal explanation. The new institutionalists and the post-Keynesians deserve mention here; however, it is the attempts at pattern modelling which show the greatest promise and are closest to the German tradition.53 Yet, even though the concepts of holism (organicism), individuality, and development are of critical importance to these models which try to provide explanation through understanding (Verstehen), little more than cursory acknowledgment is granted to the contributions of the individuals discussed in this article, particularly those of Sombart and Spiethoff. The achievementsof these scholars should receive closer scrutiny again resulting in a better appreciation of what, at worst, has been considered a dis
5 1 . Walter Eucken, Die Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie, Achte Auflage, (Berlin, 1965), trans. by T. W. Hutchison as Thefoundations of economics (London and Edinburgh, 1950). Schumpeter argues that Spiethoff’s work in particular had overcome this “unfortunate and philosophically hypostasised, illusory antinomy.” (Schumpeter, ‘Schmoller,’ 377). 52. Lionel Robbins, ‘On Latsis’s method and appraisal in economics: a review essay,” Journal of Economic Literature 18 (1979): 1003-4.
53. For a very promising presentation of “pattern models” see Charles K. Wilber and Robert S. Harrison, ‘The methodological basis of institutional economics: pattern model, storytelling and holism,’ Journal of Economic Issues 12 (1978): 61-89. This article also
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025


430 History of Political Economy 20:3 (1988)
credited tradition and, at best, what Bronfenbrenner calls a hibernating antithesis. The recent developments mentioned should, therefore, have us on the possibility of integrating at least part of the into the attempts at a new synthesis for the post
reflect more positively German contributions positivist era.
contains very useful bibliographical references. Fusfeld, in his critique of standard economics, introduces pattern models as a constructive alternative. Daniel R. Fusfeld, ‘The conceptual framework of model economics,’ Journal ofEconomic Issues 14 (1980): 1-52. A broader survey of methodological alternatives can be found in Coats’ presidential address to the HES. A. W. Coats, ‘Economics, history and HOPE,’ The History of Economics Society Bulletin, 7 (Winter, 1987): 1-20.
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/hope/article-pdf/20/3/409/424423/ddhope_20_3_409.pdf by LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE user on 16 January 2025