ON THE HISTORIOGRAPHY OF ECONOMICS
BY
MARK BLAUG
Economists suffer badly from what we might call "Cliophobia." Why bother with the history of economic thought?, they ask. Why not just do economics? What is the point of constantly recalling the inadequate economics of yesterday instead of improving the economics of today and tomorrow? This sort of questioning deserves an answer. How indeed do we justify the history of economics as a speciality within the broad stream of economic studies? A second question arises as soon as this one is answered. What kind of history should we be writing? Should we be trying to determine what the great economists "actually said"? Or instead, should we be occupied with discovering what they really "meant to say"? which of course is not necessarily the same thing as what they "actually said." There is a third possibility, however. Perhaps we would be asking "what they should have said"?, given the kind of questions they posed. Again, that is by no means necessarily the same as what they "actually said" or what they "meant to say." Historians of economic thought have often disagreed about which of these three questions they should be trying to answer.' It may be useful to remind ourselves that such diversity of opinions on historiographical matters is not confined to historians of economic doctrines. For example, the philosopher Richard Rorty (1984) distinguishes four different genres in the history of philosophy that are identical to recognizable styles in the history of economic thought: (1) "Geistesgeschichten," (2) "historical reconstructions," (3) "rational reconstructions," and (4) "doxographies." He claims that the first three are all legitimate modes of intellectual inquiry but he deplores the fourth. The first, Geistesgeschichten (literally, "history of the spirit"), tries to identify the central questions that past thinkers have posed and to show how they came to be central to their systems of thought. If, for example, we traced Ricardo's obsessive interest in the cause of the falling rate of profit to the dramatic effects of the Napoleonic wars on the price of corn
University of London, University of Buckingham, University of Exeter. This is the English text of a paper delivered at the Institut d'Humanitats de Barcelona on January 16,1990.
1. See the references in Blaug 1985, pp. 8-9.
Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 12, Spring 1990.
0 1990 History of Economic Society
27
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


28 JOURNAL OF THE HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT
and the rent of land in Great Britain in the first two decades of the nineteenth century, we would be practicing Geistesgeschichten. The second, "historical reconstructions," attempts to give an account of past thinkers' systems of thought "in their own terms," that is, in terms these thinkers would have accepted as a correct description of what they had done. That is, when we assert that Ricardo traced the tendency of the rate of profit to decline to the growing cost of producing corn in consequence of the "law" of diminishing returns, we are practicing the art of writing a "historical reconstruction." "Rational reconstructions" in contrast to "historical reconstructions" treat the great dead thinkers of the past as contemporaries with whom we can exchange views. Rational reconstruction analyze their ideas in our terms in order to locate their "mistakes" and to verify that there has been rational progress in the course of intellectual history. "We need to imagine Aristotle studying Galileo and changing his mind," Rorty remarks; "we need to think that, in philosophy as in science, the mighty mistaken dead look down from heaven at our recent successes, and are happy to find that their mistakes have been corrected. Such enterprises are of course, anachachronistic. But if they are conducted in full knowledge of their anachronism, they are unobjectionable" (Rorty 1984, p. 33). Finally, the fourth of the genres, "doxography" (literally, "the writing of hyttins of praise"), is the attempt to fit all texts into some recent orthodoxy to show that all those who have ever worked in the field have in substance treated exactly the same deep, fundamental questions. Rorty totally rejects doxography, resting as it does on the notion of absolute truth as possessed by the present generation. I once contrasted an "absolutist" and a "relativist" approach to the study of the history of economic doctrines. I defined the former as the tendency to judge past economic theories by the standards of modern economic theory, as if Truth with a capital "T" is always concentrated in the very last increment of economic knowledge, and the latter as the view that every past theory is a more or less faithful reflection of contemporary conditions (Blaug 1985, pp. 1-2). If one must choose between two polar opposites, I hold that "absolutism" is more defensible than "relativism," particularly as strict "relativism" is logically impossible. But is absolutism the method of rational reconstruction or is it in fact doxography? Suffice it to say that the distinction between the two is at best a subtle one. Absolutism can easily degenerate into omniscience, in which case there really is no point to the history of economic thought; why study what Pigou once contemptuously called "the wrong opinions of dead men." Although we can never forget what we now know, so that some version of "absolutism" is implied in every attempt to examine some text of the past, we are still left with the distinction between "historical reconstructions" and "rational reconstructions" or "moderate relativism" and "strict absolutism." I wish now to argue that however much there is a genuine distinction to be made between these two styles in the historiography of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


HISTORIOGRAPHY 29
economics, they tend invariably to shade into one another: what is in principle separable is in practice almost inseparable. I take as my first example Paul Samuelson's famous article on the Transformation Problem in Marxian economics, which caused a controversy that raged on for years. The purpose of Samuelson's paper (1971) was to demonstrate the spurious nature of Marx's transformation of labor values into relative prices. Although the exercise was feasible from a mathematical point of view, Samuelson argued, it was pointless because it failed to establish the priority of labor values and was simply an arbitrary operation on a set of prices determined by technology on the one hand and consumer preferences on the other. Although this repudiation of the Marxian theory of value was less devastating than that of Ian Steedman's Marx After Sraffa (1977), which argued convincingly that labor values simply cannot be calculated independently of competitive prices, it was sufficiently destructive to have raised the hackles of Marxists and anti-Marxists alike. After an initial volley of replies and counter-replies, William Baumol (1974) attempted to bring the discussion to a close by re-examining the intention of Marx in constructing Das Kapital in the peculiar way that he did. Baumol's argument was simply that Marx regarded the transformation of surplus values into profits as more fundamental than the transformation of values into prices and indeed was simply not interested in explaining the determination of relative prices. Now, interpreted as a "historical reconstruction," there is simply no dbubt Baumol is absolutely correct. However, if this is what Marx intended, he was simply straining to accomplish the impossible. As any reader of Piero Sraffa's Production of Commodities By Means of Commodities (1960) can prove in the twinkling of an eye, it is impossible to determine the magnitude of the rate of profit in the sort of linear production model that Marx employed without at the same time determining the set of market-clearing prices. In other words, Marx could not have "transformed" surplus values into profits without simultaneously having "transformed" values into prices. If one of these operations is meaningless, so is the other. In short, Baumol's "historical reconstruction" will not stand up as a "rational reconstruction," a point on which Samuelson immediately seized (1974a, p. 64). Baumol in reply (1974b) professed to be puzzled by Samuelson's failure to recognize that "the only objective of my paper was to determine what Marx had set out to accomplish and how Marx believed he had accomplished his objective," as if it were possible simply to ignore the fact that this objective was actually misguided. At no point in his original article or in his reply did Baumol intimate that Marx's belief in the importance of explaining the average rate of profit on capital and the unimportance of explaining the determination of relative prices was a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of his own model. Replying to Baumol, Samuelson (1974b) provided a perfect statement of the method of rational reconstruction which is worth quoting in full:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


30 JOURNAL OF THE HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT
There is a school in the history of science whose practitioners are concerned primarily with how earlier scientists perceived their own problems. In caricature, we can say it is all one to them whether Newton wrote on gravitation, alchemy or the Secret Number of the Beast in Deuteronomy. They would never dream of grading earlier writers for error or fruitfulness . . . . I begrudge no-one his pastime. But, in the realm of cumulative knowledge, I believe there is a place for what might be called Whig History of Science. In it we pay past scholars the compliment of judging how their works contributed (algebraic) value-added to the collective house of knowledge. Economics, I know, is not a hard natural science. Still I have thought it valuable to treat Marx not as an historic deity or oddity, but to appraise his transformation problem in the way a journal referee would treat any serious
contribution.2
I conclude that rational reconstructions are perfectly legitimate, although whether they are illuminating depends on the case in question. As for historical reconstructions, they are inherently problematic. Strictly speaking they are impossible because they presume that the past can be recalled without knowledge of the present; no adult can be expected to recall his childhood as if adulthood had never happened. A rational reconstruction may remain a mere rational reconstruction but a historical reconstruction must at some point lapse into a rational reconstruction for the simple reason that there is progress in economics — progress in the tools and analytical techniques of the trade and, occasionally, even progress in our understanding of the workings of the economy. We can at best struggle to grasp what a past author really meant to say in terms he would have accepted but we can never fully recapture his theoretical innocence. There are some who would deny that it is even important to determine what an author really believed or meant. If we want to understand the role played by the ideas of some great economist in the past on the history of our subject, Stigler (1976, p. 60) has argued, what is relevant is not what he intended but how those ideas were perceived by his contemporaries because "science consists of the arguments and the evidence that leads other men to accept or reject scientific views." In other words, what we should be doing is, not "personal exegesis," but "scientific exegesis" (Stigler 1965). Be that as it may, it is certainly true that the principle of scientific exegesis helps to sort out those cases in which the central message of an ancient text is difficult to detect because different passages suggest different messages. Patinkin (1982, pp. 16-17) contends that the history of doctrine is an empirical science in the sense that the historical reconstructionist is like an econometrician fitting a regression line to a scatter of empirical observations to determine the central tendency of a relationship between
2. See also Samuelson 1987.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


HISTORIOGRAPHY 31
variables. In the same way, historians of doctrine are trying "to pass a regression line through a scholar's work that will represent its central message." But that simile may be less helpful than appears at first glance if the author in question displays a high "ratio of noise to signal" as is surely the case with, say, Smith and Ricardo. Thus, in another of Samuelson's famous rational reconstructions, "The Canonical Classical Model of Political Economy" (1978), he argued that all of classical economics from Smith through Ricardo to J. S. Mill revolved around the central doctrine that increasing land scarcity would inevitably bring about a declining rate of profit and so usher in the stationary state. That may have been true for Ricardo, Samuel Hollander (1980) objected, but not for Adam Smith and this despite the fact that the chapter on colonies in Book IV of The Wealth of Nations refers to the principle of diminishing agricultural returns as choking off the growth process. The point is that all of Smith's contemporaries, including Ricardo, failed to recognize the presence in Smith's book of diminishing returns and its implications for distribution. Thus, Hollander concludes, the canonical classical model is a Ricardian construction both in terms of analytical logic and intellectual indebtedness and should not be attributed to Adam Smith. Samuelson's (1980) reply agreed that Ricardo might well have read it into Smith — it is almost there — but as a matter of logic it is there. In other words, Samuelson seemed to be saying, my rational reconstruction is virtually a historical reconstruction as well. He gave much the same response to Cigdem Kurdas (1988) who criticized him for ignoring Smith's heavy emphasis on the phenomenon of increasing returns in the first three chapters of The Wealth of Nations. Smith started the book with an optimistic scenario of increasing returns and ample technical progress, Samuelson (1988) concedes, but this gave way in a later portion of the volume to the gloom of diminishing returns and limited investment opportunities. Again, it is not easy to discern this argument in Samuelson's reply because the distinction between what "Smith should have said" and "what Smith actually said" is continually obscured. Despite Samuelson's insistence on the merits of a Whig History of Science, he sometimes lacks the courage of his own convictions in insisting on a rational reconstruction that resists even a whiff of historical reconstructionism. His critics, on the other hand, seem to deny any merit in something like rational reconstruction in the sense of Rorty. In their eyes, what Samuelson is doing is doxography, detecting in earlier writers only what hints at modern neoclassical economics. It is not easy to see how anyone can deny the value of rational reconstructions as such. Ricardo added a new chapter in the third edition of his Principles in which he announced that he had changed his mind about the effects of new machinery: it could reduce employment, wages and even the size of national income in both the short and the long run. For over 160 years this proposition has been denied by every leading economist except John Stuart Mill, and even his endorsement of Ricardo's thesis was severe
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


32 JOURNAL OF THE HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT
ly qualified as a short-run friction. In more recent times, it was regarded as a complicated fallacy by no less a theorist than Knut Wicksell. Nevertheless, Samuelson (1989) showed recently that Ricardo was right: all the three negative effects of the introduction of new machinery may occur under perfect competition as a result of purely automatic forces. This leaves aside the validity of Ricardo's own numerical example or what impelled him to pursue it, but the latter issue will never be posed in the same way now that Ricardo's basic intuition has at long last been vindicated. One of Samuelson's critics is Samuel Hollander. It is amusing to note that Hollander, despite his vehement insistence on the virtues of historical reconstruction, is himself a master of the art of rational reconstruction. In a number of books and articles summed up in his Classical Economics (1987), he has argued that there never was a "marginal revolution" in the 1870s, no fundamental' break in the history of economic thought between classical and neoclassical economics. Instead, he contends, the works of Smith, Ricardo, Mill and Marx contain a fundamental core of general equilibrium theory on Walrasian lines with resource allocation analysed in terms of the rationing function of relative prices and wages and profits treated as simply the prices of factors of production, determined by the same forces that determine the prices of final goods and services (e.g., Hollander 1987, pp. 6-7). Although no one is fonder than Hollander of quoting primary sources, his interpretation of these primary sources in support of his "continuity thesis" continually walks the thin dividing line between what the great economists of the past said in so many words and what they must surely have meant. Phrases like "it cannot be excluded that Ricardo believed . . .," "there is nothing to stop us from inferring that Marx . . .," "what Mill said is fully compatible with . . .," abound in his exegetical tutorials in which the giants of the past are invited to reconsider the logical implications of their arguments in the light of subsequent doctrine.
There is nothing wrong with this as rational reconstruction. If we water down the meaning of general equilibrium theory to the dictum that everything depends on everything else, there is simply no doubt that even the economic ideas of Aristotle or Sir Thomas Aquinas can be reconstructed as primitive general equilibrium theory. It is only objectionable because Hollander righteously insists that he alone truly immerses himself in the primary sources. Needless to say, his reinterpretations of what has long been regarded as settled issues in the history of economic thought have met with outcries of protest from other commentators, sometimes bordering on rage (see e.g., O'Brien 1981; Blaug 1986; and Peach 1988). In any case, Hollander is as guilty of historical reconstructions that are really disguised rational reconstructions as Samuelson is guilty, at least on occasions, of passing off rational reconstructions as if they were for all practical purposes historical reconstructions.
Another telling example of the hair's breadth that sometimes separates a
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


HISTORIOGRAPHY 33
rational from a historical reconstruction, consider Sraffa's discovery as editor of Ricardo's works of something called a "corn model" in Ricardo. In this model, according to Sraffa, Ricardo managed to determine the rate of profit in his 1815 Essay on the Profits of Stock in purely physical terms without entering into the question of valuation. Sraffa did not claim that Ricardo actually formulated the corn model but rather that he "must have formulated" it, either in lost papers or in conversation, for nothing else makes sense of Ricardo's belief that the rate of profit in the economy as a whole is determined by the rate of profit in agriculture. It is certainly true that we can read the corn model into early Ricardo, but on balance it is doubtful that Ricardo really committed himself to the corn model, which involved too many assumptions that he regarded as patently unrealistic (Peach 1987, p. 108; Blaug 1985, p. 92). Once again, the corn model is a valid rational reconstruction of Ricardo but it is probably not a sound historical reconstruction. In much the same way, we could provide a rational foundation for many of Ricardo's and Marx's strong conclusions if we could suppose that they frequently assumed identical capital-labor ratios in different industries. Thus, to give only a simple example, the labor theory of value is safe from virtually all criticisms traditionally levelled against it if capital-labor ratios indeed are everywhere the same. Throughout his Economics of David Ricardo (1979), Hollander repeatedly declares that Ricardo procured many of his results by the assumption of identical capital structure in all lines of industry. Not only is there zero textual support for such a declaration (Peach 1988, p. 116), however, but Ricardo had laid so much stress in his writings on the problem of unequal factor proportions that he never could have swallowed
the "heroic" assumption that Hollander attributes to him.3 There is space for only one more illustration of the distinction between a historical and a rational reconstruction of past ideas. Rational reconstructions of the history of economic thought are particularly appealing to mathematical economists because the mathematization of economic ideas abounds in striking exemplars of the improvements in analytical techniques that have been so marked a feature of economics in, say, the last 50 years. No wonder then that a mathematical economist like Paul Samuelson has frequently turned to the history of economic thought to demonstrate the progress of economic knowledge. But another (and in some ways an even more typical) instance of the same phenomenon is the work of Michio Morishima, who has written three major interpretative studies on Ricardo, Marx and Walras. Morishima's first book on Marx's Economics (1973) appeared to be a rational reconstruction of Marx in the light of the contemporary theory of
3. It is also noteworthy that not a single contemporary classical economist ever interpreted Ricardo as assuming identical capital-labor ratios. In criticizing Samuelson's reading of Smith, Hollander, as we saw earlier, involved Stigler's principle of scientific exegesis: what interpretations did Smith's contemporaries place on The Wealth of Nations'! However, this principle is constantly violated in Hollander's own readings of Ricardo.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


34 JOURNAL OF THE HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT
economic growth, being a dynamic aggregated version of Walrasian general equilibrium theory. Nevertheless, the text is peppered with references to what Marx "perceived," "clearly recognized," "clearly saw," et cetera, with copious references to Das Kapital. This must give us pause as to whether we are being furnished with another version of "it is all in Marx." What certainly is studiously avoided is Geistesgeschichte, because Morishima (1973, pp. 40, 42) is not above claiming that Marx would have accepted the utility theory of value and present-day demand theory if it had been known to him and this despite the fact that Marx always ruled out priceinduced substitution in consumption. The difficulty of figuring out Morishima's intention in writing the book is that Marxian economics is defend
ed throughout thirteen chapters as perfectly valid on its own grounds,4 and then in the fourteenth and last chapter of the book is admitted to be theoretically untenable because of joint production, heterogeneous labor and unequal rates of surplus value in different industries. Rather it is the labor theory of value that is abandoned in the last chapter (Morishima 1973 p. 193), so that what survives is Marxian economics without the labor theory of value. By Marxian economics is meant, apparently, the so-called Reproduction Schema of Volume 11 of Capital. At any rate, the "law" of the falling rate of profit, the jewel in the crown of Marxian economics, is virtually ignored in the two hundred pages of Morishima's book. Similarly, Morishima's study of Walras' Economics (1977) is deliberately constructed as a reinterpretation of the true significance of Walras' contributions to economics. According to Morishima, these were not, as some have thought, the first correct exposition of the marginal utility theory of value or the demonstration of the possibility of multimarket equilibrium, but rather certain theories of money and growth usually identified with a number of twentieth-century authors. Apart from ignoring all of Walras' writings except the Elements of Pure Economics, and even there every portion of that book except Part VII, Morishima's examination and revision of Walras' theory of tStonnement in exchange and production, followed by his formulation of Walras' theory of economic growth, becomes progressively less connected with the actual content of Walras' Elements. Walras rigorously preserved the static character of his general equilibrium edifice even when considering the use of money and credit, and treated Part VII of this book, entitled "Conditions and Consequences of Economic Progress," as a sketch suggesting uses to which his model might be put in passing from static to dynamic analysis. However, Morishima considers it to be an integral part of Walras' general equilibrium model and in so doing suggests that Walras was as interested in dynamics as in statics, and indeed
4. Thus, Morishima (1973, pp. 6, 53) takes great pains to expound the "fundamental Marxian theorem," according to which the rate of profit in a capitalist economy is positive if and only if Marx's "rate of surplus value" is positive. But this fundmental theorem turns out, on Morishima's own admission, to carry no causal implications about the nature of profits because it is equivalent to the proposition that the capitalist system normally produces a positive net product (see Blaug 1980, pp. 24-26).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


HISTORIOGRAPHY 35
anticipated not just von Neumann but also Keynes. On the one hand he concedes that "not a chapter or even a paragraph discussing the time structure of production can be found in the Elements," but on the other hand von Neumann's capital theory, which is all about intertemporal choices of techniques, is described as a Walrasian theory (Morishima 1977, p. 198-99). This is only one example of many others in which the reinterpretation of Walras' place in the history of economic thought gradually gives w#y to an original extension of general equilibrium theory into areas that Walras himself never dreamt of, Similarly, Morishima's Ricardo's Economics (1989) repeats the peculiar style of his books on Marx and Walras in which as much is given on the one hand as is taken away on the other. There is a striking difference, we may conclude, between Samuelson's and Morishima's approach to the history of economic thought. Samuelson always insists that his only concern is with rational reconstruction. It is only in occasional moments of weakness that he appeals to a historical reconstruction to support his rational reconstruction. Morishima, however, disguises his rational reconstruction as historical reconstruction and indeed is not above the strident claim that other commentators have totally misunderstood Marx, Walras, Ricardo, et cetera (e.g. Morishima 1977, pp. 2-8). But insofar as Morishima is ever concerned with the actual words employed by the great figures of the past, what is striking about his treatment is its ahistorical character: in his books, Ricardo, Marx, Walras and von Neumann all seem to be living at the same time in an instructive seminar ably conducted by himself. I hope that I have now demonstrated that Geistesgeschichten, historical reconstructions and rational reconstructions are each perfectly legitimate ways of writing the history of economic thought but that confusion is inevitably created when these distinct ways are not kept apart. In point of logic they cannot be kept entirely apart but we can at least try to be explicit about what we are doing when they are run together. I turn now at long last to the great question with which we began this discussion: how can one justify the history of doctrines as a specialization within economics? Many economists denigrate the history of economic thought as mere antiquarianism, constituting an embarrassment to the claims of economics as a hard science akin to physics or biology. Nevertheless, the heads of these very same economists are stuffed with fallacious ideas about the history of their own subject. And every time anyone has a new idea in economics, every time anyone hankers to start a new school of thought, what is the first thing they do? Naturally, it is to rummage the attic of past ideas to establish an appropriate pedigree for the new departure. All the great economists of yesterday did exactly that: Smith, Ricardo, Marx, Marshall, Keynes — they all drew on the history of economics to show that they had predecessors and forerunners. Even Milton Friedman, when he launched the monetarist counter-revolution against Keynes, could not resist the temptation to quote David Hume as an ancestral ally.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


36 JOURNAL OF THE HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT
In short, the history of economic thought is irrepressible and if it were declared illegal to study it, there is little doubt that it would be carried on in basements behind locked doors. Like the writings of books banned in the future society described by Ray Bradbury in Fahrenheit 451, it would survive in secret underground organizations. If I am right that the history of economics, like intellectual history in general, cannot be stamped out, there may be something to be said for people who do it as a full-time activity, acquiring in the course of it some professional competence in talking and writing about it. This surely is the justification for a tribe of scholars called "historians of economic thought." I am tempted to add a final argument, namely, that economic knowledge is itself historically determined, that what we know today about the economic system is not something we discovered this morning but is the sum of all our insights, discoveries and false starts in the past. Without Pigou, no Keynes; without Keynes, no Friedman; without Friedman, no Lucas; without Lucas, n o . . . T. S. Eliot (1919) expressed it perfectly: "Someone said: 'The dead writers are remote from us because we know so much more than they did.' Precisely, and they are that which we know."
REFERENCES
Baumol, W.J. 1974a. "The Transformation of Values: What Marx 'Really' Meant (An Interpretation)," Journal of Economic Literature, 12 (1), March, 51-62.
1974b. "Comment," Journal of Economic Literature, 12 (1), March, 74-75.
Blaug, M. 1980. A Methodological Appraisal of Marxian Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing.
1985. Economic Theory in Retrospect. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 4th Edition. 1986. "Review of S. Hollander, The Economics of John Stuart Mill," History of Economic Thought Newsletter, 36, Spring.
Eliot, T.S. 1919. "Tradition and Individual Talent," Egoist, September/December. Hollander, S. 1980. Classical Economics, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 1987. "On Professor Samuelson's Canonical Classical Model of Political Economy," Journal of Economic Literature, 18 (2), June, 55974. Kurdas, C. 1988. "The Whig Historian on Adam Smith: Paul Samuelson's Canonical Classical Model," History of Economics Society Bulletin, 10 (1), Spring, 13-23. Morishima, M. 1973. Marx's Economics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1977. Walras' Economics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press


HISTORIOGRAPHY 37
O'Brien, D.P. 1981. "Ricardian Economics and the Economics of David Ricardo," Oxford Economic Papers, 33(3), November.
Patinkin, D. 1982. Anticipations of the General Theory?, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Peach, T. 1988. "David Ricardo: A Review of Some Interpretative Issues," in Classical Political Economy, edited by W. O. Thweatt, Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Rorty, R. 1984. "The Historiography of Philosophy," Philosophy in History, edited by R. Rorty, J.B. Schnewind and Q. Skinner, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Samuelson, P. A. 1971. "Understanding The Marxian Notion of Exploitation: A Summary of the So-Called Transformation Problem Between Marxian Values and Competitive Prices," Journal of Economic Literature, 9(2), June, 399-431. 1974a. "Insight and Detour in the Theory of Exploitation: A Reply to Baumol," Journal of Economic Literature, 12 (1) March, 6270. 1974b. "Rejoinder: Merlin Unclothed, A Final Word," Journal of Economic Literature, 12(1) March, 75-77.
1978. "The Canonical Classical Model of Political Economy," Journal of Economic Literature, 16(4), December, 1415-34.
1980. "Noise and Signal in Debates Among Classical Economists: A Reply," Journal of Economic Literature, 18(2), June, 575-78.
1987. "Out of the Closet: A Program for the Whig History of Science," History of Economics Society Bulletin, 9 (1), Fall, 51-60.
1988. "Keeping Whig History Honest," History of Economics Society Bulletin, 10(2), Fall, 161-67. 1989. "Ricardo was Right!" Scandinavian Journal of Economics, j 91 (1), 47-62. . Stigler, G.J. 1965. "Textual Exegesis as a Scientific Problem," Economica, N.S., 32, November, 447-50. 1976. "The Scientific Uses of Scientific Biography, with Special Reference to J.S. Mill," James and John Stuart Mill: Papers of the Centenary Conference , edited by J. M. Robson and M. Laine, Toronto: Toronto University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1053837200006088 Published online by Cambridge University Press