Review
Reviewed Work(s): Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy by Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini
Review by: Sam Bucovetsky
Source: Southern Economic Journal, Jan., 2002, Vol. 68, No. 3 (Jan., 2002), pp. 738-742
Published by: Southern Economic Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1061733
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms
Southern Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Southern Economic Journal
This content downloaded from
194.156.224.251 on Sun, 03 Nov 2024 23:17:57 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


738 Book Reviews
the purposive behavior of the agents you are studying" (p. 45). The stand meant for a world of high calculation costs. We live in a world of low cal
time to move on.
Sutton's book is an intelligent look at some fundamental issues in empirical econ is also a good read. I would have liked him to be more radical in his critique of
practice and more optimistic about improving on them. But neither gripe is meant to value of the book or the pleasure of reading it.
References
Brock, William A. 2000. Some Santa Fe scenery. In The complexity vision and the teaching of economics, edited b David Colander. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 29-49. Hayek, E A. 1967. Degrees of explanation. In Studies in philosophy, politics, and economics. Chicago: University o Chicago Press, pp. 22-42. Hiemstra, Craig. 1993. An application of the modified rescaled range test to the daily returns of individual-firm stocks Mimeograph, Loyola College, Baltimore. Lo, Andrew. 1991. Long-term memory in stock market prices. Econometrica 59:1279-1313. Loretan, M., and P. C. B. Phillips. 1994. Testing the covariance stationarity of heavy-tailed time series: An overview of the theory with applications to several financial datasets. Journal of Empirical Finance 1:211-48. Mandelbrot, Benoit. 1972. Statistical methodology for nonperiodic cycles: From the covariance to R/S analysis. Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 1(3):259-90. Mandelbrot, Benoit. 1997. Fractals and scaling in finance: Discontinuity, concentration, risk. New York: Springer. Wilson, R. 1967. Competitive bidding with asymmetric information. Management Science 13:816-20.
Roger Koppl Fairleigh Dickinson University
Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy
By Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000. Pp. xix, 533. $55.00.
This book contains a succession of models of public sector decision making. In every case, the actors in the models are rational economic agents. In virtually every case, they play noncoop
erative games, the rules of which are specified by political institutions. In virtually every case,
the actions chosen by the agents or the consequences of those actions are government economic policies. Anyone who wants to learn how to construct tractable models of this sort must read this book.
Why would we want to construct such models? We are economists, and constructing models is what we do (a habit that often causes consternation to our students, acquaintances, and families). Some of us have declared a specialization in public sector economics and so have to consider the determination of government economic policy. To a large degree, "pure" public economics practitioners have tended to ignore diligently the political process. Several explanations can be given for this practice. One is that explicit consideration of political institutions
would complicate analysis of many problems without adding any significant insights. Another
is an "as if" argument: The outcome of the political process can accurately (or adequately) be represented by some sort of representative welfare function. A third is the weakness of the resources on which we could draw: the sterile formalism of the social choice literature and the
inelegance, specificity, lack of rigor, and ideological baggage of much of the public choice literature.
This content downloaded from
194.156.224.251 on Sun, 03 Nov 2024 23:17:57 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


Book Reviews 739
Persson and Tabellini really do demolish quite powerfully my first an
They show an extraordinarily deft touch in finding exactly the assumpt
and again, they start with elegant but highly stylized models, then add
one, and are still able to find economically meaningful closed-form solut
distinguish between baby and bathwater is impressive. They show this abili
examples from their own vast collection of recent published work in the ar
other people's work.
This work also demonstrates that the many important strengths of th
public choice can be preserved, even when some of the less attractive
These strengths, acknowledged by the authors, include an understanding o
interest groups, an emphasis on the manner in which lobbying affects p
the procedural rules of the electoral process, and a recognition of the role
mation. In the introduction, the authors trace the roots of the work presente
the Chicago school of rational expectations macroeconomics and the Roch
litical science being the other two. They also seem quite loathe to identify
economics, either in its roots or in its applicability. Nonetheless, I would
a very important text for public economists, despite the fact that Atkinso
Meade, Mirrlees, Stern, Stiglitz, and Vickrey merit one mention among th
of some 500 or more references. In the introduction, the authors define t
policies such as "the size and form of redistributive programs, the exten
good provision, the burden of taxation across alternative tax bases, the s
deficits, the extent of corruption by public officials, the structure of labor m
stance of monetary policy during the course of the business cycle or th
1). Except for the last item, that seems to be what public economics is a
That last item is one of the authors' major concerns. The book contai
introductory part on "The Tools of Political Economics," and then four p
tools are applied to substantive problems. But the specific issues to which
devoted tend to be macroeconomic issues or public finance issues that m
made their own. One whole part is devoted to monetary policy, predomi
credibility. Individual chapters are devoted to the capital tax levy problem,
of the public debt, and to growth. On the other hand, a little less attentio
microeconomic issues. The analysis of pensions, of regional transfers, an
insurance is all contained in a single chapter, the one titled "General Inte
To a large degree, the emphasis in the book reflects the progress
literature in political economics. A lot of important new testable predict
in the past 20 years about the effect that political structure of countries
nomic policies in the countries and on the consequences of those policies
growth rates. Many of these predictions have been subjected to empirical
been rejected by the data. The effects of (existing) economic inequality o
growth, the effects of central bank independence on inflation, and the ef
elections on the business cycle are examples discussed at some length in
On the other hand, the accomplishments of this new literature in th microeconomic policy issues look perhaps less gaudy. Existing anecdotal a
made more rigorous. Clear models have been formulated specifying how
should affect policies-other things equal. But there are perhaps fewer ne
This content downloaded from
194.156.224.251 on Sun, 03 Nov 2024 23:17:57 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


740 Book Reviews
opments that we would like to convey to intelligent laypeople and that we able to convey a few years ago.
For example, what do we know about agricultural policy? Governments
forms, in many different places, at many different times, seem to have interests. Why have agricultural lobbies been so successful? Is their success
analyses of this phenomenon have emphasized the importance of intense m
the overrepresentation of rural constituencies in many representative dem
sort of analysis did not rest on a very firm analytic foundation. Chapter 7
"Special Interest Politics," presents a much more satisfying analysis. It pre
types of model: a model of structure-induced equilibrium in legislatures Baron and Ferejohn and by Epple and Fiorina), a common-agency model o
Grossman and Helpman), and a model of electoral competition by parties Weibull and to Dixit and Londregan). In each case, the characteristics of t
group most likely to succeed are derived. The structure-induced equilibri
that legislation will favor districts with a small number of voters, districts
care more about government spending in the district, and districts for whi
of government expenditure, should no new legislation be passed, is fairly
agency model is not really used to explain which groups succeed in lobby how competition for politicians dissipates lobbyists' rents. The model of
suggests that parties' platforms will favor groups that are not wedded stro political ideology and that are more homogeneous in their ideological view
The authors have succeeded in saying a great deal about special interes
pages. They have presented quite a selection of different models and prese
simply and coherently than my hectic precis in the previous paragraph wo
the models presented has implications. Many of these implications are no
formal modeling, and many of these implications can be examined empir
they seem at odds with casual empiricism. Simple structure-induced equi
which some individual legislator gets the power to set the agenda, predict
well treated in the status quo will not be part of a majority coalition. It is t
them a policy that they will prefer to the status quo. In other words, last y be the most vulnerable in this year's legislative process. The fact that accounted for by the very simplest models itself points out the need to bu
One of the strengths of the book is that, in every chapter, the authors tak
out extensions and modifications. Each chapter contains many references to
At the end of each chapter are precisely five problems for the reader, m
extensions of the models presented within the chapters. The book can be reference to a large literature and as a text.
The success of agricultural interests can be defined relative to other c interest groups or relative to some ideal benchmark. The first sort of co political economics, is the approach emphasized in the book. In the introd
state, "We primarily want to know why policy is the way it is, not what i
In a great number of cases, they succeed in this goal. An excellent examp "Political Regimes," in which they present several models, mostly from demonstrate clearly why parliamentary regimes tend to spend more, and public goods, than do American-style democracies, with their separation executive and legislative branches. The key distinction is in the formulat
This content downloaded from
194.156.224.251 on Sun, 03 Nov 2024 23:17:57 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


Book Reviews 741
spending proposals. In each case, one legislator is in charge of setting the
in charge of expenditure. In the parliamentary system, each legislator belo
party, and each has veto power over legislation. The legislature only vote
equilibrium) a combined tax-expenditure package that has been approved by
legislators. In Persson's and Tabellini's model of a congressional system, th twice. First, one agenda setter proposes tax legislation, and then, after th
passed or defeated, another agenda setter proposes spending legislation. In a there are two different votes means that it is easier for agenda setters t
legislators against each other. In equilibrium, fewer rents have to be tran
legislators in a congressional system. While the authors are forthright in m
limited empirical confirmation for these predictions, the chapter provides
on why and how legislative rules matter for public economics.
Returning again to special interest politics, are the authors as successf new and compelling explanation for the success of agricultural lobbies? T
question, the more difficult it is, and here I think we must be satisfied with m
an understanding of the sort of forces involved and how they can be mode
Of course, in referring to the success of agricultural policy, I am imply
interests get more than they deserve, in some sense. In political economi
down the slippery slope into normative economics. The authors should be c
resolve in trying to concentrate on positive economics. They adhere to the
the consequences of political institutions for policies implemented. They
obvious questions that might be raised. If institutions matter, how do they
tutional structure is taken as given, what is an appropriate measure of th outcome? The first question they wisely avoid, acknowledging that "a pos
institutions evolved is certainly an interesting area of research" (p. 4).
They do, in quite a few instances, use a benchmark measure of an eff
compare with the outcome of the political process. They use the Benthamite
for this task, pointing out clearly in the introduction the potential problem
They also, in most of the models they use, choose utility functions for i are linear in income. This certainly provides tractability. But, together w
Benthamite benchmark, it leads to a lot of attention being paid to transfera
Persson and Tabellini, transferable utility is an analytic simplification, not
But how many transferable utility games can one smoke without inhaling?
again the analysis of special-interest lobbying. In chapter 7, Persson and
model of lobbyists as many principals competing for a single political age
auction. The use of the menu auction means that the single agent can succe
from the principals. They conclude (p. 174) that the equilibrium will be s
not all lobby groups are organized and if the government cares at all abo butions. All three conclusions presented in this section are normative. Th
result that organized groups will get too much expenditure on their pref there may be too much or too little aggregate public expenditure. Contra with those derived by Dixit, Grossman, and Helpman (1997), in which the
transferable utility is emphasized and in which it is shown the equilibrium
must be efficient in the sense that there is no other feasible policy yieldin each lobbyist and to the government. As Dixit, Grossman, and Helpman t
demonstrate, this constrained efficiency of equilibrium is not a tautology.
This content downloaded from
194.156.224.251 on Sun, 03 Nov 2024 23:17:57 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


742 Book Reviews
that it may not be enough simply to be aware of the difficulties in doin economics. In some instances, Benthamite benchmarks might best be avo
Reference
Dixit, Avinash, Gene Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman. 1997. Common agency and coordination: General theory application to government policy making. Journal of Political Economy 105:752-69.
Sam Bucovetsky
York University
Trade Policy in Developing Countries
By Edward E Buffie. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001. Pp. vi, 400. $27.95 (paperback).
This is a very interesting and useful text for the "post-Seattle" discussion of trade policies
developing countries. If the protests associated with the World Trade Organization (WTO) mee
ings there have taught us anything, it is that a very vocal opposition has emerged to the conce
of trade liberalization among developing countries. The dichotomy in debate is stark: The pro
ponents of trade liberalization speak of the static gains from trade and the power of markets
enticing disciplined economic activity, while the opponents decry the profits accruing to th
rich at the expense of the poor that this liberalization will facilitate. The beliefs on both side
are passionate and strongly held, but the grounding in economic theory is limited. Professo
Buffie has taken on the task of analyzing the theoretical costs and benefits of trade liberalizati
in this monograph. As he puts it, "It can be said with some assurance that extreme protectioni
policies are economically harmful. But the case for free trade is not airtight, and there is n
general theoretical presumption that the market failures common in LDCs (less developed cou tries) favor an export-oriented rather than an import-substituting trade strategy" (p. 5). H
succeeds handsomely in illuminating these questions with a logic embedded in theory. Let m
begin with a disclaimer. Buffie and I seem to have a similar way of framing research question
and thus I am willing to accept a number of maintained hypotheses in his work to which other
might object. These include the following:
(i) modeling of economic activity as the outcome of optimizing behavior,
(ii) a presumption that developing countries are characterized to a greater extent than develop
countries by certain forms of market failure, (iii) a presumption that mathematical modeling can be used to represent the economic interac tions of individuals in developing countries, and (iv) the absence of explicit exploitation of developing countries by developed countries in t
international marketplace.
If your own beliefs run counter to these, then Buffie's logic-and my review-will leave you dissatisfied.
Buffie sets an ambitious agenda in this monograph. He analyzes a number of specific policy questions and does so within a consistent theoretical framework that is both intertemporal
nature and has sufficient complexity to capture the features he associates with developing coun
This content downloaded from
194.156.224.251 on Sun, 03 Nov 2024 23:17:57 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms