NUNC COCNOSCO EX PARTE
THOMAS J. BATA LI BRARY
TRENT UNIVERSITY






HONOUR, FAMILY, AND PATRONAGE


Conversation


HONOUR, FAMILY
AND
PATRONAGE
J. K. CAMPBELL
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
New York and Oxford


HQln&tf . C- 3’ /f 7
© Oxford University Press 1964
First American printing 1974 Printed in the United States of America


PREFACE
I think it is useful and necessary to explain at once the par¬
ticular point of view from which I describe in this study the
life of a community of Greek Sarakatsan shepherds. I begin with
an analysis, in some detail, of kinship institutions and the struc¬
ture of the family, which emphasizes how an individual’s moral
obligations are concentrated almost exclusively within family
and kindred at the expense of his relations with people outside
that relatively limited circle. Families not connected by kin¬
ship or marriage are related through institutions of mutual
hostility and competition; and unrelated persons view one
another at all times with intense distrust. A system of social
values based on concepts of honour, strength, and pride is
associated with these institutions and attitudes, and together
they guide the conduct of Sarakatsani in the apparent anarchy
of their communal life. Inevitably these institutions and values
severely limit the possible forms of economic and civic co¬
operation. Further, they considerably affect the character of
the relations between this community of mutually opposed
family commonwealths and the rest of Greek society. Given a
centralized administration, and parliamentary government
with a universal franchise, an implication of the internal struc¬
ture of the community is that these relations tend to take
certain forms of political and social patronage. Honour,
Family, and Patronage represent a pattern of interrelated
institutions and values.
In this book I have attempted to abstract for the purposes of
analysis a particular complex of institutions and values which
are not peculiar to the Sarakatsani. Very similar formal ele¬
ments are critical for the study of society anywhere in the Greek
provinces, and even, in many respects, in the cities. Moreover,
the social forms which are described here have many interesting
parallels in other parts of the Mediterranean world, and it is
principally as a contribution to the study of social structures
in this area that I offer my study.


VI PREFACE
It follows that this is in no sense a complete ethnographic
account of even one community of Sarakatsani, let alone a
survey of Sarakatsan culture in general. Mme Chatzimichalis
has published the first volume of a work which will represent,
when it is completed, the fullest possible account of Sarakatsan
folklore and material culture. It is a pleasure to acknowledge
my debt to her work which goes far beyond the few references
noted in this book. Where there appear to be disagreements
between us these are generally accounted for by the circum¬
stance that, as a folklorist, Mme Chatzimichalis’ object is to
describe Sarakatsan life and culture in its most traditional
form. My own study, on the other hand, is concerned with only
certain aspects of a particular community of Sarakatsani as I
discovered it in 1954 and 1955.
Various incidents in this book describe the illegal acts of
some individuals, or the social humiliation of others; and most
of the information I received from Sarakatsani was certainly
regarded by them as confidential. I have therefore taken what
steps I can to cover personal identities. Although I lived among
Sarakatsani in a number of villages in Zagori, the greater part
of the material used in this study concerns the Sarakatsani who
graze the land of one particular village in central Zagori. To
this village I have given the fictitious name of Neochori. Simi¬
larly I have changed all personal names.
It is impossible, unfortunately, to acknowledge all the many
instances of help and hospitality I have received at various
times. There are original debts of gratitude to Mr. W. A. Camps
who persuaded the Ministry of Education to support my
research when they had virtually decided otherwise; and to my
father who supplemented this grant at times of crisis to make it
barely possible to carry out the necessary fieldwork. At an early
moment of indecision in Greece I received a letter from Profes¬
sor E. E. Evans-Pritchard which advised me to join the Sara¬
katsani. In retrospect, I owe much to this. I have to thank Dr.
J. G. Peristiany for his constant encouragement, and for many
discussions which have radically affected the form of this book
particularly in connexion with my analysis of Sarakatsan values.
My gratitude is due to Dr. J. M. Beattie and Dr. Rodney Needham who read the manuscript and offered many invaluable
criticisms and suggestions. I also wish to thank Sir Maurice


PREFACE Vll
Bowra, Dr. K. O. L. Burridge, Mr. E. Katsaros, Dr. R. G. Lien
hardt, Mr. Zisimos Lorenzatos, and Dr. Philip Sherrard who
read and commented on particular chapters. And to the War¬
den and Fellows of St. Antony’s College I express my apprecia¬
tion for their patient support and encouragement.
It was my misfortune that feelings over the Cyprus issue
became particularly embittered shortly after I began my field¬
work, with the result that my relations with the local authorities
were always difficult. My movements were restricted and under
surveillance. I was seldom able to persuade local officials to
provide me with, or to help me obtain, any kind of quantitative
or statistical information. Indeed, it is certain that without the
generous support of the deputy Prime Minister Mr. Panayiotis
Canellopoulos, I would not have been allowed to remain.
Within a week of his leaving office I was ordered to remove
myself from the area and on this abrupt note my fieldwork
ended. If one remembers the unhappy atmosphere which then
existed, it would be unreasonable to complain of the reaction
of some Greek officials and individuals to my presence and my
suspect work. It is with all the more gratitude that I remember
the kindness and practical assistance of many Greek friends,
which they did not always give without risk. Particularly I
wish to mention Mr. Sotiris Dakaris of the Greek Archaeo¬
logical Service, and his wife. My debt to the Sarakatsani will
be obvious from this book; and to none is it greater than to my
friend Theodoros Gogolos.
I dedicate this book to my wife, Sheila Campbell, who shared
the fieldwork in physical and political conditions which were often
unpleasant, and who first won the confidence of a secretive people.
J.K.C.
Kifissia.
May 1962.
During my fieldwork I was visited by the Greek photographer ‘Dimitri’ and I am grateful for permission to use some of the photographs he took on those occasions. I am similarly grateful to Mr. Roger Vaternelle who prepared the map; and to Professor Bernard Kayser who made it possible for him to do so.


.
I
.
'


CONTENTS
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS xi
I. HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
1. Vlachs i 2. The Sarakatsani of Zagori 7
II. OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
j. The flocks 19 a. The shepherd* 26 3. The women 31
III. KINSMEN AND AFFINES
1. The lignificance of kinsmen 36 a. The kindred 42
IV. THE EXTENDED FAMILY
1. The status of the bride 59 2. Brothers and their wives 69 3. Separation 79 4. The ‘company’ of related families 88
V. COLLATERAL KINSMEN
1. Favours and obligations 95 2. Cousins 99 3. The effective kindred 106 4. Expressions of solidarity 114
VI. AFFINAL RELATIONS
1. Betrothal and abduction 124 2. The element of hostility. Marriage and the ‘Return’. 132 3. The obligations of affmes 138 4. Some structural implications 145
VII. THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
1. Husband and wife 150 a. Parents and children 154 3. Siblings 172 4. Interrelations 179
VIII. THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
1, The solidarity of the family 185 2. Hostility between unrelated families 203


X CONTENTS
IX. PATRONAGE
1. Community 213 2. Spiritual kinship 217 3. Village friendship and patronage 224 4. Lawyers and Government officials 238 5. Merchants 247 6. Conclusion 256
X. THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
1. The hierarchy 263 — 2. Honour 268 3. The Honourable man. Positive ideals 274 4. The Honourable man. Negative restrictions 291 5. The material elements in prestige 297 6. The sanctions of prestige values 306 7. A system of values 316
XI. THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
1. God and sin 321 2. The Devil 331 3. The ways to God 341 4. Social values and religious ideals 353
APPENDIX I. THE WINTER CO-OPERATIVE GROUPINGS OF SARAKATSANI GRAZING AT NEOCHORI 357
APPENDIX II. LAND UTILIZATION IN THE ZAGORI 362
APPENDIX III. A SPECIMEN FAMILY BUDGET 363
BIBLIOGRAPHY 365
INDEX 366
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Conversation Frontispiece 1. Milking facing page 32 2. The Women 64 3. Sarakatsan Grandmother 176 4. Stani in Winter 208 5. Sarakatsan Shepherd 288 Map of Epirus indicating summer and winter grazing areas of the Zagori Sarakatsani 1


HONOUR, FAMILY, AND PATRONAGE


"K v^wZAGQRl
Igoumenitsa
CORFU 1& ®Pararnythia$ \
'Margarition
Philippiada
Villages in the district of Zagori and its environs
Villages in Zagori grazed by the Sarakatsani in the summer (including two villages outside the administrative boundary)
Dispersed winter grazing areas of Sarakatsani from one Zagori village ( NeochorP)
Stanis with more than 500 sheep and goats Stanis with less than 500 sheep and goats Kilometres F I Land 0-500m. high
ZD Land 500-1000m. high HI Land 1500-200Om. high
Land 1000-1500m. high Land over 2000m. high
Map of the Epirus Indicating Summer and Winter Grazing Areas
of the Zagori Sarakatsani


I
HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL
INTRODUCTION
1. VLACHS
I
N continental Greece north of Corinth the observant traveller
is soon aware of communities of Greek-speaking transhumant
shepherds known as Sarakatsani (Eapaxaraavoi, or Eapaxar
cjavatoi). In the plains it is unnecessary even to leave the main
roads to see small groups of circular, domed, huts of wood and
thatch, or flocks of sheep and goats guarded by shepherds
dressed in rough black suits and immense goat-hair capes woven
from the fleeces of their own animals. From May until the first
days of November these semi-nomad shepherds graze their con¬
siderable flocks on the higher slopes of the mountains, generally
3,000-6,000 feet above sea level; during the remainder of the
year they live in the coastal plains. Simple facts of climate and
relief, snow on the high ground in winter, in the summer burn¬
ing heat in the plains, encourage this transhumance in a geo¬
graphical area physically dominated by the ranges of the Pindus
massif and the southern extremity of the Rhodope mountains.
Epirus, Thessaly, Macedonia, and Thrace are the provinces in
which they are most numerous but communities are found
further south in continental Greece and some groups are estab¬
lished in the north of the Peloponnese and Euboea. In the
whole of Greece their number, perhaps, approaches eighty
thousand,1 a population which was possibly absolutely greater
a hundred years ago, but was certainly relatively more con¬
siderable as a fraction of the total inhabitants of the area.
The Greek villagers generally refer to the Sarakatsani simply
as Vlachs (pXaxoi), that is shepherds who, in step with the
rhythm of the seasons, lead their animals alternately down to
the plains and up to the mountains. The occupational reference
of the word, Vlach,2 is an old one, already in use during the
1 Mme Chatzimichalis arrives at a total of 81,473. ’AyyeXix-i) Xax^yjjuZaQaxaxadvoi, Athens, 1957, vol. i. Part A, p. v(3'. * See e.g. Anna Comnena, Ed. Bonn., i, p. 395. One of a number of references quoted by Mme Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. v?'.


2 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
Byzantine period. But it may also be used, in its original and
more specific sense, to describe Koutsovlachs (Koi>T<yo(i$Xaxoi)
an ethnic minority group speaking a romance language akin to
Rumanian, or the related groups of Albanian Vlachs (’Ap[3avi
ropXaxoi) who are trilingual, speaking the Koutsovlach language
as their mother tongue and Greek and Albanian for political
and commercial reasons. These different connotations of the
word, Vlach, have led to some confusion, which has been all
the greater because many Koutsovlachs lead a transhumant
shepherd life, identical in its general outline with that of the
Sarakatsani. To the uninitiated eye they may appear to dress
alike, to build the same type of thatched hut, and many of their
communities graze their flocks in areas of the Pindus mountains
neighbouring on those used by the Sarakatsani. The result has
been that many nineteenth-century travellers, and even some
Greek observers, failed to realize the existence of the Sarakat¬
sani and imagined that all ‘nomad’ shepherds were Koutso¬
vlachs of one kind or another.
But although many Koutsovlachs are transhumant shep¬
herds, many are not. For instance, in the eastern half of the
Zagori district in Epirus, a majority of the Koutsovlach villagers
make their living from timber and agriculture. Probably since
the sixteenth century3 a considerable number of Koutsovlachs
have been established in their own villages in the high Pindus.
They have pretensions to culture, and for generations sons of
rich Koutsovlach families have been prepared for commerce,
politics, and the professions. In these respects the Koutsovlachs
differ from the Albanian Vlachs who, in so far as they continue
to be recognized as ‘Albanian’, are generally concerned only
with shepherding. Some of these Albanian Vlachs have grazing
areas close to the Albanian frontier which until 1930 they were
able to cross in their search for winter pastures.
With both these ethnic minority groups, Koutsovlachs and
Albanian Vlachs, the Sarakatsani are culturally contrasted.
They speak only Greek; their values, institutions, and art forms
are in many respects markedly dissimilar from those of the
Koutsovlachs and Albanian Vlachs. They themselves claim
that the klephtic heroes Katsandonis and Karaiskakis were
* Sec A. J. B. Wace and M. S. Thompson, Nomads of the Balkans, London, 1914, p. 147.


VLACHS 3
Sarakatsani, and they believe that in blood and heroism their
own contribution to the freedom of Greece was incomparable.
At the same time they explicitly question the loyalty of the
Koutsovlachs4 or Albanian Vlachs, accusing them in the recent
wars of collaboration or communist affiliations. Although they
share a similar type of economy there is no sympathy between
Sarakatsani and these other shepherds. They envy the Koutso¬
vlachs for their relative affluence and their established villages.
And they are hostile to the Albanian Vlachs, because it is par¬
ticularly with these groups that many Sarakatsani must com¬
pete for the limited areas of winter grazing land. Even the flesh
of an Albanian Vlach, they say, does not smell like that of a
Christian.5 Intermarriage with these people is unknown and
between the more traditional Sarakatsani and Koutsovlachs it
is, at least, very rare.
In recent decades the problem of the origin of the Sarakatsan
communities has provoked a considerable amount of writing.
Interest was aroused more particularly after the publication in
1925 of a brilliant linguistic study of the Sarakatsan dialect by
the Danish scholar, Carsten Hoeg.0 In the opening chapters of
this work Hoeg gives some ethnographic details of the com¬
munities he visited and presents a theory that these shepherds
are the descendants of primitive pastoral tribes, which he be¬
lieves must always have existed in this part of Greece from pre
classical times.7 This view was naturally well received by Greek
folklorists and historians. For equally obvious reasons it was
strongly disputed by a number of Rumanian writers and pub¬
licists, of whom perhaps Theodor Capidan is the best known.
Before the 1939-45 war these writers, continuing in a long
tradition of Rumanian nationalist propaganda, were eager to
stress the relationship between Rumanians and Koutsovlachs.
(Indeed, even before the beginning of this century schools had
been subsidized by Rumanian funds in the larger Koutsovlach
* In fact, from the period of the Revolution the contribution of the Koutsovlachs to the Greek State both in wealth and talent has been very considerable. 8 Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. vt)'. * Carsten Hoeg, Les Saracatsans, Ptude linguistique, 2 vols., Paris and Copenhagen, 1925 and 1926. 7 P. Aravandinos had already made this claim in 1905. II. ’ApaflavTivos, MovoygayCa 7ieql KovtaopXa^fov, Athens, 1905, p. 38.


4 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
villages.) But Capidan8 and his followers also claimed that the
Sarakatsani, far from being the descendants of ancient Greek
tribesmen, were not Greeks at all, but Rumanian Koutsovlachs
who in comparatively recent times had become hellenized.9
The complete absence of any reference in Byzantine authors,
or in writers of chronicles as late as the eighteenth century, to
any communities of shepherds known as Sarakatsani, only in¬
creased the temptation to wild flights of speculative fancy by
both sides to this controversy. In the absence of any certain
historical data much of the argument centred around the
interpretation of what little the Sarakatsani themselves had
to say about their past, and a number of ingenious but quite
improbable solutions to the etymology of the name Sarakat
sanos.10
The various problems which surround the origins of the
Sarakatsani may never find definitive solutions. The affairs of
unlettered shepherds were not considered important by classi¬
cal, Byzantine, or mediaeval writers. The probability that, as a
consequence of the existing conditions of climate and relief,
transhumant pastoralism of one kind or another has, from the
earliest times, been a feature of Greek country life, has no doubt
discouraged curiosity and comment. A hundred years ago a sig¬
nificantly higher proportion of the country people lived by the
herding of sheep and goats, whether they belonged to genuinely
transhumant communities, or to established villages which sent
away their animals for six months of the year under the care of
shepherds whose families remained in the village. It is only in
the last fifty years that, with closer settlement and more inten¬
sive agriculture, groups of transhumant shepherds have become
a somewhat anomalous element in Greek country life. But the
emergence of the different Balkan nationalities is the factor
which essentially explains this sudden interest in wandering
shepherds. Before and after the Balkan Wars (1912-13),
8 See Theodor Capidan, ‘Saracacianii’, Dacoromania, 1924-6, vol. 4,
PP- 923-598 Cf. C. Jirec'ek, DasFurslenlum Bulgarien, Vienna, 1891, p. 118. 10 A lucid review of these different solutions is found in an article by Ay)[x. TeMpyaxac;, «riept tcov EapaxotTcravatwv tt)<; 0pax7)<;», ' Aoyziov tov ©Qaxixov AaoyQatpixov xai I'Acocroixov &))ouvqov, 1945-6, vol. 12, pp. 105-28. The second part of this article, 1947-8, vol. 14, pp. 193 fL, is concerned with other aspects of the problem of origin.


VLACHS 5
folklorists and historians struggled with patriotic inventiveness to
provide historical and ethnological evidence for the advance or
validation of their various national frontiers in areas which
under the unity imposed by the Byzantine and Ottoman
Empires had become an inextricable patchwork of different
ethnic and religious groups. The Sarakatsani were one element
in this complex pattern. For under Turkish rule their seasonal
migrations had led many of them across limits that were later
to become the frontiers of Greece, with Albania, Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria, and Turkey.
In these debates the Greeks and their supporters present the
more convincing argument. They suggest that if the Sarakat¬
sani were recently hellenized Koutsovlachs they would preserve
at least some traces of a foreign origin in their language and
customs. But Hoeg has shown11 that neither phonetically, nor
in terms of grammatical structure, are there traces of Koutso
vlach elements in the dialect spoken by the Sarakatsani. He
also claims that the dialects of the Sarakatsani in Epirus,
Macedonia, and Thessaly present a linguistic unity.12 If the
various groups of Sarakatsani had, indeed, been recently hel¬
lenized one would have expected them to speak the local dialect
of the province in which they now find their grazing lands; and
this is not the case. And he properly adds to these linguistic
arguments information about the different marriage customs
of the two groups.13
Where Hoeg has used linguistic and ethnographic criteria,
Mme Chatzimichalis also emphasizes the unity of Sarakatsan
art forms,14 which are simple, static, and geometric, do not
vary from one province to another, and in the absence of
naturalistic expression differ radically from those of the Kout¬
sovlachs.
But the rebuttals by both these authors of the opinion that
Sarakatsani are hellenized Koutsovlachs are only the prelimin¬
aries to their own more general theory that the Sarakatsani
are the direct descendants of shepherd communities of pre
classical Greece—a claim which it is equally difficult to prove
11 Hoeg, op. cit., vol. i, p. 78. 11 Ibid., vol. i, preface, p. VIII. l* Ibid., vol. i, p. 81. 14 Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. pc'.


6 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
or disprove. Mme Chatzimichalis believes that they are a people,
who, in their pastoral way of life, social organization, and art,
show forth certain prototypical elements of early Greek cul¬
ture.15 She is much impressed, for instance, by the similarities
between the motifs of Sarakatsan decorative art and those of
the ‘geometric’ style of pre-classical Greece.
Professor Hoeg claims that a comparison of the Sarakatsan
dialect with the other dialects of continental Greece16 suggests
that it was formed some four or five centuries ago. Arrived at
this point in time he observes that although the peoples which
invaded the Balkans during the Middle Ages, i.e. the Slavs,
Bulgars, Turks, and Tartars, were all of nomadic origin, they
rapidly changed to an agricultural economy as soon as they
were established in Europe. Further, it is only in quite ex¬
ceptional circumstances that sedentary populations revert to
nomadism. The Sarakatsan material culture, he argues, shows
no trace of sedentary origins; on the contrary it follows with
precision and simplicity from the conditions of transhumant
life in a particular physical environment. And on the other
hand Hoeg is able to supply literary evidence17 that forms of
transhumance existed in classical and Hellenistic Greece; par¬
ticularly in northern and north-western Greece. By a form of
argument ex ignorantia we arrive at the conclusion that the
Sarakatsani, a people without history, must always have lived
in more or less the same conditions and areas as we find them
today.
As is proper for a social anthropologist not concerned with
the problem of origins, my own more limited conclusion is
that in their social values and institutions, the Sarakatsani, as
they exist today, provide no evidence of a past history that was
ever anything but Greek. They still hold to what villagers now
describe as ‘the old customs’, moral attitudes in family and com¬
munity which a hundred years ago were general throughout
Greek mountain communities, and still persist today, although
now in conflict with other values of urban and alien origins.
15 Ibid., vol. i, Part A, in the section ‘Sarakatsani, nomads since ancient times?’ 16 Hoeg, op. cit., vol. i, pp. 82 ff. 17 For instance; Sophocles, Oedipus Rex, line 1135 ff.; Arrian, Anabasis, VII.9.2.


THE SARAKATSANI OF ZAGORI 7
2. THE SARAKATSANI OF ZAGORI
The community of Sarakatsan shepherds which I describe in
this study numbers about 4,000 souls.18 In summer they are
found in Zagori, a mountainous district north-east of the town
of Jannina on the western limits of the Pindus range in the
province of Epirus. Here they graze their sheep and goats from
May until the early days of November; or as they would cal¬
culate it, between the feast-days of St. George and St. Demetrius
which mark their seasonal migrations between plain and moun¬
tain (and are celebrated according to the old Julian calendar,
that is, on the 6th May and the 8th November by the new calen¬
dar). In each Zagori village with high grasslands there is a local
gathering of Sarakatsan families which exploit the grazing land
of the community and add to it a summer population of 100
300 men, women, and children. Since 1938 the majority of
these shepherd families have enjoyed the same citizenship and
grazing rights as the sedentary villagers of Zagori from whom
previously they had to rent their pastures. There are 152,000
sheep and goats in the Zagori of which 85,000 sheep and 13,000
goats belong to the Sarakatsani.19 Although the eastern villages
of the district are Koutsovlach in speech and sentiment very
few of their inhabitants are, any longer, transhumant shepherds,
and the pastures of these villages are used by the Sarakatsani,
who indeed occupy almost all the higher pastures of the district,
grazing their flocks on the lands of 30 of the 43 villages which
today constitute Zagori; the remaining villages are low lying
(where it is easier to keep animals throughout the year), or they
are without extensive areas of grass.
In the winter the community is more widely dispersed. The
Sarakatsani move down from the mountains to the coastal
plains and valleys over an area which extends from the Albanian
frontier as far south as the towns of Arta and Preveza and even
18 There are no census details for the Sarakatsani as such. And police restriction on my movements prevented me from carrying out a complete survey of all the sheep villages in Zagori. However, on the basis of my own incomplete figures and information supplied by the Ministry of Agriculture for pastoralism in Zagori generally, this figure is most unlikely to be far from the truth. 18 Thus there are 24-5 sheep and goats per head of population among the Zagori Sarakatsani.


8 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
beyond. Here many of the shepherds have no grazing rights and
they must rent pasture sometimes at great cost from village
communities or private individuals. Since the first world war
the settlement of refugees and more intensive farming tech¬
niques have progressively reduced the area of grassland in the
plains. Each year the search for winter grass by the Sarakatsani
becomes wider and more desperate. But quite apart from the
greater geographical dispersion of the community in winter, the
problems of weather and lambing isolate the shepherds of each
flock whose only concern during these months is the care of their
animals. In summer, although the Sarakatsani are still dispersed
over 390 square miles of mountainous country, there is time to
visit kinsmen who live at a distance, weddings and festivals are
celebrated, and in general there is a greater awareness of the com¬
munity and its life. Winter in the plains is a kind of exile; the
return in spring to the mountains of Zagori is the return home.
The pattern of social groupings in this community is ex¬
tremely simple. The most restricted unit is the most important.
This is the family, whether in its elementary or extended form.
To this small group the individual owes almost exclusively his
or her time, energy, and loyalties. However, the family group is
normally unable to manage its flocks without some assistance
from outside and, in these circumstances, two, three, or more
families related by kinship or marriage, associate to form ‘a
company’ (uapea), or stani (arixvrj)20, which for functional rea¬
sons must include at least four adult males and generally
numbers between 15 and 50 persons of all ages. But the duties
which the individual assumes as a member of the ‘company’ are
specific and have an obvious relation to the welfare of his family.
The relationship between the constituent families of the group
is contractual; any family may elect to leave the association
whenever it wills, any family may be expelled by the decision of
the other members. Apart from this participation in a group of
co-operating and related families, the shepherd normally has
no membership in other social groupings which might conflict
with his exclusive duties to the family.
10 I shall employ these terms interchangeably, generally using ‘company* when the emphasis is on the relations of co-operation between the consti¬ tuent families of the group, and ‘stani’ when the context refers to the un¬ differentiated group with its huts, flocks, and grazing land.


THE SARAKATSANI OF ZAGORI 9
It is believed by the Sarakatsani that the interests of unrelated
families are opposed and, indeed, mutually destructive. The
local gathering of families which in summer happen to graze
the pastures and enjoy citizenship rights of the same village, has
little cohesion as a group except when on a rare occasion, such
as a village festival, it breaks into brief and violent opposition
to the villagers; and it has no organization beyond the ephem¬
eral political combinations which appear at the time of local
village elections. The idea of the total community is, of course,
important; it represents a way of life in opposition to the ways
of peasants, merchants, and bureaucrats. But the community,
too, lacks any structure of authority or effective organization;
and, in part, for the same reasons, that is to say the solidarity,
exclusiveness, and mutual opposition of the families which
form it.
While it is true that the total community (or the local gather¬
ing of families as a segment of it) is not an organized social
group, it nevertheless defines a social space within which values
are shared and the conduct of men and women is evaluated by
other Sarakatsani. These values concern, especially, right ways
of acting in family and kinship roles and the sex-linked moral
characteristics which a man or woman ought to exhibit when
he, or she, stands forward as the protagonist of the family and
the guardian of its honour. Such evaluations imply a hierarchy
of prestige. And it is precisely through mutual competition in
terms of strength, wealth, and a reputation for honour, that the
opposed families, and groups of related families, are associated
with one another in a coherent and regular manner.
To these general features of the community it is necessary to
add a brief consideration of particular geographical and histori¬
cal factors which help to explain the presence of the Sarakatsani
in the Zagori. Geographically Zagori is the western flank of the
Pindus range immediately north of the approaches to the Met
sovo pass, which forms its southern boundary; the mountain
Mitsikeli is its western limit, and the sweep of the river Aoos
contains it from the east and the north. The ridges of the Pindus,
which effectively separate the eastern and western coastal
plains of continental Greece, run in a north-west to south-east
direction. The vast pressures which created these folds came
from the east so that the escarpments present extremely abrupt


10 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
precipices and tend to ‘lean over’ towards the west. Thus, in
general, the western slopes of the Pindus, as in parts of Zagori,
present an extremely difficult terrain over which movement is
not easy. Many of the valleys are narrow and steep-sided and
the two principal rivers Aoos and Vikos lie in deep and formid¬
able ravines. The canyon of Vikos is a remarkable natural
feature 4,000 ft. in depth.
The most important sheep grazing area of the Zagori is the
Gamila feature whose highest peak is 8,140 ft. above sea level.
On the higher slopes of this mountain the important sheep
villages of Papingo, Tsepelevo, Kapesovo, Vradeto, and Skam
neli, to mention only the villages on its western flank, graze
33,000 sheep and goats. The rocks of this mountain, as of the
other high peaks in Zagori, are of limestone formation; but the
smaller features and the valleys are mostly rocks of sandstone.
At the contact lines between the permeable limestone and the
sandstone there are often springs and streams fed by the melting
snows and the abundant rain, for this is the wettest area of
Greece with, in places, an annual rainfall of 50 inches. The
limestone slopes produce a sparse but fine grass which the
shepherds claim is the best grazing for the milking or pregnant
ewe. On some of the lower slopes in the eastern Zagori, especi¬
ally those which face eastwards, there are considerable forests
of silver fir and Corsican pine and a grass which is more
luxuriant. The shepherds, however, prefer the thin grasses of
the open limestone slopes, and comparative figures of milk
yields appear to support this preference.
The more important grazing villages of the Zagori are situated
3,000-4,000 ft. above sea level and the pastures are generally
found above the village to an altitude sometimes as high as
6,000 ft. Snow falls on the higher pastures as early as the first
days in November and the villages themselves are often deep
in snow from Christmas until the middle of March. These are
the physical and climatic conditions which lead to the transhu
mant economy—abundant and, generally, well watered sum¬
mer grasslands with maximum day temperatures which seldom
exceed 8o°F. in the village, or 7o°F. on the higher pastures,
but snow and bitter cold which force the shepherds to take
their animals to the plains in winter. In the higher villages of
Zagori a few sheep and goats are kept under cover during the


THE SARAKATSANI OF ZAGORI 11
winter, but there is neither enough hay nor sufficient steading
to attempt this on any considerable scale. Similarly, villagers in
the plains may keep some sheep through the summer despite a
smothering heat and parched grazing. But the condition of
these animals is meagre.
Yet it was the Sarakatsani rather than the people of Zagori
who exploited, and continue to exploit, these pastoral resources
of grass and water; and this is a fact that has to be explained on historical grounds.
The Turks under Sinan Pasha captured Jannina in 1430,
and that part of Epirus which now lies between the Albanian
frontier and the town of Arta remained an Ottoman possession
until its cession to Greece as recently as 1913. From the earliest
period of the occupation a majority of these lands were divided
into military fiefs. The fief-holders, tenants-in-chief, in exchange
for certain military commitments enjoyed the revenue from a
number of taxes including the tithe of one-tenth, but the culti¬
vators, mainly Christians, possessed a right of secure tenure in
their land which lapsed only if they did not cultivate it over a
period of three years. From time to time, however, and by
various methods (often through the expropriation of the rights
of peasants who had fallen into debt), fiefs were converted into
private properties, chiftliks, on which the villagers became
metayers, conceding half the produce of their cultivations to
the landowner and possessing no certain rights of tenure which
the latter did not choose to recognize.
The villages of Zagori, however, succeeded not only in de¬
fending their limited rights as Christian villagers in military
fiefs but also in persuading the Turks to grant them other and
more important privileges. By the eighteenth century the forty
six villages had developed a confederate alliance. Each village
elected a representative to a council which in turn appointed a
general intendant for Zagori who was established in Jannina
as administrator of the confederation’s affairs in liaison with the
Ottoman authorities. There were three essential privileges
which it was the task of this representative to defend; the right
of the confederation to collect and deliver to the imperial
government taxes owed by the member villages (other than
the dues payable to the fief-holders); the right of Zagori villages
to administer their own affairs, to hear cases of civil law between


12 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
citizens of Zagori, and to maintain a small force of village
guards; an undertaking by the Turkish Governor not to estab¬
lish Government representatives within the boundaries of the
district. There were reciprocal benefits in these arrangements.
The Zagori was protected from the capricious exploitation of
direct administration and tax collection which threatened the
villages with indebtedness, conversion into private estates, and
the consequent loss of private and communal rights to land. The
Turkish authorities, whose principal concerns were internal
security and regular fiscal supplies, gained as faithful and de¬
pendent allies a community in an area difficult to police, along
whose southern boundary ran the important but hazardous
line of communication to Metsovo and Thessaly.21
In the late eighteenth and throughout the nineteenth century
the Zagori was, by the standards of Greek country life, rich.
But the source of this wealth was not local. Sons whose presence
was not urgently needed at home travelled to the more pros¬
perous towns of the Empire particularly in Rumania. In these
places they established businesses of various kinds from humble
bakeries to important merchant houses. Others became doctors
and teachers. A man once established created openings for
kinsmen. These migrants were known as ‘travellers’ (xa^iSitoTe*;);
for the implication was that they would eventually return. A
man generally returned to his village when he was about 25
years of age and took a wife from his own or another Zagori
village. He remained with his new wife for perhaps three or
four months, generally until her pregnancy was established.
He then returned to his business or professional position abroad
leaving his wife behind in his parents’ home. Every four or five
years he paid further visits to the village to see his family and
perhaps to increase it, until he had amassed enough wealth to
build a substantial house and fill it with elegant carpets, fur¬
niture, and icons. Into this he retired from his business or pro¬
fession and passed the later years of his life playing the role of a
‘notable’ in village life and politics.
This curious form of emigration was practised in other parts
of Greece but perhaps nowhere more intensively than in Zagori.
But the degree to which it was developed was dependent upon
21 Todw7)<; Aaji.TrptSrj;, «Zayopiaxa» in ’Hneigwrixa MeXexrj/xara, Athens, 1889, gives a useful but sometimes uncritical account of Zagori history.


THE SARAKATSANI OF ZAGORI 13
the privileges of self-administration that have been described
and which were not finally abrogated until 1866. So many men
could not have left their families and villages unprotected, nor
would there have been any security for the wealth they amassed,
had the reciprocal rights and obligations of the authorities and
the Zagori villages not been clearly acknowledged on both
sides. In this situation an important sanction was the presence
in Constantinople of a number of rich Zagori notables able to
communicate the grievances of their compatriots directly to the
Sultan. Not only were they able to dispense bribes to high
officials on behalf of the confederation but they supplied the
central Government with intelligence about the movements
and intentions of the local governor in Jannina who was not
infrequently intriguing against his own masters in Constanti¬
nople. Even in the case of Ali the Lion, the most powerful
and greedy ofJannina’s rulers, an awareness of this introduced
some restraint into his dealings with the Zagori.
This concern with commerce and the professions, and the
imperial ambience in which their local politics were implicated,
gave the inhabitants of these villages a cosmopolitan rather
than a peasant outlook. It is true that until 1912 they assidu¬
ously worked the small pockets of cultivable land and tended
their vines and fruit trees, but generally with the manpower of
gipsies or families of lower status. A few men of Zagori possessed
large flocks of sheep but no self-respecting citizen of this district
could himself lead the life of a shepherd. Consequently by the
nineteenth century, if not earlier, shepherding in central,
western, and much of eastern Zagori, whether of village sheep
or their own, was in the hands of the Sarakatsani.
The villages in the plains of Jannina, Arta, and Preveza were
in a different and less enviable situation. Originally many of
their lands had been military fiefs. In terms of agricultural
wealth they were richer than mountain villages but geographic¬
ally they were more vulnerable to intimidation and exploitation.
By the kind of process that has been described, most of these
fiefs in time became private estates, chiftliks. By the early nine¬
teenth century these areas had been considerably depopulated
as a consequence of the capricious administration of chiftlik
proprietors or their agents, and through looting by Albanian
bands in the frequent disturbances of civil order during this


14 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
period. Both in the chiftliks and the extensive monastery lands
there were considerable tracts of uncultivated grassland.
Therefore, the very different fortunes of the villagers in the
Zagori mountains and those living in the plains, both, alike,
encouraged the transhumant sheep economy of the Sarakat
sani throughout the nineteenth century and until 1922. The
inhabitants of Zagori were primarily interested in the life
abroad, not in fully exploiting the pasturage resources of their
villages. And the influx of wealth had aroused various preten¬
sions to education and social status which could scarcely be
accommodated with a life of transhumant nomadism. In the
higher villages, apart from the few animals which it was pos¬
sible to keep under cover through the winter, the pastures were
generally empty, and the villages were willing to rent large
tracts of grazing land to wealthy Sarakatsan shepherds who
might lead groups of families controlling two or three thousand
sheep. This arrangement brought revenue to the village. And
it sometimes established relations of patronage through which
the villagers were informed about the movements of brigands
who periodically descended on their rich houses; or when
hostages had been taken shepherds were often the channel of
mediation and negotiation. Similarly, in the plains, monasteries
and chiftlik owners were equally ready to lease their unculti¬
vated grassland in the winter, often for a nominal payment
when the Sarakatsani undertook to graze the sheep of the
monastery or chiftlik as well as their own. These conditions
of adequate grassland in summer and winter, and in certain
respects a complementarity of interests between Zagori vil¬
lages and the Sarakatsani in the mountains, and in the plains
between the Sarakatsani and the owners or administrators
of large estates, persisted generally until the period of the first
world war.
But in 1922 the military defeat in Asia Minor led in the years
which followed to the exchange of population between Greece
and Turkey. One of the measures taken by the Government for
the re-settlement of refugees was the division of chiftlik and
monastery lands into peasant holdings and the building of new
villages. By 1927 the old winter pastures of the Zagori Sarakat¬
sani had largely vanished. Some of the richer shepherds had
the foresight to buy small properties in the Arta and Preveza


THE SARAKATSANI OF ZAGORI 15
plains and reduced the size of their flocks. Others found small
pastures in the area around Paramythia and until 1930 some
families, at least, were able to cross the Albanian frontier for
their winter grass. In 1944 the flight into Albania of the Muslim
villagers of Thesprotia opened new areas of grazing to the
Sarakatsani of Zagori, but these, too, are now less extensive
after the settlement of refugees from Northern Epirus and the
claims of Christian villagers who live in the district. Generally
since 1927, when the division of chiftlik lands was substantially
effected, the difficulties over winter grazing have grown more
acute each year. By 1955 it was seldom possible to find winter
grazing for a flock of more than 1,000 sheep in one area. One
consequence has been the reduction in the size of the flocks of
leading Sarakatsan families. Before 1922 it was not exceptional
for a man to own 2,000 sheep; today a flock of 500 is con¬
siderable.
The disappearance of winter grassland threatened the basis
of transhumant pastoralism not only in Epirus but also in the
other provinces of continental Greece. Although they could do
little to alter fundamentally the new conditions they had cre¬
ated by the distribution of winter grassland for cultivation, the
Government attempted in 1930 to protect the position of the
shepherds by a law22 establishing rights of protected lease
(Sixaul)[xaTa evotxtooxaaiou), so that a shepherd who had en¬
joyed a grazing lease on a pasture during one winter had the
right to return to it in the following autumn (and at a price
determined by the Government). There remained, however,
various conditions under which such leases might lapse, and
the area of available grazing continued to decrease, although
now at a less disastrous pace.
After 1922 grazing conditions did not change radically in the
Zagori. The temporary emigration of Zagori men to other
parts of the Ottoman Empire was replaced by the permanent
emigration of whole families of Zagori villagers to the towns and
cities of the Greek kingdom. But the grasslands remained to be ex¬
ploited by the Sarakatsani. In 1938, however, a law23 was passed
by the Government of Metaxas that was to have important
21 Law 4818 of 14/16 July 1930, ‘Concerning the lease of grazing lands’. ** Decree 1223 of 3/4 May 1938, ‘Concerning the settlement of Pastor
alists’.


16 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
consequences. It instructed that the names of semi-nomad
shepherds should be added to the citizenship roll of either the
summer or the winter village of their grazing grounds. A
majority of the Sarakatsani with grazing in the western and
central Zagori elected to write their names on the roll of their
summer village.24 The purpose of the central government was
to control an untidy and potentially disorderly element in a
state based on the village community of settled peasantry.
However, the proud villagers of Zagori with their inherited pre¬
tensions were deeply dismayed at this act of arbitrary legisla¬
tion. While their own youth left for the town and city, rights of
citizenship in the villages were by law extended to uncivilized
and uneducated shepherds. Traditionally the Sarakatsani had
built their summer huts on the grazing land they leased. But
now possessing the rights of village citizenship, some bought
houses in the depopulated village and others began to build their
groups of huts on its outskirts. Daily contact between the two
communities in these circumstances intensified their traditional
antipathy. Yet at the same time the newly acquired local voting
rights necessarily integrated the Sarakatsani into the village
patronage system, and the villagers’ attitude of open contempt
forced them slowly but certainly to a growing conformity with
village habits at least in their more outward and material
aspects.
There were also important changes in the forms of co-opera¬
tion between families within the community. Previously the
grazing of areas carrying two or three thousand sheep had been
sold each year by Zagori villages to the leading families of
Sarakatsani. For these alone had the wealth and experience to
carry through the negotiation. Through the lease of this grazing,
the head of such a family, the tselingas (tct^Xiyyok;), also con¬
trolled a number of other families who contracted to work with
him for the summer or winter period. The nucleus of the group
was co-operating families (opi/te<;) often related by kinship or
marriage; but a number of unrelated men with few or no
animals of their own were also associated as wage shepherds.
*4 However, a village could resist the application if it was able to show that grazing land was not available. Since the pressure on grazing land was greater in the plains, Sarakatsani often had no other choice but to apply for citizenship in a mountain village.


THE SARAKATSANI OF ZAGORI 17
In its physical aspect as a complex of flocks, grazing lands, huts,
and sheep-folds it was referred to as a stani (ctt<xvt)), or when the
speaker was more concerned with the relations of dependence
and co-operation between the tselingas and his followers, as
the ‘tselingato’ (x6 xcrEXiyxocxo); 50-150 men, women and child¬
ren were the approximate human limits of the traditional stani.
Although the co-operating families paid at the end of each
period of six months for a share of the grazing land in propor¬
tion to the size of their flocks, the power of the tselingas was
great. Since the lease was his own, a family unwilling to accept
his authority could be expelled. The sale of milk, meat, and
wool, the purchase of flour, salt, and other essential needs of the
stani, were entirely in his hands. Through the six-month period
the other families lived on his credit, and at its close his detailed
calculations of profit and debt were necessarily taken on trust
since he was often the only literate man in the group.
The measures of 1930 concerning protected leases had
already modified the power of the tselingas since not only he
but all his associated shepherds were individually protected
under the law. But the regulations of Metaxas radically rein¬
forced this trend since now each shepherd citizen was firmly
entitled to graze his sheep for six months on the communal
grassland of his own village. Thus in the summer pastures of
the Zagori villages where a majority of the community had
claimed their rights of citizenship, the size of the stani became
more narrowly related to the simple needs of sheep manage¬
ment. In general, it became smaller in numbers, seldom exceed¬
ing 30 men, women, and children, but sometimes including
only the members of a single family; its members were now
almost exclusively kinsmen and affinal relations; its structure
was looser and more egalitarian. There were parallel changes in
the size and form of the winter stani. The winter groups, how¬
ever, remained somewhat larger (up to 50 persons of all ages
and sometimes more), since with lambing and milking more
hands are needed in winter than summer. Moreover, with the
shortage of winter grazing any man with land at his disposal,
which for one reason or another was not subject to a protected
lease, was still able to hold in a position of dependence as many
sheep and men as his land would carry.
A further consequence was that the poorer shepherds.


18 HISTORICAL & GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION
relieved from the various pressures that the tselingas had pre¬
viously been able to apply, and now entitled to secure grazing
rights, were able gradually to increase their flocks or, if they
were wage shepherds, to build up a small flock that had not
previously existed. At the same time the impossibility of find¬
ing considerable tracts of winter grazing forced the rich tselingas
to reduce the size of his flocks below the formerly modest limit
of a thousand. The conjunction of these trends has led to a more
even distribution of wealth in the community.
I have indicated some of the geographical and historical con¬
ditions that help to explain the presence of the Sarakatsani in
Zagori. And I have referred to more recent developments that
have introduced important changes in the internal structure of
the community and in its relation to the outside world. But
these general considerations also emphasize the inherent vul¬
nerability of a transhumant shepherd community in a society
of settled villages. Historically, and still today, the village is the
important political and social unit in rural Greece. Its elected
officials are used by the Greek Government in many matters
(as they were by the Ottomans) as the final link in the bureau¬
cratic hierarchy. They are a channel of government and a
channel of patronage. Yet many of the Sarakatsani of Zagori
still have no secure political rights in the plains where their
difficulties are greatest. There, many stand outside the polidcal
body of the village, membership of which would grant them
each year the right on which their survival as a community
depends, the right to graze.


II
OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
1. THE FLOCKS
arakatsani are deeply concerned about three things; sheep, children (particularly sons), and honour. It is a common
feature of many pastoral peoples with simple material cul¬
tures that they are highly dependent on their physical environ¬
ment1 and that the care ofherds, the structure of the community,
and its social values, form a coherent pattern of activities and
sentiments which presents few inconsistencies. The three con¬
cerns of the Sarakatsani are mutually implicated. The sheep
support the life and prestige of the family, the sons serve the
flocks and protect the honour of their parents and sisters, and
the notion of honour presupposes physical and moral capacities
that fit the shepherds for the hard and sometimes dangerous
work of following and protecting their animals.
In the winter and spring the Sarakatsani divide their animals
into four flocks. The most important of these divisions is the
flock of pregnant ewes or, after lambing, the milking ewes (t<x
yaXapta). In the second flock are the rams, and the sterile ewes
which were not successfully mated in the summer (-ra crrepcpa).
The third division is a small flock of the last season’s ewe lambs
(ra £uyoupux).2 And finally there are the goats. Although sheep
and goats are the property of families, and are identified by
different ear-signs, the constituent families of a stani do not
separate their animals. One flock of pregnant ewes is formed
from all the stock of the different families; and similarly for the
other categories. These dispositions are influenced partly by the
difficulty of shepherding efficiently more than 250 animals in a
single flock on grazing land which is often broken ground,
always without fencing, and where wolves and wild dogs make
frequent raids by night. But an even more important factor is
that since grassland is generally natural, not cultivated, the
1 See E. E. Evans-Pritchard, The Nuer, Oxford, 1940, p. 16. 2 The Sarakatsani also keep a few wethers (t<x yxiooa£poa), which grow larger in stature than entire animals and are used as leaders of the various flocks.


20 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
quality of any tract of grazing land is seldom homogeneous. In
these circumstances the best grass must be reserved for the
pregnant ewes to strengthen them before lambing, and after¬
wards to maintain their milk yield at the highest possible level.
For the prosperity of the stani depends on the crop of lambs and
the amount of milk that is sold to the cheese merchant.
The physical plan of a stani in winter varies in detail with the
character of the grazing but certain features are almost always
present. The huts of the stani, the group ofco-operating families,
are established on or close to the best grassland, on flat ground,
sheltered from the prevailing wind, and as near as possible to
water, although in practice a spring or well may be a mile
away and sometimes farther. The huts are generally close to¬
gether but in no regular pattern; although if brothers, as is
generally the case, form the nucleus of the group, they build
their homes next to one another with the huts of cousins and
other relatives on the periphery. The size of the winter stani
varies. It is restricted, as I have suggested in the previous
chapter, by the difficulties of finding enough winter grazing
land. But a lower limit is also drawn by the minimum require¬
ment of four active adult shepherds and a young goatherd, a
working force that makes it barely possible to work the scheme
of shepherding that has been described.
In November, when the sheep arrive from the mountains, the
pregnant ewes are not allowed to pasture indiscriminately on
the better grasslands (yaXapoT07u) reserved for their use after
lambing. Until Christmas, when the lambing period begins, they
graze only on the rougher and higher sections of this grassland
perhaps a mile, or more, from the huts. In this area the women
help the shepherds to build a circular sheep-fold (ypexi) con¬
structed from bundles of brushwood tied to one another and
sometimes secured to posts. In this the ewes sleep and find some
relief from the cold and the driving rain. Outside the women
erect a small refuge of branches and thatch (yaXocT^ouxa) for the
two shepherds who guard them.
In the early days of December the women tie together
branches to make wooden frames, 5 ft. 6 in. in height and 4 ft.
wide (Ximiq), on which they interlace other more pliable
branches and bind bundles of reeds, grass, or ferns. With these
portable frames the shepherds and their women set up another


THE FLOCKS 21
circular sheep-fold on level well-drained land close to the huts.
Each frame leans towards the centre at an angle of 6o° to the
ground and is supported by a forked branch. In the lee of this
inclined wall the animals press together for warmth and pro¬
tection. During the last days of December and the first ten days
of the New Year most of the lambs are born. As each ewe drops
its lamb, the two animals are brought down from the pen on
the rough pasture at dawn and dusk by relays of unmarried
girls, and are placed in the new sheep-fold close to the huts.
By the middle of January the whole flock of ewes with their
lambs is together once more. Once the lambs are born the
yield of milk becomes the main concern. The ewes are now
grazed intensively on the best grassland which is divided into
plots or strips (daroAixriif;) used in daily rotation. Under present
conditions, however, few stanis possess enough winter grass¬
land, and for some weeks before lambing and until the move
to the mountains in the spring, the milking ewes are also
fed each morning with weighed quantities of maize, oats, or
cotton-cake.
On the first of February the cheese merchant sets up his sta¬
tion ((jurocT^apio) close to the grassland of the largest stani in the
neighbourhood. In return for this convenience the women of
this stani build two thatched huts; in one the cheese-maker and
his assistant sleep, work, and keep their equipment, cauldrons,
churns, and the cream separator; the other, which is entered
only through a low trap-door from the first hut, and is sunk
three feet below the surface of the ground, is used for the storage
of the cheeses3 on beds of fern leaves under the necessary con¬
ditions of stillness and humidity. The women must also supply
the cheese-maker with water and firewood.
Cash and credit at this time of year are very short for the
Sarakatsani and there is now a great urgency to sell milk.
Every effort is made to wean the male lambs quickly. The ewes
are seldom allowed to suckle these lambs for longer than four
weeks before they are sold to an animal dealer for the spring
lamb market; a few only are kept back to maintain the right
proportion of rams to ewes in the flock. This sale of lambs brings
* Cheese merchants separate some of the cream to make butter. From the separated milk they make a hard cheese known as xetpaAorupi; and, then, from the remaining liquid a form of cheese known as (iufrqOpcc.


22 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
in an immediate sum of money, and if the quantity of milk then
released is an encouraging amount the merchant may be per¬
suaded to make another advance of credit. Before the first of
February the shepherds will have prepared the milking pen
(aTpoiiyxa) as close as possible to the cheese-maker’s station.
The pen is a circular or elliptical enclosure of stones or brush¬
wood with a wide opening, or ‘mouth’, at one end through
which the sheep are driven in, and a narrow opening, or ‘eye’,
at the other end through which the sheep are taken in turn to
be milked by the shepherds who sit on flat stones on either side
of this narrow passage. At first in the early days of February only
a litde milk is taken, for the ewes are still with their lambs. But
the amount steadily increases after the sale of the male lambs.
However, none of the ewe lambs is sold unless the family is in
great difficulty. And anxious as the Sarakatsani are to sell all
their milk they will not endanger their development by weaning
them too quickly; for the future of the flock depends upon the
condition of these animals, which in two years’ time produce
their first lambs. The ewes are allowed to suckle them for seven
or eight weeks and it is not until early March that they are
finally weaned or ‘cut’, and that the flow of milk to the cheese
maker becomes considerable.
The three other flocks of the stani divide the remaining
grazing according to their needs. The best of this is allotted to
the young ‘zigouria’, the lambs of the previous season. The flock
of rams, with the ewes which remained sterile after the summer
mating, go to the highest and roughest grazing since they are
strong and resistant to cold, and this is generally the most
distant flock of sheep from the huts. In both cases a sheep-fold
of brushwood, and refuges of branches and thatch for the shep¬
herds, are built to protect animals and men from the winter
storms and rain.
The goats guarded by one or two young and nimble goat¬
herds feed on whatever is unsuitable or inaccessible to the sheep,
especially the leaves of scrub-oak and other trees and bushes.
Since goats seldom represent more than 20 per cent of the total
stock of Sarakatsan families from Zagori no attempt is made to
form more than one flock. At the end of November after they
have repaired or remade the family huts the women begin to
build the elaborate goat-pen with latticed sides at least six feet


THE FLOCKS 23
high, and a narrow three-foot wide roof of thatch inclined to¬
wards the centre of the pen, which has an elliptical form. Goats
are less resistant to cold weather than sheep, and the kids which
are born towards the end of December very easily contract
pneumonia during the first six weeks of life. After the kids are
born the goats graze during the day on rough ground not too
far distant from the pen which is itself positioned close to the
huts but away from the sheep-fold. They return in the evening
to feed their kids during the night, but the latter remain in the
pen during the day enclosed for warmth in a small conical
thatched shelter (xcrapxo^) built into the wall at the far end of
the pen. But the Sarakatsani add that a further reason for
keeping them in the pen during the day is that they are greedy
and ferocious feeders. After four weeks the women begin to
feed the kids with the leaves of bushes which they cut and
carry into the pen. Each day they are grazed for an hour
or two on any convenient piece of rough ground. Finally, in the
early days of March the goatherds ‘cut’ the kids from their
mothers, and the flock returns to its distant pastures. The kids
sleep alone in the pen each night and are grazed by a young
boy during the day.
The summer dispositions of the stani are different and simpler.
The leader of a stani is allotted by the president of the village
two areas of grazing: one for milking ewes, and another for the
remainder of his flock—the rams and sterile ewes, and the
winter’s ewe lambs (the ‘sterpha’, and the ‘zigouria’) which are
now merged into one flock. The two areas are not necessarily
adjacent and both are generally far from the village, two or three
hours’ steep climbing away. The families remain in the village
in houses or huts and are able to turn away from their exclusive
concern for the animals which held every moment of their
attention during the winter months. The difficult period of the
year is over and they now turn outwards, as it were, to the
affairs ofthe total community, to betrothals, marriages, quarrels,
and mutual criticism; and to their relations of clientage and
hostility to the villagers of Zagori.
Meanwhile, however, the Sarakatsani continue to sell their
milk throughout June and until the last days ofJuly. A cheese
merchant sets up a station positioned to serve a number of
neighbouring grazing areas. And where the boundaries of these


24 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
grazing areas permit the arrangement, four or five milking pens
of different stanis may be conveniently within sight ofthe cheese
maker’s hut.
Summer is not entirely without its anxieties. In June the
rams are allowed to run with the milking ewes, each ram, on
average, covering twenty-five ewes. An early and successful
mating season ([xapxaXo*;) is important because it promises few
sterile ewes, lambing before the hard winter weather sets in, and
earlier supplies of milk. Before the end of July the cheese
maker departs, and the shepherds begin to enjoy a period of
relative ease. What milk the ewes continue to give during the
early days of August before lactation finally ceases, is used, like
the milk that is taken before the first of February and during
the ten days of the journey to the mountains, to make a rough
‘feta’ cheese for the family’s own use.
***
The needs of the sheep in a particular physical and political
environment, and the arrangements made by the Sarakatsani
to meet them, have certain consequences for Sarakatsan social
life. One of these concerns seasonal differences. In the winter
the community is geographically more dispersed, stanis travel
far in different directions to find their winter grass and very
often they do not have other Sarakatsani as their immediate
neighbours. On the other hand the stani itself is physically more
concentrated. A sheep requires only a quarter of an acre of
good grass in the plain as against half an acre or more in the
mountains. The stani is turned in on its own affairs. The huts of
the stani are on the grazing land and the group of families is
concerned almost exclusively with the problems of lambing,
milk, and the protection of the animals against cold and wolves.
In the summer, for reasons which have been mentioned in the
previous chapter, stanis are generally smaller, and sometimes
may be no larger than a single family. The stani is also dis¬
persed. The families live in houses or huts in the village, the
shepherds with the two flocks of sheep and the goats are far
above the village, and are separated from one another. Yet the
community itself is more concentrated than in winter. In the
local group of families that graze the land of the same village,
the huts or houses of the different families are in sight and often


THE SHEPHERDS 25
sound of one another. And although the grazing areas high
above the village are spatially more extensive than in winter,
they are, however, overstocked. Shepherds have a common
grazing boundary with the sheep of two or three other stanis on
whose grass they systematically trespass. Between families un¬
connected by kinship or marriage, relations, acted out during
these months in terms of reciprocal hostility and theft, are more
intense than in winter. Summer, indeed, is the time for quarrels.
It is also the season of festivals. It is true that, if the total com¬
munity is less dispersed than in winter, this is a relative
difference since it is still disposed over an area of some 390
square miles. But summer shepherding conditions allow shep¬
herds the possibility of visiting kinsmen who live at a distance.
At weddings and village festivals kinsmen are able to meet and
exchange their news, and unrelated men have the opportunity
to observe one another critically. In summer, generally, social
exchanges whether friendly or hostile are both more frequent
and more ardent.
Practical arrangements for the care of the flock have a fur¬
ther consequence. Personal and family honour and pride, which
are fundamental values of the community, breed a spirit of
intense and aggressive competitiveness that sometimes threatens
even the relations of unmarried brothers, more commonly the
co-operation between more distant kin in the same stani, and
frequently provokes verbal or physical quarrels between shep¬
herds unrelated by kinship or marriage. Yet the simple circum¬
stance that within the one stani each shepherd is physically
isolated, or with only a single companion, in the service of the
different flocks which have been described, limits the potential
moments of disharmony in the family and the stani. The ani¬
mals allow their protectors no rest except when they sleep them¬
selves; otherwise they must continually graze to remain alive
and the shepherds must continually follow them because of the
absence of fencing and the presence of wolves and sometimes of
human thieves. Each shepherd is insulated, as it were, by his
work. In the winter, moreover, the shepherds may be more or
less isolated from contact with other unrelated shepherds since
there is often no grazing boundary with another stani. In the
summer, it is true, there may be common grazing boundaries
with two or three different stanis across which shepherds face


26 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
one another on terms of hostility and reciprocal trespass. Yet
even then, if we consider the community as a whole, the direc¬
tions in which the shepherds of one stani may show active
aggression are limited, as also are the form and degree of its
expression, simply because a shepherd cannot leave his sheep.
And this also makes it possible for unrelated shepherds to feel,
but not very often to express, an intensity of hostility for one
another that would otherwise reduce a vulnerable community
of shepherds to a condidon of anarchy if confrontadons were
more numerous than, in fact, they are.
2. THE SHEPHERDS
For the Sarakatsani, sheep and goats, men and women, are
important and related opposidons with a moral reference.
Sheep are peculiarly God’s animals, and their shepherds, made
in His image, are essendally noble beings. Women through the
particular sensuality of their natures are inherentiy more likely
to have relations with the Devil; and goats were originally the
animals of the Devil which Christ captured and tamed for the
service of man. It is consistent with these ideas that sheep and
shepherds in their respective animal and human worlds display
ideal moral characteristics. Sheep are docile, enduring, pure,
and intelligent. Wben the shepherd carries out a small veterin¬
ary operation or when the ewe gives birth, the animal suffers
in silence. To match this purity and passive courage shepherds
ought to be fearless and devoted guardians, and clean in the
ritual sense. After sexual intercourse a shepherd must carefully
wash his hands before milking sheep and it is generally prefer¬
able that the two shepherds of the flock of milking ewes should
be unmarried men.
Whether or not shepherds require quite the degree of courage
that the values of the community insist they do, is open to doubt.
Perhaps devotion, endurance, and a head for heights, would be
a more objective assessment. Two experienced shepherds, pref¬
erably men between twenty-five and thirty years of age, guard
the pregnant or milking ewes. Another young and active
shepherd follows the flock of last season’s lambs, the ‘zigouria’.
One or two older but not necessarily intelligent men watch the
rams and sterile ewes, the ‘sterpha’. Young shepherds before
their military service often serve their apprenticeship with the


THE SHEPHERDS 27
goats, a severe enough test of agility and endurance. One goat¬
herd is normally sufficient but he needs a companion when the
kids begin to be born. If the manpower of the stani is sufficient
a young shepherd will graze and work the mules and horses.
And often an old grandfather will graze the flock of lambs near
the huts for a few weeks after they have been weaned, or will
relieve a son or nephew with one of the flocks so that he may
take a day’s rest at the huts. Although the myth is cultivated
that shepherds are particularly skilled in those tasks which they
happen to be performing and that each of these tasks is equally
necessary for the well-being of the stani, in fact any adult
Sarakatsanos can do the work of any other; there are no
specialists.
It is tacitly understood that the post of honour is the care of
the milking ewes, for the future of the stani depends on the
lambs and the milk. In the autumn these shepherds set out each
day at dawn from the sheep-fold which may be a mile or more
from the huts, grazing the ewes on the outlying areas of the
better grassland. The sheep are not as intelligent as the Sara
katsani claim and the shepherds must constantly move around
the flock whistling, shouting, and guiding the animals with
their crooks to the better patches of grass, urging them on at
a steady but not too rapid pace so that they gain the maxi¬
mum benefit from the grazing. At dusk the sheep return to
the sheep-fold to rest (fj.ou8ia£ouv) until midnight when the
shepherds again take them out to graze for two or three hours
before they sleep again until dawn. On nights when there is
driving rain or no moon the midnight grazing (6 crxapo^) is a
situation which tests the shepherd’s nerves and ability. If a ewe
is cut off from the flock it may fall an easy victim to a wolf.
Two or three ferocious dogs assist the shepherd to give him
warning of wolves or thieves and by their barking to repel
various aerial manifestations of the Devil which also threaten
the flock.
Lambing is the crisis of the shepherd’s year. During these
weeks the shepherds work almost without sleep. They must be
constantly vigilant because a ewe generally strays from the
flock to drop its lamb and may then abandon it after the birth.
A shepherd must be at hand immediately after the birth to
ensure that the ewe cleans the lamb, that the lamb finds the


28 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
udder and that the ewe and lamb recognize one another by
smell. For this reason, too, the sheep-fold must be moved to dry
ground when it becomes fouled by mud and excrement since
this makes recognition by smell difficult. Sometimes when a
ewe has a difficult delivery the shepherd must try to manipulate
the lamb into the correct position to ease its passage. At night,
in bad weather, and with the ever present menace of wolves,
these various operations are exceedingly difficult.
With the establishment on the first of February of the cheese
maker’s station the ewes whose lambs have been weaned are
milked twice a day at dawn and dusk. Any men of the stani,
including the tselingas, who are not away with the other flocks,
come to assist the two shepherds of the milking ewes. There is
competition to discover who is the strongest milker, who draws
off most milk into his bucket and milks the greater number of
sheep without suffering cramp in his hands. But there is a more
general anxiety about the total quantity of milk taken at each
milking and the shepherds watch apprehensively for symptoms
of a disease that attacks the udder and turns milk to water
(TOxpfxapa). The Sarakatsani say that shepherds have a great
<je(3vTa<; for lambing and milking, a word perhaps impossible to
translate, which includes the ideas of love and longing, anxiety
and envy. It follows that the milking-pen is the part of the stani
most threatened by the evil eye of other shepherds, and also the
part of the stani where the shepherds are careful to deploy
different objects such as a viper’s head or an egg dyed red on
the Thursday of Easter week which have the power to neu¬
tralize this pervasive and destructive force of envy, as well as
more direct attacks by the Devil.
The next demand upon the strength of the shepherd comes
in the early days of May when the stani sets out for the moun¬
tains. This is a moment almost of festival. The sheep again
carry their bells which are not worn in the winter. As well as
their practical function of identifying the flock they express the
joy of the stani that the difficult winter period is over and its
pride in the appearance of its flock. But the journey itself is not
pleasurable for the shepherd. Particularly in recent years it has
become difficult to find grazing on the road and there are hostile
and sometimes violent encounters with villagers and agricul¬
tural guards. The sheep travel eight to ten miles each night on


THE SHEPHERDS 29
a road which is often congested with the flocks of other stanis.
In the dark and on ground he does not know the shepherd must
try to graze his sheep where he can, prevent them from mixing
with the animals of other flocks, and guard them from village
or Sarakatsan thieves for whom the conditions are an oppor¬
tunity and a temptation. At dawn they try to find some grass,
and here the mule-train (xapa^avi) with the older men, women,
and children, overtakes them to prepare a temporary milking
pen. After the animals have been milked the women at once
begin to turn the milk into cheese, and later to bake bread.
Meanwhile the shepherds graze the sheep until about 11 a.m.
when the animals lie down to rest in the heat of the day. They
are milked again in the evening before setting out on the next
leg of their journey. But the women remain to make the cheese
for the second time in the day, and to take a few hours of sleep
before they move swiftly through the night to overtake the
sheep once again. After a journey of perhaps ten days they
finally reach their homeland, the high mountains of Zagori.
In the mountains shepherding practice changes. The sheep
graze at night in the cool air when their appetite is stronger.
At dawn the animals are watered and about 9 o’clock they are
milked. They then ‘sleep in the shade’ (cttocXICouv) until the late
afternoon when they are milked again before setting out to
graze in the fresh evening air. About once in every eight days
salt is spread on flat stones. They eat this greedily and are
watered immediately afterwards, a treatment which increases
their will to graze in the summer heat, and is believed to
strengthen them for successful mating.
The quality of physical courage, on which the Sarakatsani
put so much emphasis in their list of the ideal attributes of the
shepherd, is perhaps more necessary in summer than winter.
Moving along, or over, the broken limestone ridges in the dark¬
ness from one plateau of grass to another requires a very sure
foot and steady nerves. Sheep sometimes get into difficulties and
have to be rescued. If an animal falls into a crevasse and breaks
a leg it must be extricated, the limb bound and splinted, and
the animal carried down the mountain to the village.
Immediately before or after the migration to summer pas¬
tures, the animals are shorn. Already at the end of March some
wool has been taken from their legs and haunches but the full


30 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
shearing is delayed until the warmer weather. Shearing, too,
marks the passing of the winter and is considered a festival.
On the final day there is meat, wine, and dancing. Like the
journey from the plains it is also hard work for the shepherd,
giving him, however, an opportunity to prove his expertise and
strength. In a highly competitive atmosphere before the ap¬
praising eyes of each other and the women, the men of the
stani gather in the sheep-fold to clip the fleeces of the dif¬
ferent flocks. A strong and skilful man may shear sixty animals
in a day.
The cycle of shepherding activities continues with the mating
season in June or July, the date depending on the condition of
the animals. Then, in the last days ofJuly, the cheese merchant
closes his station and gradually with the reduced flow of milk
from the pregnant ewes the shepherds milk their animals less
frequently until, some time in the first half of August, lactation
ceases. At length the shepherds pause and rest.
When the shepherds arrive in the mountains their mood
changes almost abruptly from an expectation of the worst to
guarded optimism. Since the autumn they have suffered
anxiety, crisis, and frequently physical exhaustion in their
efforts to avoid disaster to the lambs, a small milk yield, or
disease. These dangers do not exist, or are less considerable, in
the summer. At this season the systematic practice of reciprocal
grass theft, the sometimes accidental trespass, the intermingling
of two flocks when they converge on the cheese-maker’s station
at milking time, are all situations which may precipitate
quarrels with unrelated shepherds that threaten life and honour,
but they are not possibilities that cause the shepherd much
apprehensive concern. In personal oppositions he is confident
in his own strength and courage, he depends on nothing outside
himself. On the other hand, whatever skill a shepherd may
possess, the dangers which threaten the flock in winter often
depend on factors or elements beyond his individual control.
Yet extreme poverty, which is a possible consequence of such
a disaster, destroys honour and sometimes takes the lives of
small children.
The Sarakatsan shepherd identifies himself with his animals.
Their condition is almost as personal a concern as his own
health and appearance. If a sheep is stoned by another man.


THE WOMEN 31
the shepherd’s honour is touched. In numbers and quality
sheep are the prerequisite of prestige. He is aware of their
dependence on him and of the dependence of his whole family
on what the flock is able to supply. He knows each animal, its
history, and peculiarities. There is an extensive descriptive
vocabulary of sheep terms. Skilled shepherds do not count their
sheep, they scan them, recognizing at once the absence of an
animal identified by a particular combination of markings,
colours, and idiosyncrasies. Sick sheep are tended with care and
compassion. A shepherd may sleep with the animal under his
cape to give it warmth. He is neither gentle nor sentimental
towards his sheep but between the man and his animals there
exists an evident solidarity.
3. THE WOMEN
Women and goats are conceptually opposed to men and sheep.
Goats are unable to resist pain in silence, they are cunning and
insatiate feeders. Greed and cunning are important charac¬
teristics of the Devil and Sarakatsani will often say that although
Christ tamed these animals the Devil still remains in them.
Sarakatsani keep some goats to exploit that part of their grazing
land which is unfit for sheep. But as animals they are despised,
and a stani with too high a proportion of goats to sheep loses
prestige. Women are not, of course, simply creatures of the
Devil but the nature of their sexuality which continually
threatens the honour of men, makes them, willingly or un¬
willingly, agents of his will. It is consistent, therefore, that in the
practical division of labour women rather than men care for
the goats. Although it is unfitting for women to graze these
animals, they alone are responsible for building the goat-pen,
for cutting and carrying to the pen the branches of tender
leaves to wean the kids, often for watching the kids in the first
days when they graze without their mothers, always for milk¬
ing the goats, for carrying the milk to the cheese-maker, for
shearing their fleeces, and for collecting and sacking the goat
dung which is sold to the villagers.
Conversely, women, particularly married women involved in
sexual intercourse, or girls during their menstrual periods, do
not approach the sheep unnecessarily. A woman is careful not
to cross directly in front of a flock, partly for the practical


32 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
reason that it breaks the smooth rhythm of its grazing but also
because her presence in some way affronts the sheep and might
cause disease. A fortiori a woman never milks a sheep. Yet there
is no rigid avoidance. And, in fact, women regularly do the
heavy work in building sheep-folds or moving them to a new
site when they are fouled with mud and dung. And relays of
women at dawn and dusk bring down the newly bom lambs
with their mothers from the flock to the clean and better pro¬
tected sheep-fold near the huts. They are, however, by preference,
unmarried girls (raou^pei;).
But in relation to the division of labour, the complementary
opposition of the sexes in fact turns less upon the opposition of
sheep and goats and is more concerned with a wider and more
important distinction. Men are occupied with their extensive
duties of grazing and protecting the flocks, women within or
immediately around the hut, with its central hearth and fire
which gives physical warmth and spiritual protection, are con¬
cerned with the intensive tasks of the care of children and the
provision of food, clothes, and shelter for their family. The ex¬
pressive role of the woman within the family hut accentuates
the quality of motherhood, not sexuality, and it is consistent
with this aspect of her social personality that the shepherd
brings a sick sheep to his hut to be nursed and cared for by the
women. It is a woman who ties a ewe which has lost its lamb to
the wall of the hut by a short cord so that it cannot sit, and
patiently persuades it to accept the lamb of another ewe which
has borne twins.
The assistance women give in the care of the animals is their
direct contribution to the stani. Their work within the hut
concerns only their own family. These tasks are manifold. They
care for the children, cook, bake bread on the open hearth, cut
wood or bushes for the fire, carry water in barrels from the
spring, sometimes from a very considerable distance. In the
stream, or spring, they also wash the clothes of their family.
They search the mountain slopes for wild vegetables and herbs
and in the summer villages they cultivate a small vegetable
garden in which onions, beans, and lettuces are grown. They
also keep a few hens. Some of the eggs are kept for the children
but the majority are bartered in the village shop for dyes and
other small needs. A man may occasionally give his wife a kid


I. Milking




THE WOMEN 33
to sell but otherwise chickens and eggs are her only source of cash income. The huts which protect the Sarakatsani from the weather and the curiosity of other families, are of two principal kinds, circu¬ lar and domed (xoupXtoxa), or rectangular and ‘arched’ (a^tStoxa). Except that in the case of rectangular huts the men help the women to erect the posts and crossbeams the building of the hut is entirely the work of women. They cut, select, and tie into position the pliable but strong branches which form the frame¬ work of the circular hut. They collect, dress, and tie on to the wooden skeleton the bundles of reeds, grasses, or ferns with which the hut is thatched. They level the floor inside and plas¬ ter both the floor and the walls to a height of three feet with a mixture of mud and mule-dung. They form the central hearth. Five or six women working continuously are able to erect a hut of conventional size4 in two to three days, although it will have taken them at least as many days to find and prepare their materials. The treatment of the wool from which the Sarakatsani make the greater part of their clothing and all their blankets is also, naturally, in the hands of the women. The wool is divided into three categories according to the fineness and length of the staple. It is washed in hot water and beaten with a wooden implement to free it from surplus grease. After the wool has been dried in the sun and disentangled with a carding tool (Xavapi) it is spun by hand from a distaff (poxa). This is a lengthy process and when a woman’s hands are not otherwise employed she is either spinning or knitting. Finally, the spun thread is woven into cloth on the simple wooden loom which the women operate continuously during the months of August and September when the flocks and the shepherds make fewer demands on their energies. On the loom are made the blankets, the shepherd’s capes woven from a mixture of wool and goats’ hair, and the cloth for jackets, skirts, and trousers. Today pro¬ fessional village or town tailors cut and sew the suits of the men, but the cloth remains their own. Only shoes, shirts, and cotton material (for the young girls’ dresses at the summer festivals) are bought from the shops ofJannina and other towns.
4 A circular hut for a family of 6 or 7 adults generally has a diameter of
14 or 15 feet. Height and diameter are approximately the same.


34 OF SHEEP AND SHEPHERDS
From this brief and summary description of Sarakatsan
methods of animal husbandry and the other associated tasks
which provide the shepherds with food, clothes, and shelter, it is
evident that the flocks of a stani are an object of attention and
daily routine about which the working activities of men and
women in the group are co-ordinated. The complementarity of
the different contributions of the various members of the stani
or family, the symbiotic relationship between the people of the
stani and their animals, are a source of strength and solidarity.
And the physical needs of men and animals in a given physical
and political environment are satisfied by the organization and
division of labour which I have briefly outlined.
But the relation between the environment, the animals, and
their shepherds must be seen not only in terms of utilitarian
satisfaction or social function. Shepherding has intrinsic value;
it is a way of life, not merely one way of remaining alive. This
appears best perhaps in the shepherds’ conception of time. Time
is not for the Sarakatsani a homogeneous medium, units of
which may be saved or lost.5 In one aspect, it is a succession of
activities concerned directly or indirectly with the flocks and
determined by the ecological rhythms of the different seasons
and the changing conditions of temperature, grass, and water.
The cycle of the year is related, of course, to the succession of
calendrical months, but the months themselves are associated
with particular activities rather than the reverse. Within the
cycles of the day, the week, and the year different moments in
time have different qualities, sacred or profane, of ill fortune or
good fortune, to which the work and the life of the shepherd is
accommodated. For example, shearing may not begin on a
Sunday which is sacred, nor on a Tuesday or Friday which are
inauspicious. Time in another aspect is measured against the
progress of the individual through his life considered as a suc¬
cession of statuses in the family. This paradigm of statuses, also,
has a circular appearance in the replacement of one generation
by another. Time then is not a scale marking a linear progress,
or a means of dividing life into portions of work and leisure, it is
a continuum of activity within the family and in the service of
the flock. The family and the flock are both forms divinely
5 Cf. R. B. Onians, Origins of European Thought, Cambridge, 1951, p. 411; and Evans-Pritchard, op. cit. p. 103.


THE WOMEN 35
confirmed, the earthly family being a refraction of the Holy
archetype Family, while the sheep is a sacred animal blessed by
God. These things have always been so, they always will be so.
Life is sheep, children, and honour, mutually implicated elements
none of which requires any justification of utility or profit. The
family is the form in which these three elements are fused; and
it is to a consideration of this circumstance and its consequences
that the analysis now proceeds.


Ill
KINSMEN AND AFFINES
1. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF KINSMEN
T
he kindred (to cto'C) includes only those blood kinsmen of a
man (or woman)1 who are formally recognized for social
purposes. The Sarakatsani recognize as members of the
kindred all cognatic relatives as far as the degree of second
cousin, whether these links are traced through the father’s or
mother’s side of the family. In this system, all those persons
descended from a man’s four grandparents and their brothers
and sisters are his kinsmen, except the children of his second
cousins, the grandchildren of his first cousins, and the great¬
grandchildren of his own siblings, who are not members of his
kindred. To express this in more general terms, the recognition
for social purposes of collateral relations is relatively wide in a
man’s own generation and subsequently becomes, from his
point of view, relatively less wide in each descendant genera¬
tion. As a man passes through life, critical events, such as his
marriage and the birth of children, the marriages of these
children and the birth of grandchildren, direct his obligations
and interests to his own immediate descendants to the exclusion of collaterals.
Kindred relationships are considered by the Sarakatsani to
be extensions from the family. Naturally, it is always a member
of a man’s elementary family who mediates his various relation¬
ships in the kindred, parents providing the links with grand¬
parents, uncles, aunts, and cousins; siblings those with nephews
and nieces. And although the kindred is a system of personal
relationships while the family is a corporate group,2 the syste¬
matic character of the former, and the structure of the latter,
are necessarily interdependent and consistent.
1 Except where there is ambiguity I shall not repeat this cumbersome qualification. 2 Perpetuity is a quality often premised of corporate kinship groups, whereas Sarakatsan families are limited to a life of some 40 years, i.e. the period which normally elapses between a man’s marriage and the division


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF KINSMEN 37
The Sarakatsan family is not only a domestic association of
individuals with mutual affections based on blood relationship,
it is a corporate group owning in common all significant
property; and of this the leader, whether father or brother, is
the trustee not the owner. Economically it struggles to become
a self-sufficient unit with a division of labour organized about
the service of its flocks; politically its members invariably act
together. The individual in his work and behaviour is entirely
committed to his family, whose prestige and reputation for
honour are his foremost concern.
The family is also a religious community with its own ‘sacra’,
icons, and other objects. In the popular mind it is an earthly
reflection of the Heavenly Family of God the Father, the Mother
of God, and Christ. Relations between members of a family
ought to be modelled on the attitudes which, it is imagined,
inspire the relations of the Heavenly archetype Family and its
members. A father ought to have wisdom and foresight, a
mother compassion, a son courage and respect, a daughter vir¬
ginity, and so on.3 Through grace, which descends in the sacra¬
ment of the Eucharist and through the icons, and in other ways,
they are helped to achieve these modes of being, and in achiev¬
ing them they partake, in a sense, of the condition of the Holy
Family and are therefore less vulnerable as a group to material
disaster or the spiritual attacks of the Devil. Through reference
to a divine model, a man or woman in family life participates
in a reality that transcends individuality; the harsh and cease¬
less struggle to survive, even simple and often repeated actions
such as carrying water or milking sheep, come to possess a
validity which is absolute and intrinsic.
of the joint household by his married sons. Yet so long as it does last, the family group has in other respects a corporate jural existence and person¬ ality. Cf. Sir Henry Maine, The Early History of Institutions, London, 1893, p. 78. The Sarakatsan family is a system of closed relationships and a group with a recognized leader. It holds all property in common and controls the productive powers of all its members and the reproductive capacities of its women. In principle all its members are held to be responsible for the action of any other member. It is with regard to these characteristics that I describe this group as ‘corporate’. * In the different aspects of her person, the Mother of God provides a model for both the mother and the daughter in the earthly family.


38 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
The family is, indeed, the centre of the shepherd’s world.
Inside its limits he finds support, affection, and a sense of moral
obligation. With certain qualifications these attitudes are ex¬
tended to all the relations of the kindred. But outside the
family and the kindred a man meets and expects only hostility
and suspicion. There are conventions of conduct, but there is no
general conscience of obligation to others. From the point of
view of each individual, the community is divided into those
who are kinsmen, a man’s own people (SixoQ, and those who
are not kinsmen, that is strangers (£evoi). There is a third inter¬
mediate category of persons, the affines (cnj(jL7t£0epoi), strangers
with whom a man or his kinsman has become related through a
contract of marriage. Confidence, trust, and an altruistic con¬
cern about another individual’s welfare can only exist between
kinsmen, and it is only in a kinship relationship that a man is
able to abandon the outlook of self-interest which normally
guides him in relations outside the family.
It follows that a man looks towards his kinsmen for practical
support. As we have seen, unrelated families are mutually
opposed. The family, with reference to which the individual
must act in almost all contexts of behaviour, faces a hostile
community. Therefore this support is peculiarly important. Yet,
in relation to the community’s population of about 4,000 souls,
the average size of an individual’s kindred is small, seldom ex¬
ceeding 250 men, women, and children of whom some 160 will
be second cousins, a category of relations who are on the margin
of kinship. Kinsmen are relatively few and correspondingly
precious. In summer the kindred is scattered over 390 square
miles of difficult and tortuous country, and a man does not,
generally, live within an hour’s walk of more than one-fifth
of his kinsmen. This, in part, is the practical importance of
kinship connexions; they offer a certain freedom of social
manoeuvre. Kinsmen established at strategic points through
a community, which is numerically not small and geogra¬
phically very dispersed, are able to offer hospitality and local
information which pride and distrust prevent a man asking of
unrelated persons. The network of a man’s kinship relations pro¬
vides him with a system of information and intelligence without
which he cannot conduct his affairs efficiently or profitably. The
price that he should ask for his milk, his wool, and animals for


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF KINSMEN 39
slaughter, the intrigues of others with merchants and officials,
which often vitally affect his own affairs, the ever pressing prob¬
lem of where winter pasture is to be found, this is the kind of
information a man exchanges with his kinsman or, more rarely,
with a close and trusted affine.
Kinsmen are indispensable in the delicate negotiations of
‘match-making’. Before a girl is sought in marriage, very care¬
ful inquiries have to be made concerning her virtue, industry,
health, and temperament. A kinsman who lives near the girl’s
family will be in a position to give accurate details; his informa¬
tion will be trusted, and he will treat the affair with the dis¬
cretion it demands. For marriage involves a contract between
two hostile groups, and offence, given or received by either
side, is a question of honour and may lead to violence and
killing.
I have introduced the notion that the opposed families of
this fragmented community are related through competition
for prestige. Certainly, it is impossible to miss the competitive
flavour of social life outside the home. Men care passionately
about their prestige, the prestige of their families, and of their
kinsmen. Indeed all these reputations are parts of a single
complex. And in a paradoxical fashion they depend upon the
opinions of enemies. Whenever there is some incident or affray,
the news of it travels with remarkable rapidity to all quarters
of the Zagori. Within a matter of forty-eight hours small
groups of Sarakatsani throughout the area will be passing judge¬
ment on the behaviour of the people involved, as this is evalu¬
ated according to the values of the community. They will
analyse minutely what a man is reported to have said and done,
and they will decide whether he was justified in what he did
and whether he displayed manliness (av8piafj.6<;) in defending
his honour. In such discussions a man’s kinsmen will take his
side, acting as advocates and apologists for his behaviour.
Furthermore, the mere numerical size of a man’s kindred is a
matter of prestige, because, other things being equal, it means
that he is a man who will be taken notice of, assisted, and well
informed wherever he goes. In discussing kinship the Sara¬
katsani often say, ‘Nobody takes account of a man without
kinsmen’. They use, in this context, a word, Xoyapia^co, which
expresses both the idea of esteeming another man and of


40 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
being obliged to take him into consideration before proceeding
to some course of action. Consultation between trusted kinsmen about their various
affairs is continual. The enterprise itself may be of almost any
kind, the marriage of a son or daughter, a decision whether or
not to sell sheep to raise money for the payment of a debt, or
the acceptance or non-acceptance of an offer of winter pasture.
Similarly, when a man is involved in some crisis, a fight with
another shepherd, a brawl at a marriage feast, or a difficult
court case, kinsmen come to him of their own accord with
advice and criticism. In this way he learns which courses of
action will enjoy the moral support of his kin and which will
not. And since a man loses prestige if his kinsman acts wrongly,
he will always exhort him to an honourable course of action
however difficult the circumstances. For his part, the principal
actor is influenced by the fear of losing the support of his kins¬
men, as he may do if he takes decisions which lose him prestige.
His kinsmen can then only protect their own prestige by isolat¬
ing themselves to a greater or lesser degree from social contact
with him. Consequently this consultation between kinsmen is
not only to a man's advantage in terms of his own prestige, but
it is also a subtle sanction for right ways of acting in the
community as a whole.
In economic matters, too, a shepherd looks to his kinsmen
for help and co-operation. Quite apart from the deep distrust
which divides unrelated persons, shame prevents a man from
seeking assistance outside the kindred, since this would be a tacit
admission that he had been rejected by his own kinsmen. Thus
sentiment and convention lead in the same direction. A shep¬
herd lives from one monetary crisis to another. When he needs
a small money loan for an operation fee at a Jannina hospital
or for the expenses of a wedding, he is often unable to persuade
a merchant to grant him an additional advance; but he seldom
fails to raise it from his kinsmen if they have the money in
hand. Economic co-operation may take other forms. The con¬
dition of the family’s flocks is not only the basis of its physical
existence but the source of pride and prestige. A man fears to
meet the appraising eyes of another if his animals are in a
meagre and spindle-shanked condition. But grazing, both in
the Zagori and in the winter pastures, varies considerably from


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF KINSMEN 41
place to place and from year to year. Therefore, if a kinsman
has some grass which is good for fattening lambs or restoring
weakened ewes, a man may ask him to take some of his weaker
animals which are in difficulties. For this service he will have
to pay, but he would not in any circumstances trust his sheep
to the care of an unrelated shepherd.
But the most intimate form of economic association between
kinsmen occurs where a number of autonomous but related
families join together for the co-management of their flocks and,
in particular, to discover and negotiate for winter pastures.
The solution of this problem requires that the group should
reach an understanding, whether direct or through an inter¬
mediary, with persons of influence in villages and government
departments. The leader of such a ‘company’ is known as the
tselingas (6 TcreXiyyai;). In a majority of cases the nucleus of the
group he leads may be descibed as a simple fraternal
association, that is a number of married brothers with families,
each of whom maintains his own household, his own purse, and
has his own animals clearly marked. But, in addition, such
groups often include uncles, nephews, brothers-in-law, pater¬
nal and maternal cousins, and it would be possible to produce
many examples of different combinations of kinsmen and
affinal relatives. At this point, it is sufficient to stress that they
are founded upon ties of kinship and marriage, that they are
voluntary and often unstable associations in which each family
retains its own independent social personality, its own budget,
and its own animals.
In these ways kinsmen give each other moral and practical
support in facing a hostile and competitive world where one
man delights openly and with little inhibition in the misfor¬
tunes of another. A man co-operates with his kinsmen because
he trusts them. There is a sense of security within the kindred
which is significantly absent outside its limits. One may not
steal from a kinsman’s flock, nor cheat him in monetary settle¬
ments, nor seduce his sister, nor gossip about his private affairs.
But it is necessary to stress that there are definite limits to what
may be expected from kinsmen. When honour demands a
vengeance killing, kinsmen outside the family will lend moral
support but none of them is obliged to pull the trigger or thrust
home the knife. Again, money may be loaned between kinsmen


42 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
but repayment after a reasonable interval is expected, and in
almost all cases is met, even where it leads to the sale of sheep.
It amounts to this, that a man will help his kinsman and indeed
is morally obliged to do so, so long as this assistance does not
conflict with the interests of his own family.
2. THE KINDRED
The kindred of the Sarakatsani has three important formal
characteristics. It is bilateral, the limits of its extension are
precisely defined, and within these limits a man may not
marry. There is a sense in which almost all kinship systems may be
described as bilateral, or to speak more accurately, filiadon is
normally bilateral and complementary.4 But in describing the
Sarakatsan kindred as bilateral it is my intention also to suggest
a certain, though not exact, symmetry in the relations of a man
to the family of origin5 of his father on the one hand, and to the
family of origin of his mother on the other; and to indicate
further that, in principle, a man has equivalent confidence in,
and similar rights over and obligations towards, more distant
collateral kinsmen such as first or second cousins, whether the
relationships with these persons are traced through the father
or through the mother.6 There is always a very strong moral
obligation to assist any collateral kinsman. For instance, it often
4 Meyer Fortes, ‘Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups’, American Anthro¬ pologist, 1953, vol. 55, p. 33. 6 This is Lloyd Warner’s familiar distinction between the family of orientation and the family of procreation. I prefer the terms ‘origin’ and ‘marriage’; in the family of origin the individual is a child and a sibling, in the family of marriage a spouse and a parent. * The bilateral form of the kindred is plainly reflected in the terminol¬ ogy. The word o6'i, kindred, applies, of course, to both maternal and paternal relations; and the words for kinsman auyyvjrfe and relationship cruyY^veta are both used in the same way. The terms which are used to describe kinship relationship outside the family do not differentiate between maternal and paternal kinsmen. Thus the term 0eto<;, uncle, is used for both mother’s brother and father’s brother as well as for all male first cousins of both parents whether these are connected through male or female links. The same may be said about the other terms for 7ra7r7rouX7)i;, grandfather, (3a(3«, grandmother, Oeta, aunt, l^aSepcpot;, eE^aSeptpr;, male and female cousin, &veijn6<;, ave^ta, nephew and niece, and lyy6vt, iyyovr), grandchild, grand-daughter.


THE KINDRED 43
happens at weddings that quarrels develop between unrelated
guests. Insults, curses, and blows are exchanged, and sometimes
knives are drawn. These events have a certain pattern. A man
is insulted, or imagines that he has been insulted, by another.
At once all the relatives of either man range themselves along¬
side their kinsman; and those who are unrelated to either
party, as well as others embarrassed by an equal allegiance to
both sides, throw themselves between the two antagonists. But
the paternal or maternal origin of relationship neither increases
nor diminishes the obligation to support a kinsman in this or
any other situation.
Property and prestige are passed from one generation to the
next according to customary rules of inheritance in the one
case, and canons of popular judgement in the other, which re¬
flect the symmetry of an individual’s relations to the families of
origin of his father and mother. Property is itself an element in
prestige, while wealth without prestige loses its significance.
Individual and family reputation, as I have already indicated, is
a self-evident value; without it social life has no meaning. This
prestige is inherited both from the father’s family and the
mother’s. It is true that the prestige of paternal connexions is
greater; but the quality of the mother’s family of origin is also
critical, for criticism of the mother, who contributes important
moral qualities to the characters of her children, is a peculiarly
effective method of denigrating a family. The individual, of
course, may increase or diminish his reputation by his own acts
but it is on the basis of a reputation inherited from both parents
that he at first faces the judgements of the community. And if
this inherited reputation is unsatisfactory, it will be exceedingly
difficult for the individual by his own efforts to redeem it. It is
partly for these reasons that the choice of a wife is a matter
which is approached with delicacy and deliberation. Many per¬
sonal qualities of a prospective bride are taken into considera¬
tion but invariably the crucial question to be debated is the
quality and prestige of the girl’s family and close kin. The
Sarakatsani use a Turkish word, vrafrapi, of which the primary
meaning is a vein, to indicate the general quality of a man’s
immediate maternal and paternal ancestors.7 And if either the
T The more general meaning of vrajzapi in modern Greek is ‘stone quarry’.


44 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
bride or the bridegroom is from a family of lower prestige than
the other, it is said that he (or she) ‘destroys’ the vrapiapi of the
other partner. For it is thought that in the family which results
from a marriage both partners have contributed their blood ‘to
make one blood’ which is unique and on whose purity the pres¬
tige and honour of the new family depends.
In a similar manner both husband and wife contribute
wealth to the elementary family which they establish. The
corporate property of a family is a common stock of animals,
money, and goods, from which sons and daughters must be
endowed. Daughters receive their portion as dowry at the
moment of marriage, but the married sons normally continue
to live in an extended family group where family wealth is still
held in common. In the eventual partition of this joint house¬
hold and its property, which is delayed until all the daughters
have been married, and generally occurs five to ten years after
the marriage of the eldest son, equal shares of stock and other
assets are received by each son; but in the case of the youngest
son an extra half-share is provided for the maintenance of each
surviving parent who by custom remains in the household of
this son. When an elementary family leaves the joint household
of married brothers, the husband’s family has probably con¬
tributed about ioo sheep and goats and one or two mules while
the wife’s family has supplied in the form of her dowry (7cpoixi6)
the furnishings of the hut and sufficient clothes and finery for
the bride to wear or display for a period of ten years or more.
The value of such a dowry is about £150, or the equivalent of
50 sheep. Since 1945, however, the practice has grown up of
demanding from the bride’s family about forty sheep or their
equivalent in gold sovereigns in addition to the traditional
dowry. Thus approximately under the traditional convention,
and more rigorously today, there exists a certain balance be¬
tween the wealth that passes into a new family from the hus¬
band’s family of origin and that which is contributed by the
wife’s family of origin. It would be wrong to think of the dowry
merely as a payment made by a bride’s family to obtain a hus¬
band for her. Certainly there have been cases where girls who
had physical or moral deficiencies have had to pay large
dowries to get any kind of husband at all. It is also true that
calculations of family prestige are concerned in the size of the


THE KINDRED 45
dowry. But the implicit purpose of the dowry is to complement
the wealth with which the new family is or will be endowed by
the husband’s family. In this sense the handing over of the
dowry is the first act of socially regulated co-operation between
two previously unrelated and therefore hostile families. The
two parties to the marriage contract co-operate to establish a
new group. Each side contributes one of its members and a cer¬
tain amount of property. And, under the traditional custom at
least, the contribution of each side appropriately reflects the
complementary activities of the two partners. The husband
provides the animals, the wife the furnishings of the hut. And
this bilateral endowment of a new family with property from
both families of origin is also observed in the limiting case where
a man has no sons and marries his youngest girl to a bride¬
groom who is willing to live in his father-in-law’s home. In
this instance it is the bridegroom who contributes wealth at the
moment of marriage, bringing with him his share in the flocks
of his family of birth, while the property of the wife’s family of
origin, which may be considerable, does not formally come
under the control of the new family until the wife’s father has
retired from active work.
Just as the elements of wealth and prestige are inherited
through both the mother and the father, so the Sarakatsani also
believe that a child inherits the elements of its moral character
from both parents, although, since the important moral qualities
in this community are sex-linked, sons are thought to form their
moral character essentially after the pattern of their fathers,
especially with reference to manliness, while daughters par¬
ticularly inherit those qualities of the mother which affect their
sense of sexual shame. Nevertheless the pattern of character and
behaviour, which a son partly inherits and partly learns from
his father, may be modified by elements which he receives from
his mother; and in the same way a girl may inherit some charac¬
ter traits from her father. Sometimes facets of character which
are passed from or through the parent of opposite sex may be
referred to the individual’s youl'. This is an aspect of personality
to which one may attribute those idiosyncratic actions and atti¬
tudes which are in some way unusual or even deviant. The
Sarakatsani insist that this is as likely to be inherited from one
side of the family as from the other. John Charisis tears his


KINSMEN ANO AFKINKS
46
shitts to shreds \\ hen hr dances at weddings. I his odd behaviour is not approved, but in terms of xoiili it may, at least, be ex¬ plained; and it is remembered that his mother's brother, although he did not tear his shirts, used to waste his substance in another wav by gambling at cards tor high stakes, which he could not afford. It is clear, then, that the elements of wealth, prestige, and character pass into a family from both the families which enter into the original betrothal contract. This not only reflects the bilateral and symmetrical form of the kindred but in some measure helps to maintain it. l'or, if a man has contracted a judicious marriage with a girl from a family of at least equiva¬ lent prestige, the children will be anxious to associate with their matrilateral kin. On the other hand, it is noticeable that where a man has married into a family of lower prestige than his own (that is. where prestige has not been equally inherited from both sides', his children tend to evade obligations to their mother's kinsmen while they carefully cultivate kinsmen of the father. However, if a wife brings a substantial dowry (that is, where a newly established fa milv is equally endowed with wealth from both sides', the husband is obliged to be particularly helpful to the family and kinsmen of his wife, and this leads to close relations between his children and their maternal cousins. I'he bilateral structure of the kindred implies, of course, that this association of kinsmen is not a corporate group. Its defini¬ tion must always lx- relative to a particular group of siblings.* At a wedding, when representatives of all sections of the bride¬ groom's kindred gather round him in support against the kin¬ dred of the bride, the illusion is created that two solidary cor¬ porate groups of kinsmen are involved. But in fact they are only united in the particular context of the wedding and by reason of each individual's personal kinship relation to the bride¬ groom. Indeed since any particular kindred comprises descen¬ dants of tour pairs of unrelated great-grandparents, only the sibling group which is central to this kindred is related to all
* Hil* has long been rreogniaed. See bertha I'hillpotts. A :CLt*», Cambridge, 1915. pp. *?> However, it should be clear that corporate associations of kinsmen ni.iv exist in this kind of community. Rut other criteria will be involved, not merely kinship relationship.


THE KINDRED 47
its members.* *• It is only through the marriages of their grand¬
parents and parents that a man and his siblings are related to
the four component groups of collaterals in his kindred. Kin¬
dred relations are personal, not corporate, relations. And the
Sarakatsan kindred in no way acts as a property-holding group
since, besides the fact that it is relative to a particular sibling
group, it has no continuity from generation to generation.
In drawing attention to this bilateral and symmetrical form
of the kindred I have been careful to avoid speaking of bilateral
descent. In anthropological writings principles of descent
normally refer to rules which determine membership in cor¬
porate lineal descent groups. Such groups are bodies of kins¬
men whose members may be recruited through filiation to a line
of descent exclusively through males (patrilineal), or exclusively
through females (matrilineal).10 Descent from a common ances¬
tor or group of ancestors defines membership in the group and
identifies the interests of its members, which may concern
political and ritual rights and obligations as well as inheritance
and succession. It is possible to talk of a corporate bilateral
descent group where membership depends upon filiation
through both parents but in such an instance the group would
have to practise obligatory endogamous marriage. Hut the
Sarakatsan kindred is not an endogamous group. Corporate
descent groups imply a principle of perpetual succession, a fea¬
ture which the kindred entirely lacks; and they also imply that
individuals have categorical rights and obligations outside the
elementary or extended family, whereas in the Sarakatsan
kindred this is not so. Not descent, but filiation of a man or
woman to his or her family of origin is the factor which
* Any two kinsmen other than siblings have kindreds which to a greater or lesser degree overlap. A man may find himself in a situation where two men, both related to him but unrelated to one another, arc in some form of conflict in which both appeal to him for support. In this predicament the only solution is to remain neutral, since it would be sinful to act against a kinsman except under great provocation. But generally such a situation extends rather than restricts the range of kinship obligations; towards a person who, although not a kinsman himself, is closely related to a kinsman, a man ought to act with more consideration and less hostility than is usual between men who arc unrelated. *• There arc other possibilities, viz. bilineal or dual descent, parallel descent, and alternating descent.


48 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
determines status, categorical rights and obligations, and mem¬
bership in the family group, which is the only solidary kin
grouping in this system of kinship and marriage. Hence in a
description of the Sarakatsan kindred it seems preferable not to
speak, even loosely, of any principle of descent.11
It is true that the kindred of any man includes the descen¬
dants of four pairs of great grandparents. It is, therefore, pos¬
sible to represent the kindred diagrammatically as four interlock¬
ing pyramids of cognatic descent. But this kind of abstraction
bears no relation to the mental image which a Sarakatsanos
forms of his kindred, in which relations are conceived in terms
of extension from the family of origin, not descent from a
common ancestor. There is mutual affection and moral obliga¬
tion between my second cousin and myself because my grand¬
parent and his grandparent were siblings rather than because
we are both descendants of common great-grandparents. I pre¬
fer, then, to speak of equivalent bilateral extension, for this
describes precisely the consdtution of the kindred. The quali¬
fication of bilateral extension by the notion of equivalence is
intended to underline both the fact that collateral kinsmen are
recognized to the degree of second cousin on either side of the
family, and also the equipotential character of matrilateral and
patrilateral relationships.
The second formal characteristic of the kindred is the defini¬
tion of its limits, which, in this case, are drawn in a man’s own
generation at the collateral degree of second cousin, a span of
collateral kinship which is calculated by recognizing as kinsmen
the descendants of his four grandparents and their siblings.
Thereafter, as we have seen, the recognition of collaterals is
increasingly restricted in descendant generations. This limita¬
tion, considered together with equivalent bilateral extension,
leads to a simple process within the kindred whereby the range
of collateral relationship which a child may inherit from either
parent is severely delimited. The second cousins of his parent
are not, in a formal sense, a man’s kinsmen and, therefore, he
11 In some general remarks about the concept of descent in bilateral systems Professor Firth has adopted a similar viewpoint. Raymond Firth (editor), Two Studies of Kinship in London, London, 1956, p. 15. Cf. also W. H. R. Rivers, Social Organisation, London, 1924, p. 86, and G. P. Mur¬ dock, Social Structure, New York, 1949, p. 15.


THE KINDRED 49
may marry a kinswoman of this degree. In other words, the
children of a marriage throw away, as it were, perhaps three
quarters12 of those kinsmen who are recognized collateral rela¬
tions of the parents. The father, when he identifies himself with
the interests of his own children, at once creates a certain kin¬
ship distance between himself and any one of his own siblings,
the kindred of whose children only partly coincides with the
kindred of his own children. Since the descendants of the father’s
second cousins are no longer kinsmen of his children, they also
cease to be significant for him and are not recognized as kins¬
men ; similarly in the case of the grandchildren of first cousins,
and the great-grandchildren of siblings. And the same considera¬
tions apply in the case of the mother and her collateral kin.
With the passage of time parents turn their loyalty and interest
from the collateral kinsmen of their own generation to their
direct descendants and to only those collateral descendants who
remain relevant for their own descendants; these are necessarily
fewer in each descendant generation.
From one point of view a man’s kinsmen are the descendants
of the four sibling groups of his two grandfathers and two grand¬
mothers. Sarakatsan kinship finds its source in the unity of the
sibling group born and nurtured within a legitimate family.
Collateral kinsmen see themselves as the descendants of such a
group and it is this sentiment which provides the basis of the
personal moral solidarity with a kinsman. Thus the Greek word
for cousins (l^aSepcpoi) means literally ‘from brothers’. But
Sarakatsani are, also, conscious that it is through marriages in
which the interests of siblings or cousins cannot be mutually
identified that kinsmen become separated. For a man is related
more closely to a particular kinsman than to the kinsman’s
child; thus, with the close identification of a father’s interests
with those of his children and the exclusive concentration of
categorical obligations in the family of marriage, the marriages
of collaterals inevitably lead to change and a measure of dis¬
integration in the individual’s kindred. In a phrase, marriage
joins strangers while it separates those who are already kins¬
men. The consequences for the children and grandchildren of
siblings are that a man has approximately only half his kindred
12 The exact size of this fraction depends upon the size of the various sibling groups in the kindreds.


50 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
in common with his first cousin and only one quarter in common
with his second cousin. It shows with what rapidity in this kin¬
ship system the common interests of the descendants of a sibling
group disappear. With the passage of only three generations
these descendants are formally unrelated and there is no restric¬
tion on the marriage of third cousins. A man says of this third
cousin, ‘The kindred has left the house’ (Py9jxe to ctoi doro
CT7UTl).
The third formal characteristic of the kindred is that a man
may not marry within its limits. This means that the two families
who form a marriage alliance are unrelated13 and that the
kindred of the groom will not considerably overlap with the
kindred of the bride although they may claim some kinsmen in
common. A kindred in which maternal and paternal kinsmen
normally form mutually exclusive categories naturally has a
wider span than a kindred in which these categories overlap;
and to that extent, the marriage prohibition is consistent with
the need to have many kinsmen in many places.
We have seen that the principle of equivalent bilateral exten¬
sion together with the defined limits of the kindred acts over a
period of time to force collaterals apart. A second consequence
of the prohibition on marriage in the kindred is that it makes it
impossible to counteract this process by confirming in a later
generation a relationship which has already been established.
Thus the practice of either first- or second-cousin marriage such
as is reported from Spain by Pitt-Rivers,14 where it is favoured
as a means of conserving property within the family, is not
possible among the Sarakatsani. This leads to a third conse¬
quence of the marriage prohibition. It forces a man who wishes
to marry off his son or daughter to face, as it were, outwards
from his kindred towards the total community. Thus while non¬
kinsmen are rivals and even enemies, they are also in a sense
potential affines. This is peculiarly significant in a community
where men unrelated by kinship are associated mainly through
institutionalized forms of hostility and rivalry. A contract of
marriage is normally the only instrument which may bring two
unrelated families into positive association and co-operation.
Indeed, a sense of the community’s endogamy is an important
l* Except in the cases of marriage between third cousins. 14 J. A. Pitt-Rivers, The People of the Sierra, London, 1954, pp. 103-6.


THE KINDRED 51
element in their consciousness of being a community at all.
Sarakatsani, when they wish to stress their solidarity in opposi¬
tion to villagers or other outsiders, often claim that, if full
records of their marriages had been preserved through the
generations, it would be clear that they are all kinsmen, al¬
though they are quick to add the qualification that such kinship
has long ago ‘left the house’. The same principles of kinship
extension and marriage prohibition which from the point of
view of the individual tend towards the loosening of his rela¬
tions with collaterals within the kindred, at the same time lead
to a measure of cohesion within the community considered as a
system of actual and potential kinship relations. Kin and non¬
kin, actual relations and potential relations, are opposed but
also complementary categories.
Of these three formal features of the Sarakatsan kindred the
dominant is, without doubt, equivalent bilateral extension. The
distinctive consequence of this principle is that the only possible
corporate group based upon kinship alone which can exist in
such a system over a period of time as long as a generation is
the elementary family. For since there is no unilineal principle
of descent grouping, there can be no corporate kinship group
of higher order, which either includes the elementary family, or
cuts across it by including some of its members and excluding
others. Nor are there non-unilineal corporate kin groups in
which membership is based on optional or alternate filiation or
on the choice of residence after marriage.15 Such arrangements
would conflict with the symmetrical affiliation of Sarakatsani
to all kinsmen through all lines and the equivalence of obliga¬
tion to all kinsmen of the same degree. Although the associa¬
tion of an elementary family, for the first five to ten years of
its existence, with the husband’s extended family of origin
may obscure the situation, the newly established elementary
family is influenced by both the families of origin of the husband
and wife. An interesting recognition of this occurs on the very day of
marriage when in other respects the bride’s family feel that they
16 For a review of non-unilineal descent groups, see William Davenport, ‘Nonunilinear Descent and Descent Groups’, American Anthropologist, 1959, vol. 61, pp. 557-72. Cf. also J. D. Freeman, ‘The Family System of the Iban of Borneo’, Cambridge Papers in Social Anthropology No. 1, Cambridge, 1958.


52 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
have been defeated and plundered. The Greek Orthodox
marriage service is in two parts, the first being the rite of
Betrothal (appa(3cova<;), the second the rite of ‘Crowning’
(axecpavcoCTii;); and normally they are celebrated in church as one
ceremony. The Sarakatsani, however, bring a priest to the huts
of the bride’s family to perform the religious betrothal ceremony
which the shepherds name ‘the half wedding’ (6 puao<; yapio^),
and consider to be equal in importance to the office of ‘Crowning’.
The bride’s kinsmen will not surrender her to the groom’s
retinue until this ceremony is performed, and equally the
marriage ceremony cannot be completed until the bride is
brought to the home of the bridegroom. In effect, each side
celebrates half the marriage service.
This double attraction is eventually resolved by the new
family’s relative emancipation from both the old families. Once
the young family has parted from the husband’s extended
family of origin, it stands on its own without categorical rights
over, or obligations towards, other related elementary families.
It neither gives nor receives unconditional support of the kind
that involves physical violence or economic assistance. In these
important respects the family, even within the kindreds of its
members, is, in a sense, isolated.
This isolation of the elementary family is accurately reflected
by the kinship terminology, although in this respect it does not
differ from the general form of European kinship terminologies.
It is significant that the terms for the kinship personalities in a
man’s elementary families of origin and marriage, that is in his
inner circle of kinship, are not extended to more distant kins¬
men as is the case in many societies with systems of unilineal
descent. The family (olxoyeveia) which may refer, according to
context, to either or both elementary families in which the in¬
dividual has or had corporate membership, and to any surviving
grandparents, is part of the kindred, yet at the same time is
clearly distinguished from it. In its widest connotation the
‘family’ is, of course, a class of relations and not a residential
group. The principles which essentially relate members of the
family are parental obligation and filiation, while the kindred is
based on collateral extension. Between these two classes of kins¬
men siblings are the bridge, since at the same time they are
directly descended from the same parents and grandparents and


THE KINDRED 53
occupy, before marriage, a socially equivalent status, but be¬
come, after their marriages, the points of departure of distinct
collateral lines of descent.
At the beginning of this chapter I described the multiform
character of the family. It is a domestic group, an economic and
property-owning unit, a quasi-political association, a religious
communion, and so on. It is now evident that the elementary
family group is the only stable solidary unit associated with the
kindred and that while it enjoys important support from col¬
lateral kinsmen, it is also, in a sense, isolated from them. The
immense importance, then, of this social group on the one hand,
and its lack of continuity through time on the other, mean that
the institutionalized arrangements for its establishment or dis¬
solution, for the transference of categorical rights and obliga¬
tions from an old family to a new, are of critical importance.
Underlying the nature of these arrangements is the simple fact
that each individual during some part of his lifetime is almost
always the member of two families: one of origin, the other of
marriage.16 A man is a son and brother in one family, a father
and husband in the other; a woman is a daughter and sister in
the family oforigin, a mother and wife in the family of marriage.
It is obviously important that the rights and duties of these dif¬
ferent roles, when played by the same individual, should not
conflict. This is a problem for all systems of kinship, but it is
especially acute in this community because all the individual’s
significant rights and obligations inhere in the family and in no
other group. The individual passes from his first family to his
second through marriage. In the case of the woman the solution
of the problem of conflicting roles is radical; she leaves the
home of her father, who ceases to have any rights over her except
the residual right of resuming his power over her if she becomes
a widow before the birth of children. The protection of her
honour is no longer the concern of her brothers, and her work¬
ing services now belong exclusively to the husband’s family.
When later she pays one of her rare visits to her original home,
she may not spin even a handful of her mother’s wool. The hus¬
band does not shed the categorical obligations of his roles as son
11 An individual may have membership in a third family; for the grand¬ parents, after the division of the joint household, normally live as members of the family of marriage of their youngest son.


54 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
and sibling quite so rapidly, though it is significant that after
his marriage and even before the birth of his children he is
unlikely to undertake a vengeance killing for a murdered
brother or a dishonoured sister. Eventually, after five to ten
years, but often sooner, he parts from the extended family and
from all his remaining categorical rights and obligations as son
and brother.
Thus siblings before their marriages are a unity for a person
outside the group. If he injures or insults any member of the
group, he attacks the whole group, every male member of which
is under equal obligation to retaliate. At this stage siblings of
the same sex are socially equivalent as to status, there is an
almost complete identity of interest, and their mutual relations
are governed by a consciousness of their common filiation to the
same parents. After the marriages of the brothers and sisters of
a sibling group the situation entirely changes. They no longer
form a unity against the outsider nor are they socially equiva¬
lent; they have become differentiated by their marriages and
young families. Their interests are no longer identified, and
siblings both in form and effect are now merely collaterals.
There is a growing tendency to isolation from all collateral
lines, not only those of the individual’s own siblings. The supreme
value in a man’s life now becomes the economic welfare and
social prestige of his children. He is, therefore, not always free
to give unreserved and unthinking aid to his brothers and
cousins as he used to do. Moreover, he is now forced, also for
the sake of his children, who derive the half of their kindred
through their mother, to consolidate his relationship with his
affines. This he can only do by weakening to some degree the
previously exclusive solidary relations between himself and his
brothers and sisters.
Always implicit in Sarakatsan kinship relations is the inter¬
play of the two notions of sibling solidarity and parental obliga¬
tion. Parental obligation, of course, is established through legiti¬
mate marriage and the resulting conjugal relationship, but the
very strength of the latter relation is founded on the sacred
character of parental love and duty. In the elementary family
the two principles of sibling solidarity and parental obligation
are complementary and together guide its members in their
duties and exclusive affections. But in the relations of married


THE KINDRED 55
siblings and collaterals the two principles are opposed, sibling
solidarity being the source and justification of relationship and
moral obligation between collaterals, while parental obligation
is the principle which, within the limits of a bilateral kindred,
isolates the family from other kinsmen and their families. At the
risk of some repetition, and in summary form, the critical
aspects of these relationships are: (i) before marriage siblings
are bound to one another by categorical obligations; (2) after
marriage, the purpose of which is the begetting of children, this
nexus is gradually dissolved; (3) after marriage the supreme
value in a man’s life becomes the welfare of his children;
(4) parenthood forces a man for the sake of his children to culti¬
vate his affines; this weakens to some extent the relationship
with his siblings; (5) brothers after living together for a few
years after marriage as a united extended family divide the
common flock and the common household; after partition
brothers generally continue to co-operate in the management
of their sheep, but on a basis of strict accountancy; (6) collateral
kinship is conceived by the Sarakatsani themselves as an exten¬
sion from the family of origin which relates kinsmen to an
original pair of siblings; thus collaterals see themselves as united
by derivation from a once united sibling group but divided as
a result of the marriages contracted by the members of that
group and their children.
I must now introduce a consideration which to some small
extent qualifies the symmetry which I have claimed to be a
feature of the bilateral kindred. The absence of a unilineal
principle of descent grouping does not prevent the Sarakatsani
from having a very strong sentimental interest in their patriline
and a formal preference for those kinsmen who are related
through the father, especially those who bear the same name.
The cousins with whom a man often shares his early childhood
years in an extended family are agnatic cousins. And while the
obligation to carry out blood vengeance does not extend beyond
the elementary family, it is significant that when a man volun¬
tarily avenges a kinsman beyond this narrow circle it is almost
always an agnatic first cousin. Yet it must be said again that
outside the elementary family moral obligations to kinsmen of
the same collateral degree are the same however the relation¬
ship is mediated. The man, who states categorically that ‘we


56 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
prefer relatives through the father’, may name a maternal
cousin as his most trusted friend.
When a Sarakatsanos talks loosely of his ‘fathers and fore¬
fathers’, he is probably thinking of a vague body of ancestors
in the agnatic line. But in fact a man seldom knows very much
about his direct ancestors in any line beyond the generation of
his grandparents unless they have some claim to particular fame
or infamy. Ascendant kinsmen are only relevant as individual
personalities to the extent that they affect the inheritance of
physical and moral attributes and social prestige. And it is the
families of origin of the man’s parents, presided over by his
four grandparents, which essentially affect his social standing.
The lines of descent from the two pairs of grandparents are the
kinship co-ordinates, as it were, which intersect and define the
unique position of a group of siblings within the community.
Naturally the preference for the kinsmen of the father implies
that in this evaluation the qualities of paternal kin have more
weight, but this is not to be confused with the presence of a
patrilineal descent principle.
A man is more interested in his sons than in his daughters
simply because they are males and not because they are specific¬
ally agnatic links ensuring continuity in an exclusively agnatic
descent line. It is important to a man to beget male children be¬
cause in so doing he accentuates his own masculinity, extended
in time. A man wants sons ‘so that his name will be heard’
(va axouexai T’6vofi.a tou), not simply the surname which is in¬
herited patrilineally, but for it to be said that this is George
Carvounis son ofJohn Carvounis. Sons bring prestige, daughters
do not. When the husband enters the hut for the first time after
the birth of a daughter, his wife turns her head away and lowers
her eyes in shame.
This formal preference for the father’s kinsmen is consistent
with, and indeed is, in the area of kinship, a reflection of the
greater value placed upon the male sex. This is a fundamental
value of Greek culture, whose essential masculinity can be re¬
marked at all stages in its development from Homeric times
until the present day. Thus, in the Sarakatsan community it is
the behaviour of the ideal man that provides the dominant
value patterns of honour and pride. The sexes divide the com¬
munity into opposite yet complementary categories, categories


THE KINDRED 57
which are moral as well as biological. The behaviour which is
considered appropriate for the male and female stereotypes is
at many points antithetical, and relations between the sexes are
hostile although this hostility cannot generally be given overt
expression. The male sex is held to be unambiguously superior
not only in power but also in worth to the female, to which the
stigma of original sin is closely attached. The female is a con¬
stant threat to the honour and integrity of the male, and must
be disciplined and dominated. In the absence, therefore, of a
unilineal descent principle, it is reasonable to suppose that these
attitudes and beliefs of the Sarakatsani concerning the relation
of the sexes are significantly connected with the preference for
paternal kinsmen.
Patrilocal marriage fits consistently into the pattern of these
preferences. A man brings his bride into the household of his
father or if he has retired, into the household of his elder
brother. The extended family of origin remains a single cor¬
porate, unit until such time as one or more of the brothers decide
to contract out, claiming then, as is their inalienable right, their
equal shares in the flock. A brother begins to press for partition
precisely when the claims of his children for special attention
begin to be felt. Normally this occurs when the eldest child of
the second son in a family is about five years old.
But the presence of extended families needs to be explained
on other grounds than a preference for paternal kinsmen. Else¬
where in the Greek world, where masculine values and pref¬
erence for paternal kin are equally strong, the residential
pattern is often neolocal, that is to say the newly married couple
set up house in a home of their own, independent of either family
of origin. Such arrangements are, of course, exactly those we
might expect to find associated with a bilateral kindred.
Amongst the Sarakatsani there seem to be three important
reasons why separation does not take place immediately after
marriage. First there is the solidarity of the elementary family
of origin built up over a period of about 25 years of mutual
devotion and mutual responsibility in face of a hostile and
critical world. It is difficult to describe adequately the quality
of this solidarity, except perhaps to say that even by the stan¬
dards of Greek family life it is remarkable—proof against appal¬
ling adversities and unyielding to the weaknesses of individuals.


58 KINSMEN AND AFFINES
Secondly, the marriage ceremony does not set the seal upon an
already established relationship, it only creates the necessary
legal and religious conditions for its inception. This is a perti¬
nent fact in a community where, although a man may some¬
times have seen his bride before the marriage day, it is most
unlikely that he has ever spoken to her. It requires the passage
of time and the birth of a child before it can be said in any real
sense17 that an elementary family has been founded. The third
reason introduces an economic factor. The Sarakatsan tech¬
nique of grazing sheep demands for optimum efficiency the
co-operation of certainly not fewer than four adult males. An
undivided household means an undivided flock, and generally
sufficient shepherds to look after it. It is true that after partition
brothers normally continue to run their sheep together, but
sheep must then be branded, accounts kept, and in different
ways the possibility of friction between the associated brothers
is greater than when the flock is undivided.18* 19
17 As opposed to its formal establishment at the religious ceremony of marriage. 18 Parts of this chapter appear in an essay, ‘The Kindred in a Greek Mountain Community’, included in Mediterranean Countrymen, edited by Julian Pitt-Rivers, Mouton and Co., The Hague, 1963. This volume has been published in the series ‘Recherches Mediterrandennes’ of La Maison des Sciences de L’Homme. I am grateful for permission to reprint this material. ” The degree to which my analysis of the Sarakatsan kindred is valid for Greek rural communities in general may be judged by comparing it with Ernestine Friedl’s lucid account of kinship usage in her book, Vasilika: A Village in Modern Greece, New York, 1962.


IV
THE EXTENDED FAMILY
1. THE STATUS OF THE BRIDE
I
have said that the Sarakatsan family is an isolated and
autonomous social group and I have stressed the moral
solidarity which characterizes the relations of its members.
But the Sarakatsan family, like all domestic groupings, passes
through a cycle of development which in this instance begins
with the marriage of a man with a woman and normally ends
with the final division of the family’s flocks between their sons
one or two years after the youngest has married. An examina¬
tion of some aspects of this process makes it possible to give an
account of the institutions governing the redistribution of rights
over property and persons which accompanies the development
of new families and the dispersion of the older groups which
have brought them into being. But the autonomy, solidarity,
and isolation of the family make this transition difficult and
critical. It is not only that it causes individuals real psychological
distress when a girl at her marriage must abandon the family
of her birth or when another family must receive a strange
woman into the circle of their close and exclusive relationships.
The marriages of any group of siblings have to be arranged in
such a way that the family derives the maximum of prestige
from them; and also that individuals relinquish their obligations
to the family of origin only when these have been fulfilled, or
have been safely delegated to another unmarried member of
the group.
A description of the cycle of family development serves a
second purpose. It documents the changing relations in the
sibling group which are precipitated by the marriages of its
members. The solution of the conflict between parents’ newly
assumed obligations to infant children and their long estab¬
lished duties and affections to siblings and parents in the family
of origin, illustrates the distinction between the relatives of the
family and the collateral relatives of the kindred. Indeed, this
conflict is, as it were, the growing point of the distinction.
In a formal sense the elementary family is established on the


60 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
day of marriage when the groom and his retinue of kinsmen
and affines arrive to claim the bride at the huts of her father.
After the celebration of the religious ceremony of betrothal in
her own home the groom and his train escort the bride and her
dowry back to the huts of the groom’s family; there, after a
short rest, for the journey is often long and rough, the wedding
ceremony is performed by the priest on the afternoon of the
same Sunday. None of the bride’s family or kindred accom¬
panies her to the home of the groom or witnesses the marriage
service.1 The physical severance from her family and kinsmen
is complete and dramatic, the more so when it is remembered
that since the day of her birth feelings of affection, co-operation
at work, and even ordinary conversation, have only been pos¬
sible for her inside the circle of the family and her kindred.
Many points of wedding custom reflect the character of her
new status as a member of her husband’s family of origin. When
the groom arrives at the home of the bride and immediately
before the religious ceremony of betrothal takes place, three
gifts are presented to her by members of the groom’s family.
First the brother of the groom places at her feet a pair of new
shoes; and in the right shoe he leaves a coin, preferably a gold
sovereign. For now she enters a new pathway of her life, and it
is hoped she will bring prosperity both to the family she is
founding and to the family of her mother-in-law where she will
live and work, at least for some years. Having placed the shoes
at her feet the brother of the groom then greets her by taking
her right hand in his. She returns his greeting with a demure
and scarcely audible ‘Thank you’ and bending low over his
outstretched hand carries it to her lips, then touches it to her
forehead and once more to her lips. The other gift-bearers are
sisters of the groom, or, if these are lacking, wives of his
brothers. Their gifts are generally pieces of gold or silver
jewellery, earrings, bracelets or necklaces with pendant crosses.
The women greet the bride by kissing her first on the right
cheek and then on the left and the bride responds by kissing their
hands in the manner already described.
The moment comes when the bride must kiss the hands of
her parents and leave them. Together with her brothers and
1 However, where a family is related both to bride and groom, they will generally send a representative to support each side.


THE STATUS OF THE BRIDE 61
sisters, her cousins and the wives of her brothers, she walks
some two hundred yards to the place where the groom’s party
await her. As they walk they chant a song which with brevity
and unspoken inference expresses her grief.
Mother, bless me on this my first journey away from
you.
Daughter, go with my blessing, may God bring you
fortune.2
The bride is surrendered, and the eldest brother of the groom
mounts her on a chosen animal. The horse is led by a sister of
the groom while the other sisters, brothers, and brothers’ wives
surround and support her on all sides; for she is not only
frightened and desolate but physically weak after long hours of
standing, and the lack of food and sleep which she has endured
since the beginning of the customary ceremonies on the Friday.
At the end of the journey the bride is led to the door of the
bridegroom’s hut where his parents stand to receive her. The
father assists her to dismount and she kisses his hand. She kisses
the mother’s hand, too, and is embraced by her. Then, as she
enters the hut, crossing the threshold with her right foot for¬
ward, the mother of the groom passes over her wrists two brace¬
lets of bread and gives her a cup of wine in either hand which
she pours in her steps as she moves to the far side of the hut.
There she is greeted by and kisses the hands of those kinsmen
and affines of the groom who did not make the journey to
escort her from her home. Finally, they bring to her all the
children; and in the same way and with the same respect she
kisses their hands also. In the presentation of the gifts, and later
of bread and wine, which are the elements of communion and
commensality; in the concern the groom’s family show for her
on the journey to her new home; and in the bride’s first cere¬
monial, but simple, exchange of greetings with people to whom
she has never spoken, but to whom she is now irrevocably
bound, there is symbolized the initial pattern of their relations,
submission and respect on her part, and acceptance and pro¬
tection on theirs.
2 Eu/tjcjou (jt.e (jLavouXa (j.ou <tto 7rpa>To xtv7)(id piou. M£ ttjv cu/tj (iou, T<jou7rpa [xou, 0e6<; va at Tcpoxo^fj.


62 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
From Sunday until the evening of Tuesday, by which time
the guests have all departed, the bride remains secluded inside
the bridegroom’s hut, where she is attended by relays of the
groom’s close female kinswomen. This seclusion fits the feelings
of shyness and shame which a bride is expected to experience
at the thought of the various implications of her new status; but
it also protects her from the dangers of the evil eye, the destruc¬
tive force of envy whether consciously or unconsciously exer¬
cised to which both the marriage partners are thought to be
peculiarly susceptible at this time. In the groom’s hut she is
guarded and supported by the women with whom her lot is
now cast and by the icons and other ritual objects which belong
to the family. Whenever a stranger or a member of the family
comes into the hut she at once stands up to show respect, gazing
fixedly with expressionless stare at the ground in front of her.
It is not unusual for a bride to stand transfixed in this way for
three or four hours. It is with the greatest difficulty that from
time to time she is persuaded to sit down and rest, or to eat a
mouthful of wheaten bread dipped in wine.
On the Monday, however, she must leave the hut about
midday to lead the dance. She dances in turn with the marriage
sponsor (6 xoufi.7tapo<;), her husband, father-in-law and mother
in-law, brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, and other prominent
guests. On the Tuesday morning she prepares in silence cups
of sweet coffee for her parents-in-law. They wish her long life
and sons, and she thanks them. At midday she makes a rice
pie. Later that day the guests, who night and day have been
drinking, dancing, and feasting since Saturday morning, de¬
part. Before they leave, the guests, almost all of whom are kins¬
men or affines of the groom, take their leave of the bride, the
men taking her hand, the women kissing her on the cheeks; and
she with respect kisses their hands. Each guest makes her a small
money gift and she in return gives each man a small wedding
bag (Tpo(3a<;) of black and white check material woven by her¬
self, in which is placed some bread, meat, and cheese for the
homeward journey. Each female guest receives a smaller
embroidered bag. To the sponsor the bride gives the choicest
blanket ((3eXevT£a) of her dowry after he has presented her with
a money gift of about ioo drachmas (twenty-five shillings).
The bride, at this point, also exchanges gifts with the members


THE STATUS OF THE BRIDE 63
of her husband’s immediate family. She gives shirts or socks to
her father-in-law and brothers-in-law. To her husband’s sisters
and sisters-in-law she presents embroidered bodices. As a rule
the father-in-law presents the new bride with a blanket and the
other members give her various articles of clothing, such as
skirts or blouses.
All the guests have now left and on the Tuesday night the
bride and groom sleep together for the first time. But the cere¬
monial introduction of the bride to her new family and the tasks
she must perform is not yet completed. On the Wednesday the
women of the family escort the bride to the well. With them
walks a youth carrying the wedding standard. This standard
attests the virginity and purity of the two partners and, except
on the Sunday when it is borne in front of the bridegroom on his
journey to claim the bride, it has flown above the thatch of the
bridegroom’s hut since the Saturday evening.3 On the Wednes¬
day morning, since the marriage has now been consummated
in the physical union of the bride and groom, the standard is
taken down from the roof. At the spring or well the shaft of the
standard is thrust upright into the water and abandoned, while
the standard is cut free and put away until the marriage of
another son. In the minds of the Sarakatsani this is the defini¬
tive moment when the bride finally enters the ranks of the
married women.4 At once the bride fills and carries to the huts
of her new home her first barrel of water. This is an appro¬
priate task to open her new life of service; for carrying water is
rightly considered by the women to be their hardest work.
Bent double under their enormous load they must often stagger
as far as a mile from the well to the huts. On the afternoon of
the same day she takes up her distaff for the first time and spins
a little red wool, red the colour which represents virility in her
husband, strength and fertility in herself. On the Thursday,
under the supervision of her mother-in-law and with some help
from the other women, she washes the clothes of the whole
family as well as her own undergarments stained with the blood
of her virginity. During these first few days all the women of
the family make a conscious effort to put the bride at ease in
* When it replaces a smaller flag made with a handkerchief, placed there at the beginning of the marriage preparations. 4 Cf. Hoeg, op. cit., vol. i, p. 52.


64 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
her new surroundings. They can appreciate her feelings of
despair and loneliness; it is an ordeal which one day every
Sarakatsan woman must face. But such sentiments can be
afforded only a brief indulgence. From the Friday the bride
undertakes the full routine of work allotted to her by her
husband’s mother.
The ceremonial induction into the family of the groom during
and immediately after the wedding, the symbolic acts which
she must perform, and the exchange of gifts with her close
affines, all indicate the quality of her initial status within the
extended family. The essential fact is that the new bride is
subordinate to all other adults in the extended family. Even the
five-year-olds try with varying success to boss the new ‘bride’.
As a worker her services belong to the whole group. She is, as
they often say, ‘our bride’. Not only does she care for the com¬
fort of her own husband but she is responsible for washing,
mending, and darning the clothes of all his unmarried brothers.
In general, it can be said that any hard or unpleasant work will
be delegated to her. A mule to be rounded up, water to be
carried—the new bride is certain to be sent. ‘She must learn
our ways,’ the other women explain, ‘and must take root in her
new family. Besides, she has no children to care for.’ The bride
takes most of her orders from her mother-in-law under whose
critical and watchful direction she works. But she must be pre¬
pared to carry out requests from any brother, sister, or other
more senior bride of the extended family. Yet despite her sub¬
ordinate status she is accepted as a full member of the group.
This is the implication of the exchange of gifts with members of
the family; for in this community gifts are never exchanged
with unrelated persons. ‘She is one of us’, they say. Membership
carries with it the possibility of a growing comradeship, and
the right to protection against insult and injury from outsiders.
Her behaviour is extremely modest. She speaks only if she is
addressed, and then her replies are made with the utmost show
of respect. She addresses her husband’s brothers as atpevr/),
‘master’, and his sisters as xupa, ‘mistress’. She follows her hus¬
band in his modes of address to all senior relatives, father,
mother, uncle, aunt, and so on. The family and kinsmen address
the newcomer as simply vucpyj, ‘bride’. In the first months the
bride will rise to her feet and remain standing when a man of the


2. The Women




THE STATUS OF THE BRIDE 65
family comes into the hut and will not sit down unless specific¬ ally requested to do so.
The young bride is punctilious in providing all these expres¬
sions of respect and humility. In this new situation what is
important for her is that her formal membership in the extended
family shall in as short a time as is conventionally possible
become a more spontaneous acceptance of herself by the other
members of the group. Yet even at this early stage, when as an
individual she counts for very little, she is aware that her person
separates her husband from his family of origin. The dowry
wealth which she has brought, and in which the whole family
takes pride, is property held in trust for her unborn children;
it may not be alienated for the benefit of her husband’s brothers.
The distaff, with which she spins her first wool on the Wednes¬
day, is a gift from her husband, preferably carved by himself or,
if he has not the skill, at least commissioned by him.5 The bride
may not bring a distaff from her own home nor may she receive
one as a gift from her mother-in-law or anybody else in her
husband’s family. This is an object with mystical power which
will protect her children from evil forces. In these respects it is
a symbol of the solidarity and future autonomy of her family
which as yet scarcely exists but whose full development only
death or sterility can hinder. Her awareness of the odd contra¬
diction in her new situation, the humility required of her on the
one hand, the assurance of her ultimate triumph on the other,
only increases the bride’s feelings ofshyness and shame, attitudes
which on other grounds she is anyway expected to express.
During the early months of the marriage the young husband
gives the minimum of overt public attention to his bride. He
may, in stern, almost harsh, tones, make some simple request of
her for food and drink or dry clothes, but he does not make
conversation. For her part, a bride will never address her hus¬
band before other members of the family. If she requires any¬
thing she arranges it through her husband’s brother. There is
not, during this period, the slightest inclination on the part of
the husband to champion his wife in any dispute which she
may have with the other women of the family. Nor does he
show the least annoyance when a brother, in his presence,
s See Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part B, p. 410.


66 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
gives his wife some peremptory order. The husband’s obliga¬
tions and affections are still entirely contained within his own
family of origin. Indeed his behaviour reflects an almost com¬
pulsive assertion that ‘this is how it will always be’. Clearly if
this fiction is to be maintained for even a short space of time,
the husband must not display any affective interest in his bride,
since this would inevitably disturb the equilibrium in the old
pattern of his relations with his siblings and his parents. There¬
fore in his general behaviour the husband attempts to deny the
importance of his exclusive sexual relationship with his bride
and he makes every effort to conceal the occurrence and fre¬
quency of sexual intercourse. However, since all the members
of a family sleep together in the same hut, this is not easy.
Before the marriage ceremony a temporary hut is built for
the bridal pair, or sometimes a space is cleared in the hut which
is otherwise used as a store-shed. Customarily the bridegroom
does not go with the sheep for eight days from the Sunday of
his marriage and he is thus able to sleep in privacy with his
bride for six nights. Although this initial privacy is granted to
him, the whole progress of these marital events is shared by the
groom with his brothers; some of this information also leaks
through to the female members of the family. In this first sexual
communion the entire family identifies itself with the young
husband. There is no question at this stage of his having any
affection for his bride. This may emerge later partly as a result
of the intimacies now initiated. It is something of an ordeal and
a matter of considerable anxiety for all Sarakatsan bridegrooms
that they should be able to effect a technically successful assault
upon this strange woman and uphold their reputation for manli¬
ness in its most literal sense, a reputation which affects the
prestige of the entire family. The stress on physical and moral
manliness (avSpurjxo*;) in the stereotype of the ideal man en¬
courages in the Sarakatsani a deep-seated fear of sexual impo¬
tence on this critical occasion which is, indeed, almost a public
ceremony of initiation. In the morning, success or failure on
the previous night is discussed with brothers in embarrassed
monosyllables and, if there has been difficulty, they try to give
advice and encouragement. Any lack of sexual prowess almost
inevitably reaches the ears of the bride’s family and the possi¬
bility of a leakage farther afield cannot be overlooked.


THE STATUS OF THE BRIDE 67
But with the return of the young shepherd bridegroom to his
sheep this co-operative interest in his sexual relations ends. He
may continue to sleep with his bride in privacy for one or two
months but if he prolongs this period unduly it represents a
clear breach in the solidarity of the family. Sexual intercourse
becomes now progressively associated not with the proof of
manliness, but with conjugal intimacy and solidarity. And in
his attempt to maintain his relations with his family of origin
unaltered and intact he uses great care to avoid any demonstra¬
tion of this kind of interest in his bride. Sarakatsan sleeping
arrangements are simple. Velenzas, thick woollen carpet-like
blankets, are spread on the ground. The Sarakatsanos removes
his shoes and his jacket, and another velenza is placed over him.
It is the duty of the young bride to place the heavy enveloping
velenzas over each member of the family in turn and then to
put out the oil lamp before making her way to her husband’s
side. It is not generally very long before a concert of snores
indicates that the family is asleep and it is then possible for the
bride and groom under their heavy covering to exchange silent
embraces. Silence, of course, is necessary to avoid discovery but
in any case the Sarakatsani believe that speech during inter¬
course is shameful. At first light the bride is first on her feet to
blow the embers on the hearth into a blaze and prepare the
coffee. With these conventional arrangements it is possible for
the physical solidarity of the family to remain relatively un¬
impaired, and for the bride and groom to enjoy marital
intimacy without directly affronting the sensibilities of the hus¬
band’s family of origin.
However, there is a further complication. Before his marriage
the young shepherd returned from the sheep to spend a night
at the family hut perhaps once in every three weeks; then he
changed his clothes, had the luxury of a night under cover,
and heard the family news and gossip. After his marriage he
comes openly to the huts more frequently; but he cannot return
more than once in every twelve or thirteen days without feel¬
ing some embarrassment that he is showing too much interest
in a person who is still an interloper in the family circle, and a
sense of shame that his sexual desires and intentions must be
very evident. He therefore supplements his fortnightly visits
with other clandestine meetings. The bride sleeps near the door,


68 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
a cold and draughty part of the hut not favoured by more
senior members of the family. The groom arrives at the huts
some time after midnight when the family is asleep, slips into
the hut, remains with his young wife for an hour or so and
then, well before dawn, is already on his way back to the sheep
which may be two or three hours’ walking distance away.
Naturally the family are aware that these visits occur. Stories
are told about grooms who tripped over milk cans as they en¬
tered the pitch dark hut or failed to convince the dogs of their
true identity. They are considered to be hysterically funny;
perhaps an indication of the ambivalent feelings which this
conflict of loyalties provokes.
If the newly married shepherd is the eldest son the developing
pattern of relations has certain rather specific nuances. The
family take an excessive pride in the first bride. They also take
some trouble to make her feel at home, although at the same
time their sensitivity to the attitude of the groom towards her
is greater than in the case of the marriages of younger brothers.
This after all is the first intrusion of an outsider into the hitherto
exclusive family circle. More importantly the relationship be¬
tween a father and his eldest son frequently shows signs of strain
during this period. A father cannot in accordance with custo¬
mary right long delay his retirement beyond the time when his
eldest son has his first child, for it is an important value of this
community that a man who is married and a parent should be
the ‘master’ (votxoxupyjt;) in his own household. But after the
son’s marriage and before the birth of the first child the father
insists that he should continue to control the affairs of the ex¬
tended family while the son is learning under his guidance the
elements of his future role. Until the pregnancy of his wife is
well established, the irritating uncertainty about the transfer of
power, which will confer on him the status and prestige of a
family leader in the community, sometimes tempts the son to
show a lack of respect8 to his father which previously he would
not have dared to express so freely.
The retirement of the father resolves tensions between proxi¬
mate generations in the extended family which are considerably
aggravated by the influence of the prestige values of the wider
• Such lack of respect, however, is seldom shown in public.


BROTHERS AND THEIR WIVES 69
community. A man who, although married and a parent, re¬
mained for a number of years under the day-to-day direction
of an elderly father, however vigorous, would lose prestige and
find himself the butt of comic satire. The fact that the younger
married brothers work for a time under the direction of an
elder brother in a common household is a different matter. The
relations of brothers after marriage are based on free associa¬
tion. Policy decisions arc a matter of consensus rather than
direction. The suspicion against the man who does not relieve
his father of his burden of responsibility (whether he wants to
be relieved of it or not) is that he is nervous, diffident, lacking in
self-assertion, and unable to be a ‘capable protector’ (txav£><;
7cpoaTaT7]c;) of his family.
In summary, then, the first phase of the development of the
elementary family is a latency period in which conjugal soli¬
darity, although gradually developing, is subordinate to the
sibling solidarity between the husband and his brothers and
sisters. In general it may be said to last until the birth of the
first child. Also, although there is no formal change in the
relation of father and eldest son during this period, competitive
friction between them tends to increase.
2. BROTHERS AND THEIR WIVES
After one or two years most brides have become mothers.
This, naturally, brings about a great change in the bride’s
position in the extended family. Previously, although full mem¬
bership of the group was extended to her, yet in an affective
sense she remained a stranger even in the eyes of her own hus¬
band. After the birth of her first child it is said that the new
bride ‘takes root in the new family’. Not only docs she take
root, as it were, in the extended family but more significantly
the new elementary family, consisting of herself, her husband,
and the infant child, takes a definitive form. The arrival of the
child is received with joy by the whole extended family whose
attitude towards the bride shifts from tolerance to acceptance
and affection for her as the mother of their tiny kinsman.
It is from the moment when the members of the extended
family first feel this new affection for the bride that their control
over her begins to diminish. So long as the extended family
remains undivided and a younger brother of her husband does


70 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
not also bring a wife into the group, the bride continues to work
very hard carrying water, and gathering firewood for the family.
But she will now receive, necessarily, more assistance from the
other women in the family and often the demands of her child
for the breast, as well as the other attentions it requires, will
take priority over all other considerations.
At this time the husband’s behaviour towards his wife under¬
goes fundamental changes. He now begins to talk with her more
freely before other members of the family. She is not any longer
merely the conjugal partner with whom he has sexual relations,
which even in marriage possess a suspect if not exactly shameful
quality. She is now the mother of his child; and in this role,
especially if her infant is a son, the husband openly recognizes
his wife without the ambivalence which previously attached to
their relationship. For the child represents his own social in¬
dividuation; it stresses his separation even from his siblings with
whom his common interests have previously been almost un¬
differentiated. As a father he must now assert himself in the
world, and even within his own extended family, if he is to
carry out adequately his parental obligations.
After the birth of the first child the bride does not usually
continue to address her husband’s brothers and sisters as
respectively, acpevxr), ‘master’, and xupa, ‘mistress’; instead she
uses their Christian names. And if, by this time, a younger
brother of her husband has been married, the family no longer
address her as vucpyj, ‘bride’, but use the name of her husband
with the suffix ‘-ina’ added; thus Pericles, Periclina. With these
changes it is openly recognized that a new elementary family
group has emerged; and they reflect, too, the growing equality
in the relationships of the wife with the members of her hus¬
band’s family of origin who are of her own generation. It is
also significant that no member of the extended family, except
the parents-in-law, any longer orders her about in peremptory
fashion in the presence of her husband, let alone attempts to
scold or discipline her.
Parallel to the diminished control of the family over the
bride, is the tacit understanding that the husband/father of the
new elementary family is no longer able to fulfil critical obliga¬
tions of his roles as son and brother in his family of origin;
specifically, he is not expected to risk his life in any form of


BROTHERS AND THEIR WIVES 71
vengeance killing even if it concerns the death of a brother or
the dishonour of a sister. Under the conditions of social life in
a patrilocal extended family it is inevitable that there will be
some conflict between a man’s roles as son and brother in his
family of origin and his roles as husband and father in his family
of marriage. In important matters the Sarakatsani solve this
problem by holding to the principle that obligations to direct
lineal descendants always take priority over obligations to
either direct ascendant or collateral kin. It is, then, not mar¬
riage but the birth of children which breaches the unity of the
group of brothers.
The Sarakatsani claim that brothers would undoubtedly live
together all their lives were it not for the quarrels of their wives.
This is a rather too simple explanation of the causes which
eventually lead to the separation of brothers; yet it is true that
the differences between wives often provide the occasions for
separation. There are two proverbs which the Sarakatsani often
quote when discussing this subject. ‘Women make the house
and they destroy it’ (ol yuvodxeic, cpxiavouv to chuti xal to yaXav).
‘Wives are like nuts from forty different walnut trees’ (oaro
crapavTa xapuSiii; xtxpuSia). The second proverb implies that
wives are all alike, yet each comes from a different home. ‘Each
wife’, said one informant, ‘has her own mother. They cannot
come to an understanding.’ The Sarakatsani expect the wives of
brothers to quarrel and on the whole they are not disappointed
in their expectations. Yet, fundamentally, the growing dis¬
tance between brothers is due to the obligations and affec¬
tions which they owe to their children and which replace their
former attachment to the sibling group. Quarrels between wives
are not simply the result of incompatibility of temperament or
some innate Greek sense of individuality. They arise because
wives identify themselves with the rights and interests of their
children. That this exclusive identification occurs, follows from
the logic of the kinship system based on equivalent bilateral
extension. As we have seen, the elementary family is the only
corporate kinship group which is relatively enduring in this
bilateral system. The children of each brother have in common
with their cousins only half of their kindred. Through their
affiliation to the kinsmen of their mother, they have certain
affective interests and moral obligations they cannot share with


72 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
their cousins. In many unilineal descent systems, on the other
hand, the interests and rights of a woman’s children are so
intimately related to those of the children of their father’s
brothers that irrespective of personal feelings, her duty to her
own children demands loyal co-operation with all members of
the lineage. The weak extended family of the Sarakatsani does
not provide a framework with continuity in time in which units
segmented in one context may yet be united in another. When
the joint flock of animals has been divided, co-operation be¬
tween married brothers, and therefore contractual obligation,
generally continues, but categorical obligations deriving from
common membership in the family of origin are no longer valid.
An index of this instability of the extended family is the rela¬
tively early retirement of the father, which has already been
discussed.
An important characteristic of the extended family is that it is
based on consent rather than authority. The flock and every¬
thing connected with it is held as common property, and since
brothers have equal interests in the flock, decisions which con¬
cern its welfare are based on a general consensus of opinion.
The eldest brother, who normally acts as the executive head,
implements the general decision of the group. He also acts as its
treasurer and all money is controlled by him. When business
affairs take him to Jannina he does the shopping for the whole
group, returning with perhaps a pair of shoes for the wife of
one of his brothers, a cotton frock for his daughter, and a new
jacket for one of his nephews. If one of his brothers wants
cigarettes or requires money to play cards in the coffee-shop he
comes and states his needs without embarrassment. The younger
brother knows from experience what is reasonable and he does
not usually make impossible demands on the family’s slender
resources. If he injures his family, he injures himself. The soli¬
darity of brothers in such matters, even after marriage and the
birth of children, is remarkable. Yet gradually, and in most cases
with the greatest reluctance, they come to realize that their
several obligations to their new families of marriage preclude
the possibility of their living together indefinitely in a single
domestic household. Observation of the conduct of their wives
may often assist them in arriving at this conclusion.
The attitudes of wives towards one another are far less


BROTHERS AND THEIR WIVES 73
reasonable. Unless their requirements happen to be similar,
what is given to one wife is by definition not given to the other.
Inevitably each believes that the other is the better treated. An
elder brother often makes a conscious effort to treat his younger
brother’s wife with particular consideration and tact, supplying
from the family purse without debate the money required for
all her children’s needs; shoes, a new jacket, medicine and so
on. This may merely infuriate the elder brother’s wife who sees
herself and her children sacrificed to her husband’s wish to
maintain intact the relationship with his brother. On the other
hand, the younger brother’s wife is seldom grateful. She may
not believe that she is being favourably treated and, at best, she
will still resent the fact that she must apply to her husband’s
brother for the requirements of her children.
Yet the break-up of the united group of brothers is not due
to the quarrels of the wives alone. As his children pass out of
infancy, a father’s thoughts are increasingly concerned with the
problem of how to provide for their future. For instance, it may
be necessary to practise extreme economy for a number of
years, or even to borrow money to buy additional sheep, in an
attempt to build up a flock large enough to support his sons
and provide for his daughters’ dowries. Obviously such opera¬
tions can only be carried through efficiently and equitably when
each brother has command of his own share of the family’s
stock.
The affairs of the family group led by Theodoros Ferendinos
(see Chart, page 74) illustrate these problems. After thir¬
teen years together in an extended family the five brothers are
considering the need to divide their household and the flocks.
It is a family of moderate wealth and prestige owning 365 sheep
and goats. The five brothers are known to be resolute, brave,
and mutually devoted. Yet although I never observed an open
quarrel between these brothers, friction is evident. Four of the
brothers are married, two of them have children nearing school
age while three of the eldest brother’s children are already at
school. They are all concerned as to how they will support these
growing families. Theodoros the elder brother has four children,
but the second and third brothers have only two each. While
the group lives in one household it is clear that to some extent
the younger brothers are carrying part of the burden of


EXTENDED FAMILY LED BY
74 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
Pi
cn O
HH Q £ W Pi
P«H CO O Poi
Q O w ffi h
V
'.xC5>
E h-l
Tcu«3
S
OsV I
— < CO TO
IN ID
•(GcS
sE D
— 05
CO <N
>a
iO O)
CO <N“
• HO
fe
4-3»
s
CO 04 CO CO~
i(Ls>
S
Q
-ji 5?,
T<LNoOO3>
H
bo C3
to C
lO 03
?6
.S *
<D V bo bo
<<
—<
Dt»)S H-N
D 43
*S
ns IS
”8 is
3*5
CTJ
• <a § w
O
' <] Jd rf
<
•<!•§«
— <1
V
bhOo ^
1) O
T3
O <U
u£ • < TH3 ^
1b)o
.u
-< Vo O
o o CO o <cu
'£ o
° ’Sg 10
<3 iO
HH <J)
<bVo
N.B. There are also two sisters not shown in this chart. They were, in 1955, respectively 42 and 40 years of age; the elder
sister was married three years before, the younger one year after, the marriage of Theodoros.


BROTHERS AND THEIR WIVES 75
supporting Theodores’ children, particularly as the three children
who are at school must be well dressed and well shod to uphold
the family’s prestige before the children of the villagers and the
other Sarakatsani who are trying to emulate them. Dissatisfac¬
tion, it must be stressed, is not expressed by those brothers who
have no children. The attitude of the unmarried brother, or
even of the married brother without children, remains one of
common identification and mutual sharing without the keeping
of any conscious account. But the brother who has become a
parent must adopt a more calculating attitude if he is to fulfil
this new role according to accepted expectations.
For the same reasons, although brothers in an earlier phase
of the extended family’s development willingly delegate the
control of a common purse to the senior brother, they find this
arrangement less congenial at a later stage when the pressure of
anxieties about the future of their families of marriage begins to
be felt. The different spending habits of brothers, which within
limits were formerly merely an incident in the common identi¬
fication of siblings, later become difficult to ignore. Theodores
himself admits that ‘he wastes money easily’ by standing drinks
in the coffee-shop and playing cards, whereas Demetrios the
second brother has a reputation for being tight-fisted and care¬
ful. Eleutherios the third brother is somewhat uncouth and feels
ill at ease in the coffee-shop. Vasili and Aristoteles resemble their
eldest brother and like to drink and play cards when the oppor¬
tunity presents itself. Demetrios admits that Theodores must
spend money in the coffee-shop to keep in with people and to
know what is going on. But he thinks that often he spends more
money than is necessary. No doubt his drinking companions
account him a fine fellow, but this hardly assists Demetrios in his
problems. Demetrios privately grumbled to me when Theodores
bought a fifty shilling pocket watch for Aristoteles the youngest
brother. Aristoteles was the favourite of Theodores, Demetrios
complained. The boy had herded his sheep well enough for
several years by using the sun and stars. The truth was that he
wanted a watch because some of the other young shepherds had
watches. Had I not observed how he now rushed up to every¬
body and asked them if they wanted to know the time and,
before they could answer, pulled out the new watch simply to
show them that he had one? Admittedly every man must have


76 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
some ‘self-regard’ (ey<>HCTfj.6<;) but the family had to pay fifty
shillings for this watch.
During the summer of 1954 Vasili worked for a Thessaly
merchant who had come to the Epirus looking for wool. Vasili
travelled around the Zagori countryside as his agent, buying up
wool wherever he found it. By entering a price in his account
book somewhat in excess of the amount he actually paid out,
but still below the maximum buying price laid down in the
merchant’s instructions to him, he was able to make a very
pleasing profit in addition to his weekly wage. When he re¬
turned to the family he gave almost all the profit to Theodoros
but secretly withheld six pounds for himself. Vasili had been
married only two years at the time, but his wife was expecting
a child in the next month. His conscience was clearly troubled
at the deception he was practising and in his confession to me
he explained that three years ago there would have been no
point in keeping any of the money to himself, but now he was
married, his wife was about to have a child, and he vaguely
felt the need to have some reserve of money which was entirely
under his own control.
The wives of the four married brothers live together in one
domestic unit and work under the direction of their mother-in
law. There are many practical advantages in this situation of
which they are not unaware. When one wife is cooking the
communal meal, another is collecting firewood or carrying water
while the old mother-in-law watches over the children. There
are goats to be milked, wild herbs to be collected, clothes to be
washed. There is the whole lengthy process of spinning and
weaving. In all these multifarious domestic tasks the collabora¬
tion of the five women makes for companionship and a certain
economy of time and energy. But while the joint operations of
the brothers with the sheep are based on a relationship of com¬
mon identification, the co-operation of their wives is of a con¬
tractual character. The partnership works smoothly so long as
each wife is thought to be pulling her weight in relation to her
seniority. This clearly may often be a matter rather of opinion
than obvious fact. And while the brothers are usually careful
not to express any displeasure they may feel for one another,
wives are only too ready to criticize one another in public.
Theodorina, the wife of Theodoros, is criticized because of


BROTHERS AND THEIR WIVES 77
her lack of physical robustness. About three years ago she lost
a baby girl. She was prostrate with grief and never fully re¬
covered. She has been to a number of different doctors who
have agreed that she is suffering from ‘weakness’ but have
variously diagnosed this as due to infected tonsils, bad heart,
and anaemia. She has had her tonsils and adenoids removed
and a number of courses of injections; this treatment has cost a
considerable sum of money and has produced no visible im¬
provement. Demetrina, the wife of the second brother, is par¬
ticularly scornful of Theodorina. ‘Theodorina is down on the
ground (xaxa -pji;) again’, she complains, and goes on to explain
that she is leaving her children in the ditch to fend for them¬
selves just because of an idea in her head. This refers to her
grief for her little girl. It is right to grieve, but not to this extent
where she is unable to care properly for her sons and daughters
for whose existence she ought to thank God. No doubt what
really annoys Demetrina and the other women is the money
wasted on medicines, and the extra work which they have to do
when Theodorina periodically says she is too sick to go about
her tasks.
Demetrina, herself, is disliked by all the other wives and her
mother-in-law because of her sharp tongue and her dogmatic
holier-than-thou attitude. Her own family of origin is on the
worst of terms with her husband’s brothers and she is suspected,
not without reason, of passing on information about the conduct
of affairs in the extended family into which she has married.
She is a storm centre in many quarrels with the other wives on
account of her four-year-old son, an unpleasant and physically
tough blonde-headed bully, who maltreats his young cousins by
hurling stones and hitting them over the head with pieces of
wood. They note that this child resembles his maternal kin.
The third wife, Eleutherina, is a good worker but graceless
in body and personality. She suffers from some catarrhal com¬
plaint which makes her speech almost unintelligible and causes
her nostrils to drool with mucus. Behind her back the other
wives mock her for these defects and she is conscious of this.
Her small son Alec, who is four years old, suffers from the same
catarrhal complaint, appears to be mentally backward, and is
subject to periodic fits. She is held responsible for the disabilities
of the child which affect the prestige of the whole family.


7N THE EXTENDED FAMII-Y
Vasilin;i the youngest wife has been married for about two years. She gave birth to a son, but the child was weak and died. Since she has scarcely advanced from the status of being a new bride, she does not assert herself. She is a willing worker but slow and without much intelligence. For these reasons the other women have litth‘ patience with her and criticize her freely. The wives openly admit that they live in anticipation of the day when their husbands will separate the single household and each wife will become ‘mistress’ (voixoxupa) in her own home. Their imputation of various short-comings to the other wives is merely a way of demonstrating their fundamentally opposed interests in respect to their different families. Each wife/mother is in herself a symbol of the kinship distance which separates her children from their paternal cousins, and therefore her husband from his siblings. The worst quarrels between wives are about their children. And such quarrels arc particularly dangerous to the unity of the brothers. Two married brothers frequently stand together and verbally or even physically chas¬ tise their wives who make trouble in the family by quarrels over personal differences; but when the issue between the wives concerns their children (however trivial its origin may be), the two sibling/fathers, out of loyalty to and identification with their children, are inevitably committed to the support of their wives. Therefore a circumstantial factor of some importance in deciding the moment when brothers must separate is the in¬ creasing dilliculty of maintaining discipline in a joint household without causing offence to the constituent elementary families. When Theodoros on occasions shook a worried head and said, 'We are eighteen individuals (vopaxot) in this house’, this was the cause of his anxiety. As head of the house he could directly discipline only his own wife and children. He would not verbally reprimand a brother's wife in her husband’s presence, unless she was a newly married bride or without children; in his absence he would certainly scold her if she did not comply with some instruction which concerned the general running of the joint household; but he could not interfere in her relations with her children. No brother would ever strike another brother’s wife. Even the control of the mother-in-law over her sons’ wives, though it is still considerable, becomes less complete after three or four years ofmarriage. In this household there are eight young


SEPARATION 79
children and babies playing, fighting, and screaming. Except in
the early evening when a sleep of exhaustion stills their activi¬
ties, the scene is one of constant tumult. In this situation a
brother cannot strike the children of another. Afortiori one wife
cannot in any way interfere with the children of another wife.
When a father separates two embattled cousins he pushes the
child which is not his own out of the way telling it to go to its
mother, and then turns to deal his own child a slap across the
face. Clearly these symptoms of disorder and indiscipline in the
extended family result from the growing isolation of each of
the constituent elementary families. The autonomy of each
elementary family in regard to all its internal relationships
and the control of its children is not compatible with the co¬
existence of the families in a single domestic unit.
When an extended family of several brothers and their wives
has lived as a single household for a number of years it is not
unusual to hear in the gossip of other families some criticism of
this arrangement. In fact, few extended families survive for
longer than ten years without the separation of at least some
brothers. No doubt the criticism of the extended family which
does remain united beyond this limit may be attributed, in some
measure, to the jealousy of other groups in which brothers have
not been able to show quite the same mutual devotion. Yet, if
they have succeeded in living up to one kinship value, their
detractors are right to point out that they have failed to maintain
other and more important values. Thus one critic of the Feren
dinos family said that it was not right that the second and third
brothers in the family, who each had two children, were not
yet complete masters in their own households. They were assist¬
ing their elder brother with his larger family to a degree which
was scarcely honourable when they had their own children to
care for. Moreover, it was added, everybody knew that the
wives were at each others’ throats. It was dangerous to allow
this state of affairs to continue because it would inevitably end
in quarrels between the brothers themselves.
3. SEPARATION
There is no precise formalized rule as to when brothers ought
to separate. Some informants say that when an elder brother
has a family of his own, and his younger brother is also married


80 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
and has had two children born to him, the elder brother ought
to leave the extended family. Others state that an elder brother
with a family should not share a common household with a
younger brother after the latter’s eldest child approaches school
aged (5-6 years of age). It is also said that it is necessary for
brothers to remain united in one household until all the sisters
are married. All agree that in any individual family the course
of events depends upon the particular circumstances.
An examination of field data reveals that broadly speaking
there are two modes of separation. Either a group of brothers
waits until all the brothers are married before any separation
occurs, or, from time to time, individual brothers leave the
extended family to set up their own households and withdraw
their share of the stock from the common flock before the whole
group has completed its marriages.
TABLE I
THE SEPARATION OF BROTHERS
Number of brothers in a sibling group 23456
Groups united until all are married 84110 14
Groups divided before all are married o 3 4 1 1 9
87521 23
In this simple table, data is presented on twenty-three groups
of brothers which in recent years completed their marriages.
Of these twenty-three groups, nine did not wait until all the
brothers were married before some division occurred. On the
other hand, of the fourteen groups which have waited until all
the brothers were married before dividing their sheep and
households, eight had only two brothers and a further four,
three brothers. Thus it would appear that there is a correlation
between the size of the group of brothers and the method of
separation. In groups of four or more brothers, it is generally
not possible to wait until all the brothers are married before
some division occurs.
Where the division of the household is effected in a single
operation after all the brothers have been married, and where it
occurs ‘with good heart’ (pi xaX7) xapSia), the whole group


SEPARATION 81
co-operates in the erection ofnew dwellings, each brother setting
up a separate household in a new hut. The common treasury
is used to furnish the new homes with the necessary simple
domestic equipment. Articles of dowry such as blankets, mirrors,
trays, drinking glasses, which may have been in communal use
in the extended family, accompany each wife to her new hut.
The youngest son with his parents, if they are alive, and his
bride remain in the hut of the former joint household.
When these arrangements have been completed, the animals
are massed and penned. The animals of each category, rams,
ewe lambs, 2-year-old ewes, 3-year-old ewes, and so on are
driven in turn through a narrow opening. As each animal
passes through the opening, it is nominated to a particular
brother, each brother taking animals in a fixed rotation. Or
sometimes the animals of each category are divided by the
drawing of lots. In either case, as the animals are assigned to
each brother, he effects some variation on the existing ear-sign.
The youngest brother, who receives an additional half-share of
stock for each of his surviving parents, also retains the original
ear-sign.
This operation is a severe test of brotherly love. A brother
who finds that he has an undue number of indifferent animals
in his share is unlikely to believe that the division of stock has
been just. Therefore, in some cases, a disinterested relative,
generally an uncle, is persuaded to hold the ring and preside
over a fair distribution. The separate flocks which result from
this division are unlikely to be equal in numbers. For, apart
from the extra animals which the youngest son receives for the
maintenance of the old parents, any animals and their natural
increase which came into the flock as dowry of the brothers’
wives are never under any circumstances included in the equal
distribution, but remain the property of the brothers concerned.
For the other method of separation, in which individual
brothers leave the main body of the extended family to set up
their own households, the procedure is similar; but in this case
only one share is separated out from the joint property. If this
process is continued to its logical conclusion, the operation is
finally completed when the youngest brother finds himself alone
with his bride and surviving parents in the original extended
family hut. In fact, what occurs more frequently in separations


82 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
of this type, is that after the first two or three brothers have
contracted out of the extended family, the remaining two or
three younger brothers hold together until the youngest is
married and established before a further and final division is
made.
It is now necessary to introduce a further complicating factor.
The groups of brothers we have been considering have sisters
to whom they owe certain categorical obligations. We are here
mainly concerned with two of these obligations. They must, as
members of the family, contribute their share towards her
dowry, and they must defend her honour (ti[xy)). The marriage
of the sister represents for the brother the successful and honour¬
able accomplishment of these tasks: her virginity has been con¬
served intact and the dowry has been handed over. In logical
order these obligations are prior to any that a man later acquires
through marriage in the new elementary family which is then
formed. Thus, ideally, it is held that all the sisters in a family
should marry first, before even the eldest brother takes a wife.
In this way, duties which a man has in the role of brother in the
family of origin do not come into conflict with his duties as a
father and husband in the family of marriage. Generally speak¬
ing, men marry when they are about thirty or thirty-one years
of age, whereas their sisters hope to find a bridegroom when
they are in their mid-twenties. Table II gives an indication
of these general trends.
The age at which any girl marries depends on a number of
different considerations. Normally, her own family do not wish
to lose her before she is about twenty-five years of age. It
requires the labour of years to accumulate a worthy dowry;
and this is important for reasons of prestige. Further, the family
does not want to be deprived of her working services prema¬
turely. Despite the stated ideal that all the sisters should marry
before the eldest brother, this is seldom realized since it would
destroy the balance of female labour in the group. Generally at
least one sister remains unmarried until the bride of the eldest
brother is brought into the family. Another factor which delays
the marriage of a girl is the real distress which this causes her
parents and siblings in a group where affective loyalties are so
remarkably strong. However, a family may accept a proposal
of marriage for a daughter in her early twenties if it helps the


SEPARATION 83
general arrangement of the marriages of a sibling group or if it
is an attractive offer for prestige reasons. But it has to be remem¬
bered that although it may be hinted through the mediation of
kinsmen that a girl is ready to marry, it is always the man’s
family who must make the approach. If a girl is poor, ugly, un¬
healthy, or from a family of low social standing, she may wait
TABLE II
THE AGE OF MARRIAGE (i945
Age at Marriage Brides Grooms
Over 32 2 13
32 2 12
31 6 27 30 7 21 29 10 17 28 17 13 27 14 9 26 22 4
25 25 5 24 16 2
23 6 O 22 5 O
132 123
many years without receiving an offer; and, in the end, she
may be forced to accept the proposal of a widower or a man
with some physical or mental incapacity.
But, providing that all the brothers are not born first and all
the sisters last, or that there are two sisters very much younger
than the rest of the sibling group, it is often possible to marry off
all but one of the sisters before the eldest brother has had to
wait beyond the age when he might normally expect to marry.
Although the late age of marriage of brothers is not unconnected
with the duty of first discharging obligations towards the sisters
before a man acquires a family of his own, it is not a simple
correlation. It is also related to the balance of power between
father and son. If a man marries at the age of 30 and his first
son is born a year later, this son will in turn reach the age of
30 when his father is in his early sixties, an age at which he be¬
comes physically incapable of the strenuous life that the execu¬
tive head of a shepherd family necessarily leads. And even if his


84 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
physique remains unimpaired he cannot delay the marriage of
his first son beyond his thirty-first year without suffering con¬
siderable and growing criticism in the community. He must,
then, bow to the inevitable, arrange the marriage of his son and
in a short time (at the birth of the first grandchild) hand over
control; for, as we have stressed, it is not compatible with the
values of this community for a married man with a child to be
still under parental control and not master in his own house.
But fathers do not normally hand over control until they have
to. An elder brother, who has no sisters to guard or provide for,
may marry a year or two sooner, but the difference is not
marked.
Old age, then, and the fear of public criticism and ridicule
generally force a man to arrange the eldest son’s marriage be¬
fore his thirty-second birthday. No consideration of the needs
of sisters will normally delay this event. And the marriage of
other brothers in the middle of the birth order of the sibling
group are arranged with the same upper limit in mind. On the
other hand, the youngest brother will almost certainly not
marry until all the sisters have found husbands. Through the
social equivalence of brothers, the duty of watching over and,
if need be, avenging the honour of the sisters, is delegated to
the unmarried member of the group of brothers. This arrange¬
ment recognizes the conflict between the roles of father/husband
and brother when they are played simultaneously by the same
person; a conflict which, according to Sarakatsan kinship values,
can only be resolved in favour of the father/husband. It is an
arrangement which, on occasion, may delay considerably the
marriage of the youngest brother.
TABLE III
CHILDREN OF EUTHYMIOS CARVOUNIS
Group of Siblingsr Age at marriage Age in 7555
Demetrios (M) 3i 42
George (M) 30 38
Michael (M) 32 36
Elias (M) Unmarried 35
Amalia (F) 24 32 Evangelike (F) 28 28


SEPARATION 85
The children of Euthymios Carvounis (Table III) are one of
those unfortunate sibling groups where all the brothers were
born first and the sisters afterwards. The youngest sister has just
been successfully married to a villager. But the youngest
brother, Elias, is 35 and only now becomes free to find himself
a wife.
Naturally, under these conventions, a sister may sometimes
find herself without an unmarried brother to act as guardian of
her honour. Apart from sibling groups with no brothers, this is
likely to be the case where there is only one brother with sisters
who are considerably younger and a father who is incapacitated.
Pericles Gogolos, for instance, had to marry and succeed his
father at the age of 27, when his two younger unmarried sisters,
Erasmia and Machoula, were respectively only 23 and 19 years
of age.
It appears, then, that the solidarity of the sibling group, as
this is manifested in the obligations of brothers towards sisters,
ideally demands that all sisters should be married before any
of their brothers. In practice, we find that while the ideal is
approached, though seldom achieved, when the ages and birth
order of the siblings are not an obstacle, in less favourable cir¬
cumstances it is only the youngest brother who may have to
wait some time before marrying. But while the obligations to a
sister do not in the main delay the marriages of brothers, the
presence of unmarried sisters in the house does effectively pre¬
vent married brothers from dividing the extended family house¬
hold. It is true that in most families, by the time the second
brother has married and has children approaching school age,
the sisters because of their earlier age of marriage will have left
their family of origin. But where this is not so, it is held to be
wrong for married brothers to break up the united family
group before the sisters are married. In the first place, it is said
that brothers who live in a united household are accustomed to
reaching unanimous decisions. If each brother has become used
to making various decisions for himself, it is less likely that they
will agree about whom the sister should marry, and how much
dowry in sheep and money should be conceded. Moreover, the
traditional element in the dowry, the heavy blankets and per¬
sonal clothing, claims the better grades of wool from all the
sheep of all the brothers for a number of years before the


86 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
marriage takes place. In a united extended family this presents
no difficulty; but if wool had to be collected from a number of
autonomous households, it would certainly lead to friction be¬
tween the wives with reciprocal accusations of sharp practice.
Finally, in a large household which has many women the honour
of the sister is more efficiently safeguarded. It is not sufficient to
have an unmarried brother to take revenge if the sister suffers
rape or insult. This is certainly a deterrent, but it does not
ensure complete security. It is equally important that whenever
a sister goes out on some errand, to gather firewood or carry
water, she has a companion to go with her. In the popular
mind wells and illicit sexual intercourse are linked together. If
a man for any reason wants to see the local girls, he has only to
sit by the well and by and by he will see them all. (The wells
used by the Sarakatsani traditionally were never, and today are
often not, village wells, but remote mountain springs.) If an
unmarried girl goes to the well too frequently alone, the gossips
are quick to suggest that her object is to collect something more
than a barrel of water. But if she always has a companion, she
is protected both from the danger of assault which is probably,
in fact, remote, and from the danger of slander which is much
more real.
For these reasons, then, brothers do not divide the extended
household until all the sisters are married. Afterwards, the
brothers are free to complete their own marriages and separate
their households in the manner that has been described. Each
is now the leader of an autonomous family. But when the divi¬
sion of the joint household occurs with ‘good heart’, and where
there is sufficient grazing, they will normally remain together
in a ‘company’ under the general leadership of the eldest
brother. But working operations are now on a basis of strict
accounting. Brothers often point out that the relative peace and
goodwill which prevails between their wives and children after
the division of the extended family household is bought at the
price of a hitherto unknown element of calculation in their own
relations. This is true. However, they sometimes forget that
just before division took place it was often precisely the lack of
calculation in their relations that they themselves had been
complaining about.
In describing the process of development which occurs


SEPARATION 87
within and between the elementary family of marriage and the
extended family of origin, it has been possible to document a
number of statements about kinship relations which were pre¬
sented rather more formally in the previous chapter. During
this review, a constant theme has been the inherent conflict
between the sibling bond and the conjugal relation. It becomes
clear that the conjugal relationship only takes priority over the
long established relations between siblings after the birth of
children; and this is because, in the Sarakatsan view, the obliga¬
tions of parents towards their children possess an absolute and
sacred quality. Indeed, it is the conflict between the individual’s
roles in his families of origin and of marriage which provide the
key to the understanding of Sarakatsan kinship usages. The
individual’s withdrawal after marriage from categorical obliga¬
tions to the other members of the sibling group marks the isola¬
tion of the family of marriage; and the increasing kinship
distance which separates the husband or wife from brothers
and sisters and other collateral kinsmen. And these processes are
consistently related to the bilateral form of the kindred and the
prohibition on marriage within its limits.
It is also apparent that the processes we have been discussing
are not unaffected by the dominantly competitive values of the
community. We have seen how the belief that a married man
with a family ought to be master in his own household so that
he may assert the interests of his own elementary family of
marriage, influences the decision of a brother to set up his own
household. It is not merely a question of material interest.
Prestige is also involved. This is clear in the case of the eldest
son, who puts pressure on his father to hand over the administra¬
tion of family affairs. For in this instance there is no immediate
fission of the unit into two or more parts, merely a redistribu¬
tion of roles. The assumption of the status of head of household
is in itself a matter of prestige. It makes a man in principle the
equal, in that particular respect, of all the other heads of house¬
hold in the community, and enables him to compete with them
in all those situations where the prize is approval of a man’s
conduct and ability as worthy of the ideal type family protec¬
tor. Therefore, in so far as the absolute quality of the parental
obligation is institutionalized in the kinship system in the separa¬
tion of brothers’ households, the kinship system is consistent


88 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
with the competitive values. On the other hand, two factors
have been noted which tend to hinder the young shepherd
from attaining the status of head of household as soon as might
otherwise be the case. First, an eldest son must show respect to
his father and accept his leadership as long as he is physically
active and capable; or until the son is about thirty years of age.
This is another way of saying that normally an eldest son cannot
take a wife and expect to be in charge of family affairs until he
is about thirty years of age. Secondly, brothers, although
married, must remain as a united extended family until their
sisters are safely married. This, of course, reflects the original
unity of the sibling group. Thus, so far as respect and obedience
towards an active father, or the unity of the sibling group
(which are both important values of the kinship system), delay
the young shepherd from assuming the role of a head of house¬
hold, the kinship system and the competitive values of the
community are in some measure of conflict.
4. THE ‘COMPANY’ OF RELATED FAMILIES
It is some consolation to brothers who may feel a genuine
distress at the necessary development of their relationship, if
after the dissolution of the extended family they continue to
manage their sheep together in a ‘company’. It is also a prac¬
tical convenience since the elementary family is not, normally,
the sheep management unit in the winter unless it happens to
possess at least 200 sheep and the services of four active shep¬
herds. As we have seen in chapter two, the Sarakatsani prefer,
in winter, to divide their sheep and goats into a number of
different flocks. Where, grassland is natural and scarce, the
advantage of this division is that the optimum use is made of
the pasture offered by any particular stretch of country. The
lower limit of 200 sheep follows from the difficulty of renting
very small areas of grazing from village communities. Also it is
damaging to the pride of a shepherd if he is seen standing on
watch over a flock of only forty or fifty ‘zigouria’, ‘sterpha’, or
‘galaria’. Nevertheless, if poorer families with less than a hun¬
dred animals are unable to find or persuade kinsmen to accept
them into their ‘company’, they are forced to work during the
winter as wage shepherds for villagers, or occasionally for richer
Sarakatsani, a situation which emphasizes their poverty and


THE ‘COMPANY’ OF RELATED FAMILIES 89
suggests the inadequacy of their kindreds. Six of the forty-two
households at Neochori find themselves in this position.
The requirements of a particular system of sheep manage¬
ment, then, often result in the association of two or more ele¬
mentary or extended families in a ‘company’. However, to
explain the size and constitution of a particular ‘company’ it
may be necessary to consider other factors as well. One of these
is the difficulty of finding winter grazing. Where a tselingas owns
or controls, by whatever means, grazing land in excess of the
requirements of his own family, he almost inevitably leads a
‘company’ of kinsmen whose number is determined simply by
the size of their flocks and the carrying capacity of his land.
Another factor is security. One of the larger ‘stanis’ in Thes
protia represents the interests of eighty persons with two thou¬
sand head of sheep and goats. They occupy a continuous tract
of grazing land but although the different families are now
individually entitled to their occupancy they still prefer to
manage their affairs together in what represents, in fact, a con¬
federation of three ‘companies’. The stani had originally arrived
in the area in the winter of 1944-5 after the Muslim landowners
had fled to Albania, an exodus which left considerable areas of
grassland untenanted. The Christian villagers of the district who
claimed the abandoned lands strongly resented this immigra¬
tion of shepherds while the final distribution of the land was still
in doubt. Yet they were impressed by the strength and arma¬
ment of the group and were not unpleased, at a time when food
was short, to barter the grazing land for quantities of cheese in
the first winter and olive oil in the second. However, difficulties
soon arose between the two groups. After the Sarakatsani had
refused to sell a proportion of their own lambs to replace the
village flocks which had been destroyed or stolen in the war,
they were peremptorily ordered, in January 1946 at the height
of the lambing, to leave the village boundaries; an ultimatum
which the villagers must have known they would refuse. Shortly
afterwards a desperate attempt to burn down the Sarakatsan
huts was also unsuccessful. In the six years which followed these
incidents, 1947-53, the Muslim lands were administered by the
Ministry of Finance and the Sarakatsani continued to graze
them in relative peace. But in 1954 the land used by the stani
became village common land and without village citizenship the


90 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
Sarakatsani no longer had any rights to grazing which the
village council did not choose to recognize. They were warned
not to return in the autumn.
The stani commissioned two patrons, who are influential
lawyers in Jannina, to present their case to the Governor
General of the Epirus. Their plea was simply that their clients
had nowhere to go; that they were simple men but easily
tempted to violence in a crisis. In October the Nomarch (or
Prefect) of Thesprotia was ordered to arrange for the compul¬
sory admission of the shepherds to the same winter grazing. But
the Nomarch (it was alleged) had received gifts from the
villagers and did not wish to comply. He replied that the size
of the villagers’ own flocks made the administration of the order
very difficult. Delay in correspondence and the endless discus¬
sion of practical difficulties are the time-honoured methods by
which a junior officer in the hierarchy may evade the instruc¬
tion of a senior official without becoming guilty of direct
disobedience. But by late October the sheep were already on
the road. The tselingas now appealed to his cheese merchant
who suggested a present of fifty pounds to be passed by himself
to his friend the Nomarch’s Chief of Staff. It is impossible to
say how this money was used, or if indeed it ever left the pocket
of the merchant. But early in November, when the sheep had
almost reached the village, an order was sent by the Nomarch
to the President of the village that he must again receive the
sheep of the Sarakatsani into the pastures.
It seems very probable that the relative success of this stani
in facing these threats owes something to its size. If the stani
had been smaller it is possible that the villagers would have
resisted its initial lodgement in 1944 or that the later attempt to
drive it out by force would have been more effective. It is cer¬
tain that in 1954 the most impressive argument which their
patrons were able to advance to the authorities was the simple
fact that this large body of persons and animals had to be
accommodated somewhere to avoid violence and political
embarrassment. Furthermore, no stani of moderate size and
resources could have easily afforded the expenses of these
struggles in fees and bribes.
The composition of co-operating ‘companies’ in the winter
and summer pastures is not necessarily the same. Often those


THE ‘COMPANY’ OF RELATED FAMILIES 91
who are grouped together in a co-operative ‘company’ in the
winter do not have their summer grazing rights at the same
village. But, apart from this contingency, two factors which
lead to a modification in co-operative arrangements for the
summer are first, that most families have secure grazing rights
in the Zagori villages where their members are enrolled as
citizens, and secondly, that in the summer a group which owns
more than 200 sheep disposes them in two flocks instead of
three through the amalgamation of the ‘zigouria’ with the
‘sterpha’. In summer the sheep do not require the same atten¬
tion that they do in winter; and at the end of July when the
ewes cease to give any considerable quantity of milk a single
shepherd is sufficient for the care of these animals. A family
which would be unable to care for its own animals in winter
and spring, under summer conditions is able to manage on its
own. Whereas the 42 Sarakatsan households which spend the
summer at Neochori form 18 sheep management units of one
kind or another in the winter (including 4 families working as
single households which are not extended families), in the sum¬
mer when they return to the mountains there are 25 groups, of
which no less than 11 are single households. Indeed, one reason
why Sarakatsani look forward to the summer is that, apart
from the festivities it promises, many families enjoy the release
of attending to their own affairs and their own animals after
the restrictions, tensions, and self-discipline, which inevitably
accompany arrangements in the co-operating ‘company’. In
general, only married brothers continue to work together in the
summer when there is no practical necessity to do so.
But whatever the size of a co-operating group, the nature and
method of its operations are the same. The sheep and goats are
divided into flocks in the manner I have already described. It is
generally considered that a flock of more than 250 sheep is not
grazed with ease and efficiency. Therefore if a group has five
or six hundred milking ewes, there will be two or even three
separate flocks in this category. In these instances care is taken
that every family in the stani has some of its animals in each
flock. A flock of milking ewes is tended by two shepherds when
this is possible, and these men are not normally members of the
same family, an arrangement that is partly due to the division
of labour within the family, but which also checks the possibility


92 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
of a shepherd showing favouritism to his own animals by guiding
them to patches of better pasture. At lambing time each family
tries to keep a careful watch in case ewe lambs born to its own
sheep are surreptitiously exchanged for unwanted males. A
careful awareness of one another and a vigilant concern for
family rights govern the attitudes of the partners.
The principle ofjoint action also covers the various items of
income and expenditure which concern the interests ofthe whole
stani. At the cheese-maker’s hut the milk is measured and
credited to the stani as whole; this is partly a matter of con¬
venience but it also means that all the shepherds have a com¬
mon interest that the milk yield of the whole stani is as high as
possible. Similarly, cotton-cake which supplements the diet of
the ewes is bought by the ‘company’ not the family. The stani
is regularly involved in minor law-suits over grazing boun¬
daries, damage to crops, and sometimes there are more serious
legal disputes. The fines which have to be paid and the fees for
the attendance or advice of lawyers where this is necessary, are
met by the stani as a whole; as are the expenses of the tselingas
when he makes a journey to the town where the merchants,
lawyers, and officials have their offices. Twice a year before the
spring and autumn migrations the tselingas sits down with the
other heads of family to settle their accounts. After the total
expenses of the stani have been agreed, each family pays its
share in proportion to the size of its flocks.
The form of association in a ‘company’ is contractual. Each
family has a number of relatively clearly defined and specific
obligations to the group. It will not go far beyond these obliga¬
tions out of feelings of sentiment. Debts, for instance, are seldom
allowed to accumulate between families in the same ‘company’.
Yet in the absence of formal legal sanctions contractual relations
depend on a measure of confidence, a sentiment that is possible
in this community only between those related by kinship or
marriage.
In the table (see appendix I) which indicates the winter dis¬
positions of the Neochori shepherds, two facts emerge about the
composition of the winter co-operating groups. In all but one
instance the nucleus of the ‘company’ is a group of brothers or,
in one case, two pairs of brothers related as first cousins. A
man prefers to co-operate with brothers. The confidence they


THE ‘COMPANY’ OF RELATED FAMILIES 93
have in one another is a source of moral and physical strength
which supports their prestige in the community. The second
observation is that of the other heads of family associated
with the brothers who form the nucleus of a ‘company’, eleven
are linked affinally and only seven collaterally. This reflects the
bilateral form of the kindred. A man does not co-operate with
affines from personal preference; in the absence of brothers he
would generally prefer to work and live with cousins, nephews,
or uncles. But he must always consider the interests of his
children and if a wife’s brother or a sister’s husband is the
member of a strong and influential group of brothers he may
attach himself to their stani for the sake of his children, to
whom they are closer kinsmen than, for example, his own first
cousins.
The tselingas, the leader of the co-operating ‘company’, holds
this position not by reason of particular charismatic qualities,
but simply because he is the eldest brother of the sibling group
which dominates the stani. It is true that if the eldest son is
diffident, lacking in intelligence, or physically deformed, another
son will be nominated by the father to succeed him when he
retires from the active control of the family’s affairs; but this
happens only infrequently. If the group of brothers are still
living as one extended family the eldest brother is both the
executive head of his own family of origin and the tselingas of
the co-operating ‘company’. After the brothers of the extended
family establish separate households, the eldest brother ceases
to have any formal domestic jurisdiction over his brothers, but
he generally remains as the tselingas of the group because of his
greater experience in negotiations with merchants and officials.
But although a man becomes a tselingas because of his ‘struc¬
tural’ position and not because of personal qualities, he is
nevertheless judged against the ideal type leader who above all
possesses the quality of cleverness (e£u7rvaSa). He ought to be
mature but not old, and he should have many brothers, a large
kindred, influential affines, patrons in high positions, and
grazing land. For it is a man with these personal and practical
advantages who attracts into his following the families ofkinsmen
or affines who do not have brothers, cannot agree with them, or
whose brothers are not sufficiently wealthy and influential to
remain together as the nucleus of a co-operating ‘company’.


94 THE EXTENDED FAMILY
Membership in a ‘company’ is in principle based on free
association, although in particular cases a man without brothers
may be so dependent upon the particular kinsmen who form
the dominant nucleus of a ‘company’, that he has, in fact, little
choice. But co-operating ‘companies’ are relatively stable asso¬
ciations only as long as the problems they help member families
to overcome remain problems. They are a loose form of con¬
tractual association in which each family jealously guards its
domestic autonomy and the right to secede at any time. Power
to influence the association’s decisions lies with the dominant
group of brothers from whom the company takes its name, and
it is the desire to escape from the position of dependence on this
group which leads the more distantly related families in the
association to detach themselves from it in the summer months.
Co-operation between kinsmen and affines has its difficulties.
So imperative are the interests of a man’s own family that some¬
times he begins to suspect even the actions of a close kinsman if
he co-operates with him: and he, himself, must sometimes fight
against the temptation to defraud a kinsman or an affine. The
Sarakatsani say that ‘every stani has a pimp’ (xa0e crravy] eyei to
poucpiavo Tt]Q). Poutptavo^ means a procurer and by extension a
man without conscience or manliness. In this context it implies
that in each co-operating group the cheese merchant is able to
find at least one man who for the favour of more liberal credits
is prepared to play the part of informer about the secrets of the
group. As a statement of fact this is an exaggeration, but it
testifies accurately to the strains and restraints that co-operation
between related families involves, strains which are thought to
be peculiarly inappropriate in the relations of kinsmen.


V
COLLATERAL KINSMEN
1. FAVOURS AND OBLIGATIONS
he Sarakatsani assume that ill-faith, doubt, and suspicion
characterize the relations of men who are not kinsmen. In
JL contrast, they think that the values and attitudes which
make possible the communion of kinsmen are expressed in the
meaning of e[i.7tt,arocnjv7), faith, trust, confidence; or mornr), faith,
belief. It is, then, not surprising that unrelated men very rarely
co-operate in the management of their sheep or in any other
venture; except, necessarily, the marriages of their children.
The rights and obligations of kinship are of a general and
diffuse kind, not restricted to specific situations. A man is con¬
fident that a kinsman will keep a secret. He opens his mind to
him freely because he knows he will use discretion in what he
should pass on and what he must not. He believes the informa¬
tion that a kinsman gives to him, and he uses it as a basis for
action without the fear of a lie or a trap. He is confident that
when his own conduct is being evaluated by the community his
kinsmen will support his case; and for his part he will not suffer
in silence the public criticism of any of his kin. Above all, he
feels secure and confident that when he is in difficulty there will
be people who care for his interests and will give him assistance.
These sentiments of confidence and trust are prescribed and
follow from the simple existence of the kin relationship; they do
not depend on the history of a gradually developing intimacy.
When a Sarakatsanos receives a favour from another, he must
show gratitude. ‘One good turn deserves another’ (rj x«p"*) 6eXet
avTtxap7)J* Even if only between the acceptance of some service
and its later repayment, gratitude must for a while act as a
makeweight in the balance. Not to show gratitude for help,
which has been freely given, is behaviour open to severe public
reproach. But to be grateful is to be ‘obliged’ (u7roxpecofjivo<;);
and this is an admission of inequality and even of weakness.
The rare attempts at co-operation between unrelated persons
have invariably ended in accusations and counter accusations
that one man has done more for the other who, in return, has


96 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
not shown the right attitude of a man under obligation. This,
in a sense, is true. For neither side can admit to obligation with¬
out losing prestige; and both must attempt to claim the super¬
ordinate position in a creditor-debtor relationship.
But a man does not feel any embarrassment in asking for
help from a kinsman. In these circumstances there is no shame
in being under obligation or a debt of gratitude. Irrespective of
the state of the balance offavours and counter favours, collateral
relatives of the same generation, by reason of their kinship, are
conceptually equal since they are descended from a pair of
siblings who, before marriage and apart from the chances of
age and sex, were socially equivalent persons. A man does not
lose prestige through obligation to a kinsman; on the contrary
his reputation is increased, for the community pays attention to
a person whose kinsmen lend him immediate and effective sup¬
port. And for the man who gives aid to his kin, the knowledge
that men learn of his actions through the gratitude of the kins¬
man who receives it, is sufficient recompense. For in this way he
wins a reputation as a man of honour ‘who supports his kins¬
men’. If through wealth or influence a man is in a position to
act as a general protector of his kindred, not only is he expected
to do so, but this, in most cases, is also his wish. There is some
altruism here. A man takes pleasure in the company of his kins¬
man ; he finds him on occasion a source of practical advantage,
but in particular he holds to him and has confidence in him
simply because he is a kinsman. And for these reasons com¬
plaints of ingratitude against kinsmen are relatively few.
But although a man is under a moral obligation to help a
collateral relative, this assistance is not given unconditionally.
The important consideration is that it must not conflict with the
interests of the family. This emerges very clearly in situations of
physical violence. A man is not expected to accept responsibility
for avenging the death of a collateral kinsman. He will give moral
support to the family of the victim but he is unlikely to go
farther than that. A vengeance killing leads to the arrest of the
killer and a prison sentence, which is sometimes followed by
self-imposed exile in another district of Greece when there is any
fear of counter vengeance. In this way a shepherd’s family
might lose its protector at least for some years, perhaps for ever.
Only in unusual circumstances where a man feels that his


FAVOURS AND OBLIGATIONS 97
honour is very closely identified with the blood of the murdered
man is it possible that a cousin, uncle, or nephew may under¬
take this duty; and there have been no such cases in recent
years. In any case such a situation would only arise where the
murdered man had no family relative, a brother or even an
infant son, who could balance the debt of blood at that time or
in the future.
It is quite a different matter when a man is physically attacked
in the presence of a kinsman. The latter cannot stand by and
do nothing; indeed, it is a personal insult to a man that another
should dare to strike his kinsman before his eyes. Fights and
brawls are not infrequent; they may happen in coffee-shops
when a man is winning too successfully at cards, in a dispute
over the boundaries of grazing land, or at a wedding when
men drink to excess and see a veiled insult in each word or
gesture. Yet these fights seldom lead to a killing. The Sarakat
sani are very aware ofthe consequences ofmurder and vengeance
killing; and even when they seem to be in the grip of ungovern¬
able rage they do not draw a knife unless they see, or sense,
that there are witnesses uncommitted by kinship obligation
who will prevent them from using it. It is noticeable that in
boundary disputes, where two shepherds may sometimes find
themselves alone, quarrels are more often decided with iron
hooked shepherds’ crooks, capable of ugly but generally not
mortal wounds. In a brawl, as distinct from a calculated ven¬
geance killing, a shepherd relies on the active support of a
kinsman, for this does no injury to the interests of his family; on
the contrary, the family gains honour by action, but loses it by
inaction.
We must distinguish between two kinds of favour and service
which may be exchanged between collateral kin; and it is,
again, the question of responsibility to the family which marks
the form of this distinction. In the first instance a man is able to
assist his kinsman in a manner which cannot possibly conflict
with the interests of his own family or become a charge on its
limited resources. Shelter and hospitality, information about the
affairs of other people and their gossip, physical support in a
brawl, are examples of this kind of assistance. These services are
true favours (x<xpe<;) which in a relationship of personal kinship
a man is bound to perform. ‘We hold to our kindred’ (xpaTafxe


98 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
to croi) the Sarakatsani say. But a man’s own feelings also prompt
him to give this help. Like the grace of God, which is expressed
by the same word, such favours are generally without motive or
conscious sense of calculation.
There are, however, other forms of assistance and co-opera¬
tion between collaterals which make some demand on the
material wealth of a kinsman and his family. This is no longer
merely a matter of personal kinship solidarity, since it is the
principle of parental obligation which guides a man in his con¬
duct as trustee of the corporate resources of the family, human
and material, under his control. He is not free to make gifts of
money or animals to a kinsman in difficulties. Yet it is still
possible for the families of these men to help one another in
situations which involve corporately owned resources, providing
that the assistance or co-operation is on a contractual basis of
strict accountability. And this, of course, is only possible be¬
cause between kinsmen there are normally sentiments of con¬
fidence and trust. In this way kinsmen sometimes make modest
money loans, pasture each other’s animals for a consideration,
and frequently join in the co-management of their flocks.
The history of the misfortunes of Vasili Arvanitis illustrates
this distinction. In the spring of 1955 his winter pastures were
flooded by the irrigation ofadjoining fields and, as often happens
in these conditions, his animals contracted fiver-fluke. From a
flock of 105 sheep only 63 survived, an entirely inadequate
number to support a growing family of five children. Vasili has
a first cousin, Spiros Tangas, a more fortunate Sarakatsanos with
450 animals and a small property in the winter pastures near
Preveza. When Spiros learned of the difficulties of his cousin he
at once left home and went by bus to Igoumenitsa, a day’s
journey away. There he visited an official of the Ministry of
Agriculture, a friend who had baptized his youngest daughter,
and asked him if he would try to arrange his cousin’s applica¬
tion for a considerable loan from the Agricultural Bank. For
such applications are sometimes delayed for many months be¬
cause of the formalities of proof relating to the cause of the
animals’ death. The following day he made another bus jour¬
ney of some hours to a small town where the Mayor was an
animal dealer with whom he sometimes did business. The
Mayor introduced him to a friend wdth a few acres of rough


COUSINS 99
pasture which he was willing to rent to Vasili for the weeks that
remained before the Sarakatsani began their journey to the
Zagori mountains. Spiros paid him twelve pounds for the use
of the pasture and sent a message to Vasili to bring his surviving
animals as quickly as possible before they, too, contracted the
disease. He also told him to send his wife and children to
Spiros’ own home, since it would not be worth while construct¬
ing new huts for so short a time.
At the time, I suggested to Spiros that he had acted very
generously towards Vasili. But he could only shrug his shoulders,
not in modesty for this was entirely foreign to his nature, but
because he felt that his conduct was only natural and did not
call for any explanation. At the same time he made it quite
clear that Vasili would have to repay the twelve pounds. He
admitted without embarrassment that Vasili would be in great
difficulties for many years to come. Nevertheless each family
had its own responsibilities, for instance he himself was hoping
to set up one of his sons as a shopkeeper in Jannina. He did
not expect repayment this year or even next. And anyway, he
added, Vasili would not allow him to forget the debt. In fact,
later in the summer of the same year when Vasili had received
a much reduced sum of money for the sale of his milk, he at
once repaid the loan. Spiros’ comment to me was simply, ‘You
see how quickly he paid off the debt. We have trust in our
kinsmen.’ The time and energy which Spiros gave to the
arrangement of his kinsman’s affairs, the use of his valuable
patronage relationships with a Ministry official and the mayor
of a local town, were favours freely given, mere incidents in the
personal relations of cousins. But the money, although not a
particularly large sum, was part of the wealth of the family and
under no circumstance could it be alienated.
2. COUSINS
Cousins are the most significant of a person’s collateral kinsmen
both for purposes of practical co-operation and for simple com¬
panionship. This is particularly true of the periods immediately
before and after marriage. For these are the years when the
individual’s social reputation and prestige are judged by the com¬
munity, and when the problems and difficulties of establishing
a family require the practical assistance and moral support of


100 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
a wide circle of kin. It is entirely consistent with these needs
that the collateral extension of the kindred is wider in a person’s
own generation than in either the first ascendant or descendant
generations. As the children of a family approach adult status,
a father through the identification of his interests with those of
his children, is drawn less into the affairs of his own cousins and
becomes more concerned with the cousins of his children’s
kindred, who from his point of view include affinal relatives as
well as the children of his own siblings and first cousins.
The essence of cousinhood, as indeed of all collateral kinship,
is that measure of confidence and altruism to which we have
referred more than once. Cousins are the children or grand
childen of siblings and the values of cousinship contain the ideal
that their affections are like those of brothers and sisters.
Cousins are genuinely concerned about each others’ successes
or misfortunes, hopes and fears. When a man meets a cousin
after a long interval of time there is obvious pleasure on both
sides. They find a quiet comer away from other people and a
conversation begins which, if circumstances allow, may con¬
tinue for many hours. There is a certain conventional sequence
of topics. At first there are detailed inquiries about the health
of each member of the two families. This is followed by an
exchange of information about sheep and grazing, marriages
and match-making in either family or amongst their kinsmen.
Afterwards the talk ranges in random fashion over many sub¬
jects, the local personalities and gossip of their villages, the latest
oppressive measure of government bureaucrats. What is so
striking about the private talk of kinsmen is its fluency, free¬
dom, and its mellow modulated tones. It presents a striking
contrast with the talk of unrelated Sarakatsani in the forum of
the village square or coffee-shop. There, conversation is a con¬
test of wits, cast in a compulsively restrained monosyllabic form,
yet accompanied with the striking of assertive attitudes. It is not
intended as a means for exchanging information but rather as
a form of protagonistic competition.
There are certain kinds of general social intercourse which
are possible only between kinsmen, more especially between
cousins. For the Sarakatsani, marriage and sexual relations can¬
not be separated. A girl who loses her honour is in danger of her
life at the hands of her own family. The importance of virginity


COUSINS 101
is such that it leads to the complete segregation of the sexes
amongst unmarried persons. Only in the family and the kindred
is it possible for unmarried persons of opposite sex even to hold
conversation. And it will be remembered that generally men do
not marry until they are thirty, girls until they are about twenty
five. These two circumstances, a relatively late age of marriage,
and the segregation of the sexes except in the family and kin¬
dred, inevitably add to the value of an unmarried boy’s social
relations with his young female cousins; for apart from his own
sisters, they are the only unmarried women of his own genera¬
tion with whom he is allowed to have any contact. A youth is
very close to his sister to whom he is bound by categorical
obligations, yet his behaviour with her is restrained. With
female cousins, on the other hand, he behaves in a familiar
manner which includes a good deal of mutual teasing and
bodily contact. Particularly among first cousins of opposite
sex between the ages of thirteen and sixteen familiarity is ex¬
pressed in playful wrestling, bottom smacking, and cheek pinch¬
ing. Generally, teasing between second cousins of opposite
sex is a little more restrained; for here one approaches the
margin of kinship. The girl is a kinswoman but she is also
almost a ‘stranger’ in terms of kinship distance. The risk, for a
boy, of being tempted into some sexual misconduct is inherently
greater. Friendship between rather older cousins takes the form
of lounging before the hearth, the youth perhaps resting his
head on the girl cousin’s shoulder while they talk and joke.
In this context teasing is a social convention which permits
a form of very mild and unacknowledged sexual byplay, yet
absolutely prohibits any degree of overt sexuality and is easily
rationalized as being ‘only a game’. It reconciles the two guises
under which a female cousin appears to the youth; first, as the
only female company of his own age that he is permitted to
enjoy outside his family until he reaches the age of thirty; and
secondly, as a kinswoman whose honour he is bound in faith and
trust to uphold.
If young kinsmen and kinswomen find in each other the only
heterosexual companionship which is permitted outside the
family, it is also true in a more general sense that in this com¬
munity true friendship is only possible between kinsmen. Friends
are, necessarily, kinsmen. From this general body of relatives a


102 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
man finds perhaps two or three cousins with whom his friend¬
ship is particularly intimate; this is a relationship based on sym¬
pathy and mutual concern for the other, it is the delight taken
in the company of the other person for the quality of sociability
itself. But these relations of affection and uncalculating trust
tend not to be with cousins with whom a man co-operates, or
has co-operated, in the day-to-day management of the same
flocks. The goodwill of kinsmen is important both in those
situations where purpose, aim, and practical interest are involved,
and for its own sake where pleasure is taken in the quality of a
friendly sympathetic relationship. In both instances a man finds
in his kinsman what lack of trust and antipathy prevents him
from seeking in an unrelated individual. But there is a difference
between a relationship of co-operation and one of sympathetic
friendship. Men who herd their sheep together in the same
‘company’, are concerned in co-operation between corporate
family groups; the obligations of this co-operative activity are
specific and quasi-contractual, requiring restraint, discipline,
and calculated book-keeping. These are elements at odds with
the free, unrestrained, attitudes of devoted personal friendship
in which obligations are diffuse not specific in character. In
principle one cannot deny a friend what he asks. Therefore,
friendship between kinsmen flourishes better where the demands
put upon it fall into the category of free favours. And this is
more likely to be the case where cousins do not work together.
This last consideration raises the question whether there is
any significant variation in the degree or quality of solidarity
between the various categories of first cousins. Marriage is patri
local and brothers live for a number of years after their mar¬
riage in a united extended family; afterwards they may con¬
tinue to co-operate as a single sheep management group until
their children are often in late adolescence. Although these
cousins are unlikely to share a relationship of devoted personal
friendship, there is the fact or the memory of common service
to the same flocks and of essentially identified interests. The
possession of the same surname and the value placed upon rela¬
tionships which are mediated through male kinsmen, are further
factors which encourage a formal preference for cousins who
are father’s brother’s children. Equally, however, early child¬
hood in a joint household and co-operative labour in early


COUSINS 103
youth provide enough incidents to nourish any personal aver¬
sion which for one reason or another may have arisen between
young cousins. And if brothers quarrel, this, of course, inevit¬
ably affects the relations of their children. But a marked cool¬
ness between cousins of this class is rare; the Neochori group of
317 Sarakatsani provides only one example.
Relations between men and women who are reciprocally
mother’s brother’s children and father’s sister’s children are
almost always close and affectionate. These cousins are the
children of a sister and brother whose relationship before the
sister’s marriage was governed by categorical obligations which
concerned the honour of the girl, her brother, and the whole
family. For the sister who arrives at her wedding day with a
reputation in the community for right conduct, a brother has
feelings of deep gratitude and trust which he expresses in his
constant anxious inquiries about her welfare from anyone he
meets who lives near her husband’s huts. He is always ready to
help his brother-in-law, however little he may like him per¬
sonally, in order to make life a little easier for his sister and her
children. And since women spend much time discussing kins¬
men and their affairs, the sister’s children learn at an early
age about their cousins who are the children of her brother.
But the relations of these cousins are not only a question of senti¬
ment and its extension. Marriage is a contract between two
unrelated families; and despite mutual distrust both groups are
interested to consolidate their alliance. In the early years the
two families of origin of the married pair may find in it a useful
addition to the range of their co-operative relationships. How¬
ever, the true concern of the husband and his wife’s brothers is
that their children shall not lack the support of a strong and
devoted kindred. Their children are reciprocally those cousins
who normally live in different localities and do not co-operate
in sheep management. Between them there ought to be the
kind of trust and sympathy which lead to deep friendship, the
exchange of free favours, and that measure of general moral
support without which a man’s reputation cannot survive for
long among the Sarakatsani.
From time to time there are opportunities to strengthen the
affective quality of these relations. For a number of years after
her marriage a woman pays one or possibly two visits a year to


104 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
her parents’ home and takes her young children with her. These
visits which last for five or six days are eagerly looked forward
to by the children who find there new playfellows and grand¬
parents, uncles, and aunts far more indulgent than those at their
own home. The inevitable frictions and jealousies of communal
life do not threaten the cross-cousin relationship in its formative
period; on the contrary it grows in an atmosphere of gaiety,
holiday, and permissiveness. It is, then, not surprising that in
seven cases out of ten a man names a cousin of this category as
his most intimate and trusted friend. In later life these cousins
are remarkably generous and trusting, and there is a noticeable
tendency for cousins related in this way to give small money
loans at moments of need or unexpected crisis.
In general, cousins who are related through their mothers’
sisters are less likely to have known one another in childhood,
and relations in adult fife are usually based on the conventional
existence of cousinship. Married sisters do not pay one another
the kind of formal visit which lasts for a number of days unless
their husbands have developed common interests on the basis
of their affinal connection. Relations will be more intimate
where the two sisters have married men who live in the same
summer or winter neighbourhood. The two women will make
informal daily visits and their husbands will encourage the
children to form close friendships with their cousins. Sometimes
a man arranges a marriage between his own cousin and his
wife’s sister. If the cousin is a father’s brother’s son, the two
sisters may find themselves close neighbours and, perhaps, work¬
ing in the same co-operating ‘company’. Yet even where two
young men who are sisters’ sons meet for the first time at a
wedding or village festival they at once adopt the easy, friendly,
and sympathetic attitude towards one another which is typical
of the cousin relationship at all times, and equally foreign to
the behaviour which must be adopted towards an unrelated
person of the same sex and age, even where this unrelated person
has been a close neighbour and has shared the same school desk.
The feature of cross-cousin or maternal parallel cousin re¬
lationships which distinguishes them from the ties between
brothers’ sons is that they generally involve physical separation,
since sisters in a system of patrilocal marriage must leave the
parental home. Men prefer to bring their brides from a distant


COUSINS 105
quarter of the scattered community, both because they seek to establish strategic alliances in neighbourhoods other than their own, and because of the fear of trouble with affines if the young bride is within easy tale-telling distance of her own family. What is decisive in these cousin relationships is whether regular visits are exchanged or whether contact between the cousins must rely on the chance meeting at a wedding or a village festi¬ val. On the other hand, where cross-cousins or maternal parallel cousins happen to live in the same neighbourhood, and more especially if they co-operate in sheep management, their rela¬ tions are of the kind which generally exist between the sons of brothers. In these distinctions it is not the kind of cousin relationship itself which is strictly relevant (for the norms of kinship be¬ haviour towards cousins are the same whatever the mediating links in the relationship), but whether cousins live near to one another and possibly work together in daily co-operation, or whether they live at a distance and, if so, whether there are regular opportunities for exchanging visits or not. There are, then, two important classes of first cousins; those who live in the same summer neighbourhood and who co-operate or have at some time co-operated in sheep management; and those who live in other neighbourhoods in summer and winter. (The classi¬ fication is not, of course, exhaustive.) The two classes of cousins give a man and his family different but complementary forms of support. The attitude of friendly interest and affectionate concern which exists between cousins is also present in a man’s relations with his uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces. The differences which have been described between various types of first cousin relationships have their analogues in the ties which exist between uncles, aunts, nephews, and nieces. Uncles who are fathers’ brothers are known better than brothers of the mother but they are not always loved better. The wicked uncle, though he is not a common figure, is generally a father’s brother with whom the father has quarrelled. The favourite uncle is generally a mother’s brother who was excessively indulgent to his nephews and nieces when they came on periodical visits. Aunts who are father’s sisters are generally well known but mother’s sisters may be seen very seldom.


106 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
In general, uncles and aunts, as in our own society, are
notoriously indulgent towards their nephews and nieces in their
childhood days. Of the father’s brothers who may be living for
a time in the same extended household, it is the unmarried
uncles who are the favourites of the children, dandling them
on the knee and buying them sweets; between the married
uncles and their young nephews and nieces there is, necessarily,
more restraint. Uncles may attempt occasionally to lecture
young nephews and nieces but the relationship at this age is
essentially one of permissive familiarity. In his adolescence a
nephew shows a more formal respect to his uncles who are
by this time almost all married men at the height of their
powers, yet even now the relationship is nearer to one of easy
camaraderie than careful respect. But after his marriage and
even for some years before it, the nephew in manner and con¬
versation pays less and less attention to his uncle who is now
generally an old man on the brink of retirement if he has not
already been forced into it. There is often a touch of impatience
in a nephew’s attitude to his old uncle; almost, indeed, an air
of patronage, though he does not generally show him public
disrespect. Affection remains, but an old uncle is of little account
in the affairs of the community except occasionally if it is
necessary to find a precedent from the past for action in some
puzzling situation. For the adult man or woman the practical
significance of an uncle or aunt is their function as a mediating
link with their children, the cousins of an individual’s own
age and generation who provide comradeship and support in
facing the problems of life in a competitive and hostile com¬
munity.
3. THE EFFECTIVE KINDRED
In many situations formal kinship distance must be the criterion
which measures obligation and responsibility, especially where
preference has to be given to one kinsman over another. The
stani led by Theodoros Ferendinos includes, as well as his
married brothers, two cousins; Pericles, a father’s brother’s son,
and Demetrios, a second cousin whose mother and the mother
of Theodoros are first cousins. In 1954, when this group could
not find sufficient winter grazing, one cousin had to leave the
‘company’. Inevitably this was Demetrios, even though he had


THE EFFECTIVE KINDRED 107
a very intimate friendship with Theodoros’ youngest brother;
and despite the fact that Pericles was idle, quarrelsome and
inefficient. Similarly, when a man visits another neighbourhood
he will always stay at the huts of his first cousin although, on
personal grounds, he might prefer to be entertained by a more
congenial but more distant kinsman.
These facts are easily understood. A collateral kinship bond
is a relationship derived from a pair of siblings. It makes a
sensible difference whether this derivation is at one or two
removes. And this is so not only on grounds of sentiment but
also in relation to the limits of the kindred. The children of
first cousins are members of the kindred but the children of
second cousins are not kinsmen. The first is a growing relation¬
ship, the second is not. A man who is 35 years old will generally
know all his first cousins, but sometimes there may be a number
of his second cousins whom he has not met personally, although
he will always know something about their families and their
affairs. Second cousins are on the margin of kinship, people who
are nearly ‘strangers’. They remain kinsmen who must be
guarded and cherished but there is some diminution of responsi¬
bility towards them. These facts are illustrated by the different
behaviour of first and second cousins which may sometimes be
observed at weddings. In the quarrels which flare up on these
occasions between unrelated guests, there is always the danger
that fighting may become so violent and general that the wed¬
ding festivities have to be abandoned; this is a great disgrace
for the family which is acting as host. It is noticeable that a
bridegroom’s first cousins feel it is their responsibility to prevent
this both by the swiftness of their intervention, where their own
kinship alignments allow this, and by the restraint they hold
over their own feelings when they are themselves concerned in
some incident. Second cousins on the other hand abandon them¬
selves more easily to considerations of injured dignity and self
regard and, in the rush of blood to their heads, temporarily
forget their duties to kinsmen.
Yet despite the general importance of kinship distance as a
measure of obligation and solidarity, a quality which is par¬
ticularly characteristic of the kindred is its flexibility. If a man
has interests in some part of the community where he can find
only a second cousin, or an uncle who is a cousin of one of his


108 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
parents, he may yet establish with him a relationship which is
closer and more significant than the relationships he has with
other kinsmen genealogically less distant but living in places
where his affairs do not lead him. Similarly, if a man is forced
by circumstances to co-operate in sheep management with a
distant uncle or second cousin this transforms a genealogically
distant connexion into a close and very significant kinship bond.
Naturally, a man normally prefers to co-operate and have inti¬
mate friendships with close relatives, but in their absence, or
where there is an exceptionally strong personal preference for
an individual kinsman who is not closely connected, a distant
kinsman is, as it were, ‘drawn in’ so that what becomes sig¬
nificant is the fact of relationship and not the genealogical
distance separating kinsmen. This potential efficiency of any
kinship relation is perhaps reflected in the way a man refers
to a cousin when he is in his presence. In explaining that a man
is a first cousin he will say, ‘He is my first cousin’, but of his
second cousin he will only say ‘He is my cousin’. By omitting
any reference to the distance of cousinship, the effect is to draw
the distant kinsman nearer to the man who is speaking. It might
be said that an individual has two kindreds; the first is the
‘ideal’ kindred in which conflicts of obligation and responsibility
to kinsmen are measured by formal kinship distance; the second
is the ‘effective kindred’ in which the frequency and character
of kinship intercourse which actually takes place, and the prac¬
tical needs of a man and his family, are also important con¬
siderations.
Genealogical connexion beyond the limits of the kindred is
not normally of any significance. Men who are third or fourth
cousins may possibly be aware of this fact but in general it does
not make them behave towards one another differently than
they would if they were unrelated. But if a man possesses wealth
or influence in the community so that some advantage is to be
gained by claiming relationship with him, then he often finds
that his ‘effective kindred’ extends beyond the conventional
range of second cousinship and comes to include third and even
fourth cousins. When Sotiri Achnoulas, who unlike most of the
Sarakatsani in Zagori has more goats than sheep in his flock,
was dismayed at the promulgation of a government order for¬
bidding the pasturage of these animals in certain areas of the


THE EFFECTIVE KINDRED 109
Zagori, he decided to pay a visit to his ‘cousin’John, a Sarakat
sanos of wealth and influence. He was confident that John could
help him through his influence over the local Member of Par¬
liament. ‘He has him in his pocket’ (xov eyzi <rrr) t<te7T7) tou), he
explained. John and Sotiri are third cousins. This otherwise
tenuous and formally unrecognized kinship link is ‘drawn in’ to
provide a basis of mutual trust in a relationship which is clearly
one of patronage. John, for his part, does not resent the impor¬
tunate requests of his distant relatives. The ability to bestow
patronage is its own reward, for it increases his prestige not only
in the community of Sarakatsani but with such personalities as
parliamentary candidates who compete for the votes which
they believe he commands.
A man’s ‘effective kindred’ may also be considerably more
restricted than the conventional limits allow. This happens
when a family possesses so little prestige that kinsmen would
rather not have any unnecessary association with its members.
A case in point is the family of Pistiolis at Skamneli which is
desperately poor and although morally upright is almost socially
outcast. The genealogical information which the father was able
to provide was meagre. He did not even know where most of his
first cousins were living, and of second cousins he could name
only a few. Over a long period of years he had received very
few invitations to the weddings of kinsmen, and although he
travelled considerably, earning a pittance by carrying goods on
his two pack mules, he was too ashamed to ask for hospitality
at a kinsman’s home in the places where he knew them to be
living; consequently he always slept in the open, a circumstance
which encouraged mocking remarks about his shaggy and un¬
couth appearance.
But besides the flexibility in the range of obligations to col¬
lateral kinsmen there are also situations which may lead to their
complete abrogation. Trust and mutual confidence is the basis
of kin relationship. Quarrels which question these qualities are
rare, but where they do occur they are far more serious than
the differences which are expected to arise between unrelated
men. In the latter instance normal social relations may be
resumed after a long period of estrangement, but in the former
case, especially where one kinsman has publicly insulted
another, confidence is permanently destroyed. The proverb,


110 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
‘Why is the wound in your eye so deep? Because my kinsman
gouged it out’ (ytaTiV-ro jj.cm erou (iaOeia PyaXjiivo; —yiarC pou
xo’PyaXe Soto?), expresses precisely this difference.
Between kinsmen who co-operate in a ‘company’ for the co¬
management of their flocks it is almost inevitable that from time
to time differing interests produce a coolness in their relations.
Yet it is remarkable how seldom these frictions develop into
the kind of quarrel which causes an irreparable breach. A stern
self-control is maintained by these kinsmen on their injured
feelings because they know that they depend on each other’s
assistance in the struggle to survive the hazards, natural and
political, which surround them. However, any form of dis¬
honesty in their co-operative handling of the flocks destroys the
basis of their association. Recently a cousin who was herding his
sheep with a ‘company’ of married brothers was discovered
during the lambing season in the act of trying to attach a
number of his kinsmen’s newly born ewe lambs to his own ewes,
and his own male lambs to the ewes which he had robbed.
Inevitably, after such an incident, the trust between these kins¬
men was permanently broken.
Incest (al[i.o[xi^ia) represents the most dramatic form of decep¬
tion that one kinsman can practise on another. Unmarried
cousins of opposite sex enjoy an easy, friendly companionship
with one another which they are denied with unrelated persons.
Very occasionally a youth succumbs to the temptation of sexual
experiments with a young kinswoman, an act in which he may
destroy both the girl’s honour and his own. It seems most un¬
likely that these affairs, if protracted, can ever remain secret in
a community where there are so many questioning eyes. Over
a period of ten years I discovered three probable instances, of
which one was incest between first cousins. In this case a youth
was staying in his uncle’s house and there, it seems, seduced the
unmarried daughter. The cousin had left his uncle’s house before
it became apparent that the girl was pregnant, and he naturally
denied from a distance that he had had any hand in the matter.
The girl for her part claimed that she had been impregnated
by divine, not human, means, but little attention was paid to
this suggestion. The girl’s family did not take any drastic action
in the matter beyond disposing of the child when it was born.
The girl herself was allowed to live; and in fact, a year or two


THE EFFECTIVE KINDRED 111
later was married off to a poor widower who extracted a con¬
siderable dowry in consideration of her blemished history. Al¬
though the girl had an unmarried brother no action was ever
taken against the alleged seducer. The family claimed that it
would not be right to kill a first cousin (any more than a brother)
whatever the crime committed, and there are those who agree
that there was some force in this argument. But there are others
who do not hold this view and believe that the family made a
virtue of a dishonourable preference. In any case the family
emerged from this affair with its honour destroyed. Needless to
say, all forms of social intercourse have ceased between the kins¬
men concerned. This involved the destruction of the relationship
between the brothers who were the heads of the two families.
Incest between first cousins is a sin, for the same blood turns in
upon itself in the pollution of sexual intercourse. It is something
which goes against nature and something also which inevitably
wrecks the whole scheme of kinship relations.
Sexual intercourse between second cousins is still described
as incest but it cannot be said in quite the same way that it is an
act which goes against nature. Second cousins are kinsmen but
they are, also, nearly ‘strangers’. Men know that in the towns
the Church, from time to time, solemnizes marriages between
second cousins, and that in two notorious instances in recent
years such marriages have even been contracted by Sarakatsani.
But so far as premarital sex relations are concerned the choice
here lies between calling them incest or fornication. Whichever
term is chosen to describe the liaison, it is less an unnatural sin
than conduct of the deepest dishonour. As one man put it with
ironic scorn, ‘It would be better to marry your own sister’
(y.aXXiTepa va <TT£9avcL>07)^ tyjv aScpcprj aou). But although an illicit
affair between second cousins is serious enough, for it inevitably
destroys the girl’s honour and the relationship between the two
parents who are first cousins, it does not have quite the same
catastrophic consequences for family and kindred relationships
as incest between first cousins.
It is clear, then, that where there is a flagrant breach of the
norms of kinship, the relationship is annulled. The trust which
is the basis of kinship relations is an axiomatic value in Sarakat
san life which is never questioned. From the injured kinsman’s
point of view there can be no extenuating circumstances which


112 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
in time, and after long consideration, may provide the offender
with an excuse. There is no basis for forgiveness and recon¬
ciliation. The support of kinsmen is also withdrawn sometimes in a
manner which does not necessarily imply a permanent rupture
of social relations, though it may come to this in the end. I have
previously emphasized the importance of the moral support of
kinsmen when the community is evaluating a man’s conduct.
The idea that a man must defend the actions of his kinsmen is
expressed in the proverb, '0 8ixo<; (j.7ropet va pia 8ev propei
v’axouqQ. Literally this means, ‘A relation can speak to his kins¬
man but he cannot listen to something about him’, that is to
say he can scold a kinsman for his shortcomings in private, but
he will not allow others to accuse him in public. This in general
is true, but it depends upon the possibility of advancing some
reasonable explanation of a kinsman’s conduct. Where a man
has behaved in a manner clearly at variance with the values of
the community a kinsman is forced to abandon him, and even
to take some part in condemning his conduct. For if he continues
to support his cause his own reputation and that of his family
will suffer. By condemning the actions of his kinsmen he ex¬
presses in an unequivocal fashion that he supports the values of
the community; and he maintains a measure of social distance
between himself and his kinsman. In this way he hopes to avoid
the taint of association with his conduct and the shame which
accompanies it.
The history of Nasios illustrates this process. One afternoon
in the summer of 1953 he happened to meet Mitrina Mastoras
on the hill-side above his village, and there, after failing to win
her willing co-operation, he attempted to take her ‘by force’
(pii tb £6pi); but unsuccessfully according to Mitrina’s story.
The terrified woman ran down the hill to the huts of her second
cousin for, at the time, her own husband was away from home.
The cousin at once sent word to the husband who returned
immediately. He surprised Nasios, knocked him to the ground,
and had already drawn his knife to settle the matter when he
was seized from behind by two villagers. In terror Nasios escaped to his home.
Public opinion was unanimous in condemning Nasios. This
was not the first time he had attacked women, although on the


THE EFFECTIVE KINDRED 113
two previous occasions he had more wisely confined his atten¬
tions to gipsy women. His family was in any case poor and of
low prestige. There was nothing at all to be said in his favour.
He had a number of kinsmen among the Sarakatsani who graze
the lands of the same village, and of these the closest was
Evangelos Balatsos, a first cousin. Evangelos and the other kins¬
men all joined in the universal condemnation of Nasios. During
the weeks which followed Evangelos made a point of going each
day to the home of Nasios and unnerving him with imaginary
accounts of the plots and ambushes which the husband of
Mitrina was preparing to lure him to his death. So thorough
were his efforts that for the next two months, until the Sarakat¬
sani left for the winter pastures, Nasios was never seen outside
his hut in daylight. Evangelos after his daily visits to Nasios
made his way to the coffee-shop where he described to an appre¬
ciative audience the state of affairs in Nasios’s household, how
he remained each night, sleepless behind the door with axe in
hand, and how his wife was obliged under cover of darkness to
remove his faeces from the hut. In this fashion Evangelos took
a leading part in the shaming of his kinsman, and saved his
own name by denying solidarity with his kinsman and damaging
his reputation.
The possibility of losing the moral and practical support of
kinsmen, perhaps for ever, is clearly a most powerful sanction
of the norms of kinship behaviour and the values of the wider
community. If Nasios, a poor man who herded the sheep of
villagers, had possessed a substantial flock and had therefore
been dependent on the help of kinsmen in a ‘company’, this
estrangement from his kinsmen would have affected him even
more seriously than it did. It is also evident that the application
of this sanction by the kinsman is itself sanctioned by the threat
that a man and his family may lose prestige if he does not tem¬
porarily abandon the evil-doer. Since the interests of the family
always take precedence over obligations of individual collateral
kinship, there is never any doubt that a man will conform. We
see, not for the first time, the connexion between prestige values
and the isolation of the family; for these values necessarily
threaten the solidarity of any personal relationship or social
grouping which may conflict with a man’s duty to uphold, or
promote, the prestige of his family.


114 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
4. EXPRESSIONS OF SOLIDARITY
The Zagori community of Sarakatsani is geographically dis¬
persed for reasons which are mainly ecological. Patrilocal
marriage, suspicion of affines who live near the same village,
yet the need for strategic alliances in other parts of Zagori, are
factors which lead men to look for brides in a distant neigh¬
bourhood. Consequently the kindred of any individual tends
to be more or less congruent with the boundaries of the com¬
munity itself, in the sense that a shepherd generally has at least
a few relatives in any quarter of the Zagori. For these reasons the
few festive occasions during the year which bring distant kins¬
men together are looked forward to with some anticipation.
This is so not only for the utilitarian consideration that it is
valuable to renew associations with kinsmen whose practical
help may be required in the future, but simply for the company
of people who value a man and return his affections. It is an
aspect of the constant yearning for unity in a society which is, in
fact, fragmented by exclusive familial loyalties. It might be said
that these occasions when kinsmen meet are important because
in the atmosphere of festival excitement the sentiments of kin¬
ship solidarity are strengthened and recreated. At weddings, for
example, quarrels almost always develop between unrelated
guests, and the kinsmen who rush to the aid of their own people
are giving a dramatized expression to the ideal of kinship
solidarity. But, if it is true that the gathering of dispersed kins¬
folk is an occasion for the restatement of kinship values, it is
also true that it is the sentiment of kinship which invokes the
gathering at all. Thus, although wedding invitations are sent
out to all consanguineal and to a large number of affinal rela¬
tives, not all of the more distantly related of these persons will
attend, and it is always recognized that whether or not an in¬
vited kinsman comes to the wedding is an indication of the
effective solidarity, or absence of solidarity, between the invited
man’s family and the family of the groom or bride. Naturally
the whole of the kinsman’s family cannot attend a wedding to¬
gether. The demands of shepherding prevent this. But one
member at least is expected to go as a representative.
A man, of course, may visit a kinsman at any time; in his
huts he will always find shelter and hospitality for the night.


EXPRESSIONS OF SOLIDARITY 115
But these visits are unlikely to be merely social and the main
purpose of the journey is generally the arrangement of some
business. At festivals, on the other hand, kinsmen meet to enjoy
one another’s company and other considerations are secondary.
On the Tuesday after Easter Monday a man often sets off on a
journey to a close kinsman living at a distance whom he has
not seen during the winter. And after the feast of St. George
before the migration to summer pastures there may be a wedding
to attend. Later in the year when the Sarakatsani have moved
up to the mountain villages of the Zagori there are other oppor¬
tunities to meet less closely related kinsmen. About the end of
July when the impregnated ewes gradually cease to yield milk,
there is more leisure for the shepherds to attend the weddings,
most of which occur in August and September. Also a number
of the villages in the Zagori celebrate in the summer the feast
day of their patron saint. These village feasts (TOxvqyupia) last
for three days and nights during which there is almost continuous
dancing in the village square with much eating and drinking
besides. Many Sarakatsani go to these village festivals not only
when it is the feast-day of the saint of their own summer village,
but also to the celebrations of other villages where they have a
kinsman. In the holiday atmosphere they are hospitably wel¬
comed and their company and conversation give pleasure to
their hosts. It makes no difference whether visitors are near or
distant relatives; the more visitors a family entertains the more
its prestige increases. But in addition to these public festivals
each Sarakatsan family, or stani, celebrates privately one of the
three summer religious festivals which they consider important.
These are: the prophet Elias, 20th July, Saint Paraskeve, 26th
July, and the Assumption of the All Holy One (The Virgin
Mary), 15th August. On these feast-days meat is killed, wine is
drunk, and in the larger stanis there is dancing. It is essen¬
tially a family celebration but kinsmen, who live in other
villages and celebrate a different festival, will come to visit and
share in the festivities. These are the various occasions which
help to maintain a certain minimal frequency of contact be¬
tween dispersed kinsmen, although the demands of the sheep
prevent any individual shepherd from being present at more
than one or perhaps two of these events each year.
But weddings are, undoubtedly, the most significant of these


116 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
festivals. An invitation morally obliges a family to send a repre¬
sentative. It is not a question of whether a man can afford the
time and expense to go and enjoy himself for three or four days,
but rather that it is his duty to attend and support the family of
the bride or groom simply because the members of that family
are kinsmen. A man may pay a visit to a kinsman or assist him
in some way out of motives which are in part practical and
ulterior, but he goes to help a kinsman at his wedding without
such utilitarian interest. The kinsman may live in a part of
Zagori or the winter pastures where he is unlikely to be of any
assistance. He may be poor while the wedding guest may be
rich. It might perhaps be argued that a man stands by his kins¬
men at their weddings so that in return they will support the
weddings in his own family. For it is true that if a large number
of kinsmen come to a wedding the family gains prestige. But
more important than this outward sanction is the inner concern
for, and interest in, the personal affairs ofa kinsman. In this matter
as in the other moral obligations of kinship the Sarakatsani
advance no explanation of why they must act in a particular
way beyond the comment ‘That’s how we found it and that’s
the way we keep it’ (erai to (3pf)xafze xal erci to xpaTapie). In other
words, in discussing the solidarity of the kindred we are dealing
with self-evident values which appear to a man to be sentiments
innate in every Sarakatsanos.
The wedding customs of the Sarakatsani reflect in many ways
the solidarity of kinsmen. And although it is not my purpose to
give an exhaustive description of these customs it will be rele¬
vant to the present discussion if I indicate in a general way how
kinsmen participate in these ceremonies.
The celebrations are held separately by the family of the
bride and the family of the groom at their respective homes. The
only point at which the activities of the two groups intersect is
when the bridegroom arrives on Sunday morning with his
bridal procession of kinsmen (ijaxi) to take away the bride. A
man who is related to both the bride and the groom must be the
guest of only one side. He is not permitted to spend part of the time with both groups.
Each guest to a wedding brings an offering of food and wine.
This consists of a round of bread (xouXoupa) with symbolical
ornamentations on the crust; a wooden bottle ((BouTcreXi) of


EXPRESSIONS OF SOLIDARITY 117
wine; and a slaughtered lamb or sheep. For the Sarakatsani a
meal is a family communion to which unrelated shepherds are
never invited. The wedding-feast is the family meal writ large
with the family of the kindred sitting down to eat bread together.
For all food is in a generic sense bread. ‘Come, let us eat bread’,
cries the wedding master of ceremonies. As E. S. Drower1 has
said in discussing the symbolism of bread in Mediterranean cul¬
tures, ‘It is not only the symbol of life. Bread, itself a union of
many grains into a single substance, when broken into frag¬
ments and divided amongst many, becomes a symbol of life
shared, of a society at peace with itself, of a family bound to¬
gether by a common factor.’
Wine, too, is a life-fluid. It is drunk ritually by the bride and
groom during the religious wedding ceremony. From the
Saturday till the Tuesday afternoon, when the festivities end, it
is drunk to excess by the whole bibulous assembly. A glass of
wine must be accompanied by a toast, and every man tries to
drink to the health of each of his kinsmen present. Wine is the
symbol of blood; and each toast affirms a relationship. ‘To your
health, John’ (Feta aou TiawT]). ‘To your marriages, boys’
(Mcope TcaiSia ctti? yaps*; CTa,?)> when drinking with unmarried
youths or young men; or simply, ‘To your wedding’ (<tt& yapo
aou). ‘To the marriages of your sons’ (cttcov mxiSiGiv gccq), in a
toast to married men. ‘A happy old age’ (xaXa yepapaxa aa<;),
used in drinking to the old men. And so on.2
In the confined space of an arbour covered with thick woollen
blankets, between one hundred and two hundred men and
boys are gathered. In the centre of the floor space the dancing
only stops when the company sits down to eat. Then the plates
of roasted meat are devoured almost in silence. Afterwards the
dance is on again. Those who are not dancing, sing in accom¬
paniment. The gipsy band beat out strange and exciting
rhythms in which the high-pitched clarinet is never silent. In
this intense atmosphere with men drinking steadily and shouting
their toasts across the heads of the squatting assembly to their
kinsmen, any link of kinship makes men like brothers, its
absence potential enemies. For it must not be forgotten that
although the wedding guests are all related in some fashion to
1 E. S. Drower, Water into Wine, London, 1956, p. 44. * See Hoeg, op. cit., vol. i, p. 50.


118 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
their hosts, they are not necessarily related to one another. Men
whose pride is always sensitive become tense with nervous ex¬
citement and excess of alcohol. An alleged word or act which is
interpreted as insulting, or the memory of a past grievance, may
be the occasion of a quarrel; and this, if it is not controlled at
once, may end in general violence by mobilizing support for the
antagonists along the lines of kinship allegiance. As I have
already suggested, these fights give very tangible expression to
kinship bonds. But there are, also, less dramatic forms of com¬
munion. During the three days and nights of sustained revelry
there are occasional breaks of an hour or two when musicians
rest or the company observe some item of wedding custom such
as the display of the bride’s dowry. Then kinsmen sit apart and
exchange their news offamilies and marriages, sheep and politics.
Guests come to a wedding to support their kinsmen. They do
this not only by their presence but also by lending practical
assistance. Among the men this applies particularly to the first
cousins of the bride or groom. These relatives take a hand in
preparing the carcasses of the animals for roasting by fixing
them on spits. Later they supervise the fires over which the
spits are turned and they baste the meat to prevent it from
burning. They cut up the whole animal into individual por¬
tions. When the meal is ready it is the first cousins who assist the
brothers of the family to lay cloths on the ground, pass round
forks and spoons and finally hand to each guest his individual
portion of meat. After the meal is over it is again first cousins
who stand in the middle of the dancing, one with a bottle of
ouzo and the other with a plate of cheese or olives to give
refreshment to the sweating dancers. These are not considered
to be menial tasks; on the contrary, it is a privilege of close kin¬
ship to be allowed to assist in this way.
The women hold their sombre, almost melancholy, celebra¬
tions apart from the men in a nearby hut where they sing and
sometimes dance. Here, again, the close female relatives of the
family assist in handing round the food. But of the women
guests it is the old grandmothers who play the most important
role. Outside in the open-air kitchen they preside over the huge
cooking-pots of potatoes, stews, and soups, enlivening their
labours with gossip and attended by dogs and children antici¬ pating scraps.


EXPRESSIONS OF SOLIDARITY 119
The support of kinsmen for the bride or groom is expressed
more specifically in particular points of marriage custom. One
of the more important ceremonies is ‘The sewing of the wedding
standard’ (to paijxpo tou cpXafZ7roupou), which takes place on the
Saturday evening after the guests have arrived. For this stan¬
dard, which flies from the hut of the groom until the marriage
has been consummated, is more than a sign that nuptial cele¬
brations are in progress; it is a symbol of marriage itself, the
joining of noble youth with virgin maid.3 In standing with him
at this ceremony the company of kinsmen witness their certain
knowledge of the bridegroom’s nobility and their belief in the
bride’s virginity. Only the joining ofthese qualities in a marriage
celebrated before God makes possible parenthood with honour.
‘Whose is the wedding standard, noble and red? It is the stan¬
dard of the bridegroom . . .’ (Tlvo<; elv’xo <pXapt.7T:oupo, t’oc^io xou to
xoxxtvo, tou yapurpou eIv’to cpXafjuroupo . . .), they sing. Astandard
requires a standard-bearer (^XaptrcoupapT)*;), and for this coveted
position a youth between the ages of sixteen and twenty is
chosen. He must not have had experience of sexual intercourse
and both his mother and father must be alive. He is almost
always a young first cousin or nephew of the groom. On the
Saturday night the flag, which nowadays is the national flag of
Greece, is sewn by the youth to a pole some six or seven feet in
length, at the top of which a small wooden cross is secured. As
the boy sews the flag the whole company of kinsmen stand
around him in a circle and sing the appropriate wedding song.
When the sewing is completed, the boy impales pomegranates
or apples, symbols of fertility, on the three points of the small
wooden cross and, finally, ties to the flag-pole below the cross a
handkerchief and two strands of wool, one coloured red for
virility, the other white for purity. The guests now form a
dance-ring, the band strikes up, and the standard-bearer leads
the dance holding aloft in his right hand the newly sewn stan¬
dard. He then sets up the flag in the thatch of the groom’s hut
at the right-hand side of the doorway where it remains until the
next morning, when the standard-bearer, mounted on a fine
horse, lifts it down from the roof and leads the groom’s bridal
procession on its journey to the home of the bride.
The groom and his family rely on the support of their kindred
s At the weddings of widows or widowers no flag is flown.


120 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
to make the bridal procession the spectacular occasion it must
appear if their prestige is to be maintained in the community.
They give this support by their numbers, their own bearing, and
the quality of their horses and the coloured woollen saddle¬
cloths which are draped over the backs of the animals. For
whenever the procession passes through or close to a village
both Sarakatsani and villagers line the path, to enjoy the spec¬
tacle with critical eyes, and to exchange greetings with the
riders. The watchers laugh excitedly and try to draw the riders
into an exchange of bawdy quips and jokes, but the horsemen
must remain unmoved with upright backs and proud serious
faces. Earlier on the same Sunday morning before the bridal pro¬
cession sets out on its journey, the bridegroom is prepared for
his ordeal. Seated on a chair outside the door of his hut he is
attended by a kinsman with the necessary skill, who cuts his
hair, shaves his beard, and trims the moustache. This, like the
sewing of the standard, is a part of customary wedding ritual.
The kinsmen gather about the groom and accompanied by the
gipsy band sing about the shaving of the bridegroom. From
time to time the singing is interrupted by heated debate between
the watching kinsmen and the barber as to the style of the hair
cutting, the angle of the moustache, and the effectiveness of the
shaving. For they fear the appraisal of strangers on the road
and the malicious hopes of the bride’s kinsmen that the bride¬
groom will in some way look ridiculous.
After the barber has completed his task, two or three of
the more senior first cousins with a reputation for worldly
knowledge go into the hut to supervise the changing of the
bridegroom’s clothes (v’aXXa^ouv to yapurpo). The Sarakatsani
have abandoned the traditional kilt and today the prosaic
costume of a bridegroom consists of a white shirt buttoned to the
neck without a tie, and a blue suit of manufactured cloth.
The cousins help their young kinsman to put on these clothes to
which he is not accustomed and they make certain that he does
not change his underclothes; for with these an envious man or
woman might affect the sexual potency of the groom by sorcery.
As a prophylactic against the same peril they place some steel
object in the folds of the shirt tails before he puts it on. As he is
dressed, almost like a child, they feed him with various pieces


EXPRESSIONS OF SOLIDARITY 121
of good advice, telling him in detail how he must deport
himself that day on the road and later at the home of the
bride.
At the home of the bride kinsfolk support her family in a
similar manner, particularly in a number of situations where a
measure of dramatized hostility is shown to the groom’s party
when they arrive to take away the bride; but these are episodes
which I shall describe in the following chapter. The dressing and
adornment of the bride, naturally, is a more elaborate affair
than the preparation of the groom. In this, two or three senior
married aunts or first cousins generally take a hand, assisted by
the more sophisticated village dressmaker who in most cases has
been responsible for cutting and sewing the white wedding
gown. All through the long night of Saturday the bride sits
in her parents’ hut. She must not sleep for this would demon¬
strate an equanimity at odds with the grief she is expected to
feel at the thought of leaving her parents and her home on the
morrow. Her kinswomen sit closely round her. Two of them
hold her hands. From time to time they sing the repetitive,
intensely sad, songs that tell of the bride’s departure from the
only home she has ever known.
***
In this chapter I have attempted to give a fuller description
of the relations of collateral kin than it was possible to present
in chapter three, where I was mainly concerned to describe the
formal characteristics of the kindred. I mentioned, then, that
various aspects of kindred relations might be seen in terms of an
opposition between the solidarity of siblings and the principle
of parental obligation, the former being the source of moral
solidarity between kinsmen, the latter strongly influencing the
isolation of the family group from the collateral kinsmen of its
members. The Tree favours’ which a man does without thought
or calculation for an uncle, cousin, or nephew, are related to
kinship solidarity, the qualities of which follow from the notion
of an extensive sibling relationship; while calculated co-opera¬
tion which involves the corporate wealth of family groups is
influenced by the particularistic obligations of parenthood. As
one might expect, those cousins, father’s brother’s children,
whose families of origin were concerned in co-operative sheep


122 COLLATERAL KINSMEN
management, are the cousins least likely to form those impor¬
tant links of devoted friendship. Since marriage is patrilocal it is
the fathers of these cousins who experienced the various con¬
straints of life in an extended family. These considerations do
not generally apply to the other categories of first cousin who
normally live in other neighbourhoods. It is among these rela¬
tives that a man finds his intimate friends. For these cousins are
able to emphasize in their behaviour the altruistic qualities of
collateral kinship, particularly in the performance of free
favours. Various considerations, then, tend to identify the in¬
terests of collateral kinsmen, others to set them apart. We may
look at this from another point of view. The fact that for any
individual the community is divided into the opposed categories
of kinsmen, ‘own people’, and non-kinsmen, ‘strangers’, is
clearly a factor which unites people who can trust one another
against the rest of the world who are not to be trusted. Generally,
a man can only co-operate with a kinsman, find a true friend
among his cousins, talk to an unmarried girl who is a kins¬
woman, and so on. However, the members of a man’s kindred
are not undifferentiated. Some are close kinsmen, others more
distant. There is not quite the same measure of responsibility
and obligation to a second cousin as there is to a first. Moreover,
as children grow up their parents are more concerned with
their own descendants and less with collateral kinsmen. But,
quite apart from any considerations which relate specifically to
the internal structure of the kindred, questions of prestige are
always a potential threat to the solidarity of kinsmen. Kinsmen
are identified in the thoughts of outsiders and if one man loses
prestige, whether it is due to moral error, poverty, or physical
deformity, his kinsman suffers with him. In these circumstances
his only defence is to withdraw temporarily or permanently
from the relationship.
Sarakatsani are fully aware of the fragmented character of
their community. They realize that one man’s hand is turned
against another’s. They continually lament the distrust which
exists between unrelated men and the element of calculation
which must exist even in the relations of kinsmen who co¬
operate at work. They value their relations with kinsmen who
live in other neighbourhoods not only for the various practical
reasons we have elaborated, but because of the generally


EXPRESSIONS OF SOLIDARITY 123
altruistic quality of these relationships. This is an end in itself.
It balances the qualities of calculation and restraint which enter
into all the other situations of social life, excepting only certain
contexts of religious experience. This partly explains the im¬
mense pleasure which individuals experience when they take
part with their kinsmen in festivals and weddings. There is a
sense of release from the restrictions of daily life and local
animosities which more articulate shepherds describe by the
same phrase that is sometimes used after receiving the
Eucharist at Easter, ‘A weight has left me’, fioucpuye evoc pdpo<;.


VI
AFFINAL RELATIONS
1. BETROTHAL AND ABDUCTION
though in one respect marriage is a religious sacrament
binding together two individuals in the sight of God, it is
1 JLalso a contract between the two families of origin of the
man and the girl. In the early years of the marriage a brother’s
wife or a sister’s husband is often referred to in such phrases as,
‘She is our bride’, or ‘We have him as bridegroom’. Similarly,
people do not ask whom a man has married, but whose daughter
has he taken. Indeed it is only as a contract between two
families of origin that a marriage arrangement has immediate
significance, for, in effect, there is no real recognition of a new
family until the first child is born. And since the prohibition on
marriage within the kindred compels the Sarakatsanos to find a
bride among families which are not related to him, that is
among people who are hostile to himself and his interests, this
marriage contract is in the nature of a peace treaty between
two previously-opposed social groups.1
Despite the contrary testimony of love songs, romantic
courtship is impossible. ‘The songs tell lies,’ the Sarakatsani
say. Virtually all marriages are arranged. It would be shameful
for a man or girl to express any preference, and they have only
to answer the specific question, ‘Will you marry this particular
man or girl?’ It is almost impossible for a girl to refuse the
bridegroom of her family’s choice if they insist upon it, although
it is believed that a good father or brother ought not to force
her into a marriage against her will. But it is also said that a
daughter should be guided by her parents’ or brothers’ choice,
and in the period of the last twenty years I have discovered
evidence of only two cases of ‘marriage by force’ (roxvrpeia pi
to £6pi). It is more difficult for a father or brother to dictate to a
potential bridegroom, but here again, in most cases, unless his
feelings are very strongly engaged against a particular girl,
the weight of family opinion is likely to persuade him to accept
their decision. John Myriounis saw a maiden at a wedding
1 Except in the marginal instance of a marriage between third cousins.


BETROTHAL AND ABDUCTION 125
whose fair hair and black eyes captured his heart, but when his
father pressed him to marry another not strikingly well
favoured girl, after some resistance he finally agreed, ‘so as not
to displease’ (va piv] yaXasco to yarlpt). A marriage is arranged
to suit the requirements of the family group, not the individual
preference of the youth or maiden.
Since marriage is, from one point of view, a contract between
hostile groups, a family which is looking for a bride proceeds
with the utmost circumspection, to avoid offending other
families with daughters of marriageable age. For this reason
they appoint a kinsman or a close affine, generally a senior
man with a reputation for skill in these matters, as the marriage
negotiator. If the family already have a particular girl in mind,
the negotiator will make a tentative approach to a close
kinsman of the girl’s father from whom he inquires with a great
deal of periphrasis, whether he has any knowledge of the
family’s plans, and how much dowry she is likely to have. The
girl’s kinsman may undertake to make the inquiries if he does
not already know, and report to the negotiator in one or two
days’ time. If the negotiator has some link of kinship or affinity
with both families, he may make a more direct approach to the
girl’s family.
When the negotiator by one means or another has obtained
oblique assurances that the girl’s family are willing to consider a
marriage proposal, he informs the family of his kinsman. The
head of that family now waylays the girl’s brother or father in
some quiet place, but not at his home. Naturally both are
aware why the one has sought out the other. But for a while
they pursue a conventional conversation about sheep and
weather, until, quite casually, the one remarks that he has a
brother or son who is of an age when it is right that he should
marry. And then he asks, ‘Would you give us the girl so that we
may become one house ?’ (va 8cocr/]<; tt) xo7ieXXa va ylvtopie eva
<T7im). At this point he will also mention how many sheep or
gold pounds are demanded in addition to the traditional
dowry. This too will already be known to the girl’s family and is
therefore no longer a matter for debate. The other receives the
news as if it comes as a complete surprise. He explains that this
is not a light matter and therefore he would like to discuss it
with his family, and that he will send word to the other’s home


126 AFFINAL RELATIONS
within eight days. If the negotiator has worked skilfully, there is
little chance of the girl’s family rejecting the proposal. Within
a few days a kinsman of the girl’s family arrives at the future
bridegroom’s homestead, inviting the family to come to the
home of the girl’s family on the next Sunday to effect the
betrothal contract (to ao[ika(T(xa).
It is only in the last ten years that the betrothal ceremony,
under the influence of village customs, has developed into a
feast where both the families participate. Previously, the father
or eldest brother came alone to the girl’s house. He was offered
Turkish delight and ouzo (xepocapia), and immediately after¬
wards the two heads of family exchanged the rings, an act which
indicated the formal sealing of the contract. The girl’s repre¬
sentative handed over her wedding ring, tied in a white hand¬
kerchief, which contained also, rice, red and white wool, and a
gold sovereign. In return, he took from the bridegroom’s
brother, or father, the ring which was to be worn by the groom
at the wedding ceremony. Each side kept the other’s ring until
the day of the marriage as a pledge that the marriage contract
would be honoured.
At the modern betrothal feast the exchange of rings is effected
in the same manner. But in place of the single representative
the whole of the bridegroom’s family together with various close
kinsmen make the journey on the appointed Sunday to the
home of the bride’s family where they are entertained with
feasting and dancing until the early hours of the Monday
morning. There is something inappropriate about this act of
commensality between future affines. At the moment of
betrothal there are only feelings of suspicion and distrust
between the two sides. This is reflected in the unhappy record
of betrothal feasts since this village custom was adopted.
Brawling between hosts and guests is not infrequent and
generally the result of these celebrations is that relations
between the two groups deteriorate yet further.
Under the old convention, when the groom’s representative
arrived to exchange the rings, it was customary to hide away
the future bride in the hut of a close kinsman. The ostensible
purpose of this manoeuvre was to protect the reputation and
sensibilities of the maiden from the shame of suffering the gaze
of her future father- or brother-in-law. But, also, it was thought


BETROTHAL AND ABDUCTION 127
to be imprudent to display the girl in case she did not please
the groom’s representative. Girls marry strictly in accordance
with the order of birth and if the eldest unmarried daughter is
ugly or unhealthy a family will sometimes try to deceive an
inexperienced negotiator into believing that a younger and
more personable sister is the next in order to marry. In any
event, whether the bride was particularly ill favoured or not,
it was considered wise that the groom’s people should remain
in ignorance of the bride’s appearance until the wedding day.
And this was the more easily achieved twenty years ago when
the Sarakatsani did not live in, or generally close to, the
mountain villages. In the modern betrothal feast, the future
bride appears only about an hour before the groom’s party
are due to depart, that is between four and five o’clock in the
morning. By this time the rings have been exchanged and
there is no way of retreat left open to the bridegroom. The girl
appears in the doorway with a tray of Turkish delight and small
glasses of ouzo which she offers to each member of the other
party in turn, including her future husband. She disappears, to
return a quarter of an hour later with cups of coffee which she
again offers to the bridegroom and his kinsmen. The groom’s
kinsmen invariably demand that the girl should appear much
earlier in the proceedings before the rings have been exchanged,
as indeed she ought to do if the village custom were strictly
adhered to. Invariably, the girl’s father and brothers refuse
the request, and it is often this refusal which is the beginning
of the brawling and quarrelling between the two groups. The
traditional seclusion of the girl in a relative’s hut, the present
day precaution to produce her only when the rings have been
exchanged, the practice of trickery and the fear of it, all
indicate the quality of the relations which exist between the
two sides at the moment they enter into this contract.
The betrothal contract amongst the Sarakatsani is entirely
secular and it is an agreement between families rather than
individuals. The groom contracts to marry a certain man’s
daughter whose face he may never have seen rather than a
particular person of the opposite sex. If he withdraws from this
agreement, not only does he break his pledged word but he
damages the girl’s reputation in a way which makes it impossible
for her to make an honourable marriage in the future. For it


128 AFFINAL RELATIONS
will be said that a man would not lightly or without reason
change his mind on so serious a matter if he had not discovered
some grave moral or physical deficiency in the girl. No man of
worth is likely to choose a girl whom another has previously
rejected. She can only hope to marry a widower or a poor man
from a despised family. Therefore to break an engagement is a
violent affront to the honour of all the members of the bride’s
family, and as such it carries the ultimate sanction of vengeance
killing, which the girl’s brothers, if they are men of honour,
ought to carry through against the person of the bridegroom.
It follows that both for the sake of his honour and prestige in
the community, and for very life itself, a man is unlikely to
break a betrothal contract. On the other hand, a bridegroom,
if he finds out between the betrothal and the marriage (a
period of between three months to a year) that he is being
tricked into marriage with a particularly ugly or unhealthy
girl, may consider himself released from his pledge of honour.
It is generally in connexion with incurable diseases such as
advanced pulmonary tuberculosis that betrothals are sometimes
broken off. It cannot, however, be said that the danger of a
broken betrothal deters the girl’s family from every kind of
trickery or concealment when there is the possibility of marrying
off an ugly or unhealthy daughter or sister. The disgrace of a
girl remaining unmarried is feared more than the bridegroom’s
reluctance and its possible consequences.
It is mainly to avoid these risks and difficulties that, today, a
bridegroom often will not allow the formal approach to be
made to a girl’s family until he, or a trusted brother, has had an
opportunity of secretly appraising the appearance and bearing
of a prospective bride. For the same reasons, families with
daughters of marriageable age try to display the more attrac¬
tive girls and prevent their ugly or sick sisters from being seen
at wells or in other public places. When a man wants to view a
possible bride, he generally goes to stay at a kinsman’s home
near to the huts of the girl’s family. From the women of his
kinsman’s family he learns of the girl’s daily movements and
arranges to be near the well or stream when she goes to draw
water or wash clothes. He may watch her secretly from behind
cover or may saunter casually past and say ‘Good day’, to which
she will not reply. These antics are unnecessary if the man has


BETROTHAL AND ABDUCTION 129
already had the opportunity to see the girl more naturally at a
wedding, a village festival, or perhaps on the road during the
two annual migrations between the mountains and the plain.
And young men look forward to these occasions as opportunities
to assess the virtues of unrelated maidens. But in whatever way
a man succeeds in seeing the girl, his purpose must remain
secret.
There is no likelihood of a change of mind on the part of the
girl’s family between betrothal and marriage. Men and youths
lead a public life and their virtues and deficiencies are more
widely known than those of their sisters and daughters who live
and work in privacy close to, or inside, the huts. The action of
the girl’s family which is most likely to give grave offence to
the man and his kinsmen is not the breaking of the betrothal
contract, but unwillingness to enter into it at all. Even if the
refusal is made through the negotiator, the situation is serious
enough, and the reactions of the groom’s family depend to
some extent on the diplomacy with which the negative answer
is given. The usual formula is that the family are not yet ready
to marry the girl. -She is too young, and she has not yet com¬
pleted her dowry, or the supplementary dowry asked for is too
high, although this last excuse is not often made since no family
wishes to plead poverty. In the event of the refusal being made
after the brother or father of the man has made a formal
request for the girl’s hand, the situation is much graver. In any
event, the fact that the man wanted the girl, and was refused,
is bound to become generally known. If the refusal is made
directly and not through the negotiator, it is more obviously
an insult. Such direct refusals are, however, rare. What the
rejected bridegroom will do depends upon his estimate of the
effect of his unsuccessful suit on his own and his family’s prestige
in the community. If he believes that he has been made to look
ridiculous, he may be driven to attempt the only remedy,
abduction.
To abduct a girl against her will is a dangerous undertaking.
The man, together with one or two trusted kinsmen, mounted
on fast horses, waylay the girl when she is collecting wood or
water at some distance from her home. Naturally she resists
and on this account she is not always handled with gentleness.
One wife, who is now happily devoted to her abductor, told


130 AFFINAL RELATIONS
me with pride how she was beaten about the head and body and dragged fifty yards by the hair. The captured girl is taken without delay to a prepared hideout in a cave or forest clearing. Here she is held by the bridegroom for three days and three nights. On the fourth day, the man takes the girl to the nearest police post and gives himself up, explaining that he took the girl from her home because he wished to marry her. The police at once send for the father or brother of the girl, and in his presence the police officer asks her il she wishes to marry her abductor or return to her home. She is asked this question three times and gives her answer three times. If she says that she is willing to marry the man they are taken immediately to the church and the service is celebrated. Ifshe elects to return home, she is handed over to her kinsmen while the man is held to await trial on a serious charge which may send him to prison for a number of years. It is remarkable that in the live cases ot abduction which 1 discovered amongst the Zagori-Sarakatsani, there is only one instance of the girl choosing to return to her own people. During the days and nights when she is detained by her abductor, the situation is carefully explained to her. If she refuses to marry the man, nobody will believe that after three nights in the wilderness with an ardent lover she is any longer a virgin. In any case, she cannot expect to be sought in marriage except by a man of low prestige or a widower. Secondly, if she goes back to her family, it inevitably obliges one of her brothers to seek vengeance on the abductor when he emerges from prison. And in this case, the brother in turn may lose his life in counter vengeance or, at least, be forced into voluntary exile. Thirdly, she is asked if it is not pleasant, despite the sudden shocks, to be married to a man who is willing to risk his life to take her as his wife. For these reasons, and especially for the first of them, the girl is more likely to say ‘Yes’ than ‘No’. • Abduction, then, is a recognized institution through which, if the normal negotiations between two opposed groups for the arrangement of a marriage break down in a manner detri¬ mental to his social prestige, a man may yet save his reputation and win his bride without necessarily precipitating the two families into acts of reciprocal vengeance. To refuse a bride¬ groom is to suggest that he is not worthy. The abduction of the


BETROTHAL AND ABDUCTION 131
girl is a proof of courage and strength which refutes this
suggestion and reinstates the man’s prestige. The bride’s
family are extremely angry at the time but their reputation is
not unduly damaged; the original assertion of their greater
worth, which the refusal to give the girl implied, still carries
some of its force and there is considerable material compen¬
sation in the fact that no dowry need be handed over.
It is, now, easy to appreciate why much thought and dis¬
cussion is given to the negotiation of marriages. A marriage is
an arrangement between opposed groups which involves
important considerations of honour and prestige. Its negotia¬
tion is a difficult and delicate operation. The importance of the
negotiator in the marriage settlement is that he stands between
the two groups and prevents any direct collision which might
otherwise prove fatal to the conclusion of an agreement. He is
able to present to the girl’s kinsmen in a relatively objective and
calm manner all the virtues of the prospective bridegroom, and
to bargain over the dowry in a disinterested fashion which
cannot easily cause offence. If the girl’s family decline the
proposal, he is able to soften the blow so that it docs not
inevitably lead to the dangers of an attempted abduction.
The ideal marriage negotiator is a kinsman who is also a
kinsman of the intended bride. Such a man serves as a direct
bridge between the two unrelated and opposed groups. When
the bridegroom’s family ask a kinsman to act as negotiator and
have not yet decided on a suitable bride, he will first search
in his mind for a possible bride from those female kinsmen of
his own kindred who are not related to the youth. In this way,
it frequently happens that a man takes as his bride the cousin
of a cousin. In another direction the negotiator may look
among the kinswomen of his own wife or the wives of his
brothers and cousins. It is not unusual for two cousins to have
as wives, women who are themselves cousins or even sisters.
Also, it is possible for a man to marry his third cousin. Such a
union has the obvious advantage that the two contracting
families are known to one another, but, among some Sarakat
sani, there is the uneasy feeling that it is wrong that relations
originally founded on the confidence of cousinship should be
endangered by the ambivalence of affinal ties of which they
are well aware.


132 AFFINAL RELATIONS
In these manoeuvres, the object of both the family and their
negotiator is to establish a marriage contract with a group in
which, by reason of some mediating link of kinship, they can
place a measure of trust. Some hostility will still exist between
the groups, but there is the hope that it will pass more rapidly
from the overt to the latent phase than otherwise is the case.
From 121 marriages in recent years, 52 were contracted between
families connected by some mediating link of kinship or
marriage; nine were marriages between third cousins.
2. THE ELEMENT OF HOSTILITY
MARRIAGE AND THE ‘RETURN’
During the months which pass between the betrothal and the
day of the marriage, the date of which is fixed at the betrothal,
there is no communication between the two groups. If members
of the two families or their close relatives meet by chance, they
avoid one another. When Machoula Gogolos was approached
by a sophisticated cousin of her betrothed after the Easter
Sunday church service, she refused to exchange greetings with
her, and turning her back, walked away. Each side in an
atmosphere of mutual aversion separately attends to its wedding
preparations.
The day of the wedding marks an important change in the
relations between the two groups. On this day the two sides
formally enter into affinal relations (<ru[i.7te0epia), and a daughter
leaves her home. The feelings of the girl’s family, especially of
her parents, are mixed. On the one hand there is relief and
self-congratulation that they have succeeded in guarding her
reputation unblemished and arranging an honourable marriage.
But there is also true grief at the loss of a daughter, a loss which
is harder to bear because of their anxiety about how the
strangers will use her. It is easy to observe the strained expres¬
sions on the faces of the bride’s brothers as they watch the
groom’s people boasting in loud voices and strutting about the
homestead. But self-restraint must be exercised in dealings with
affines, if only for the sake of the bride. The exchanges between
the two groups, when the groom arrives to take away the bride,
vary between the openly expressed hostility which sometimes
occurs and a formal display of amity which is, in fact, a con¬
trolled hostility cloaked with fair words. Midway between


THE ELEMENT OF HOSTILITY 133
these extremes is the ambivalence of certain marriage customs
which express the mutual antagonism between the two sides
and its limitation within conventional bounds.
When the groom’s bridal procession arrives at a point about
a quarter of a mile from the bride’s home it halts. Five of the
younger, braver, and better mounted men (cruYX«pi«Te<;) ride
on ahead to bear the tidings of the groom’s approach to the
bride’s people. Their object is to ride up to the door of the
bride’s hut at a full gallop, where they attempt to scatter and
terrify the kinsmen of the bride. The aim of the bride’s people,
on the other hand, is to dismount and thereby ridicule as
many of the riders as possible. Traditionally, this was done by
firing blank charges at the feet of the oncoming horses, so that
they reared in terror and threw their riders. Nowadays, if the
bride lives near a village, this method of attack is not
attempted because the possession of firearms is illegal, but with
the help of barking dogs and the banging of tin cans it is still
possible to give the riders an unpleasant reception. Because
convention permits this cut and thrust, no offence may be
taken, unless it is pursued with an excess of malice. As each man
reaches the door of the bride’s hut, he claims from an appointed
kinsman of the bride the coloured handkerchief which is the
prerogative of these riders.
When the entire party of the groom has assembled, they are
offered Turkish delight and a glass of ouzo by the bride’s
family, but this is the limit of the hospitality which is offered.
Before the arrival of the groom, the bride’s people have
prepared a shady picnic site, by spreading blankets on the
ground and providing a barrel of fresh water. Thus while the
bride’s kinsmen eat and dance inside the huts, the groom’s
party take their midday meal outside under a tree, eating the
food they have brought with them. They invariably eat this
meal in a mood of impatient ill-humour, with many complaints
that the water is tepid and the place unsuitable. By this
formal denial of commensality the bride’s family express their
opposition to those who support the bridegroom.
After the religious betrothal ceremony has been completed,
the groom’s party are eager to leave. The bride’s family, on the
contrary, insist that she goes through the lengthy ritual of
dancing for the last time with each member of her family.


134 AFFINAL RELATIONS
‘She is ours, now’, shout the groom’s men, which only en¬
courages the other side to delay the departure for another
half an hour. These arguments are accepted moves in the game
and do not cause permanent offence so long as they remain
within the limits of what is conventionally permitted.
Finally, when the bride is prepared to leave, there is some
byplay over the acceptance and loading of the bride’s dowry.
The trunks and sacks in which this is contained are stacked in
the doorway of the bride’s hut. The young kinsmen of the
groom advance to take it, but at this moment a kinsman of the
bride jumps astride the first sack and shouts, ‘Don’t interfere
with it. The sack doesn’t belong to you. This dowry has great
worth’ (My) to 7teipa^Y)<;, elvai £evo to craxxt. ’'Eyouv a£ta Ta 7cpoo«a).
He refuses to get off the sack until the groom’s eldest brother
pays over some token pieces of money. The groom’s kinsmen
now drag the bulky sacks and trunks outside, where they begin
to load them on to pack mules. This is an awkward operation
which gives much enjoyment to the bride’s kinsmen who stand
round in a close circle mocking at the efforts of the other side
to balance and secure the difficult loads.
But fair words are also exchanged. These expressions of amity
indicate the readiness of each side to co-operate in establishing
the new relationship and in supporting the children of the new
family, on the understanding that the other side will also play
their part. For the contract which is entered into at the be¬
trothal is not confined to co-operation in the arrangement of
the marriage, it also foresees the future obligations which the
two families must assume towards the new family group in
which both will have a common and balanced interest.
When the groom’s party arrives at the bride’s house, all the
riders, including those unfortunates who may have been
thrown from their horses, must exchange conventional greetings
which express their common interest in the bridal couple. ‘Good
health to you, it is well that we have found you! May our bride
and groom live long and prosper!’ (Teta aa<;! KaXcoc; cra<; Tjupapie!
Na (zac; ^yjctouv! Na [za<; 7rpoxo^ouv!). And a brother of the
groom exchanges the wine and ‘bread of the bride’ (xouXoupa
TTjc vu97]<;), baked by the women of the groom’s family, for the
same elements of communion and commensality prepared and
presented by the bride’s family.


THE ELEMENT OF HOSTILITY 135
Half an hour later, as they drink the one glass of ouzo which,
as we have seen, is the full extent of the hospitality shown to
them, the bridegroom’s kinsmen sing,
‘We have not come for food or drink,
But because we love you,
We have come to see you.
I find tables fair and laden,
And glasses brimming over.
Three maidens with black eyes serve us.
Three maidens with the eyebrows of angels.’2
They could hardly sing more fairly. Thus during the two or
three hours that the parties of the bride and the groom are in
contact, marriage custom enjoins the expression of the opposed
sentiments of friendship and enmity. It indicates the ambivalent
character of the affinal relationship which demands co¬
operation between previously unrelated and therefore hostile
families. Naturally this ambivalence of sentiment is more
apparent in the early years, but it never wholly vanishes at
any time.
The margin between antagonism permitted and instituted
by convention and the display of excessive malice is narrow.
Quarrels over the time and precise arrangements of the bride’s
departure frequently flare up into free violence. In one case, no
sooner had the bride progressed some two hundred yards on
her journey to the groom’s home, than a fierce rain storm broke
overhead drenching the bride and her white wedding dress.
2 Aev rjpOatxav yta 9x1 ytd mt po'iSouXa, po'iSouXa. Met? aa? dya7rf]aa[i.av, po'iSouXa, poiSouXa, po'iSouXa, yaptaiSouXa, xt’^pGaptav va aaq Soupte. pptaxto Tparcs^ta v6[zop9a poiSouXa, po'tSouXa, po'tSouXa, yapiaiSouXa, yoaXta Trapayiopiaxa. Tpeiq piaupoptaxei; pta? xepvav, pol'SouXx, po'iSouXa, po'iSouXa, yaixatoouXa, xt Tpei? dyyeXa9pu$£!;.


136 AFFINAL RELATIONS
Her relatives, leaping to their horses, rode after the cavalcade
insisting that the bride return and take shelter. The groom’s
kinsmen angrily refused to halt, pointing out that if a bride
retraces her steps or even looks round upon the house she has
left, it brings ill luck upon her new home. Refusing to be drawn
into further argument, they rode on. The enraged kinsmen of
the bride dismounted, and blaspheming against the sisters and
mothers of their future affines, sent them away to a fusillade of
rifle shots over their heads and stones aimed at their bodies.
However, the separate celebration of the wedding feast, each
family in its own home, the denial of commensality, and the
mutual display of antagonism institutionalized in wedding
custom, are the last occasions on which the two families are
permitted to bear witness openly to the aspect of mutual
opposition in their relationship. Before the eldest brother of
the bridegroom leaves the bride’s house, he is offered a glass
of ouzo by the bride’s father or brother who says, ‘We shall
wait for you’. This refers to the customary visit or ‘return’
(e7u<TTpo<py)), which is made by the bride and groom and the
latter’s close relatives to the former home of the bride, generally
on the second Sunday after the wedding. Meat is killed,
quantities of wine are bought, and there is feasting and dancing
through the night.
The ‘return’ is an important occasion. By this time, the new
marriage relationship has been established both by the secular
contract of betrothal between the two families and by the
joining of the two individuals in the religious sacrament of
marriage. In the first words of the service which refer to the
bride and groom, the priest says, ‘Let us pray to the Lord for
his servants (X., Y.) who are now joining the one with the
other for the common life of marriage.’ The two individuals
are now a social unity, a man-and-wife (avSpoyuvo). It is not
possible to help the one and not help the other, or withdraw
support from one without withdrawing support from the
other. Thus, the behaviour of both families at the ‘return’ is
necessarily oriented towards co-operation and forced goodwill.
At first conversation between the two families is stilted and
formal, and restricted to neutral topics such as weather and
taxes. The bride and groom, under the eyes of their respective
affines, sit silent and constrained. But as the evening wears on,


THE ELEMENT OF HOSTILITY 137
the wine and the dance produce a mellowing effect on the
assembly; the groom begins to smile, and even the bride, with
the merest flutter of her lips, tries to follow the singing.
One effect of this reunion of the bride with her people is
to establish the interest of the bride’s family in the new family
which will be formed at the birth of the first child. The
knowledge that the unborn children of the married pair
will be affiliated equally to both their maternal and paternal
relatives forces both sets of affines to act towards each other in
a calculatingly friendly manner. However, this attitude is dic¬
tated not only by their common interest in the new family, but
for reasons of prestige. Other people are uncharitably amused
when a family is having in-law trouble (TuaCTnqxav ol aujiTreGepot).
In general both sets of affines try hard to conciliate one another
and it follows that the attitudes of affines act as a strong sanction
on a spouse in his or her actions within the marriage relation¬
ship. Similarly, in a wider sense, the attitude of one set of
affines is a sanction for the correct conduct of the other set.
But what is undoubtedly uppermost in the minds of the
bride’s kinsmen at the ‘return’, is an anxiety to find out how
the girl has been treated in general and in particular a certain
malicious hope that perhaps the bridegroom has encountered
some sexual difficulty. Conversely, the object of the groom’s
people is to deny the bride the opportunity to transmit this
kind of information. A sister or brother’s wife of the bride¬
groom is always a member of the groom’s party; she sits close
to the bride, and attends her every movement so far as good
manners will allow. However, the young wife generally
succeeds in whispering a few of the desired details into the ear
of her mother or a sister; and every Sarakatsan woman is a
mistress of the art of conveying meaning with her eyes.
In the morning the affines say farewell. No sooner have the
echoes of the piously uttered sentiments of goodwill died away
than each side indulges in a critical appraisal of what was said
and done by the other side at the ‘return’. The bride’s family,
in particular, may have some very interesting material to
discuss whether it is fact or simply conjecture. Invariably the
criticism is very unfriendly and reveals the hostility of the
affinal relationship, a hostility, however, which must no longer
be openly expressed.


138 AFFINAL RELATIONS
Betrothal, marriage, and the ‘return’ are the three stages
in which affinal relations are fully established. The betrothal
is the formal contract between the two hostile groups after
which there is a period of separation while the two sides, like
two opposed camps of war, prepare for the marriage. At the
marriage the emphasis is still upon the distance which separates
the two groups. Each family surrounded by its own kinsmen and
affines celebrates the occasion apart. The two sides make
contact only at the point where the groom comes to take
away the bride. And this confrontation, although it is marked,
as we have seen, by the expression of friendship as well as
antagonism, is essentially characterized as a warlike descent.3
The martial array of the groom’s procession, the standard
bearer, the charge of the leading riders to the door of the
bride’s hut, and the deployment of the bride’s supporters to
repel this attack, all contribute to form this dramatic im¬
pression. After the marriage, until they meet generally two
weeks later at the ‘return’, the two sides adjust themselves to the
realities of a new situation. The groom’s family try to help the
bride overcome her loneliness and despair, while the bride’s
family, in a sense the defeated party, are anxious and sensitive
about the treatment of the bride at her new home. The two
groups, despite the inevitable undercurrents of animosity
and suspicion, meet at the ‘return’ fully conscious of the
necessity and the advantages of future co-operation.
3. THE OBLIGATIONS OF AFFINES
The recognition of affinal relationships is even more flexible
than the recognition of cognatic kinship. Affinal relationship
may be claimed not only with the elementary family of origin
of a person’s spouse, or the elementary family of origin of the
wife or husband of any member in a person’s kindred, but also
with the entire kindred of the marriage partner. Consequently
a man may, if it suits his convenience, describe himself as an
affine of the second cousin of the spouse of his second cousin.
Generally, however, a man limits his use of the term affine
to the kindreds of his own wife, and of the marriage partners
of his brothers and sisters, and to only the elementary families
3 Cf. Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol i, Part A, p. poe'.


THE OBLIGATIONS OF AFFINES 139
of origin of the marriage partners of his collateral kinsmen.
There are also two quasi-affinal relationships which must be
mentioned; that of co-bride (cruvvu<pa8a), which is the link
between a man’s wife and the wife of his brother; and similarly
that of co-bridegroom (fX7TaT£avdba]<;), which describes the rela¬
tionship of two men who are married to sisters.
The importance of the principle of parental obligation is
once more apparent when we ask which are the significant
affinal relationships. These are, in fact, the relationships
between an individual and those affines who are, or will be,
parents of the first cousins of his (or her) own children; more
specifically relationships with the husbands or wives of siblings,
and with the siblings of the individual’s own marriage partner.
Whatever a man’s personal feelings may be, for the sake of his
children he is almost compelled to co-operate with these affines.
A brother tries hard to win the goodwill of his sister’s husband.
He is anxious that she should receive good treatment among
the strangers to whom he and his family have given her. And
it is noticeable that in the early years of marriage while the
bride is still unsure of her position in the new family, her
brothers often do more favours and good turns for the husband
and his family than they receive in return.
But from the point of view of the husband, too, this is the
critical affinal relation. So long as his dealings with the siblings
and parents of his wife remain friendly his children are assured
of adequate kinship support. In the early years of marriage, the
nostalgia of the wife for her family of origin and her old home
is not easily appeased. The physical separation of affines does
not make visits to her parents very easy, and in any case, as
we have seen, her husband and his brothers are not pleased if
communication is too frequent. In practice, most young
brides manage to visit their homes about twice a year. It is an
accepted custom that young brides accompanied by their
husbands set out on the Tuesday after Easter to visit the bride’s
home for five or six days. In the early years, these occasions
may be something of an ordeal for the bridegroom. He must
show a careful and studied respect towards his father-in-law
and mother-in-law (raGspoc;, ireGspa). Even with the brother or
sister of his wife (xouviaSoc;, xouviaSa) he cannot relax, but
must appear at all times severe and grave.


140 AFFINAL RELATIONS
For their part, the family of the bride both for her sake and
the sake of her children try very hard to please the ‘bridegroom*.
‘The father-in-law must entertain the bridegroom and keep
him content’ (6 TCOcpcx; 7tp£7r£t, va EuyapicrrrjaT] xal <pt.Xo!;evY)(T7)
to yapi7rp6), they say. When the bridegroom comes on a visit
meat is always killed, an honour which is not automatically
accorded to a blood kinsman however close. After the passage
of some years and the establishment of the new family, relations
between the husband and his wife’s family of origin become
less tense and formal, and if the bridegroom is an honourable
man, his father- and brothers-in-law may eventually trust him with some of their secrets. Yet even after the passage of years,
close affinal relatives of the same generation must behave in a
dignified and restrained manner in each other’s presence.
The easy familiarity between cousins of both sexes finds no
parallel in the case of affinal relations. Affines do not laugh and
joke together.
We need not discuss again the position of the bride in her
husband’s extended family of origin; something has already
been said about this in chapter four. The brothers and sisters
of the married pair may see one another from time to time. The
husband, or a young unmarried brother of the husband, always
escorts the wife when she goes to her home to see her parents,
and one of the wife’s brothers brings her back to her husband’s
home at the end of her visit. On these and other chance
occasions, some at least of the members of the two families of
origin come to know one another. But these relations never
become easy and familiar. The link between co-parents-in-law
(crunTceOepot)4 is formal. At the time of the marriage of their
children, the fathers have already retired or are on the point of
doing so, and since affines generally do not live in the same
village, and the parents-in-law do not visit each other’s homes,
social contact between them is minimal.
In general, effective co-operation between affines does not
usually occur beyond the limits of the two elementary families
of origin of a married pair. The significance of affinal relations
beyond this range is negative, that is to say a man avoids giving
offence to or dealing deceitfully with such people. But even
* As we have seen, au[Z7r£0epoi is also used in a wider sense to mean affines in general.


THE OBLIGATIONS OF AFFINES 141
within this narrow circle affinal relationships which do not
mediate links of cousinship in the first descendant generation
are vulnerable to stress and friction. In particular a man’s
relations with the brothers of his brother’s wife are easily beset
with resentment and jealousies. Inevitably one brother some¬
times makes a more successful marriage than another, whether
this be judged in terms of dowry, the social standing of the
bride’s family, or her physical beauty. Furthermore, marriage
and the birth of his children end a man’s categorical obligations
to his own siblings; and at the same time he must give particular
consideration to his relations with the close kinsmen of his wife.
These are events which must lead to a growing distance between
the members of a sibling group. A man feels free to show more
enmity to affines related through his brother’s wife, persons
who stand for the weakening of kinship ties in his family of
origin and his kindred, than to affines related through his own
wife who represent co-operative endeavour in the support of
his own descendants.
An example of difficulties between affines occurred in the
extended family of Theodoros Ferendinos, whose affairs were
discussed in some detail in chapter four. The second brother,
Demetrios, married the sister of George Balatsos. During the
village elections, in 1955, an agreement was made between the
heads of all the Sarakatsan households to cast their votes in
unanimous support of the opposition party which had secretly
promised a reduction in pasturage dues. This agreement
became known to the other side. The President of the village
by an astute combination of bribery and threats persuaded
Balatsos and another influential family head secretly to ignore
the agreement and vote for his own group. In the event, the
President retained office by a margin of five votes. The defection
of the Balatsos family from the original agreement did not,
however, remain a secret. When Theodoros Ferendinos met
George Balatsos in a street in Jannina a week after the election,
bitter words passed between the two men. From that day,
although the two families lived in the same village, the members
of the two groups avoided meeting or talking to one another.
Demetrios and his wife, however, were exceptions. Without
mentioning the fact Demetrios paid a number of visits to his
affines whose huts lay only some 300 yards away. Theodoros


142 AFFINAL-RELATIONS
and his other brothers were able effectively to express their
hostility towards the Balatsos group for their faithless behaviour.
But Demetrios, because they were the family of his wife and
the close maternal kin of his two young children, felt that in
some way he must maintain these relations. For some months
this fact was a source of considerable annoyance to his brothers,
who inside the family circle and in the absences of his wife
ridiculed his attitude of compromise. Fortunately he is an easy
tempered man and accepted these rebukes in silence. But an
element of strain was introduced into the relations of the
brothers which in other families might have led to blows and
the permanent severance of relations. A man must try to hold a
balance between his attachment to his siblings which derives
from the bonds of mutual identification in his family of origin
and his relations of contractual co-operation with the kinsmen
of his wife. This is not always easy.
It is this ‘balance’, in relation to parents’ categorical duties
to their children, which leads to the emancipation of the
elementary family from both the families of origin of the two
parents. In describing life in the extended family we saw how
the control of the husband’s family over his bride suddenly
weakens after the birth of her first child; how the brothers of
the husband no longer give the bride peremptory orders in his
presence; how they must never interfere with her handling of
her children and so on.
There is a corresponding degree of independence from any
influence of the wife’s family of origin; but in this instance it is
established immediately on the day of marriage. When a
bride goes to see her parents, she is not permitted for the four or
five days of her visit to do any work. As an honoured guest
she sits by the hearth, and to occupy her hands, while she
gossips, she spins wool. But it must be her own wool especially
transported in a small sack by her husband for this purpose.
She is not permitted to spin her mother’s wool even in a
situation where the family is under pressure to finish the dowry
of a younger sister.
Moreover, when a father or brother has given his daughter or
sister in marriage, he is quite powerless to interfere directly if
the husband maltreats her. Chronic wife-beating is rare, but
where it does occur, the wife’s family can only help her by


THE OBLIGATIONS OF AFFINES 143
indirect pressures, such as the withdrawal of moral and
practical support from the husband or, if his conduct is hot
widely known, the threat to ridicule him in public. But these,
it may be added, are powerful sanctions.
The content of co-operation between affines is not signifi¬
cantly different from the kind of assistance given and received
by cognatic kinsmen. Since affines generally live in a different
neighbourhood, it happens not infrequently that a wife’s
brother acts as negotiator in arranging a marriage for a
younger brother of his sister’s husband. The fact that he is
willing to perform this service is in itself a recommendation of
the prospective bridegroom’s family. It is also because they
generally live in different neighbourhoods that a man some¬
times turns to a close affine when he is in difficulty over the
pasturing of his animals. When Apostolis Zygos had a few
acres of grazing land in excess of his winter grazing needs, he
rented them to the husband of his brother’s daughter for a
sum somewhat lower than an offer made to him by an unrelated
neighbour. The neighbour was hard-pressed for grass and
later showed his resentment, it is alleged, by stealing two of
Zygos’ lambs. The niece’s husband brought a hundred of his
sheep from his own winter grazing, forty miles away, and
employed a local village boy to assist one of his brothers in
watching them. Thus, affinal ties, like relations within the
kindred, although they often involve physical separation,
generally take precedence over the more tenuous obligations of
being a good neighbour.
Another example of help given to an affine illustrates the
variable character of this assistance. In the territory of certain
of the eastern villages of Zagori the Sarakatsani do not live in
or close to the village but build their encampments, each stani
separately, some miles away and close to their grazing land.
Alec Katris lives three miles from the village of Laista. His
small ten-year-old daughter Chrysanthe cannot make this long
journey to school each day unaccompanied. And since Alec
has no kinsman or affine who lives close to Laista, he sends his
daughter for the summer term to live with the family of the
brother of his sister’s husband who lives at Skamneli, a neigh¬
bouring village, where she attends the school. There is no
money payment for the girl’s board but at the beginning of the


144 AFFINAL RELATIONS
term the father sends a generously large sack of flour to his
relatives. And when he heard that his affine was in need of
some timber to repair the rafters of his house, Alec at once
despatched, as a free gift, a mule load of sawn planks of which
he happened to possess a small store. The difference between
the help given to a kinsman and the co-operative assistance
lent to an affine is that in the latter instance there is no such
thing as a ‘free favour’. Had Alec Katris been able to send his
little daughter to live with a cousin or some other kinsman, he
would have made a contribution in flour to cover the expense
of her presence in the kinsman’s family, but it would not have
been necessary to make a counter gift of a load of valuable
timber. The ‘trouble’ as opposed to the ‘expense’ of having the
child in the home would have been a ‘free favour’, making
no demands upon the family’s corporately owned resources.
But where a man does a personal service for an affine, some
return favour is always awaited. In these relations the element
of contract is always present, and a certain competitive attitude
as to which set of affines fulfils its obligations with the greater
punctilio.
The fate of a man who lives as a son-in-law in the home of
his wife’s parents is the extreme example of how affines are
always expected to claim their pound of flesh. This arrangement
is made only in a case where a man has daughters but no sons.
After the elder daughters have been married off in the normal
manner, the youngest girl marries a man who ‘goes as bride¬
groom’ (ram Y<x[i.7Tp6^) into the home of his wife. As his contri¬
bution to the establishment of the new elementary family, he
brings with him his share of the flock in his own family of
origin, an amount of wealth which corresponds in function to
the woman’s dowry in the normal marriage. Materially, the
bridegroom may do very well out of this transaction, since
eventually he becomes the trustee of the whole of his father-in
law’s flock. Yet it is difficult to find a man from a family of good
standing and moderate wealth to take this step. Particularly
in the earlier years a man loses his self-respect and manliness
in a situation where he is at the beck and call of his wife’s
parents, who feel entitled, without embarrassment, to exploit
his labour in return for the eventual inheritance of the wife’s
patrimony; this in most cases greatly exceeds the value of an


SOME STRUCTURAL IMPLICATIONS 145
ordinary dowry. Yet the Sarakatsani say of such a bridegroom
that his fate is ‘worse than that of a skinned fox’ (xeipoxepa <xno
tt]v ySappLevT) aXeTrou).
A man never entirely trusts his affines. Yet precisely because
of the co-operative compact which has been established and
their equal concern for children who will claim both sets of
affines as blood kinsmen, close affinal relatives must give
positive proof of seeming to trust one another. A man will
sometimes entrust his unmarried sister to the care of a sister’s
husband or a sister’s husband’s brother. When Patra Achnoulas
went to Athens to see an eye specialist, her sister’s husband, who
also had business in the capital, accompanied her. It is reasoned
correctly that only a mentally deranged person would act
dishonourably in such a situation since his punishment at the
hands of the community would be ostracism. Yet such is the
suspicious attitude adopted towards affines that the Sarakatsani
have many stories, no doubt spurious in the main, about illicit
sexual intercourse between a bridegroom and his wife’s sister;
although it is true that these cautionary tales generally involve
villagers or gipsies and not Sarakatsani. The true incidence
of such affairs amongst the Sarakatsani themselves is probably
very low; I could discover only one case, and that did not
occur in recent years. If we speak generally of breaches of
trust, it may be said that where these occur between kinsmen
they produce a feeling of horror akin to the reaction to treason
in our own society; but where the breach of trust is between
affines the shock rather prompts a degree of criticism that,
affines being what they are, a man did not take more care.
4. SOME STRUCTURAL IMPLICATIONS
The marriage contract which establishes affinal relations
between two previously unrelated families is unique and may
not be repeated. For instance, two brothers may not marry two
sisters, although they are permitted to marry women related as
first cousins. Like the prohibition on marriage in the kindred
this reinforces the tendency towards the isolation of the
family from collateral kinsmen. The suggestion that if the first
marriage were successful it might be a good thing for two
brothers to be married to two sisters is met with shocked
incredulity. ‘They have made one blood. They must search


146 AFFINAL RELATIONS
elsewhere,’ the Sarakatsani say. The restriction on the marriage
of close affines, associated with the prohibition on marriage in
the kindred, forces those who are searching for prospective
brides always to look outside the circle of well established
relationships.
Indeed this examination of affinal relationships has largely
turned on the various correlates of the prohibition on marriage
in the kindred. We have seen that a man must marry a person
who, in effect, was formerly an enemy, and that the element
of hostility never entirely vanishes from the affinal relationship
although a common interest in the children of a marriage
produces and sanctions a degree of co-operation between
affines. The marriage prohibitions symbolize and divide off
a category of social relations based on trust. Those people with
whom marriage is permitted are, on the other hand, suspect.
The prohibitions clearly set apart non-kinsmen; ‘strangers’,
from kinsmen, ‘own people’, and the two opposed behaviour
patterns which are proper to each of these categories of
relations. Affinal connexions compose a third interstitial
category of social relations with persons previously strangers
to whom a man is related through the contract of marriage of
himselfor a kinsman. In the opposition between kin and non-kin
they tend to be assimilated to the latter category when the
practical consideration is one of trust or confidence, and to the
former when it is a question of the possibility of co-operation.
The marriage prohibitions prevent alliances in the kindred
which would in some degree reverse the process of isolation from
collateral kinsmen. They also force each family to regard un¬
related families as potential affines. In this analysis of Sarakat
san kinship the importance of prestige values has been con¬
stantly emphasized. If men of standing will not marry the
daughters of a family or give their own in marriage to its sons,
the prestige of this family must inevitably fall. The kind of
marriage a man or woman makes is an index of prestige and
at the same time is a very important element in the future
reputation of the new family they are establishing. Therefore
marriage prohibitions while they contribute inevitably to the
relative isolation of a man from his collateral kin, not only have
the consequence that marriages establish co-operative re¬
lationships between previously opposed family groups, but


SOME STRUCTURAL IMPLICATIONS 147
they are also an important incidental factor in support of the
community’s values; because, if men do not conform to these,
they and their close kinsmen will not make honourable
marriages. What sets men apart in one set of circumstances,
tends to unite them in another.
The characteristic ambivalence of affinal relations has
analogous consequences in terms of the spatial distribution of
kinsmen. The Sarakatsani do not approve of marriages
between families who live in the same village neighbourhood.
For instance, the marriage of Demetrios Ferendinos to the
sister of George Balatsos is the only case in his summer vil¬
lage. It is significant that this alliance provides us with an
example of friction between affines. The Sarakatsani tell one
that ‘affines quarrel easily’ (mavovToci, euxoXa oi cru[XTC0epot).
It is particularly dangerous if the bride is able to run to her
parents and brothers with tales of ill-treatment, and gossip
about what goes on inside her husband’s family. Not only is it
safer to keep affines at a distance, but in another neighbour¬
hood they may sometimes be of practical use. Marriages
which are arranged between families in different neighbour¬
hoods tend to produce individual kindreds which are dispersed
and whose geographical ‘boundaries’ are roughly congruent
with the boundaries of the community itself. A man through his
scattered kindred and affinal relations participates vicariously
in the life of the community of the Zagori Sarakatsani. If he
has a kinsman or affine in a distant neighbourhood, he is
interested in its local affairs, for these affect his relative whose
interests are a matter of sympathetic concern to him and in
certain circumstances may affect his own prestige. Therefore
distrust of affines leads to the practice of taking a bride from
another, preferably a distant, neighbourhood; this is one
factor in the wide dispersion of individual kindreds in the
community; and, in turn, this dispersion of recognized kinship
ties increases the individual’s consciousness of participation
and membership in the total community.
These, then, are instances where marriage regulations or
conventional attitudes about affines lead to a certain distance,
between kinsmen in the first instance, between affines in the
second, but in their further consequences encourage a wider
synthesis; in the one case, in terms of conformity to the values


148 AFFINAL RELATIONS
of the community and the constant proliferation, through
marriages, of new relationships between opposed families;
and in the other, a moral participation in the affairs of the
different local segments of the geographically dispersed com¬
munity. In both cases these considerations depend ultimately
on the simple fact that ‘kinsmen’ and ‘strangers’ represent
opposed but complementary categories of persons.
***
This completes the discussion of the general characteristics
of Sarakatsan kinship and marriage. Naturally the consequent
system of personal relations has various implications beyond the
field of kinship behaviour. Here I will indicate only one of
these, but one that is peculiarly characteristic of Greek society
and will continue to concern us in the chapters that follow.
As we have seen, the community from the viewpoint of each
individual is divided into kinsmen and non-kinsmen, ‘own
people’ and ‘strangers’. The division is unequivocal; kinsmen
inspire loyalty and obligation, strangers distrust and moral
indifference. Yet within the category of kinsmen itself the only
stable solidary group is the family. Plainly, the nature of the
physical and social environment is such that it forces this small
group, however it may value the ideal of autarky, to cultivate
both intensively and extensively the support of kinsmen and
affines. But for reasons inherent in the structure of the kindred,
which it has been my purpose in this and the three preceding
chapters to analyse, that support is contingent upon a kinsman’s
prior commitments to his own family. Thus the family emerges
as a social isolate in two associated respects. In the first case,
families unrelated by kinship admit virtually no moral obli¬
gation towards one another; in the second, families related
by kinship nevertheless owe only conditional services. In a
community where social relations are marked by such radical
discontinuities it follows that the primary values are necessarily
particularistic. The mutual opposition of family groups is
expressed through the concept of honour with its connotations
of exclusiveness, not the morality of universal values such as
honesty or fair dealing. And Christian virtues such as humility,
meekness, and self-effacement suggest only weakness; whereas


SOME STRUCTURAL IMPLICATIONS 149
strength is simulated better by the heroic attitudes of self
assertion, pride, and even arrogance. Strength, individual
prepotence, is what each man needs to be an effective pro¬
tagonist for his family, and the protector of its public reputation
and honour against the calumnies of those who are also its
judges.


VII
THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
' 1. HUSBAND AND WIFE
T
he elementary family contains a number of different
relationships and it will be convenient to say something
about each of these in turn, always bearing in mind that
these constituent relationships do not exist in vacuo but are
mutually affected by each other and their position in the total
complex of family relations of which they are part. There is
some difficulty in writing about relations familiar in our own
society. We are describing shades of difference and emphasis in
relationships which are common to European society. But the
importance of the elementary family group in the Sarakatsan
community is so considerable that its constituent relationships
merit attention.
One source of strength in the Sarakatsan marriage relation¬
ship is its complementary form. A man only participates fully
in the community as the head of a household and the father of
sons. Similarly, a woman realizes herself in marriage and
motherhood. Only as the mother of adult sons does she, to a
degree, emancipate herself from male domination. To remain
unmarried is failure and the admission of some grave moral or
physical deficiency. Both the man and the woman, therefore,
become mature social personalities in marriage directed to
parenthood. And from a marriage that has been physically
consummated there is no escape except in death.
The roles of husband and wife are complementary, and
generally restrict each partner to a particular sphere of activity.
The role of the husband is representative and protective. His
work lies with the sheep, their management, and the disposal
of their produce. He alone handles money, negotiates with
officials, and takes definite decisions about the marriage
alliances of his children. He also is the protector of his wife
from rape and insult, and when she is sick he brings her medical
and spiritual assistance.
The wife’s role is domestic and expressive. Her activities
centre in and around the huts where she cooks, spins, weaves,


HUSBAND AND WIFE 151
and cares for her children. Her role is expressive in that she is a
symbol of the mutual love and acceptance which bind the
different members of the family to one another. The shepherd
husband is often away from his home for days and nights, and
if the weather is bad he spends much of this time soaked to the
skin and shivering. In these depressing conditions he thinks and
talks about little else than dry clothes, hot food, and the fire he
will sit by when he returns to his hut. The hearth with its fire
situated in the centre of the circular hut and tended by the
wife or mother is, in fact and in symbol, the centre of Sarakatsan
family life; it gives physical warmth and protection against the
spiritual forces of evil. -The husband is dependent on his wife
for the simple but to him very important attentions which he
associates with its light and warmth. In return he seldom
interferes in what concerns the work and duties of his wife. In a
contingent sense, she is independent in her own sphere of
action.
But, ultimately, the authority of the husband over the wife
is absolute. A wife must show respect (ae(3aajj.6<;) to her husband
before strangers at all times. If they have to walk together in the
village or the town, the wife follows some two or three yards
behind him. When visitors are entertained in her hut, the wife
never sits and eats with her husband and the guests, but stands
erect and motionless ready to attend to the needs of the
squatting men. Even in the extended family household husband
and wife do not eat together. The men eat first, the women of
the household afterwards. No portion of a cooked dish (7tpocj(pai)
is set aside for the women, who must satisfy themselves with
whatever is left by the men; this is often very little. The act of
eating together implies sharing equally in what is placed upon
the one common dish from which the Sarakatsani customarily
eat. It indicates in that particular context, a certain equality
between those who partake. Only sometimes in the intimacy of
the elementary family may the husband, wife, and children sit
and eat together. For in this most private situation, the
relationship of mutual identification between the members of
the elementary family makes them, for that moment, equals in
the communion of their common meal.
Indeed, there is a marked difference between the public and
private behaviour of a man and his wife towards each other.


152 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
Publicly a husband addresses his wife in a stern severe voice.
Requests are commands, barked out in sharp phrases. It is
important for a man’s self-regard (eycoiCTixoi;) that other men
should see that he is master in his own house. In public the wife
is meek and modest, silent and submissive. She does not smile
at him or laugh with him before strangers. But in the seclusion
of the hut matters are otherwise. She abandons the mask of
expressionless humility and discusses with her husband all the
affairs of the family, putting forward her own suggestions in a
respectful but fearless fashion. Yet even here respect is implicit
and a wife must never use tones of mockery or abuse towards her
husband. Obedience to her husband is a moral imperative for the wife.
She will not be excused by public opinion, however badly she
may have been treated by the man. She cannot refuse to co¬
habit with him sexually. Conversely, the act of disobedience
by which she damages her husband most severely is adultery.;
In adultery she makes her husband a cuckold (xeparai;), one
who wears a horn. ‘She puts horns on him’ (rou [3a£et xepaxa), it
is said. The implication that the cuckold wears a horn may be
an ironical allusion to the sexual potency which his wife’s
action suggests he does not possess.1 Adultery attacks the moral
integrity and honour of the family and makes a laughing-stock
of its leader and head. Thus, Sarakatsani always insist that if
a husband surprises the guilty parties in the act, he must first
kill his wife and then her seducer. The axiomatic acceptance
of family obligations, the uncompromising character of the
sanction, and the extreme difficulty of conducting such a liaison
secretly, are all factors which contribute to the extremely low
incidence of adultery. Indeed, since 1950, there appears to
have been only one clear and unambiguous case of discovered
adultery.
The disobedience of the wife in the sense of flatly refusing to
do the spoken bidding of her husband is also rare. This situation
or the mutual irritation which arises over the ‘trivia’ of com¬
munal living results in the wife receiving a beating with a stick.
The Sarakatsani of both sexes accept the right of a husband to
strike a disobedient or erring wife. It is also true, however, that
men who are continually beating their wives (and certain men
1 Cf. Pitt-Rivers, op. cit., p. 116; and Onians, op. cit., p. 243.


HUSBAND AND WIFE 153
in the community have this reputation) are held in con¬
siderable contempt.
The story is told of a shepherd who habitually beat his wife
before leaving his hut to go to the sheep. One morning he was
some distance on his way when he remembered that he had
forgotten to beat his wife. He at once returned to his home
where he found the woman working at her loom. ‘Get up,’ he
shouted to her, ‘so that I can give you your beating’ (Srjxto,
jj.copY], va cte Sslpco). At these words, his little son, only four
years old, flung himself on his father and tried to wound him
with a knife. Whether or not this cautionary tale has any
foundation of truth, its moral is clear enough. The unjust and
over-frequent use of physical force by the husband destroys the
moral unity not only of the marriage relationship but of the
elementary family itself.
The wife submits herself completely to her husband because
she accepts her position as part of a natural and inevitable
order. Her sex is part of her fate. The physical strain of domestic
labour under harsh conditions is immense. It is rare to find a
wife after four or five years of marriage who retains the least
hint of her former comeliness. ‘When you are married you are
enslaved because God wills it so’ (7ravTpeuTi)X£<;, axXa(3a)07]X£(;,
yiar’o 0so<; to 0£Xei), the women chant. But the wife’s accep¬
tance of subordination and physical hardship is also made
tolerable partly by her relative independence in her own do¬
main, and more particularly by a consciousness of the signifi¬
cance of her position as wife and mother in the family, a position
which relative to that of her husband increases in importance
with the passage of the years. Therefore, a wife accepts her
husband’s authority, shows respect and esteems him, if he
proves himself able to protect her children and herself and if he
uses his power over his family with a measure of justice. The
husband reciprocally approves of his wife if she cares for her
children with love and faces her physical labours without
showing herself to be that most feared type of female, a
quarrelsome grumbler (yxptvtapa).j
The striking complementarity of the roles of the marriage
partners (and therefore their mutual dependence), and the
unquestioning acceptance of the husband’s authority by the
wife, partly explain the impressive strength of Sarakatsan


154 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
marriages. But in the Sarakatsan family the obligations of the
parents towards their children transcend all other considera¬
tions. It is their duty to bring them up in an honourable and
integral family group. Divorce is not possible. Consequently
the marriage bond, if for no other reason than its position
within the total complex of family relations, is an indestructible
tie. The husband and wife, through their categorical obligations
to their children, are compelled to an almost complete identi¬
fication of interests.
2. PARENTS AND CHILDREN
Children from the day of their birth are the centre of attention
and interest in the family. The needs of the infant take priority
over all others. Since the family generally lives in a single hut
without internal partitions, the adults must make many
concessions. The new-born child sleeps tightly swaddled in a
wooden rocking cradle which is enveloped from end to end in a
blanket, so that he lies in a kind of dark airless tent. Mothers
are fearful of the effects of cold air and evil spirits, and even at
the height of summer a fire is kept burning day and night inside
the hut to the discomfiture of the adults. If the child is a light
sleeper, nobody is allowed to talk. For the first forty days after
the birth, the hut or house after dusk is like a city under siege,
with windows boarded, the door barred, and salt and incense
at strategic points such as the threshold and window cracks to
repel any invasion of the Devil. The child is the single concern,
and its condition almost the only topic of conversation.
From its earliest days the infant receives attention from all
the members of the family. The grandmother nurses it while her
daughter-in-law moves about her many tasks. When he returns
from the sheep the father at once turns to his child and plays
with it. The grandfather, the uncles, and the unmarried aunts,
are always bending over the cradle to smile at it, and young
siblings, ignoring the child’s resentment, plant enormous
kisses on its face. This intense attitude of love and concern for
the child on the part of all the members of the extended family
does not change as the child grows up.
By the age of four, a child has differentiated in an elementary
fashion the various roles of different individuals in the extended
family. He has distinguished between the attitudes of his


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 155
kinsmen who love him and unrelated adults who simply ignore him. He is clear about the difference between ‘our sheep’ around which he skips and smiles, and ‘strange sheep’ at the sight of which he screws his face into a comical grimace of resentment. About this age, when his spirit of adventure takes him beyond the protection of his own huts, he is almost certain to meet with some unpleasant treatment at the hands of older unrelated children. In these ways the child quickly comes to associate membership in his own family and kindred as synonymous with love and acceptance, and non-membership with hostility. Later experience in adolescence and adult life gives him no cause to change these early established attitudes. During these first four years the child suffers only the minimum of discipline, almost exclusively at the hands of the mother and sometimes the grandmother. Weaning is a gradual process and most children take some milk until they are two years old, and occasionally for a year longer. Training in cleanliness is a simple matter. They are not punished for fouling the hut until they are walking strongly; generally, by the age of two a number of sudden evictions from the hut when they have misbehaved, and the ridicule of their siblings and cousins, have persuaded most children to walk outside. In other matters the child does very much as he likes. He is continually assured by his adult kinsmen that he is admirable and remarkable and his father, in particular, is consistently loving and indulgent. But from about the age of two or two and a half years a mother in her attempts to reduce her child to a minimum of discipline begins to refer to the father as an authority figure. ‘Your father will beat you,’ she sometimes says in desperation when her own authority fails. The child of three or four years knows quite well that this is most unlikely to happen, but by the time he is four years old he recognizes that the father is the leader of the family and a person in authority. He observes his mother’s deference and the disci¬ plinary action which a father sometimes exerts on his elder siblings. The general picture of the first four years of a child’s life is one of extreme permissiveness on the part of both parents. The mother is a source of physical care, comfort, and love, but


156 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
also of some discipline. The father appears as benign and
indulgent, but in the last year of this period he begins to be
recognized by the child as the family leader, although he is not
yet actively exercising his authority.
From the age of four until they go to school for their com¬
pulsory primary education, at an age of between six and a half
and seven years, children remain for the most part in their
mother’s care. But they begin now to identify themselves with
the parent of their own sex. Little girls of four or five follow
their mothers about pretending to spin thread from a distaff or
to help them in their work; or they play amongst themselves
at being mothers, with dolls improvised out of pieces of stick
and rags. Boys of five and six are given miniature shepherd
crooks with which they solemnly help their fathers and uncles
to control the sheep when they are mustered near the huts.
They begin, too, to join in the play of their elder brothers and
cousins where they learn to throw and wrestle. A small boy al¬
ways loses but if he shows spirit he is approved of, and his father
pats his head and tells him he is a ‘tough lad’ (yepo raxiS!). The
father remains indulgent but there is now a suggestion that his
easy permissive attitude is contingent on the child learning
more grown-up ways of behaviour.
In his seventh year the child begins to attend school. In the
case of both sexes this marks a degree of enforced emancipation
from the constant care and supervision of the mother, an
emancipation which is greater in the case of the boy than the
girl. This introduces a new element of strain into his life. The
child now for the first time plays a representative role for his
family vis-d-vis the outside world. The other children will
know from which family he comes, they will tell their own
parents what he did or did not do, the schoolmaster will sit
in the coffee-shop and tell his audience that the child of John
Carvounis is clever or dull. Not only is the child’s new role
representative but it involves responsibility since his success or
failure in public behaviour reflects in some degree on all the
other members of his family, particularly his parents.
As their six years of schooling advance, children become
progressively more aware that the loving indulgence of their
father is conditional on their living up to the standards which
are expected of a child of their particular sex and age, especially


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 157
in behaviour outside the family. The affection of Sarakatsan
children for their fathers is remarkable; and the positive
sanction of the warmth of the father’s reciprocal affection is
correspondingly strong. The mother, on the other hand, re¬
mains the source of unconditional love, care, and support.
When Lambrine, who is twelve years old, returned home with a
note from the schoolmaster which said that on account of her
constant inattention and consequent backwardness he intended
to keep her in the same grade for another year, her father,
Theodoros, harangued her bitterly in the courtyard of his house
in front of an audience of half a dozen siblings and cousins.
The crying child turned to her mother who silently comforted
her while the father continued his merciless criticism. It is
significant on these occasions that the mother does not disagree
with the father’s strictness, nor does the father complain at the
mother because she is comforting such a shameless child. It
seems clear that their roles are complementary; the father acts
as an agent of discipline and instruction through whom the
child learns that he must hold his own against other children
of the same age and sex and that in his behaviour he has a
responsibility towards the whole family; the mother, while she
does not deny that the child has done wrong, assures him that he
is still wanted and accepted within the family circle.
However, very little direct instruction in correct behaviour
is received by children through solemn lectures from the father
or the mother in the form of‘You must do this, you must not do
that.’ Children of all ages are tolerated on almost all family
occasions and no topic of discussion is considered unfit for their
ears. They hear their elders interminably discussing and
criticizing the behaviour ofadults and children in other unrelated
families. Rape, adultery, the quarrels of brothers, public dis¬
respect to a father, the whole gamut of lapses from social virtue
is brought indirectly to their attention. Furthermore, the child
of ten or eleven is allowed to make his own contributions to such
discussions which are listened to with attention if they are not
always accepted as correct. During a discussion in one family
about the shamelessness of villagers, the young son of eleven
years old was able to give some interesting evidence about how
he was sitting in a cherry tree when a villager began to seduce
his sister-in-law immediately beneath. Out of his shame at the


158 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
thought of witnessing such an act, he shook the tree violently so
that the guilty pair hurriedly made off. There was a general
murmur of approval. ‘You did well,’ was the verdict of his
uncle, the senior man present. In this way, the young child
learns at an early age how people in various roles and at various
ages ought to behave in any particular situation. He discovers
that an infringement of these norms of conduct reflects upon the
reputation of the individual, but also upon the general prestige
of those with whom he is closely connected. He learns what is
right and what is wrong very largely in terms of a responsibility
related to the loyalty he owes as a member of a group which
loves and accepts him; in terms, that is, of identification rather
than of authority. The school years, then, are a time for the
learning of new skills and attitudes, and a new role as a
representative of the family in a wider world. It is a period of
trial and error during which the child is constantly encouraged
by the love and support of all the members of the family and
other kinsmen. The importance of success is continually
stressed, but occasional failure is still not an irretrievable
catastrophe.
Children leave school when they are about thirteen years old.
Between the ages of thirteen and sixteen girls work under the
instruction of the mother, and attempt all the usual tasks that
fall within the general domestic duties of a woman. If she has a
number of older sisters still unmarried she has an easy life,
but in any case a mother with a view to her daughter’s marriage
prospects is careful not to overtax her physical strength. These
years are perhaps the most care-free of a girl’s life. Her beauty
is not yet blemished by hard physical labour; she goes to many
weddings and spends much of her time spinning, knitting, and
sewing, in the company of other related girls of about the
same age.
But from the age of seventeen until she marries, a period of
seven to thirteen years, a girl’s deportment inside and outside
the family changes considerably. She must now behave as a
maiden of virtue who is acutely sensitive to shame (vTpo7raXyj).
No longer may she show her feelings in an uninhibited way, and
in her conversation and her movements a careful self-control is
demanded. Her relations with her father now become less
familiar. Since she left school at thirteen, a certain barrier has


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 159
already arisen between them, and from that age she is expected
in front of strangers to show him respect by standing when he
sits and helping her mother to wait on her father and his
guests. By the time a girl is seventeen there is a noticeable
neutrality of tone in her conversation with her father. She is
careful to avoid any reference to sexual matters or the possi¬
bility ofher marriage. They are both conscious of the categorical
obligations they owe to one another and the severe penalties
which sanction their fulfilment. If a father does not arrange
an honourable and successful marriage for his daughter, his
reputation in the community is diminished. If a daughter
does not preserve her virginity and her reputation for virginity,
she faces death possibly; or, should she avoid this fate, she must
certainly endure dishonour and a dishonourable marriage to a
widower or a poor man of ill repute. Although between puberty
and marriage a daughter receives almost all her instructions
from her mother, her father, to whom she is subordinate both
by reason of sex and generation, remains the ultimate source of
authority.
***
At thirteen, when a boy leaves school, he generally begins
his working life as a goatherd. He comes at once under the
direction of his father who in his role of leader and co-ordinator
of the family labour group exerts a stronger authority over the
boy than he has yet experienced in his relations with his father.
A son is now careful to show his father respect. Occasional
lapses in correct behaviour towards a father are not taken too
seriously while a boy is still at school. He is, then, still a child
and is in an obvious sense under the power and instruction of
his father and the school teacher. He cannot, however rebellious
his nature, become independent at this stage. The boy leaves
school at an age which coincides approximately with the onset
ofpuberty and at the same time he becomes a full and responsible
working member of the family under his father’s leadership.
He still offers no threat to his father’s position as leader, yet
his sexual maturity and the responsibilities of his new status in
the family foreshadow the inevitable retirement of the father
shortly after the marriage of his eldest son. The firm authority
exerted by the father at this stage, and the required attitude of


160 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
respect from the son, serve to dissuade the latter from any
attempt at precocious self-assertion. And it protects a man from
the ridicule of his equals; for if a youth answers his father’s
remarks or instructions in a rude or argumentative fashion,
other men smile with satisfaction and say that already ‘the boy
is acting as family head’ (to mxiSl xavei tov TcreXiyya).
The respect of the son is a general attitude which accepts the
authority of the father as right and legitimate. A son shows his
respect for his father by carrying out conscientiously the
instructions he is given. If he is under the age of twenty, he
does not smoke or drink ouzo in his father’s presence. Similarly,
he does not swear or make coarse remarks or jokes about
sexual matters before his father. If a youth is sitting in the
village coffee-shop when his father enters, he unobtrusively
gets up and leaves. Drinking, smoking, and playing cards in the
coffee-shop are the social activities of those equal in status, and
are therefore incompatible with the respect owed by a son to
his father. After a young man returns from his military service,
when he is about twenty-three years of age, he will begin to
drink and smoke with his father at home, a step which he
generally takes at the express invitation of the father. The son
no longer has occasion to leave the coffee-shop, but this is be¬
cause a father knowing his son to be there stays at home or, in
a large village, goes to another shop; the son, similarly, avoids
giving embarrassment and showing disrespect to the father by
entering the shop if he knows he is there. If the son is in the shop,
the father understands that it is unfair to expect him to leave.
After his return from military service, the young man becomes
a member of the ‘pallikari’ group2 of fully adult but unmarried
men of the community. When he is not with the sheep, he is
expected to show himself in the forum of the coffee-shop, to
give periodic proof of certain outward signs of his manliness
by drinking, smoking, arguing, and by general self-assertion.
He cannot do these things in front of his father, without
diminishing his father’s honour and his own prestige.
The idea of an adolescent or adult son striking his father is
2 Nowadays this consists of the young unmarried men who have com¬ pleted their military service, that is of unmarried men between the ages of 23 and 30. The ideal type raxXXigxdpi is the hero warrior unencumbered with family responsibilities.


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 161
almost unthinkable. Only slightly less serious is swearing at or
insulting a father. Both are acts of insolent and wanton violence.
Of one son, not a Sarakatsanos, who publicly struck his father,
the Sarakatsani said, ‘He has the devil in him’ (eyei to 8ia(3oXo
gicra tou), in a sense which was not intended as metaphorical.
It was indeed the only way of explaining the youth’s behaviour.
To swear at a father at any time, but especially in public,
shows the contempt of the son for his father. If he had been a
good father with the moral authority of a good father, it is held
that such an incident could scarcely have occurred. A son, it is
pointed out, takes after his father particularly in his moral
constitution, and thus both the outraged parent and the guilty
son are dishonoured through the action of the son. To curse or
strike a father is, also, a grave sin (a^apria), for it is an act which
upsets a part of the absolute order in life instituted and sanc¬
tioned by God. The misfortunes of a person guilty of such acts
are always considered to be punishments from God.
The relationship of a father and a son in late adolescence or
early manhood is one of delicate balance. The son continues to
accept the authority of the father and to show him respect, but
this acceptance by the son is now to a degree contingent on his
father respecting the growing maturity of his son’s social
personality. Violence, whether it comes from father or son,
destroys the moral basis of the relationship and the mutual
esteem which ought to exist between them. During the last
five or six years before the eldest son marries, there may be
many differences of opinion between an ageing father and his
young sons. That these very seldom occasion a show of public as
distinct from private disrespect to a father, and almost never
develop into quarrels with physical violence, is undoubtedly
due to the consciousness of a responsibility felt by both father
and son to the total family group, in which through common
membership and common loyalties their interests are identified.
In chapter four I have already said something about the
transfer of executive power from the father to his eldest son. It
will be remembered that the eldest son, impatient to be
recognized in the community as a family head, cannot be
expected to wait beyond his thirtieth or thirty-first birthday
before taking a wife, and that after the birth of his first child, he
expects to take over control of the family’s affairs. The sanction


162 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
for these arrangements is public opinion. However reluctant a
man may be to hand over the reins to his son, he knows that he
will lose less personal prestige by moving into retirement than
by attempting to hold power against the conventions of
customary usage. He is also aware that any temporizing over
this problem will lead to the kind of friction with his son that is
unlikely to remain private and may result in a further loss of
prestige for the whole family.
There are two other circumstances which may help to per¬
suade a father to cede his position at the customary time.
Grazing land in summer for a herd of three hundred sheep and
goats represents a considerable area of mountainous country.
The journey from the huts of the family near the village to the
farthest limits of the summer grazing is very often a walk of
two or three hours, climbing steeply the whole way along
difficult rock-strewn paths generally no wider than a rabbit’s
track. Such a journey two or three times a week for a man in
his early sixties, which is the age a father is likely to have reached
when his own son approaches the age of marriage, is a severe
physical strain. But if the family head is not physically able to
see for himself the condition of the grass and the state of his
animals, his shepherd sons cease to treat his instructions or
criticisms with any seriousness, and in respect to animal
management virtually arrange matters for themselves. From
this point it is a short step to question the father’s authority in
other matters. Physical or mental feebleness of the father is
invariably the explanation of a son assuming control of family
affairs at an early age.
The second circumstance has to do with the relation of the
family to the outside world. With few exceptions the shepherds
who are today over sixty years of age are illiterate. Under
modern conditions these men are at an obvious disadvantage in
understanding the content of government agricultural regu¬
lations and in filling up the increasing number of printed
forms. Unlike their more sophisticated and literate sons, men
of this age group do not understand the ways of minor officials.
‘They don’t know how to go about things in the offices’ (Sev
£epouv xa ypxcpeitx'), their sons explain. In part, the prestige of
letters is attributable to the idea that they are the necessary
weapons for a successful resistance or adaption to bureaucratic


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 163
administration. It is easy to understand that if the head of the
family must be constantly asking his young son to read, explain,
and advise on all written documents, he finds it difficult to
maintain his authority until his son has reached the customary
age of marriage. Significantly, the sack in which the business
papers and account books are kept has become in recent years
a symbol of the authority of the head of family, who alone has
the right to open it.
In the majority of cases, however, these two circumstances,
although they may cause difficulties, do not force or even allow a
father to hand over executive control much earlier than
custom demands. If, for example, a father of fifty-nine hands
over the control of family affairs to a son of twenty-six, he will
undoubtedly be considered a man of weak character even
where it is known that he suffers some physical disability. He
must, for reasons of personal and family prestige, attempt to
assert and exercise his authority. Sons are not unaware of the
father’s position and difficulties. During the last years of
a father’s exercise of power a degree of rivalry between a
father and his sons is always present, but because fathers and
sons, together, accept responsibility for the prestige of the
family, they guard most carefully against any public expression
of their differences.
After the eldest son assumes control, the father continues to
do such work as he is capable of. It is generally a task of his
own selection and the senior son is careful to avoid giving direct
instructions of any kind to his father. There are always a few sick
sheep or late lambs which need to be grazed close to the huts,
and occasionally he will spend a day with one of the flocks to
relieve a son. In some families with many sons, where there is no
essential task for the old father to perform, he will create some
activity to occupy his time.- The old father of John Charisis
daily saddles and exercises a favourite horse. When visitors
ask where the old father is, his sons reply with affectionate but
patronizing smiles that he is out with his horse again. The
visitors join in the laughter at the old man’s expense and the
sons do not take offence, for this is a general attitude to old
people in the community. They are respected if they have led
honourable lives, yet in relation to present preoccupations they
are unimportant. The old father always expresses his views


164 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
about current problems but, as with the opinions of women
and children, they are gently ignored. Yet even after a father’s
retirement a son continues to owe filial respect to him as long
as this does not interfere with his full control of the extended
family’s affairs. A father must give his consent to the arrange¬
ment of a daughter’s or son’s marriage if this is made after his
retirement. And at the celebration of a wedding he always
acts as the formal head of the family. Any exhibition of arro¬
gance by a son who tries to deny his father the centre of the
stage on this occasion is severely condemned. Vestiges of the
relations of authority and respect, which previously bound
father and son in the elementary family, always remain; but
in his declining years an old man’s relations with his son are
more characteristically marked by their common concern for
the grandchildren to whom the grandfather is devoted.
***
We must now retrace our steps to make some comment on
the relation between mother and son after the boy has left
school at the age of thirteen. It is noticeable that a boy during
the last two years at school begins to resent his mother’s acts
of protective care and love. After he has left school this attempt
to behave in a completely masculine manner becomes more
evident. He no longer suffers his mother’s caresses. If he
returns from his herding duties cold and wet, he pointedly
ignores the dry clothes which his solicitous mother puts ready
for him. Particularly between the ages of thirteen and sixteen,
he is given to outbursts of rudeness towards his mother and his
sisters. By this abruptness to the women of his family he hopes
to give a further demonstration of his growing manliness.
Mothers are amused and also a little proud as they observe
these antics of their young sons. They understand their feelings
and approve of them.
From the time that a son becomes fully adult his attitude
towards his mother becomes less strained and there is a
recognition of his deep attachment to her. When Sarakatsani
talk about their mothers, they very often mention the original
physical connexion; for this appears to them to be an important
element in the moral solidarity between mother and son. One
cannot abandon an old mother because ‘she brought me into


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 165
the world’ (|ii ecpepe axo xoapto). With the physical connexion
between mother and son, goes a recognition of the overwhelm¬
ing pain of childbirth, and the passive courage which is
necessary to resist it. Women work until the last moment. Some
Sarakatsani tell how their mothers were out gathering herbs or
firewood when the pains began. They point out the tree or stone
that marks the place of their birth. They tell how the mother
assisted by a companion, or in some cases entirely alone,
having cut the cord and buried the afterbirth, then loaded
up the new child and the bundle of firewood and returned to
the hut.
The attachment of the son to his mother draws strength from
his own childhood memories and from the accepted qualities
any Sarakatsan mother is presumed to possess. There is the long
suckling period. He remembers how his mother was always the
provider of food and unconditional love; how she made a
phylactery and secured it under his shirt to protect him from
the attacks of the Devil. He remembers her distracted care
for him in sickness and her divination to find the evil eye that
was the cause of it.
The status of a mother of married sons is considerable in the
extended family. I remarked earlier that the wife/mother plays
an expressive role. What she expresses is the integrity and
solidarity of the group. The brothers explain their attachment
to one another with reference to the fact that they were born
from the same mother. The mother acts as the diplomat and
peacemaker between the dissident wives. Despite the ambi¬
valence of attitude between mother and daughter-in-law, wives
work amicably enough under the instructions of their husband’s
mother. They do not work amicably under the wife of the
eldest brother and it is noticeable that extended families, where
the mother of the brothers is dead, do not survive long. In such
cases there is lacking a social personality that symbolizes and
mediates the mutual attachment of the various elementary
families within the extended group. Thus, married sons in an
extended family come once more to respect their mother’s
authority in her own particular sphere as mistress of the
extended household. The senior brother who is head of the
household punctiliously consults her about all decisions that
affect the family, whether they are strictly concerned with her


166 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
domestic affairs or not. Sitting for most of the day at the hearth
with her various grandchildren around her, the mother be¬
comes the physical and moral centre of the extended family,
while the father, if he is still alive, is now a genial nonentity.
***
Parenthood brings to a man or woman joy and pride, but
also anxiety. It is often said, ‘Children bring worries’ (e/ouv
CTTevoytopiei; ra mxiSia). The quality of this worry which besets
Sarakatsan parents is nicely reflected in the literal meaning of
oTEvoxyipia, a narrowness of space or insufficiency of room. It
is both the desire to do more for children and the lack of means
which prevents this, and the relative helplessness of a parent in
the face of the various physical and spiritual dangers which
surround a child.
Sons and daughters, for their part, recognize that ‘bringing
up a child has many troubles and cares’, and this is an impor¬
tant element in the belief that a father or mother, even in
extreme senility, cannot be repudiated. The obligation to
support aged parents is absolutely binding on children. But
just as the regard of a father for his children was conditional
upon their conduct, so in his old age the affection and respect
he receives from his children is qualified by their judgement of
him as a good or bad parent. On the other hand, a mother’s
love is always unconditional: and equally so are the attitudes
of care and devotion to her in the last years of her life. She toils
without thought of self. A mother ‘sacrifices herself for her
children’, it is often said. In return she has an absolute right
to be mistress of the extended family household of her married
sons; and after the separation of the brothers she has a further
right to the services of the wife of her youngest son.
Parents and children not only have categorical obligations
towards each other but they are morally identified. The
responsibility for the wrongdoing of a child is in part referred
back to his parents. In general, evil children must have been
born of evil parents and, vice versa, wicked parents beget
wicked offspring. In illustration of this idea that children share
the moral virtues and weaknesses of their parents, Sarakatsani
explain that ‘The apple will fall under the apple tree’ (to |j.9)Xo


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 167
aTCo x<xt’ <xn rr] [i7)XLa Ox ttecty]). It is thought that God often
punishes a man in his children, a belief which finds expression
in another proverb, ‘The sins of parents torment the children’
(a(i,aprie? yoveoov toxlSeuouv texvoc).3 Clearly the inherent
inequity of this idea is rationalized in the belief that the moral
defects of parents pass down to their children. If misfortune
falls on an innocent and blameless child, it is argued that in
time the child would in any case have followed the evil example
of its parents and thus merits the prophylactic wrath of God.
The relationship between a mother and her children takes its
general character from the close physical and psychical de¬
pendence of the childhood years and the memory of this in
later life. A mother is so closely identified with her child that
even her thoughts may affect its welfare. When the nine-year
old son of Demetrios Carvounis went to Athens to sit a scholar¬
ship examination, success in which would have placed him in a
school three hundred miles from his home, his mother in tears
and distress admitted openly that she did not want him to go.
People said that in the face of this attitude the child, however
brilliant, could not possibly succeed. It follows that there is no
defence against a mother’s curse.
The intimacy of the relationship is antithetical to any very
strong element of authority. Whatever ability a mother
possesses to make a child of any age conform to her wishes, is
the result of a response to her free and unquestioning love and
acceptance. Unmotivated love (dtydbnr)) is the true basis of the
bond between a woman and her children. Whereas the
relationship of the father with his children is characterized,
ideally at least, by respect (a£(3a<7pi6<;); but in this there is the
hint of the external sanction of the father’s power, and the
child’s fear of it. Both these attitudes of love and respect are
represented to some degree in the relations of children towards
either parent. But a Sarakatsanos would use the word aydar/)
more readily in connexion with his father than he would
cre^aapLoq towards his mother. Kin bound by dcydor/) are in a
relationship sanctioned by a moral sense of duty. In this sense
the verb, dcyaTico, in modern Greek, is opposed in some contexts
to epo)Teuo(i.ai which is used only to express the free unreasoning
libido of sexual love.
3 Not a demotic proverb but often quoted by the Sarakatsani.


168 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
The close intimacy between a mother and her children finds a
different expression according to the sex of the child. A mother
with her daughters is on terms almost of camaraderie as together
they tackle the heavy domestic responsibilities of their sex.
Between mother and son, because of the opposition of their
sexes, there is some abruptness, especially during those years
when the son is trying compulsively to behave in a masculine
manner. But their relationship is none the less close, uncon¬
ditional acceptance of her son and his deeds by the mother,
protective concern on the part of the son for his mother. To
take in vain the name of a man’s mother is to offer him the
worst possible insult. The bond between mother and son is
indestructible. She gave him life; in him she fulfils herself and
transcends the moral inferiority of her sex. Although a mother
is more in the company of her daughters, it is the sons who are
closest to her heart. They are her pride and the significant
achievement of her life.
I have said that the mother plays a role expressive of the
solidarity of the family. A Sarakatsanos sometimes says that
‘The mother is the heart of the family’. Any kind of breach in
the physical unity of the family distracts and worries her. After
the first few years of her marriage, a wife shows less eagerness
to pay visits to the family of her birth. She begins to fret and
agitate to return after only one or two days’ absence from her
home, particularly if she has not brought all her children with
her. For the first days after a daughter’s marriage or a son’s
departure on military service a mother is inconsolable. Squat¬
ting by the hearth and rocking back and forth on her haunches,
she maintains a continuous low moaning broken only by bouts
of deep sobbing. It is the wife or mother who is the leading
mourner at the death of a husband, son, or daughter. For the
twenty-four hours which intervene between death and burial,
she does not leave her position at the right of the head of the
corpse. During this time she is the chief singer of dirges
((i.oipoX6yia) in which she recites the golden qualities of the dead
man or woman. But for the most part, she expresses her grief in
simple and terrifying screams of lamentation (crxou^ei), while
she and the other women beat their breasts and tear at their
hair and cheeks (piaStouvTou). For a son a mother remains in
full mourning for five years whereas a father does not continue


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 169
beyond the second year. Each morning at dawn, each evening
at dusk, during these long years she sings her dirges and
lamentations again. Even when the period of mourning is
completed, she will never again dance at a festival, or sing a
ballad, during the remaining years of her life.
If the role of the mother expresses the solidarity of the
family, its honour and integrity largely depend on her virtue. A
mother who is thought to have lost her virginity before
marriage or, afterwards, to have been guilty of adultery, or
even an apparent inclination towards it, infects her children
with the taint of her dishonour, and however closely these
children may conform to right ways of behaviour, they cannot
retrieve the reputation of their family.
Although the honour of a woman is so intimately connected
with the disciplining of her sexual activity as to be almost
synonymous with it, any lapse from social rectitude also affects
her honour; for it is argued that if she fails in the one respect,
she is very likely to fail in other and more critical situations
concerned with her sexual virtue. The wife of Costas Pistiolis
is a woman who cannot restrain her laughter. It is held against
her that ‘she always jokes and never talks with seriousness’.
This is an attitude unbecoming to a married woman of modesty
with children and responsibilities, for it betrays a lack of self
discipline. Her family is, in any case, poor and despised. She
ought to be conscious of so many worries that laughter should
be impossible for her. It is insulting to suggest to a young man
that he might consider marrying the daughter of this family.
The girl, Chrysanthe, is acknowledged to be modest, comely,
and hard-working. But it is pointed out that, although there
is no positive evidence of sexual misconduct on the part of the
mother, her uncontrolled and unwomanly behaviour makes the
possibility of this not unlikely. And despite the seeming virtue
of the girl Chrysanthe, the fact that she is the daughter of such
a woman leads a man to await with some confidence the time
when serious moral faults in her character will be discovered.
Thus, upon the honour of the mother depends the honour of
her children in a sense which logically precedes the mutual
responsibility which members of a family in their conduct bear
at all times for the reputation of the family. A brother can take
some action to cleanse the dishonour of a sister, either against


170 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
the sister herself or her seducer, but a son is unable to do
anything to wash away the stain of his mother’s dishonour.
The role of the father in the elementary family is concerned
with leadership and representation of the group to the outside
world. The management of the flock, the handling of money,
and the arrangement of matches, fall within his sphere of
activity and upon his successful manipulation of these affairs
depend his own prestige and that of his family and its descen¬
dants. For these reasons a father must be an ‘able4 protector’
(ixav&<; TrpoCTxdcTY]^). He must at least be able to provide his
family with food, clothing, and shelter. A man who fails in this
duty forfeits any respect in the eyes of the community; he is
heedless of his obligations, depraved, lost (yocfiivop). But to be
accepted as an ‘able protector’ demands more than this. A
man must be a skilful shepherd and a shrewd bargainer,
possess friends in the right places, and be of sufficient wealth
to sustain honourably his family responsibilities. Above all,
he requires the quality of manliness (dvSpicrpo?), to guard the
honour of the family from rape or insult, and by his general
behaviour in public to uphold the prestige of the group.
The father’s duty of protection is balanced by his right to a
position of authority. This is legitimate by reason of social
convention, and is sanctioned by public opinion and in the
early years by the simple fact of power. Children acknowledge
the father’s authority by their attitude of careful respect. And
from this position the father is able to discipline them into
accepting important social values, and to co-ordinate their
various activities in the family’s labour force. But the attitude
of respect towards a father also prevents any precocious
assertion of authority by a son which would damage his
father’s reputation, and place father and son in open com¬
petition. The fact that all economic resources are owned
corporately by family groups presents a problem for the method
of succession to wealth and status in the community, a problem
which inevitably causes difficulties between members of
proximate generations in the same family. We have seen that
by the time a son is approaching the age of thirty less deference
4 I translate txav6<; as able or capable, but it also indicates ‘One who suffices, one who is able to provide’, specific meanings which are significant in the present context.


PARENTS AND CHILDREN 171
is shown to a father in private, but that public disrespect is
carefully avoided. Friction between father and son is lessened
by the definition in customary usage, within narrow limits, of
the age at which a son may expect to marry and hold executive
authority. In the case of an unmarried daughter, on the other
hand, the authority of a father is always more complete since a
daughter by reason both of sex and generation is subordinate
even to a father of advanced years.
We have already remarked how a father imposes scarcely any
discipline on a child who is less than four years of age. It is
difficult to describe the confusion and noise created by young
children in a Sarakatsan hut. If a father is asked why he bears
this with such patience, and would not a little discipline, even
perhaps an occasional beating, benefit the child, he generally
replies that the child has no developed sense of judgement to
distinguish between right and wrong, and that to beat a child
of this age will only destroy his love for his father, with the
unhappy consequence that a son may not treat his father with
consideration in his old age.
After the age of four, whatever his fears as to his treatment in
later life, a father’s love for his child inevitably becomes in¬
creasingly conditional upon the child’s behaviour; for it is the
duty of the father to guide, by his approval and disapproval, the
child’s first attempts to represent his family in the outside
world. And it may be suggested that the love of a four-year-old
Sarakatsan child for his father, which makes an immediate
impression on the observer, on the one hand is related to the
period of extreme permissiveness in the child’s early years, and
on the other is a lever by which early steps in its moral education
are in part accomplished. According to its age and sex, a child
must assimilate certain lessons of conventional politeness, show
a constant loyalty to his family, and display a proud and com¬
bative front before unrelated children of his own sex and
age. Already at this early age the importance of pride and
prestige weighs upon the small boy or girl. Yet these values of
personal and family prestige, which it is the duty of the father
to foster and approve in his son or daughter, foreshadow his
own abdication from power at some future time.
From the moment that a son is subjected to the direct
authority of his father after he leaves school, a strong element of


172 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
contingency and reciprocity enters into the relationship. A
son must give his father respect, be an efficient worker, and
above all else show that he is a courageous protagonist of his
family. The love and esteem of the father depend on his
performance in these matters. By the time a son has returned
from his military service, the conditional element in the
relationship is increasingly on the side of the son, who avoids
showing public disrespect to his father and continues to accept
his authority on the understanding that the father, for his
part, respects his son’s maturing social personality. After the
retirement of the father, the sons in the extended family are
under an absolute obligation to care for the old man, but the
degree of their concern for his comfort may vary according to
the past history of their relations. The conditional character of
the affection of the father for a daughter is even more pro¬
nounced. If the girl’s reputation for virtue remains unblemished,
she receives his favour; if it does not, she may suffer the ulti¬
mate sanction of death at the hands of her own father. In turn,
the attitude of a married daughter to her father is contingent
on whether he has given her to a good husband of an honourable
family. The daughter of a rich and powerful family, forced
against her will to marry her second cousin, swore to her father
as she left her home that she would never set foot in it again.
Such a case of a complete breach of trust and mutual esteem
between father and daughter is rare; but there are also women
who harbour resentment against their fathers because, as they
allege, they were given to indifferent husbands in order to avoid
the payment of a substantial dowry.
3. SIBLINGS
The idea of ‘one blood’ which they share in their common
filiation to the same parents is the value that underlies the
impressive solidarity of siblings in the elementary family and
their almost complete identification of interests. In the eyes of
outsiders siblings are morally identified. Whatever, for good or
ill, is suffered or achieved by one sibling is held to affect the
other siblings to an almost equivalent degree. An insult to any
member of the group is felt with the same resentment by all the
brothers and sisters. If the brothers are adult, the Sarakatsani
believe that an unmarried brother is the right and appropriate


SIBLINGS 173
person to redress the wrongs of rape and homicide. The
solidarity of siblings is also passive, in the sense that the loss of
prestige suffered by an individual on account of his evil or
dishonourable acts equally affects his siblings. Therefore, the
individual is responsible to his brothers and sisters for whatever
he says or does. Only in the context of a vengeance killing do
siblings generally escape the liabilities of passive solidarity; for
the brother of a homicide is not generally considered to be a
legitimate surrogate as an object of vengeance for the victim’s family.
The emotional identification of siblings has its origin in the
common experiences of early childhood. As children they
sleep under the same blanket and eat from the same bowl.
Older siblings look after the younger ones and protect them
from the bullying of other children. There is an unthinking
trust and loyalty. It is rarely possible to persuade an unmarried
sibling to pass even a mildly adverse comment about a brother
or sister. Usually personal secrets are not entrusted to anybody
but a sibling of the same sex. Sisters discuss their fears and
hopes of marriage, a subject which it would be shameful to
mention even to their mother. Brothers share each other’s
anxieties about personal animosities and imagined insults.
The sympathy and emotional identification of sisters emerge
with poignancy on the day of a girl’s marriage. The unmarried
sisters whom the bride leaves behind display a grief which in
its public aspect is certainly conventionally expected, but for
some days after the wedding they seem even within the privacy
of the family hut to be stunned by the loss of their sister’s
accustomed presence. Sisters sense the dread and apprehension
which the bride herself feels when she leaves the protective
circle of her family to be given into the care of strangers. The
violent shock of the sexual assault is also in their thoughts.
Unmarried brothers work together in service to the family
flock. They are conscious that the physical survival of the
family as well as its prestige depend in the last resort on the
animals. This common dependence and service to the flock is
another ground for their close identification. They do not work
(as is the case in the co-operation of cousins or married brothers
with separate households) with one eye on their partner to make
sure that he is not shirking his share of the work. The mutual


174 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
identification of brothers tolerates some variation in individual
skill, strength, and energy, and a man does not complain
although it may be clear that he contributes more to the total
effort than his brother. For if in this fellowship my brother is
as myself, a strict sense of calculation and reciprocity is out of
place. Brothers practise a simple communism in respect of the
small amounts of pocket-money which they receive from a
father or elder brother. If a brother wants a shilling so that
he can go to the coffee-shop, another brother will at once give
it to him without question, or thought of repayment. Brothers
borrow goat-hair capes, shepherds’ crooks, water-bottles and
articles of clothing indiscriminately from one another without
asking permission and without causing offence.
But it will not be imagined that the relations of brothers and
sisters always proceed smoothly according to the preferred
pattern of solidarity based on mutual identification, under¬
standing, and support. Precisely because siblings are conceived
by one another and by outsiders as occupying in many respects
similar status roles, their performances may be compared and
evaluated, and the resulting rivalry may lead to envy, and at a
further remove, to open enmity. The danger of such com¬
petition to the solidarity of the family is particularly acute in a
community where social relations outside the family are largely
regulated by the struggle for prestige. If a brother sees the
possibility of winning the applause of outsiders, although it
may be at his brother’s expense, he may be very tempted to
take the opportunity. The danger is greatest in situations where
individual skills or qualities, for instance abilities as a shepherd
or as a dancer, the proof of courage or the possession of a fine
physique, may become the basis for judging differences
between brothers. And outsiders delight in making and
voicing such judgements because they appreciate the strains
they may cause. In other situations, there may be a desire to
escape the effects of public disapproval for the action of a sibling
even though this involves disloyalty. ‘Hang my brother, I am
too busy’ (xp£[i.acjTe tov aSepcpo pou, eyw Sev aSeia^co) is a
proverb which expresses this idea with a certain astringency.
The effective sanction against such behaviour is simply the
knowledge that while a quarrel between brothers which is not
known and talked about outside the family generally allows


SIBLINGS 175
some hope of reconciliation, a quarrel that follows on the
public humiliation of a brother very often leads to a permanent
estrangement. Such an estrangement seriously affects the pres¬
tige of all the members of the family and destroys the solidarity
of a group on which unmarried brothers and, in the early
years of marriage, married brothers are almost wholly de¬
pendent.
But rivalry between brothers is also inhibited in two other
ways; by the dogma of the equality of siblings of the same sex;
and by the fiction of the specialization of technical roles.
It is a truism that equals are rivals. Rivalry, here, is an
attempt to upset the pattern of equality which then provokes
in others reciprocal attempts to reassert once more the original
relation of equality. However, in so far as there exists a precise
equality in rights and duties between siblings of the same sex,
and to the extent that other members of the family refuse to
discriminate between brothers or sisters, the possibility of
disruptive rivalry is checked. All unmarried siblings of the
same sex have exactly equivalent rights and duties. Brothers
are equally committed to the duties of vengeance in the
defence of family honour; they are similarly entitled to an
exactly equal patrimony. Sisters have the same rights to
adequate dowries with which honourable marriages may be
arranged for them. In lesser matters, too, the equality of
brothers implies the notion of equal shares. A ten-year-old
boy returning home from a cherry-picking expedition with
bulging pockets at once spread out his loot and divided the
fruit with scrupulous care between his two younger brothers,
himself, and a sister. Lacking a single cherry to make four
equivalent heaps, he gave the fractionally smaller portion to
the sister.
It is significant that a parent will never admit to liking one
of his children in preference to another. He will agree that,
of course, sons are more important than daughters, but he is
quick to add that they are all his children and that to show any
discrimination would be sinful. Practice confirms this assertion.
One child is often clearly more gifted or attractive than
another, yet parents take great care to give the same affection
to all their children. Adult Sarakatsani act with a conscious
self-discipline in these matters since they are well aware of the


176 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
dangerous consequences of envy (C/jXeta). ‘There is not enough
room in the pen for the envious sheep’ (to £>qXiapixo apvl
t6 jjiavTp't, 8k ywpaet), it is said.
A person’s position in the birth order of the sibling group
is part of his fate; therefore it is considered right that siblings of
the same sex should marry strictly in order of seniority. There
are no exceptions to this rule. It removes from the sphere of
competition a matter which, in the case of brothers, is intimately
connected with status and prestige. Similarly, it is normally the
eldest brother who becomes head of the family after the
retirement of the father. Thus, the question of succession to this
position does not provoke rivalry between brothers. Only
rarely does a younger brother take the position of leadership in
preference to a senior brother who may be temperamentally
unsuited to the position of responsibility. But, in general,
authority is an element foreign to the relations of siblings of the
same sex. The position of family head, when it is held by a
brother, is treated as merely one of a number of specialized
tasks which different brothers must undertake. Important
decisions are, in fact, arrived at through a consensus of opinion.
Rivalry between brothers is also discouraged by the speciali¬
zation of technical roles.5 Shepherding in the Zagori country
demands skill, resource and, sometimes, daring. His success or
failure in this activity considerably affects the prestige of the
Sarakatsanos. But within the family the fiction is maintained
with considerable vehemence that each brother is a specialist
at his own task. In the family of Theodoros it is said that
Theodoros, the head of the family, has a certain ability as an
efficient negotiator with the outside world; Demetrios is a
specialist cheese-maker and muleteer; only Eleutherios knows
certain high places in the winter pastures where the sterile
ewes will thrive and recover their fertility; Vasili is a specialist
in fattening up the lambs and young sheep; and Aristoteles is
said to have some intuitive facility for the management of the
milking ewes. It is a fact, however, that all the brothers are
quite capable of undertaking any task of animal husbandry
4 An early statement of the idea that competitive pressures are eased by qualitative differentiation of roles is perhaps to be found in E. Durkheim, The Division of Labour in Society, translated by Simpson, Glencoe Illinois, 1949, p. 266.


3. Sarakatsan Grandmother


'•


SIBLINGS 177
and that this does occur in various emergencies without any
apparent loss of efficiency. But the important point is that the
belief is firmly held that each is better than anybody else in his
own department; and for the well-being of the family, each
department is essential. On the other hand, where brothers are
found alongside one another in the performance of the same
task, rivalry is almost always present. If brothers are milking a
flock of ewes there is invariably an argument about who has
drawn off the most milk. Similarly, at the spring shearing the
speed and efficiency of the cutting is a matter for competition
and debate. Such rivalry is generally acted out as a form of
play, yet it causes sufficient sullenness and passing bad-temper
to indicate the importance of the differentiation of technical
roles which has been described.
Although the Sarakatsani insist upon the mutual devotion of
brothers they recognize that brothers do sometimes quarrel
seriously. Such a development strikes at the unity of the family
and threatens the horror of fratricide. ‘When two brothers
quarrel, two madmen rejoice’ (Auo aScpcpioc piaXAcovav xal 8uo
rpeXXol xa^P0VTav)j as a proverb expresses it. But the conse¬ quences of a serious quarrel between brothers partly depend on
the stage of development reached by the family. Quarrels
between adolescent brothers are quickly extinguished by the
father’s authority, and in differences between unmarried but
adult brothers the pressure of elder brothers and parents is
generally sufficient to bring the contestants to reason. It is
possible for an adult unmarried son to claim his share of the
sheep and leave the family, but one man and a hundred sheep
do not, in this community, form a viable economic and
domestic unit. Even a married pair do not. To some degree,
brothers are dependent on one another for many years, often,
indeed, until their own sons are in late adolescence. It is said
that if brothers quarrel today, tomorrow they will be talking
again because, ‘The one has need of the other’. ‘Blood’ (alpta),
and ‘necessity’ (avayxr]), provide the motivation and the
sanction for fraternal solidarity.
Quarrels between married brothers with separate house¬
holds are more likely to lead to a break in relations, particularly
if some of their children have finished school. The factor of
importance, then, is whether the quarrel took place in public


178 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
with mutual insult. If it did, it is very likely to end all forms of co-operation. But if the parents of the brothers are still alive, even a quarrel of these dimensions may sometimes be healed. The ties between unmarried sisters are particularly close. If dishonour attaches to one sister, it infects them all. Together, passively and modestly, they await with anxiety for some stranger to ask for their hand, an event which is both dreaded and desired. Unlike the brothers who separate to carry out their different work, the sisters are constantly in one another’s company and are often working together at the same task. Their relationship differs from that of brothers in the absence of any considerable rivalry. While brothers stand in the public gaze, sisters are closeted within the privacy of domestic life. The reputation of a girl does not depend upon positive selfassertion, but rather on the passive preservation of her virginal condition. She succeeds in this through the closest possible association with her sisters; their physical inseparability is her chief defence against the slander of enemies. Differences in physical beauty may cause some jealousy but these are facts which cannot be altered and, since sisters in any case marry strictly in order of seniority, competition to snare a husband does not exist. The absence of competitive attitudes between sisters means that any elaborate fiction of differentiated roles is unnecessary, and sisters work happily and amicably at the same task without any serious comparison of productivity or skill.6 The ties between brother and sister are also close. Here again, from the viewpoint of the outsider, brothers and sisters are identified as children of the same parents; the short-comings of a sister reflect upon the brother, and vice versa. But the difference of sex introduces into the relationship an important element of complementarity. The brother is the guardian of his sister from rape and insult and he must avenge any violation of her person or character. If his father has retired, it is the duty of the eldest brother, with his father’s consent and guidance, to arrange for his sister an honourable marriage. And the youngest brother in a sibling group must remain unmarried until all the
* Young sisters or cousins sometimes compete to see who can spin more quickly than the other. And they mark a cross on the forehead of the loser with a piece of charcoal. But these are games played in an atmosphere of great hilarity and goodwill.


INTERRELATIONS 179
sisters have been settled. On the other hand, the honour of the
family which affects so intimately the prestige of the brothers, is
largely in the keeping of the sister. Her honour is their honour.
Later, through her marriage, she provides her brother with new
affinal relationships of co-operation; he, in turn, is able to
influence her husband to treat her well. Brother and sister are
interdependent.
Since the female sex is subordinate to the male sex, the
unmarried sister is always under the authority of her brothers.
There are no conventional forms of respect between brother
and sister but the latter obeys the instructions of an older or
adult brother without debate. A brother watches over his
sister’s conduct and criticizes her freely when he thinks her
public behaviour is unseemly. This disciplinary care begins
at an early age. Ten-year-old Nausicaa was discovered one day
by her young brother Charilaos, who is only six years old,
when she was performing for my benefit a very comic imitation
of how old men dance at weddings. Pink with the shame of it
and with tears streaming down his face, he vainly tried to stop
her mimicry.
After puberty, a certain formality enters into the relationship.
Physical contact is avoided and there is little teasing. Conver¬
sation about family interests is easy and natural, but is more
restrained in regard to personal matters. This is, no doubt, a
conventional attitude which helps to maintain the neutral
character of a relationship which exists between members of
opposite sexes. But it seems also to be not inconsistent with the
gravity of the categorical obligations which bind so closely a
brother with his sister.
4. INTERRELATIONS
In all societies, the biological differentiae of sex and age
provide criteria for the ordering of social relations in the family,
although the emphasis on each factor and their mode of combi¬
nation is peculiar to the particular society.
As one might expect, difference in age or generation is an
equivocal criterion for the ordering of family roles in a com¬
munity where the importance of competitive values is so
pronounced. Persons of different sex have complementary
functions and they do not compete. Naturally, difference of


180 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
age and generation provides a basis for the authority of the
parents during the childhood and adolescence of their sons
and daughters, an authority which is sanctioned both by social
convention and the simple fact of power. But as the children of a
family approach adult status, we have seen that parental
authority becomes less assured, especially in father-son re¬
lations where the son’s continued acceptance of his father’s
authority becomes increasingly conditional upon the father’s
tact in his attitude towards his son; and in the relationship
between the mother and her adolescent son, where differences
of sex and generation do not reinforce one another as is the
case in the relationship between father and daughter.
The diminished authority of the father is the inevitable
outcome of his sons’ assumption of adult status which, in this
community, is incompatible with subordination. Marriage
completes the process by which a son asserts his individuality
and after the establishment of his own family, his categorical
obligations are centred in his family of marriage and not in his
family of origin.
On the other hand, difference of sex provides the basis for a
radical separation of male and female roles in the family, which
is not confined to a clearly marked division of labour, but
involves, also, more general sex-linked values which influence
behaviour and attitudes. The activity of female roles is essen¬
tially confined to the house and they require passive, co¬
operative, and self-disciplined attitudes. Masculine roles are
concerned with the management of the flocks and the repre¬
sentation of the family in the community. Since this wider
participation is realized in terms of strife and rivalry, male
roles demand extreme self-assertion in situations outside the
family. Male and female spheres of action are mutually
exclusive but they are also complementary. We have noted the
complementary solidarity and mutual dependence which exist
in the relationships between husband/father and wife/mother,
father and daughter, mother and son, brother and sister. Further,
the female sex is subordinate to the male sex. In adult rela¬
tionships involving persons of opposite sex, the female owes
obedience, the male protection to the other person. Only in the
case of the relation between a mother and her adult married son
does a woman in some degree escape the dominion of the male.


INTERRELATIONS 181
Not only are the various relationships between roles of
opposite sex based upon a complementarity of function, but the
whole complex of relationships between the two parents and
the children of both sexes is similarly structured. No doubt the
same statement might be made about parental roles in many
societies. This is a matter of degree. But I believe that the very
clear definition of the complementarity of the parental roles in
the Sarakatsan family is related to two significant features of
this community.
The first of these features is the relative isolation of the
members of an elementary family from their collateral kin and
the opposition of the family to all other unrelated families. A
consequence of this is that almost all the individual’s categorical
obligations fall within the one small group; where also he finds
the only source of unconditional security and support to which
he is able to turn. Hence the relations between the mother and
the other members of the Sarakatsan family group, of whose
solidarity she is the material and symbolic focus, possess a
particular intensity and unconditional quality. I have illus¬
trated a number of ways in which the mother represents the
solidarity of the family and the security to be found within its
circle; in the valuation of the physiological connexion between
mother and child; in the ideal of the mother as the unselfish
and self-sacrificing giver of protective care. We have remarked
the absence of strong authority in a relationship of intimacy,
and the sexual virtue of the mother as the symbol of the
family’s honour and moral solidarity.
The second characteristic feature of the community that
concerns the parental roles is the importance of prestige values.
In the first four years such mild discipline as the child suffers
originates from the mother; the father and all other members
of the family are loving and indulgent. After the age of four the
father’s authority is gradually established and the very strong
affection of the child for the father which grew up during the
first four years of permissive behaviour is used by the father to
encourage the child to more adult ways of behaviour and to a
sense of responsibility to the family group. The mother is now
the more permissive of the two parents. As we saw in the case of
young Lambrine, however harsh and angry the father becomes
the mother remains compassionate and unchanged. Thus after


182 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
the child’s first four years there is virtually a reversal of roles
between mother and father. And this occurs precisely at the
point in time when the child begins to play a representative
role outside the family. The behaviour of the child now becomes
a legitimate object for criticism by outsiders and the reputation
of the whole group is at stake. Therefore the authority of the
leader of the family is invoked to sanction the correct pattern
of behaviour; pride, loyalty, and fearlessness in a boy, sexual
modesty and obedience in a girl. But the father achieves this
purpose more often by the withdrawal of his affection and the
encouragement of feelings of shame, than by direct physical
punishment.
During the period of adolescence (13-21 years of age
approximately) the son or daughter must show a careful respect
to the father and there is less familiarity. In the case of a
daughter this is related to her sexual maturity and the need to
discipline her actions; in the case of the son it prevents his
premature self-assertion and protects the prestige of the father
against the ridicule of outsiders. On the other hand, while a
son’s relations with his father are stable at this time, he goes
through a period of some abruptness towards his mother in his
efforts to prove his manliness.
As a son reaches the threshold of full manhood (23 years of
age) the importance of his prestige ranking within the ‘pallikari’
age group becomes incompatible with undue deference to any
senior person, even his father. This is reflected by an argu¬
mentative attitude in the private life of the family circle, and
publicly by a measure of avoidance which makes it possible for
a son not to show disrespect to his father without, however,
showing positive deference. But this period of latent competition
with the father, also, sees the son renewing a firm attachment
to his mother.
After his retirement the opinion of the father counts for little
except in questions concerning the marriages of his children and
as a commentator on morality. Yet by identifying himself with
his sons and daughters through an intense interest in his
grandchildren he finds consolation.
On the other hand, the status of the mother (so long as she
is not physically or mentally feeble) increases with age. As a
mother of honourably married sons and daughters she has


INTERRELATIONS 183
transcended the inferiority of her sex and becomes the focus of
her sons’ co-operation within the extended family, or later in a
group of autonomous households. Only she is able successfully
to mediate and contain the conflicting loyalties of married
brothers.
It is clear that the various difficulties between parents and
children are all related in some degree to the necessary involve¬
ment of the individual and his family in the community’s system
of prestige values. When the child begins to play a represen¬
tative role outside the family the father has to educate and
discipline it in a way that puts a considerable strain on a small
boy or girl. An adolescent son in adopting the prescribed
attitudes of manliness becomes abrupt to his mother. The adult
‘pallikari’ is particularly sensitive to his public reputation for
honour and self-assertion, and it is this that bedevils his re¬
lations with his father. Thus the peculiarly clear-cut comple¬
mentarity of the parental roles has to do with the fact that when
the relation of a child (particularly a son) to one of his parents
is strained, the relation to the other parent is one of positive
attachment and identification.
In this complex of family roles and relationships the ties
between parents and children represent the core of the system.
The categorical obligations of parents towards their children
are the values underlying the isolation of the family. They are
values which in the popular mind are supported by their
reference to a divine model, to the unmotivated love of God, to
the patient devotion of the Mother of Christ. But sons and
daughters must also be educated to conformity with the
system of values of the wider community which makes demands
even on small children; requires self-discipline and self-assertion
in youths; and places young men and their fathers in com¬
petitive opposition while the former advance to adult status
and independence. Throughout this process of development the
moral solidarity of the family must remain unbroken. And
this, in effect, is the achievement of the complementary structure
of the two parental roles and their reciprocals.
It seems that there are three important contexts in which
the stability of family relations may be threatened by conflict
from within. In the first case, the integrity and solidarity
of the family is destroyed when a female member willingly


184 THE FAMILY: A SYSTEM OF ROLES
compromises her sexual honour. Secondly, there is the danger
of competitive differences between a father who has not yet
retired and his adult but unmarried sons. Thirdly, the rivalry
inherent in the relations of brothers is a continuing threat to
the solidarity of the family. It grows in inverse proportion to
the degree of authority which the father is able to exert, and to
the extent that brothers are dependent on one another for
co-operative assistance. In each of these instances, we have
already reviewed particular sanctions and institutionalized
arrangements which generally help to prevent altogether, or to
keep within tolerable limits, these types of disruptive behaviour.
But in each of these instances, there is also the positive sanction
of the mutual identification of interests and the responsibility
of all members of the family for the actions of other members,
attitudes which follow from a common opposition to all those
persons who are not members of the family. And it is to the
consideration of the solidarity of corporate family groups, which
is a consequence of their mutual hostility, that we turn in the
following pages.


VIII
THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
1. THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY
T
he Sarakatsan family is a corporate group. The property
of the family is owned in common. It holds exclusive
rights over the productive powers of all its members and
the reproductive capacities of its women. And in principle all
its members are held to be responsible for the action of any
other member. It is true that, in effect, it ceases to exist when
the married brothers divide the joint household some 40 years
after the marriage which originally brought the family into
being. But during this period its members think of it as a
permanent entity, and in so far as they consider the future
separation of brothers’ households they see it at this time as
merely a modification of their corporate existence which will
be extended in their continued association.
The solidarity of the corporate family is symbolized in the
idea of blood (alpa). In marriage a man and woman mix their
different blood to produce ‘one blood’ which is the blood of
their children. One says of a child, ‘he is my blood’, (ehca alyux
(xou). Relationships in the family are a participation in this
common blood. It provides the reason and the sanction within
the individual’s conscience for the fulfilment of those exigent
and uncompromising duties of family membership. The
relevance of blood to intelligence and moral character, and their
inheritance, is an idea with a long history.1 But for the Sarakat
sani, the blood which children inherit not only represents, but
it ‘is’ the physical and moral attributes that form their social
personalities. If a man is not of honourable lineage his blood
does not ‘take fire’ at an insult; and when he is faced with
sudden danger ‘his blood is cut’ (xonrjxe to alpa tou). These
are not metaphorical usages. The blood centred in the heart
is both the medium and the agent of emotional thought and
feeling. Thus blood is intimately related to courage. And it
is a matter of common observation that as a man loses blood,
1 Onians, op. cit., pp. 48, 121.


186 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
he loses strength. Since courage and physical strength are
particularly the qualities that men require in order to defend
the reputation of their families, it becomes clear why, for the
Sarakatsani, the honour of the family is literally the honour of
its blood.
The solidarity of the family group restricts the expression of
purely individual feelings, opinions, and personality. This is
reflected in the way that individual members are normally
described by reference to the father, who until the marriage of
his eldest son holds the chief authority. After her marriage a
woman is never again addressed by her baptismal name except
when she visits the home of her birth. She takes instead the
Christian name of her husband to which the suffix ‘-ina’ is
added; for instance, Periclina (see p. 70, above). In this way
there is expressed not only the severance of a woman from her
family of origin and her subordination to the authority of her
husband, but also the absolute quality of their union. Similarly
children of both sexes are known by their own Christian name
followed by the name of their father in the genitive case, for
instance ‘John the son of George’. In the eyes ofits own members
and the outside world, the family is a unity.
Whether we regard Sarakatsan marriage as a solemn contract
between two opposed groups, or as a religious sacrament
establishing the union of a youth with a maiden, it is certainly a
transaction which transcends individual interests and desires.
Just as the partners must be spotless (nobility in the boy,
virginity in the girl), if the relationships which result from their
union are to approach and participate in the qualities and
nature of the divine model, so it is clear that either divorce or
illegitimacy is incompatible with these values. To be born and
to grow up in a complete and legitimate family is a minimal
requirement for the honourable establishment of children.
In fact, divorce is permitted in Greece by the Orthodox
Church on a number of grounds including adultery. Among
the Sarakatsani I discovered only two instances of divorce;
but in neither case had the marriage been consummated. In
one instance, the father of the bridegroom advised his son not
to have intercourse with the bride because she was coughing
and expectorating blood. The Sarakatsani are apprehensive
of tuberculosis, and after eight days during which the girl’s


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 187
condition did not improve, she was returned to her father with
the dowry. In the second instance, the bride discovered after
the wedding ceremony that the bridegroom had a cleft palate.
She succeeded in evading the embraces of her husband by
feigning sickness and escaped in the night to her father’s home.
But once the blood of a woman’s virginity has been dedicated
to her marriage and the honour of her unborn children, the
marriage bond is indestructible except in death.
Ideally a girl who has a premarital love affair should be
killed. However, there have been cases where either the father
or the brother had not the courage to do it, or was persuaded
by the girl that she was raped rather than seduced. But where
the fate of the mother may hang in the balance, that of the
illegitimate child is never in doubt. It cannot be allowed to
live in the community, a testimony to the dishonour of the girl’s
family. It is placed on a mule-path where it may perhaps be
found by others and delivered to an orphanage before it dies.
No trace of pity is felt for the infant, for it is a thing without
honour and therefore scarcely to be considered human at all.
In this community an individual cannot exist simply qua
individual, he can only be taken account of and evaluated in
relation to his family membership; and this implies membership
within the group of a wedded pair and their legitimate offspring.
To harbour in the family a bastard, only one of whose parents
belonged to the group, would be a contradiction in terms. It
seems clear that the impossibility of divorce and the destruction
of illegitimate children are, in different ways, indices of the
solidarity and exclusiveness of the corporate family group.
The property of the family is owned corporately. Although
the father and, later, the elder brother administer it, it is never,
in Sarakatsan thought, the individual ‘dominion’ of the head
of the family. When the elder brother takes the place of his
father, he does not succeed to an estate but only to an office.
Speaking of the Indian Joint Family, Vinogradoff2 suggests
that the material goods belonging to it are regarded as a com¬
mon stock of wealth providing means for the subsistence of its
members. This applies equally to the Sarakatsan family. Of the
sheep it is said, ‘They guard us, they allow us to live’ (p.a<; cpuXav,
* Sir Paul Vinogradoff, Outlines of Historical Jurisprudence, Oxford, 1920, vol. i, p. 265.


188 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
(j.a? Cow). Every member of the family has a right to draw on
this common stock according to the needs of his status and
situation. From it are drawn the dowries of the daughters,
which sometimes exceed in value the patrimony of a brother.
It is the family flock which must support the expenses of a
son’s higher education, or the cost of medical treatment in
emergencies.
As we have observed in chapter four, no partition of the
family property ought to occur before all the daughters have
been married with dowries which represent their share of the
commonwealth. Thereafter each son has a right to one share
in the flock and any other property which the family may own.
One further share is reserved for the support of the two parents
if they are still alive when the joint property is divided, and
this property passes with them into the family of the youngest
son in which by custom they spend the last days of their life. If
only one parent is alive at the time of partition, only a half
share is retained for his or her support. When the old people
eventually die, their sheep remain with the flock of the youngest
son. This is not regarded as a form of ultimogeniture any more
than the succession of the eldest brother to the office of family
head is considered to be primogeniture. The additional
wealth which passes to the youngest brother is thought to be
only a just compensation for the support of the aged parents
which, although it is a sacred duty, is also in their declining
years of mental and physical feebleness a considerable burden.
The right of a son to a share in the flock of the corporate family
may be implemented at any time after he reaches adult age,
which today is judged to be his twenty-second or twenty-third
year, on his return from military service. In practice, he will
not claim this share until he is married and the father of
children, yet if he should quarrel with his father or brothers
and decide to leave the family before this time, or if he is
driven out, he is entitled to his share of the family wealth.
Normally, however bitter the quarrel, a son may not be
disinherited. A father may drive his son out of the house but
not out of his inheritance; unless he is guilty of some ultimate
crime such as incest or fratricide.
We can see from these facts that in principle the father
and his sons, by virtue of their common membership in the


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 189
corporate family, stand as equals in relation to the common
flock and the common property. Strictly speaking, the son does
not inherit property from his father; rather the father and
the son both have claims on the corporate property which they
exercise when they leave the group or when the group is
dissolved. Through their dowries, the daughters also have
parallel claims, and should a daughter remain unmarried she
too will receive something, a half share, with which, like her
parents, she passes into the family of her youngest brother. The
partition of the corporate property and the single household
does not come about so much as the result of individuals
claiming individual rights, as through the redeployment of the
resources of one corporate family group to endow and accom¬
modate the needs of a number of new corporate families which,
in part, are sprung from it. That this process of growth cannot
be contained within the framework of a single corporation with
continuity through time, is a consequence of the bilateral
kinship system.
The authority of the head of the family group is limited in a
number of ways. In the early years, before the maturity of his
children, the authority of the father is unquestioned, but in the
administration of family affairs his position, even then, is that
of trustee rather than master and owner. A father who squan¬
ders the wealth of his family through gambling or inattention
to his duties is despised. If the community discovers that he
punishes his wife and children too harshly, or without reason,
he will lose prestige. In the later years of the family’s develop¬
ment when the father holds his authority over adult sons and
daughters, and a fortiori during the period when the elder
brother presides over an extended family group, the head of the
family increasingly exercises an authority which is based on a
process of collective decision and unanimity. During these
years, for instance, the family head does not buy or sell stock
or other property without consulting his sons or brothers.
Through discussion, in which everybody participates, a
collective viewpoint about conduct and action emerges, and
the family is prepared to continue a debate for many hours
until unanimity is reached. As opinion begins to harden, the
remaining dissenters give way out of loyalty, if not from
conviction. So tightly drawn to one another in the mutual


190 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
identification of their interests and affections are the members
of the family that they cannot tolerate a permanent minority
opinion. To dissent is a kind of treason. In a qualified sense, it
may be said that authority over the affairs of the corporate
family, in the later years of its existence, is corporately
exercised. In practice, there are naturally many matters in
which the head of the family through his experience in bargain¬
ing and negotiation has more expert judgement; and here the
family will be guided by his recommendations. But, similarly,
he in turn will take the advice of his sons or brothers when diffi¬
culties arise over the grazing and condition of the animals.
No outside person or group has the right to interfere in the
internal affairs of a family. The family has an unfettered juris¬
diction over its own concerns. Public opinion exerts an immense
moral pressure on a family, if the conduct of its members falls
appreciably short of the ideals of family life; but it has no means
of legitimately and forcibly restraining an unrepentant father
or brother. One day, together with a Sarakatsan friend, I was
passing the home of a man from whose courtyard we heard a
confusion of shouts and cries. Looking carefully over the high
wall, we saw the father lashing his thirteen-year-old daughter
with a leather belt; it seemed that the girl’s only fault was that
she was too frail to lift and secure some heavy sacks on to a
waiting mule. My friend’s fury was evident. Sarakatsani can¬
not tolerate any form of cruelty to children. Yet he insisted that
he could not interfere with the father’s action even if he were on
the point of killing her. But, lifting a heavy stone, he tossed it
over the wall. The man, realizing that somebody had been
watching him, at once ceased his blows on the child.
Within this autonomous family group there is a certain
equivalence of rights and obligations between the members. It
must be said, however, that this abstraction and separation of
rights and obligations only emerges somewhat artificially in our
analysis. Because of their very diffuseness it would not normally
occur to an individual to balance his rights and privileges
against those of another member of the family. There is no
conscious accountancy in this solidarity. In general terms every¬
body has the right to expect material, moral and affective sup¬
port from the family, as well as assistance in the event of physical
assault. We have already stressed that a person will never admit


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 191
to an outsider that a member of his family is worthy of moral
blame in any dispute. We shall discuss again the right to moral
support, as well as the right to protection from physical assault,
when we consider the concept of family honour. As to the right
to material support, this has been dealt with in the dis¬
cussion of family property. It remains, therefore, to examine a
person’s right to affective support.
It is only within the privacy and secrecy of the family hut
that a man or woman is able to relax, to laugh, to give affection
and receive it. The burden of public life is a heavy one. Outside
his house a man must be severe and proud. He must strut about
like some turkey-cock as if his affairs were matters of abnormal
consequence. He must on no account show his emotions unless
it be an unrestrained anger at some actual or imagined slight.
Publicly, he treats his wife and daughters with disdain, barking
at them orders in harsh staccato phrases. An unmarried girl or
a wife must walk slowly with measured tread and downcast
gaze. Only inside the hut is it possible to abandon these con¬
ventional attitudes. After the evening meal, an act ofcommunion
to which only a visiting kinsman will be admitted, the whole
family, men, women and children, sit or lie around the hearth
in no fixed order, laughing, gossiping and asking riddles. The
centrally-positioned hearth, around which the family gathers,
seems to symbolize a common fellowship rather than a hier¬
archy of relations. Despite a measure of conventional restraint
in certain relationships, especially that between father and
daughter, the general tone of the family in assembly is one of the
utmost intimacy, solidarity and identification. Trust between
brothers is proclaimed in the action of a younger brother who
leans his head against the shoulder of his older brother’s wife. It
is an atmosphere of easy camaraderie and undemonstrative
affection, which is impossible with unrelated persons in any
situation, and possible for the members of a family only when
they are shielded from the public gaze.
A person also has obligations to the family which gives this
protection and support. The most general of these obligations
is an attitude of loyalty and reciprocal support towards the
other members of the family who must be sustained morally and
physically in all situations without any consideration of the
consequences. A sequel to the affair of the man who beat his


192 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
daughter which we have just described illustrates the strength
of this loyalty. This girl was a regular visitor to our hut. On the
first visit after her ordeal, some expression of sympathy was
made. The girl’s composure was visibly upset, tears came to her
eyes and her lips trembled, but she would not discuss the inci¬
dent and even refused to comprehend what we were talking
about. Whatever maltreatment the individual may receive in
the family, he remains loyal in the face of outsiders. And indeed
there is no alternative, for the individual cannot abandon or
change his family, or live outside its limits.
Secrecy about the family and its affairs is a measure of
loyalty and of the internal cohesion of the group. The Sarakat
sani are, in fact, extremely secretive. As a matter of policy and
habit they never give accurate answers to questions about
numbers of sheep possessed or quantities of milk sold. The
answers to taxing authorities are diminished, and to other
persons, when the purpose is to impress, responses to the same
questions are inflated beyond credible limits. The marriage
aspirations and negotiations of sons and daughters are guarded
secrets. Information about private family life is denied to all
unrelated persons; and with reason, because people are always
seeking to find or fabricate incidents of intimate family fife to
destroy the reputations of others. But secrecy goes beyond the
point of mere discretion and becomes an end in itself. A Sarakat
sanos declines to give almost any personal information to a non¬
kinsman, even where it could not remotely damage the family’s
interests or prestige. One housewife will not disclose to another
what she is cooking for the evening meal. Two shepherds lead¬
ing mules meet on a path and pause for ten minutes to deny
each other the simple pleasure of knowing where each has come
from, what he is carrying, and where he is going. The questions
are as pertinent as the answers are evasive. Children are drilled
into these attitudes from their early years. Asked by another
adult Sarakatsanos or villager who his father is, a child replies
with an air of false innocence, ‘And you do not know me?’
Secrecy erects a barrier around the members of the family and
their intimate relations. The family secrets, whether they have
significant content or not, are relevant, simply because they
represent something which is denied to other people who
are not members of the group.


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 193
But the obligation that Sarakatsani must not on any account
fail to fulfil is the defence of family honour. Honour (Ttpr)) is
directly concerned in a limited range of situations; typically
these emerge after physical assault or verbal insult, or following
a sexual assault on the women of a family, or their own mis¬
conduct. Whether or not honour is lost depends essentially upon
two qualities in the moral characters of its members; the man¬
liness (av8pt,<T[j.6<;) of the men, and the sexual shame (vTpo7nf]) of
the women. Objectively, therefore, honour is an aspect of the
integrity and social worth of the family as this is judged by the
community; subjectively it represents the moral solidarity of
the family, an ideal circle that must be defended against any
violation by outsiders.
Honour is concerned with strength or prepotency rather than
justice. The most direct blow to the strength of another family
is simply to kill one of its men. His blood pours out and with it
go life, consciousness, and strength. Sarakatsani believe that in
some way a killer absorbs the strength from the blood of the
man he slays. T shall drink your blood’ (6a crou 7uco to alpa), is
a phrase that threatens murder. Given the connexion between
\ strength and honour, it follows that the family of the killer
validates its claim to honour, except in circumstances where the
motive of the killing is itself dishonourable; such motives of
dishonour include sexual lust but not theft. On the other hand,
the family of the victim must remain inferior until one of its
members ‘takes out the blood’ (PyaXy) to alpa) from the viola¬
tor himself, or until he is at least driven into exile. One avenger
bathed his hands in the blood of the original killer and returned
to show his mother ‘the blood of her son’. With certain quali¬
fications that will concern us in a later chapter, all Sarakatsani
are born with honour. But it is constantly threatened; and its
conservation is, in effect, a struggle to maintain an ideal
equality. When a life or the virtue of a woman has been taken
away, something equivalent must be taken back if the family is
not to fall for ever from grace and social reputation.
The family of the victim, then, have this duty of active
solidarity3 ‘to take out the blood’ of their kinsman from the
* The useful distinction between active and passive solidarity is borrowed from Glotz. See Gustave Glotz, La Solidarity de la famille dans le droit criminel en Grece, Paris, 1904, Chapter 6.


194 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
person of his violator. On the other hand, the family of the
original killer do not have to suffer the consequences of passive
solidarity; a brother, father, or son of the killer is not generally
an object of vengeance. But despite the absence of passive
solidarity in vengeance killing, the ideal course of a vendetta is
still visualized as terminating in the mutual extinction of the
two families. As we shall see, this is most unlikely to occur in
practice. It is generally to a brother or son, more especially the
former, that the duty of vengeance killing for murder falls. A
father is seldom involved, for women and children are inviolate,
and only in the case of the killing of an only son without issue
will he be left as the one possible avenger. Normally, an un¬
married brother avenges a brother, a son his father, when the
latter has no unmarried brother.
During the period 1945-55 it seems that only two successful
killings have occurred amongst the Sarakatsani that were
specifically vengeance for a previous murder, although for the
same period I have details of varying completeness concerning
seven other killings for various causes (other than the hostilities
of the 1947-9 civil war). One reason for the low incidence of
vengeance killing is that the killer is generally removed or re¬
moves himself from the scene of action immediately after the
event. Today, the Greek police are well organized and omni¬
present. Generally, killings occur either as the result of boun¬
dary disputes or questions of honour, so that the identity of a
killer is widely known. He is quickly arrested and finds asylum
in prison. When he is released from prison some five to ten
years later, his kinsmen will advise him whether the victim has
a brother or son able to revenge him, and depending on the
nature of this advice the killer will either return to the com¬
munity or move to another district of the Epirus or to Thessaly.
Therefore, in most cases, the absence of passive solidarity in
blood vengeance and the removal of the killer to prison and later
to voluntary exile prevents the execution of vengeance. Exile
is clearly not so honourable an outcome as a vengeance killing
for the victim’s family, but it strikes some kind of rough balance
between the two groups. It relieves the avenger of the need to
spend a number of years in prison, followed possibly by exile.
The killer himself is believed to suffer considerably in his exile,
distant from the support of his family and kinsmen. And it is the


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 195
reputation for manliness of the victim’s group which has driven
him there.
But if all the dead man’s brothers are married, he is unlikely
to be avenged. A married brother’s obligations to his own family
take precedence. If he were to kill the murderer he would be
removed to prison, and afterwards would face exile or possible
counter-vengeance. In either event his family would be de¬
prived of its head at a time when the sons were almost certainly
still children or adolescents. Yet the consciences of married
men with an unavenged brother are never altogether easy. If
the dead man has a son, however young, they feel less troubled.
For this son will be expected to revenge his father before he
marries. However, by the time the son is mature enough to act,
the killer is probably an old man and removed from the public
scene. In this situation a son tends to put off the execution of his
duty in the hope that the murderer will soon die naturally
without his assistance.
If the dead man has an unmarried brother, ideally the latter
may not marry until the murderer has been killed or driven
into exile. But if the dead man has also a son, even though it is
still in the cradle, he will probably take a wife; particularly if
the killer has a long sentence to serve. If the dead man has no
son, an unmarried brother will certainly wait until the murderer
emerges from prison, but if the latter does not then return to
the community the brother will probably consider himself free
to marry a year or two afterwards.
Yet despite the dearth of reciprocal vengeance killings, the
idea of this obligation is very real, and it remains a potent
sanction against light-hearted killings in a community with a
taste for violence. Of five Sarakatsan murderers released from
prison in recent years, three moved to other parts of Greece,
and the two who returned to the community only did so be¬
cause their victims had left no ready avenger on the scene.
The details of a vengeance killing which occurred in 1950
illustrate some aspects of the problem. During the civil war of
1947-9 the Sarakatsani were unable to reach their summer
grazing in the mountains and remained in the plains of
Thesprotia under conditions of extreme heat and absence of
grass. There was a boundary dispute between the extended
family group of Achnoulas and a ‘company’ of families led by


196 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
John Stratos. Accused of stealing the grass of the other group, a
young shepherd of the Achnoulas family insulted a brother of
John Stratos, who struck him with his crook. Both families
heard the shouts and rushed to the aid of their kinsmen. In the
scuffle that followed the old father ofJohn Stratos was wounded
by the knife of one of his own sons which had fallen to the
ground and was then picked up by one of the Achnoulas
brothers. He died from the wound. The fight was so confused,
with six men grappling in a body, that the Stratos family never
discovered which Achnoulas brother killed the old man. Nor
did the police. After a lengthy inquiry, nobody was charged
with the killing since much of the evidence appeared to suggest
that it had been accidental. The Achnoulas family felt reason¬
ably secure from direct attack because of the anonymity of the
killer and nothing happened for nine months, until one day
George Achnoulas, drunkenly quarrelling at a wedding, told
an adversary to take care, hinting darkly that he was not afraid
of spilling blood since it would not be the first time. The Stratos
family, informed of this incident, necessarily accepted the evi¬
dence as sufficient, and an unmarried brother, Charalambos,
waited in ambush for George and shot him dead as he walked
along a path.
What we are faced with in these seeming evasions, or half
evasions, of a duty which is declared to be sacred, is generally
not any real weakness in the solidarity of the family of origin,
but the conflict of roles between the duty of the brother or son
on the one hand, and, on the other, the obligations of a father
to his own family, or the right of a brother or son to marry and
found his own elementary family at about the age of thirty.
This conflict is, of course, related to the bilateral form of the
kindred and the isolated corporate family which is associated
with it. It places an inherent limit on vendetta. Clearly, a com¬
munity fragmented into family commonwealths, where the
individual’s categorical rights and obligations are contained
exclusively in this small group, where the help a man can claim
from his collateral kin is severely limited, and where a family to
exist in any real sense must have at least one adult male to
support and lead it, is peculiarly ill contrived to prosecute blood
vengeance.
It is, then, not inconsistent with these considerations that the


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 197
Sarakatsani have no notions about the blood or spirit of an
unavenged victim turning upon the kinsmen who have failed
in their duties. For this would be an uncomfortable belief to
accommodate where successful vengeance killing is contingent
on a number of circumstances. This is interesting because, as
we have already seen, blood is the material medium of kinship
and its values. In other related contexts Sarakatsani clearly
believe that blood has mysterious and intelligent powers. A
horse standing outside a house when its master was murdered
‘dropped dead from the blood’ (eoxacre duo to alp.a). A shep¬
herd who killed a woman ‘was seized by the blood’ (tov eutaae
to al(i.a). He was paralysed before his victim until the husband
returned to kill him. For this was an evil and unnatural deed
where supernatural sanctions rightly operated. Sarakatsani will
even say that the avenging brother’s blood gives him the
courage to reclaim ‘his own blood’ from the killer. But sugges¬
tions that a dead man might be personally angry and dangerous
if he is not avenged are met with amused and pragmatic dis¬
belief. If care is taken over a man’s burial so that the Devil
cannot use him as a '(3puxoAaxa<;’ (phantom), a dead man is
simply dead. Vengeance, then, is a duty owed to the honour of
the family and not to the memory of a particular individual.
And honour depends on the strength, confidence, and self
regard of living men, not on any mysterious or spiritual powers.
The problems which the duty of vengeance killing presents
to a family sometimes have an element of paradox. For in
prosecuting vengeance and defending its honour a family
almost inevitably deprives itself of one of its men. This may
represent a dangerous weakening of its strength; and strength,
it may be remembered, is the basis of honour. In the very act
of defending one’s honour one may in fact be jeopardizing it.
The violator is always in mortal danger immediately after the
deed, when grief and humiliation are fresh. But if he survives
the first two years unscathed the victim’s family begin to con¬
sider the situation in a more calculating and unemotional
fashion. It then becomes a question rather of whether there are
reasonable grounds, of the kind we have discussed, for ‘not’
prosecuting vengeance. This depends entirely on how the com¬
munity views their predicament. If all the brothers of the victim
are married when the killer returns from prison, the consensus


198 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
of opinion is likely to be favourable to a policy of inaction but
mutual avoidance. There is, inevitably, some loss of prestige
but this may be the lesser of two evils. But mutual avoidance
(which is possible in this dispersed community) is essential. If
the killer were to appear before the victim’s brothers on a public
occasion, such as a wedding or a festival, the humiliating con¬
frontation would force the brothers to kill him or forfeit their
honour. Generally, both sides have strong motives to keep out
of each other’s way. In the case of the vengeance killing between
the Achnoulas and Stratos families, after some months the
Stratos family may have felt relief that they did not know the
identity of the killer. But the incident at the wedding was
generally interpreted as a display of public boasting by George
Achnoulas, and this made retaliation almost inevitable.
The loss of a life in a killing is seen as a loss of blood, and for
this outrage the violator ought to pay with his own blood. We have
shown that there is no passive solidarity in vengeance killing;
a man does not generally suffer for a killing committed by his
brother. This is a convention which plainly restricts the possible
extensions of a vengeance killing and prevents a number of
families from losing their ‘protectors’. It is the analogue of those
qualifications of active solidarity that we have already dis¬
cussed. However, this does not detract from the importance of
active and passive solidarity in other situations nor the sig¬
nificance of the shedding of the common blood. This is very
evident in fights which do not involve homicide.
An evenly contested fight in which no blood is spilled is an
episode complete in itself; a fight of similar character and pro¬
portions in which one side physically loses blood but the other
does not, inevitably provokes its own sequel in the attempt at
some later time to draw blood from the opponent. But a man
does not himself revenge the outrage which has been committed
on him. This is the task of a brother or son. Also, the object of
vengeance need not be the original opponent; any male
member of this man’s family is appropriate. In a typical dispute
over the boundaries of grazing areas, Aristoteles was cut about
the head by the other shepherd’s crook. Some weeks later,
Christos, the brother of Aristoteles, found himself at a wedding
feast opposite the brother of the man who had recently quar¬
relled with his own brother. In his own words, ‘I suddenly saw


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 199
him there, drinking and putting on airs. I remembered that
his brother Vasili drew blood from my brother. I could not
stand it.’ The consequences for the other man was a head
wound from a broken bottle before the two men were parted
and expelled from the wedding. It has to be remembered that
fights and brawls in which individuals have the duty of both
active and passive solidarity are relatively frequent, but that
killings are rare.
The second category of affairs of honour concerns the sexual
conduct of women. The family has exclusive rights over the
sexual capacities of its women, and in this respect women
always remain in loco filiae. Here we are concerned not only
with external attack as in the spilling of blood, but also, some¬
times, with treason from within when a daughter or sister
betrays her virginity or when a wife voluntarily commits
adultery. The will of a woman is vulnerable and her sensuality
is evil. She is the weak link in the chain. For this very reason
her sexual purity is an appropriate symbol of the family’s
honour. Its destruction, although itself a dishonourable act, in
some way places the destroyer and his family in a position of
superiority; for they have demonstrated that the woman is
willing to abandon sacred loyalties for the gratification of her
sensual feelings by a stranger. In these circumstances vengeance
becomes primarily an act of purification. A father (or brother)
must first destroy his daughter (or sister) and only afterwards
turn his attention to the lover. Similarly, a husband ought first
to kill a wife taken in adultery and then the paramour.
If it seems surprising that such violence may occur in a group
whose jural and affective solidarity I have been at some pains
to stress, this nevertheless seems to be a characteristic of small
groups whose solidarity is very intense. In the mutual identifica¬
tion of one member with another, there is no flexibility to con¬
tain widely divergent interests. We have seen that brothers, if
they cannot reach unanimous decisions, must part company.
Similarly, the association of family members demands absolute
loyalty; the treachery of one member disrupts the group in such
a way that this member’s very presence is a denial of the quali¬
ties and attitudes on which the harmony of its internal relations
depends. The objectionable element must, therefore, be excised.
This is the only way in which the family honour can be


200 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE C-ROUP
reinstated. And the father4 or brother who accomplishes this
terrible work wins a grudging respect in the general community.
Families do not always find at once the moral strength to
take the only honourable action. In an affair between two
second cousins in 1955 near a village on Mitsikeli, the girl’s
brothers first tried unsuccessfully to kill her lover. The girl then
ran away to the man’s home; no doubt as much through fear
of her family as out of devotion to her lover. In another case,
which occurred in 1944, the lover of an unmarried girl escaped
from the neighbourhood after one unsuccessful attempt to shoot
him. Although the girl’s association with the man had been
notorious, no action was at first taken against her, but over a
period of six months the family suffered acutely from public
sneers and scorn until, quite suddenly, the girl disappeared.
The nature of her fate was never satisfactorily explained.
The most recent instance of the vengeance of a family on a
daughter occurred in 1948 when a Sarakatsanos wintering his
sheep near the Gulf of Arta discovered that his daughter was
conducting an affair with a villager, who had seduced her with
false promises of marriage. At the time, there was no other
Sarakatsan family in the immediate neighbourhood, so that
there seemed to be some possibility of hushing up the matter;
but the girl discovered that she was pregnant, and the man
refused to marry her.5 The father took the girl to a secluded
place, shot her with a pistol, and disposed of her body by rowing
out into the gulf and sinking it with weights attached. Later, he
killed the villager and dealt with his body in the same way. This
case is often cited as the right solution to problems of this kind.
In cases where a girl is raped or a wife is similarly violated,
or where at least the community accepts this presentation of
the matter, the action is one of straightforward vengeance. The
natural avenger is the brother for a sister and a husband for a
wife. Such an attempt will certainly be made where an avenger
is available, and it will be recalled that in the case of unmarried
girls one of the brothers does not marry until all the sisters are
4 It seems to be the opinion that the father who begot the girl is a more appropriate executioner than the brother. 5 Marriage is not an honourable solution to a premarital affair unless, as is most unlikely, the liaison is known only to the two families, and not to the community.


THE SOLIDARITY OF THE FAMILY 201
established in marriage, an arrangement which expressly pro¬
vides them with this avenger. Consequently, in cases where an
act of vengeance concerns the sexual honour of a sister or a
wife, there is little chance of it not being executed through
default of a ready avenger.
A question of honour is also involved when a man breaks the
contract of betrothal. The girl’s brother ought to kill him. Here
the attack on the girl and her family is not a physical assault
upon her virginity, but the suggestion that in this or some other
respect she is not worthy of marriage. And the knowledge that
the breaking of the contract involves an obligation of vengeance
only establishes more strongly in the minds of other members
of the community the suspicion that there must exist some
serious fault in the girl. I know of only two instances of broken
betrothals over a period of ten years and significantly both
these cases were arrangements between Sarakatsan girls and
village men. Marriages between Sarakatsani are only arranged
after exhaustive inquiry and considerable debate; mistakes are
thus unlikely. In the first of these two cases, the former bride¬
groom fled to Athens after he had lost the top of a finger in an
unsuccessful attempt on his life; in the second case, the father
of the unhappy girl had no adult son, and was glad enough
to have the additional excuse that the man lived some consider¬
able distance away. He was loud in his threats, but in the event
he did nothing; and people were quick to point out that this
was exactly the kind of conduct one might have expected from
this particular individual.
Between the two categories of ‘affairs of honour’ which I
have described there is one important difference. In the first
category, a killing demands a counter killing, and in theory, at
least, this process may continue until all the adult male mem¬
bers of the two families have exterminated one another. The
first killing which initiates the affair is not itself a random or
indiscriminate act. It happens generally as the reply to an
insult or as the consequence of a boundary dispute or some other
quarrel. A man does not intend to kill in these situations, but
accidents happen. The rough balance which in most cases, as
we have seen, is struck between the two sides, satisfies neither
group. The community remains relatively indifferent to ques¬
tions of ‘right’ and gives its preference to the side which shows


202 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
the greater manliness. In the second category, however, where
an affair concerns the sexual honour of a woman, the community
strongly upholds the ‘right’, in an ethical sense, of a family to
kill a man who has assaulted one of its women. For this act is
evil and dishonourable. An avenger in an affair of the second
category does not generally go into exile, since his life is to a
degree protected by public opinion. Where a balance is struck
between the two groups in affairs of family honour, it is in¬
herently less stable in cases of the first category than in those of
the second. And this appears in the fact that two families, be¬
tween whom there is a killing and an exile, are extremely care¬
ful to avoid meeting in circumstances where their presence may
represent an affront to one another. Mutual avoidance is a
means of preventing the disturbance of a precarious equili¬
brium. It appears, then, that the processes of vengeance pro¬
vide through exile a sanction against killing, and through
vengeance killing a sanction against breaches of the code of
sexual behaviour.
When a man is killed or a woman is assaulted something, a
life or honour, is taken away, not merely from the violated
individual, but more importantly from his family. One group
has committed a wanton and hostile act upon the other, and
between the two groups a debt of honour now exists. Something
has been taken, something equivalent must be taken back.
Until some kind of a balance is re-established, the victim’s
family is in the eyes of the community inferior to the group of
the violator, even where the act of outrage, as in the case of
sexual assault, is in itself evil.
It is a peculiarity of‘affairs of honour’ that they consist of at
least two events between which some interval of time elapses.
The first is the violation of family honour which is generally an
outrage on one particular member; the second is the act of
vengeance which is similarly performed, in most cases, by one
member only. In both instances the individual as victim or
avenger represents his family. If the honour of the individual
and the honour of the family are analytically separable, in
action they are one. And if the execution of vengeance brings a
measure of personal glory to the individual, at the same time
it is also an act which is essentially altruistic.
The longer the interval of time between the two events the


HOSTILITY BETWEEN UNRELATED FAMILIES 203
less effective is the response. To some extent this is so even where the reasons for delay are physical: for instance, the killer is in prison, or the avenger is not yet adult. But it is said that if an affront to honour remained unanswered over a period of years after an adult unmarried avenger was available and the killer physically present in the community, then the quality of the dishonour ascribed to the family would be such that an eventual vengeance killing would not reinstate the reputation of the victim’s family. For, on grounds of damaging conjec¬ tures about the personal motives for this delay, other families would be able to continue asserting the relative integrity of their own honour by denying it to the family of the victim. The case is hypothetical since there has been no instance of this kind in recent years, but it is indicative of Sarakatsan thinking on this matter. ^ The defence of family honour is at once an indication of family solidarity and a process which recreates it. The honour of the family, the solidarity of this group, and the mutual responsibility of its members, are correlated notions. It is true that passive solidarity does not extend to questions of vengeance where a life is demanded, but in other respects it is complete. A man may suffer physical assault for the offence of his father, brother, or son. Further, if one member of a family acts dis¬ honourably, all the other members of the family lose honour in the eyes of the community. If a man is killed or a sister’s be¬ trothal is broken, and the family remains inactive, all its mem¬ bers are equally dishonoured. Since all are responsible for the actions of any one, every member is accountable to every other member. All the members of the family necessarily form a single solidary group for the protection of their common honour.
2. HOSTILITY BETWEEN UNRELATED FAMILIES
In the preceding chapters we have seen that for each individual this community is divided into the two opposite but complemen¬ tary categories of kinsmen and strangers; trust marking rela¬ tions in the one category, distrust in the other. Distrust prevents co-operation between shepherds who are not kinsmen or affines, and the four or five men that are necessary to manage a flock are either father and sons or a co-operative ‘company’ of kins¬ men and relatives by marriage. Moreover, the produce of the


204 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
flock is sold to persons outside the community. No Sarakatsanos
who remains a member of the community acts as a trader or
shopkeeper. Indeed, unrelated families are only dependent on
one another in two significant ways, for marriage partners and
social reputation. In both instances this form of dependence
helps to breed hostility and suspicion, which is all the more
intense since there are no other forms of social or economic
co-operation. Perhaps, too, the dispersed character of the com¬
munity, and the fact that for most of the time shepherds are
bound to the care of their animals, allow attitudes of intense
hostility without giving too frequent opportunities for its physi¬
cal expression.
The hostility that exists between unrelated families is en¬
couraged by the belief that their interests are mutually destruc¬
tive. There is the story that after he had created the other
countries, God had a few stones and rocks left in his sack. He
threw these over his shoulder and they became the land of
Greece. It is believed that there are not enough resources and
wealth to satisfy the needs of everybody, and that therefore the
success and prosperity of other families is necessarily a threat to
the very existence of one’s own. It follows that a man must
rejoice when another suffers misfortune and ‘falls in the mud’
(7re<pTei gty] Xatnnq). For the Sarakatsani, these beliefs have an
immediate relevance. If the village President allots one man an
area of good summer grass, another must receive an area of in¬
different grazing. Again, in the winter, pasture is scarce, and
every family that has successfully negotiated for its requirements
of winter grass leaves less for the others. Whether it is a question
of material assets or social prestige the Sarakatsani see life as
a kind of seesaw. If one family goes up in the world the others
must necessarily come down.
The hostility between unrelated families is intimately related
to the nature of rights and obligations inside the elementary
family. These have a diffuse character; that is to say, a man is
obliged to support his brothers, sisters, parents, or children in
every situation and circumstance unless this assistance con¬
flicts with other and higher obligations. But not only do all a
man’s significant interests fall within the limits of the family,
but in most contexts loyalty to the family is the supreme social
value. Moreover, there is no social group in this community


HOSTILITY BETWEEN UNRELATED FAMILIES 205
which through common membership can commit him to any
duty towards persons with whom he is not related by kinship
or marriage. Indeed, any relationship with an unrelated person
would be regarded by other members of the family as a form of
betrayal. For a man’s energies and affections belong to his
family and his relatives, and to nobody else. This explains why
personal friendship with an unrelated person, based simply on
liking and sympathy, is impossible. There is devoted friendship
between cousins, but even here we have seen that such an
association is immediately sacrificed if any friction develops
between the two families. The solidarity of the family resides in
its exclusiveness and opposition to those who do not belong.
And any relationship between one of its members and an out¬
sider, which is not shared by the others, necessarily weakens it.
The mutual distrust of unrelated families emerges very
clearly on those rare occasions when for some specific purpose
they are forced into co-operation. During the summer a hut is
established high in the mountains above the village so that the
various shepherds who have sold their milk to a particular mer¬
chant are able to deliver it twice a day to his agents who at
once turn it into cheese. Towards the end of July these opera¬
tions come to an end, and it is then the responsibility of those
selling their milk to the merchant to carry down to the village
on their mules the machinery, utensils, and the mass of accu¬
mulated cheeses. The cheese-maker and his assistant calculate
from their books the total quantity of milk which each family
has delivered during the whole summer, and in proportion to
these quantities each family is allotted so many mule-loads of
cheeses and equipment, which it is their duty to transport as far
as the village. But the assessment of these loads by the cheese
maker is not accepted without many amendments and bitter
wrangling. The cream separator for instance is a heavy, awk¬
ward thing to load on a mule. Who is to say what the equivalent
in cheeses or smaller pieces of equipment may be ? Each family is
determined not to be outmanoeuvred by the others into per¬
forming any service which can possibly be avoided, and no
trust is placed by anybody in the impartiality of the cheese
maker. It sometimes happens that the family which has sold
the largest quantity of milk has only one mule, while another
group with only a small flock possesses three or four pack


206 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
animals. But this never leads to a comradely offer of assistance
which might finish the task in a single mule train. A man with
a single animal may have to struggle three or four times in
the day up and down to the village while the man with three
or four mules sits and watches as his animals graze in idleness.
All social relations between unrelated persons are pervaded
by this attitude of distrust. We may recall how sometimes in
marriage negotiations the girl’s family try to conceal her short¬
comings and attempt by implication to suggest that a more
attractive younger sister is the prospective bride. A man and his
family distrust unrelated people because they expect to be ex¬
ploited and tricked by them. They admit that they themselves
would act in a similar manner. They say that a man must pro¬
tect his family, and to do this in the world as he finds it some
cunning and some lies are necessary.
Before 1937, the mutual hostility of unrelated families found
an institutionalized form of expression in the custom of ‘animal
theft’ (£a>oxXo7T7)), more especially of sheep. Although the
severity of the penalties introduced by the government of
Metaxas effectively stifled this activity almost overnight, most
of the heads of families are old enough to remember the alarms
and excitements of sheep theft. The desire to steal is still
privately expressed (and occasionally indulged in) and the
qualities of courage and intelligence which were necessary in
these adventures are still the ideal attributes of the hero and
‘pallikari’. As we shall see, theft of another sort has now re¬
placed it. But one cannot doubt that but for the pressure of the
State law sheep theft would still be a vigorous institution.
The more general form of sheep theft was the small-scale
expedition undertaken by a lone individual or in company with
one or two trusted kinsmen. The object was to steal one or two
sheep from the flock of an unrelated man, transport the animals
with speed to the huts of the families involved where the sheep
were at once killed, roasted, and eaten, as a precaution against
the discovery of incriminating evidence. Sheep were never stolen
from kinsmen or affines and generally not from other flocks in
the immediate vicinity. This precaution was taken not from any
neighbourly spirit, but because it was realized that, if two neigh¬
bouring groups engaged in a sequence of theft and counter¬
theft, shepherding would soon become impossible, and the


HOSTILITY BETWEEN UNRELATED FAMILIES 207
strength of both flocks would rapidly be reduced to vanishing
point. The evidence suggests that small-scale theft was not
generally found among those families using the grazing lands
of the same village, but was concentrated on the flocks within
the territory of immediately neighbouring villages, that is to
say in an area some 5-10 miles distant from the homesteads of
the thieves. But at this distance an expedition became a planned
undertaking requiring the absence of shepherds for perhaps two
days and nights from their own sheep, a circumstance which
significantly limited the frequency of these raids. It is extremely
difficult to assess what was the frequency, but it seems unlikely
that the average family enjoyed this sport more often than four
or five times in a summer.
The Sarakatsani justify animal theft on the grounds that
before 1937 a man could not provide his family with enough
food without stolen meat. It was, therefore, an honourable
undertaking. Moreover, since other men stole your animals,
both interest and honour demanded retaliation. The older
men are lyrical about the satisfaction of eating a stolen sheep
by moonlight. A man only kills his own animals for meat at
important social and religious celebrations, and then with reluc¬
tance. The stolen sheep was a luxury, a luxury at the enemy’s
expense.
After these expeditions, a shepherd was torn between the pre¬
caution of secrecy and the desire to win renown for the daring
and cleverness of his exploits. He would openly boast about the
number of sheep he had recently lifted, but would not generally
reveal their original owner. The latter, however, on his own
account or through the reports ofkinsmen, formed certain shrewd
suspicions. In any event, whether he suspected the identity of
the thief or not, he had to take some retaliatory action on some¬
body since otherwise he would not only become a laughing¬
stock, but a prey to other thieves sensing an easy victim. The
best defence against theft was swift retaliation with interest.
Even where a man was sure of the thief’s identity, his retaliation
against the flock of the stani of which the thief was a member
might not fall on a sheep or sheep which belonged to the original
thief. Therefore, in either instance, an original act of sheep theft
might lead to a series of thefts not necessarily confined to the
original participants.


208 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
There existed also a more ambitious form of sheep theft,
which was less often attempted, partly because of the consider¬
able danger and partly because it made even greater demands
on the time and energy of the thieves than the variety already
described. Three or four kinsmen, travelling swiftly from their
homes, arrived at the victims’ grazing land about dusk. As soon
as it grew dark, they cut out fifty or so sheep and, using a care¬
fully prospected route, drove the animals through the hours of
darkness to a secluded river bed or forest clearing, which was
distant both from the thieves’ own home and the home of the
victim. From this place of relative security, the animals were
delivered in batches to some Jannina livestock merchant for
slaughter; the latter would ask no questions, but also paid a
price less than the market rate. Sometimes the ear-signs on the
animals were carefully altered and the animals were added,
some to the flocks of the thieves, and others to those of kinsmen
who lived at a distance from the victim. Care was taken to
arrange a wide distribution of the animals so that the chances
of recognition were less than if the animals remained together
in a single body. For reasons analogous to those already given
for the avoidance of small-scale sheep theft on the flocks of
immediate neighbours, these more ambitious operations were
carried out at even greater distance from the homes of the
raiders, generally at the farthest limit of the community some
15-20 miles distant, or on the flocks of Koutsovlachs beyond the
community boundary. Fear ofmassive retaliation also prevented
men from boasting about this kind of exploit, at least until some
years after the event. Secrecy was essential. Nevertheless, the
prestige motive was not altogether lacking from these thefts,
since wealth, either in money or in sheep, was an important
element in the prestige standing of a family.
Before 1937 it seems possible to distinguish, in very broad
outline, three areas and modes of hostility. Towards unrelated
families, within a radius of some five miles from a family’s own
sheep, hostility was expressed in attitude rather than act. There
existed constant distrust and suspicion, but an avoidance of
provocation. In the second area, stretching beyond the first to
a distance of ten miles and often somewhat farther, hostility
found expression in the small-scale theft of sheep; the frequency
of these acts, however, was limited by considerations of time and


4. Stani in Winter




HOSTILITY BETWEEN UNRELATED FAMILIES 209
distance and perhaps a certain moderation sanctioned by the
fear of too many reprisals. In the third and farthest area of the
community, any individual family only rarely, and possibly
never, undertook hostile raiding operations on an ambitious
scale; here again the frequency of these acts was limited by con
sideradons of time and distance, and more certainly by the fear
of retaliation. According to the distance which separated un¬
related families, there was a certain inverse relation between the
frequency of hostile contact and the severity of its manner of
expression.
The vigorous measures of Metaxas ended extensive sheep
theft. But today hostility still finds a parallel form of expression.
Since 1937 the sheep population of the Zagori has considerably
increased, with the result that the lands of most of the summer
villages are over-grazed; it is now the constant anxiety of each
group that its animals may not find enough grass to mate
effectively and resist disease, let alone return a good milk yield.
At the beginning of each summer, the President of the village
allots to each family or ‘company’ grazing land in proportion
to the size of each flock. If the number of Sarakatsan sheep
entitled to graze on the land of the village increases, there is
less grass for each sheep. In a very obvious sense the size and
condition of a family’s flock are threatened by the sheep of
other families, and the grass they eat. It is now too dangerous
to steal the sheep, but it is possible to steal the grass. During
the summer heat, sheep are grazed at night; the technique of
grass stealing is to pasture sheep just over the boundary dividing
a man’s own land from that of his immediate neighbour, but
never so deeply into his territory that he cannot retreat rapidly
at the approach of the other shepherd or the agricultural guard.
It is the duty of this official to summon all offenders before the
local agricultural court, where fines, generally of the order of
two or three pounds, are levied. It is very doubtful if the value
of the grass taken in the course of the trespassing is equivalent to
the fines which are paid, even if the fact is ignored that a neigh¬
bour is almost certainly making similar raids in the opposite
direction. The Sarakatsani are well aware of these facts, but
they feel that inactivity would be weakness and would be so in¬
terpreted by the neighbouring groups. It is the consciousness
and certainty of the hostile intent of other families threatening


210 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
the group from without which drives it to reciprocal action.
There is no missing the intense satisfaction expressed by shep¬
herds after a successful night’s grazing on another’s grass. Such
acts define the exclusiveness and prepotency of a family group
against other family groups and the world in general.
Under present-day conditions the distinction between dif¬
ferent ways of showing enmity towards immediate neighbours
and more distantly situated families is not so immediately clear,
but nevertheless exists. In its relations with another family
group using the grazing land of the same village, a family
maintains a measure of restraint it would not be concerned to
show in chance encounters with families which live at a dis¬
tance. We have shown how a grass thief is careful never to
stray too far across the boundary of his neighbour. He does not
boast about these exploits, and if accused would deny that he
was aware he had crossed the line. Similarly, the victim, unless
he accidentally comes upon the thief red-handed, is unlikely
to make wild or insulting accusations which transform an affair
of limited hostility into a ‘question of honour’. A man whose
grass is being raided merely retaliates upon the thief, if he is
not already doing so.
But a family has hostile relations of grass-stealing with only
its immediate grazing neighbours. And since the summer pas¬
tures are reallotted each year a man is unlikely to have the
same neighbours two years in succession. Therefore, over the
years these hostilities are diffused, as it were, throughout the
local gathering of families. In general, shepherds who must live
in or close to the same village express hostility in their attitudes
rather than in their actions. An almost aggressive secrecy, the
cloistered care of unmarried girls, the pleasure taken in the
misfortunes of others and the fear of the evil eye, the slanderous
vilification of all unrelated people and their motives, are indica¬
tive of these attitudes. On the other hand, people are punctilious
in their formal greetings when they meet. Women exchange
careful and guarded conversation at the well, probing for in¬
formation and avoiding the need to give it; but with civility.
And their men drink in the coffee-shop and play cards with
self-assertion but apparent bonhomie—yet always on guard for a
possible slight, and always with a mental picture of who is for
them, and who against, in the immediate vicinity.


HOSTILITY BETWEEN UNRELATED FAMILIES 211
During the spring and autumn migrations between the moun¬
tains and the plains, many thousands of sheep move along the
main road from Jannina to the coastal area around and south
of Igoumenitsa. On these occasions, men and their sheep who
normally live at a distance find themselves head to tail on the
same stretch of road, jostling one another for the meagre
stretches of roadside grass, blocking one another’s passage on
the road, or travelling in the pall of dust raised by the flock in
front. In these circumstances, families give a very free rein to
their hostility, fights are frequent and sheep theft at night is one
of the excitements of the road to which young men look for¬
ward. But if on these occasions a man finds himself immediately
behind a flock with which he may share a boundary during the
coming six months, he moves off the road and waits for half an
hour until distance or another flock places a barrier between
future neighbours. However, it would be wrong to interpret the
relative restraint shown in relations with neighbouring families
as reflecting any measure of co-operation. But shepherds and
their sheep are peculiarly vulnerable to attack, and it is a struc¬
tural imperative of such a community that hostility between
groups living in close proximity be controlled, if only through
their fear of mutual destruction.
Hostility is a kind of relationship, and providing it is limited
in such a way that it cannot succeed in its ultimate aim, that is
the annihilation of the adversary, it may represent an important
element in the pattern of social relations of a community. This
is the case among the Sarakatsani where the opportunities for
the expression of open hostility are limited by the constant
demands of the flocks on the shepherds’ attention, and the cir¬
cumstance that the shepherds and their animals are physically
dispersed. Obviously the ability of one man to get at another
is always an important factor in a relationship of hostility. But
these behaviours are also controlled, partially at any rate, in
the competitive forms through which they are acted out. And
it is perhaps not unprofitable to consider theft in the general
context of competitive gift exchange. The victim, both from
honour and self-interest, is obliged to commit a counter-theft.
Like the return gift in other societies, the return theft amongst the
Sarakatsani should ideally be greater than the original theft.
Like a series of prestations and counter-prestations, in theory a


212 THE FAMILY AS A CORPORATE GROUP
series of thefts never ends, for after each reciprocal act an amount
of debt remains.
The sheep are part of the family corporation, they are its
source of life and wealth, and a family’s prestige and pride are
closely bound up with the size and condition of its flock. Each
sheep and its eccentricities are individually known. The theft
ofa sheep from a family removes something more than a material
object, it takes away also a spiritual value. Thus before 1937
the theft and counter-theft of sheep provided ‘a pattern of
spiritual bonds between things which are to some extent part of
persons.’6 The modern practice of stealing grass, although its
effects are less direct, may be viewed in a similar way. Whereas
gift exchange in other societies achieves a measure of co-opera¬
tion between differentiated groups, amongst the Sarakatsani
the reciprocal exchange of theft relates one family group to
another in a nexus of debt, while at the same time it denies the
need, or the possibility, of co-operation and stresses the mutual
exclusiveness and opposition of unrelated families.
***
The analysis of family roles in the previous chapter revealed
that the solidarity of the family was vulnerable in certain impor¬
tant respects. These were the loss of sexual honour by a woman
of the family, and competition between father and son or
between brothers. In the first part of this chapter I have dis¬
cussed certain values and institutions which support the intense
solidarity of the Sarakatsan family and are in various ways sanc¬
tions against the potentially deviant attitudes described in the
analysis of family roles; for instance, there were ideas about
blood, divorce, illegitimacy, secrecy; and institutions of cor¬
porate property and family honour. In the final section of this
chapter certain beliefs about the inevitable opposition and
hostility of unrelated families have been examined as well as
some institutions through which they are expressed. And this
reciprocal exchange of hostility represents a further sanction
that encourages the identification of the interests and affections
of family members in opposition to all who do not belong.
• Marcel Mauss, The Gift, translated by Ian Cunnison, London. 1954, p. 11.


IX
PATRONAGE
1. COMMUNITY
he Sarakatsani of Zagori are profoundly conscious of their
identity as a community in relation to villagers or towns
-L people. Hostility to villagers is not only a question of a
conflict of interests but also a difference of values. The Sarakat¬
sani believe that if the material conditions of their life are in¬
deed regrettable, yet the moral life of their community upholds
Greek traditional values which villagers, especially in Zagori,
have debased and betrayed. Specifically they claim that the
men may be cursed or the women seduced with little fear of
provoking the reaction expected of honourable men. These
claims are spiced with illustrations. The classic instance is the
case of the postman who surprised another villager in the act
of intercourse with his wife. He took no action, however, except
to observe that this did not seem to him to be the conduct of a
good neighbour. Other tales inform of homosexual practices
with gipsies, and of ugly widows and unmarried spinsters who
satisfy their lusts with dogs. The evidence is rather more con¬
vincing for the accusation that they are mean and inhospitable.
The common purpose of these allegations is, simply, to deny that
the villagers of Zagori have honour. The men are lacking in
manliness, courage, and generosity: the women are shameless
and given to sexual lust. Criticism is sharpened by the know¬
ledge that the shepherds themselves are despised by the villagers
as people unfit to live in civilized society, physically unclean
barbarians who put their trust in violence and self-help rather
than the processes of law.
In these attitudes two ideal types are opposed. For the villagers
of Zagori, actions must be judged against the image of the
clever, astute, educated merchant and patriot who may travel
abroad but continues to support the village by his benefactions.
His activities, however, require an orderly social environment,
a respect for the minimum of law and order, an absence of
physical violence, and (although this would not be admitted) it
required in the past a qualified understanding with the Turkish


214 PATRONAGE
master. In contrast the Sarakatsan model is the anarchic palli
kari hero whose ideal is personal freedom and aggressive pride,
the patriot of the klephtic ballads, trussed with bandoliers,
physically hard and morally self-disciplined. By implication
such men are shepherds, not villagers; the latter, whether they
live by agriculture or not, are despised as ‘bent men’ ((rxufxpivot
&v0pa>7roi), men who servilely dig in the earth.
The community is a closed group: individuals are members
because they were born into it. On the other hand, some people
leave it through marriage to villagers; and through education
or wealth where these lead to a change in occupation or the
material conditions of living. In one respect, then, the Sarakat
sani of Zagori are an occupational group sharing a homogeneous
style of life: in another, a community practising preferential
endogamy. For probably not more than 5 per cent of all
Sarakatsan marriages are to persons outside the community.
Significantly such marriages meet with some disapproval; and
even where a man who has taken a village wife continues to live
from his flocks, he is no longer considered to be a full member
of the community without some qualification.
The Sarakatsani of Zagori, while they have this clear sense
of their solidarity in opposition to the villagers, are nevertheless
a widely dispersed community in which the only group able
to act together on the basis of local community, rather than
kinship ties, is the local gathering of shepherds who in summer
live on the grazing lands of the same village. This gathering of
families has little group consciousness and no formal organiza¬
tion. There are various reasons for this. A family may sometimes
have ties of kinship and marriage with as many as half the
families in the local gathering, but never with all. Distrust
between unrelated families does not prevent the momentary up¬
surge of feelings of identification against villagers, but it com¬
pletely cripples the co-operation that is necessary for systematic
opposition. In difficulties men turn for practical help to kinsmen
and affines, not to unrelated neighbours. A further reason is that
the local group is dissolved in the autumn when each co¬
operating group moves down to its winter pastures which are
seldom in the same neighbourhood. Since a family has one set
of Sarakatsan neighbours in the summer and generally an en¬
tirely different set in the winter, the feeling emerges that there


COMMUNITY 215
is something impermanent, almost fortuitous, about the local
neighbourhood whether in summer or winter.1 At the same
time the significance and solidarity of the total Sarakatsan
community is emphasized. The expression, ‘we, the Sarakat
sani of Zagori’ is common; but ‘we, the Sarakatsani of Tsepe
levo’ (or any other village), is heard less frequently.
Yet it is in the local neighbourhood that hostility between
Sarakatsani and Zagori villagers is actively expressed. Property
rights are jealously guarded, and in the absence of fencing it is
inevitable that Sarakatsan sheep and mules are discovered in
the crops or gardens of villagers. They trespass regularly and
deliberately on certain areas ofgrassland reserved for the cutting
of hay on which the villagers rely to feed their livestock during
the winter months. The shepherds also attempt to defraud the
village treasury by concealing some of their sheep when the
flock is numbered each spring. For their part the Sarakatsani
resent the fines they must pay in the agricultural court for the
depredations committed by their animals. They believe, too,
that they are cheated in the allotment of watering time by the
villager who regulates the irrigation ofvillage vegetable gardens.
There are quarrels over the reguladons for the grazing and
watering of mules, which favour the villagers. There is trouble
over the use of springs for washing clothes and over the refusal
of the Sarakatsani to use earth-closets. Indeed, there is trouble
between the two groups at every point of contact between them.
Since their rights are entrenched by the decrees passed in the
village council and because the executive administration of
village affairs is necessarily in the hands of villagers who are in
residence all the year, the villagers are almost always in a
legally secure position in differences with Sarakatsani. It follows
that the villager appeals to the law which happens to favour his
interests, the Sarakatsanos more often turns to self-help and
violence. Justice is not a question of the impartial administra¬
tion of existing law, although this, too, may be lacking in the
view of the Sarakatsani. If the law does not allow a man to pro¬
tect the interests and dignity of his family, then it does not
represent justice.
1 In this connexion it is worth remarking that before the Sarakatsani became village citizens in 1938 a family, or stani, did not necessarily go to the same grazing village in Zagori each year.


216 PATRONAGE
Although the individual family receives from the local gather¬
ing of Sarakatsani no practical support in its difficulties with
the villagers, there may be expressions of moral support. In the
coffee-shop where the Sarakatsan heads of family gather to
drink, play cards, argue, and discuss the village news, a man
who has had a quarrel with a villager, or difficulties with the
village council, will be asked what happened. He may not tell
his audience all the facts, or the truth, but he will tell them
something of the matter, careful always to present his own
actions and arguments so that they appear honourable and
vigorous. The villagers in the case he will condemn as unjust,
cowardly, and as men who do not love honour. Such a recital
is a formal statement of the moral solidarity of the whole
Sarakatsan community against those who molest it and its way
of life. Every Sarakatsanos present supports without reservation
the condemnation of villagers. ‘Eh, what a “poustis”2 that man
is.’ They all agree. Many, of course, will have unspoken reser¬
vations as to the part played by the narrator. Yet in regard to
the actions of the villagers in the dispute, the solidarity of feel¬
ing is complete. Often at the end of the discussion, just as a
hymn sometimes closes a religious service, somebody will start
to sing a wild klephtic ballad in which the whole assembly join
their voices.
Parallel to this conflict of interests and values is the social
exclusiveness practised by each community towards the other.
Sarakatsani do not generally invite villagers to their homes at
weddings or festivals unless they are patrons or the godparents
of their children. Nor do the villagers receive the Sarakatsani
in their houses unless there is some particular relationship.
At the festival of the village patron Saint, the reluctance of
the master of ceremonies to allow shepherds to lead the tradi¬
tional ring dance may be interpreted by the Sarakatsani as
an attempt to humiliate them publicly. Each year it pro¬
vokes in some villages violent incidents. In this context men
forget the absence of relationship and stand together with the
help of visiting kinsmen from other villages in defence of
the honour of the whole Sarakatsan community against the
villagers of Zagori who attempt to ridicule and belittle their
way of life.
1 A tcoucttt^ is the passive partner in a homosexual relationship.


SPIRITUAL KINSHIP 217
On the other hand, any attempt to organize systematic co¬
operation between the families of the community faces almost
insuperable obstacles. An ‘Association of Nomad Pastoralists’
was formed in 1950 to represent the interests of the community
to the government and other agencies. But enthusiasm waned
rapidly as soon as it was realized that it could not miraculously
improve the situation without the moral and financial support of
its members over a number of years. The members are almost
exclusively Sarakatsani but significantly the salaried executive
secretary is a villager; first, because no shepherd possesses the
legal expertise to negotiate with officials; secondly, because,
although few shepherds trust the secretary, it would be even
more distasteful to discuss one’s problems with another Sarakat
sanos. Here we touch on the difficulty which faces any attempt
at community organization beyond the competence of the co¬
operating ‘company’. It necessarily involves the acceptance of
some executive authority. But for reasons of pride and distrust
a Sarakatsanos cannot surrender any fraction of the sovereignty
of his family.
As we have seen, this does not mean that the community has
no sense of its solidarity and opposition to villagers. On the con¬
trary, when the honour of the community is publicly attacked,
unrelated men will stand together in its defence. To do nothing
would be to betray their manhood in one another’s eyes. This
is a relationship of identification. But the conflict of practical
interests between Sarakatsani and the villagers, the merchants,
or the government, is a different form of threat. And although
these problems are similar in kind for all, the problems of one
family are generally separated in time and space from those of
another. When a man’s own interests are not immediately en¬
dangered, he is secretly pleased about the misfortunes of other
men who are not kinsmen or affines. To face these difficulties
as a united community would require co-operative relationships
between non-kinsmen. Since these are not possible, we must now
consider how, in fact, each family attempts to protect itself
from the external threats to its security and prosperity.
2. SPIRITUAL KINSHIP
In his struggle to protect his family and live his own way of
life the Sarakatsanos must come to terms with various persons


218 PATRONAGE
and groups in the village, the town, and the State, which have
the power to threaten his interests. The officers and merchants
with whom he must deal have a common quality that they
stand outside the community’s field of values. In the absence of
strongly held universal values concerning the obligations of a
man towards general humanity they feel free to exploit, or at
least not to help, another person from whom they are divided
by the absence of common ties of kinship, community, or class.
If they have power, they see no reason why they should discip¬
line themselves in its use towards a person from whom they are
morally isolated.
To protect himself the Sarakatsanos tries to establish some
kind of link which will transform an otherwise impersonal con¬
frontation into a personal relation; that is, he attempts to draw
the individual whose goodwill he wishes to influence into an
institutionalized relationship which may exist across the fron¬
tiers of community and involves the person’s self-esteem and to
some extent the sanction of public opinion, so that he must
discipline himself in the extent and manner in which he exer¬
cises his power. The most effective means of achieving these
ends is the form of spiritual kinship between the bridegroom
and his wedding sponsor (xou(j.7rapo<;). After the birth of a child
this changes into the even more significant relation between the
natural parent and the spiritual parent.
The duties of the wedding sponsor begin on the day of the
wedding, throughout which he supports the bridegroom by his
close presence both in the secular marriage custom and feasting,
and at the religious services of betrothal and marriage. He
stands at the right hand of the groom and it is his privilege to
exchange three times the crowns of the bride and bridegroom.
By his public sponsorship of the marriage he declares that it is
an honourable union and that the partners are persons worthy
to receive the sacrament of marriage; on the spiritual plane he
becomes responsible for them. The relationship (xoupurapia)
which is established between the groom and his sponsor (and
for which there seems to be no adequate modern English trans¬
lation) does not end with the ceremony. It looks forward to the
birth of children which is the explicit purpose of the marriage.
It is the right and the duty of the wedding sponsor to stand for
these children at their baptism, and consequently to enter a


SPIRITUAL KINSHIP 219
twofold relationship of godfather-godchild and spiritual parent
natural parent.
The sacrament of Baptism, which is immediately followed in
the Eastern rite by the sacrament of Holy Chrism or Confirma¬
tion, is the spiritual foundation of these social relationships. In
the two sacraments the Holy Spirit purifies and recreates the
nature of the child, uniting it to the body of Christ and bestow¬
ing Spirit upon it. The rite of Baptism marks the acceptance of
a soul into the Church, it makes possible the remission of future
sins and it releases the individual from the weight of original sin.
In the rite of Holy Chrism the Holy Spirit descends upon the
person of the newly-baptized. In a simple fashion these things
are well understood by the Sarakatsani. If a child dies un¬
baptized its soul ‘goes into the air and is lost’. They think that
men require the grace which is initially conferred by the Holy
Spirit through these sacraments both to realize the inherent
nobility of their manhood (identifying a condition of honour
with a state of grace), and for the more pragmatic reason that
if the barrier of sin between a man and God is too considerable
he will not be able to protect his family against the many forms
of catastrophe which threaten it.
In these critical sacraments the child needs a spiritual guar¬
dian to stand and answer for him. Since they are related to the
child through the act of generation the natural parents are
unable to assume this role and, perhaps, for the same reason,
they are not present at the ceremony. The godfather (vouvo*;)
receives the child from a member of the family at the door of
the church. The service begins with an exorcism of the Devil
and the evil spirits of error, wickedness, idolatry, covetousness,
lying, and uncleanness, in which the godfather indicates the
child’s renunciation of Evil, blowing and spitting three times to
effect this rejection. The rite of Baptism then begins. The water
is blessed in a long prayer and the priest intercedes that the
person may put off the old man which is corrupt through deceit¬
ful lusts and put on the new man after the image of Him that
made him, that he may eventually be a partaker in His resur¬
rection. Olive oil is blessed, the surface of the water is signed
with it and the child is anointed with the oil of gladness in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The priest
then baptizes the child by a threefold total immersion. The


220 PATRONAGE
sacrament of Holy Chrism follows at once. In this rite the child
is anointed with chrism, a consecrated unguent of many in¬
gredients, on the forehead, eyes, nostrils, lips, ears, breast,
hands, and feet; each time the priest says, ‘The seal of the Gift
of the Holy Spirit. Amen.’ During the service the godfather
holds the child. At the beginning of the service the priest asks the godfather
the name of the child. Although a father may give some hint of
his preference, it is recognized that it is the absolute prerogative
of the godfather to name the child. Generally, he follows tradi¬
tion by naming the child after one of its grandparents or per¬
haps after the saint on whose day the Baptism occurs. As soon
as the name is known small children rush from the church to
the home of the parents to give the news and to be rewarded
with small coins or sugared sweets. In the child’s home there is
always some anxiety until this information is received, for a
person’s first name is in some peculiar way an important aspect
of his individual personality; and it links him, also, to a par¬
ticular saint to whom he will turn for protection.
At the end of the service those who have attended return with
the godfather to the child’s home where they offer their wishes
for long life and prosperity. The godfather hands back the child
to the mother and tells her, ‘I return the child to you in this
life; but I shall ask it back from you in the next. Protect it well
from fire, water, and all evil.’
There are certain exchanges of gifts between spiritual kins¬
men. The wedding sponsor makes a not inconsiderable outlay
at a wedding. He must give the bride a dress, and a gift of
money when he takes his leave at the end of the celebrations;
he must provide the wedding crowns, the candles, and sugared
almonds, as well as his share of bread, meat, and wine; he must
tip the band generously when the bride, the bridegroom, and his
close relatives are leading the dance; and he is responsible for
the offering to the priest. The sum of these expenses is unlikely
to be less than ten pounds. In return the bride gives the sponsor
the choicest blanket from her dowry. Later, as the godfather,
he is expected to give his godchild a complete set of clothing, a
gift which is generally offered when the child is one or two years
old. It must be reciprocated by the child’s family at the next
Easter with the gift of a lamb with fleece dyed red, a round of


SPIRITUAL KINSHIP 221
bread, and a new shirt. Each Easter the godfather must send to
his godchild a candle to take to church for the service on Easter
Saturday, and a red egg. At Easter, the relationship between
the godchild and the spiritual parent takes a fresh strength and
emphasis when men with repentant hearts are renewing their
state of grace, a condition which is made possible for each in¬
dividual through Baptism.
Bridegroom and wedding sponsor, or natural father and
spiritual father, address one another reciprocally as xoufj.7rape;
the godchild addresses his spiritual father as vouve. The very use
of these terms of address carries with them an implied pattern
of conduct, of duties, and privileges. The quality of the relation¬
ship between the natural parent and the spiritual parent is
recognized in the prohibition on marriage between members
of the two elementary families of marriage of the co-parents.
Sexual relations between these persons are incestuous. The joint
responsibility of the co-parents for the spiritual condition of the
child, not only in their relations to the child but more particu¬
larly in their behaviour to one another, is the strength of the
relationship. For if the natural or spiritual father of the child
employs any sharp or dishonourable practice against the other,
‘he destroys the oil’ with which the child was anointed and, con¬
sequently, his right relation to God. Therefore such actions are
wanton and sinful. This heavy responsibility of the natural and
spiritual co-parents is consistent with the more significant ritual
role that is played by the sponsor-godparent at the Baptism in
comparison with his duties at the marriage ceremony. In the lat¬
ter rite he sponsors a responsible adult, in the former he stands
in the place of a small child who cannot answer for himself.
The natural father and the spiritual father must have con¬
fidence in one another; they must never quarrel, or gossip about
one another’s affairs. It is argued that kinsmen by blood are
not chosen, consequently it is inevitable that a man will quarrel
with some of them. But the duties ofspiritual kinship are entered
into freely and for this reason spiritual kinsmen ought never to
allow any difference of interest to threaten their relationship.
Behind this belief are two considerations. The relationship is
concerned with critical religious sacraments, therefore the ap¬
propriate behaviour pattern ought to follow the ideal of Chris¬
tian fellowship. On the other hand, it is a relation with a person


222 PATRONAGE
generally not connected by kinship or marriage. It is therefore,
despite the ritual sanction it contains, an inherently fragile
bond which can only be sustained through the meticulous dis¬
ciplining of attitudes and feelings on both sides. Two people
formerly unrelated are drawn into a relationship of exacting
ethical standards in which their mutual esteem and respect are
profoundly committed.
Just as the gift of God’s grace which is implied in the rite of
Baptism is a free gift, a gift without motive, and one which
expects no reciprocity, so it is held that a godfather ought not
to refuse any reasonable request of his godchild. In practice a
godchild has little to do with his godfather, to whom, however,
he must show a formal respect more punctilious than the respect
he observes to his natural parents. While the ritual relation
between the godfather and his godchild is more important than
that between bridegroom and sponsor, the social relationship
between the natural parent and the spiritual parent, persons of
the same generation with common or complementary interests,
is more important than that between the spiritual father and his
godchild. Nevertheless, when a man seeks a favour from the
godfather of his child, he asks for this help implicitly, or ex¬
plicitly, in the name of the child; for it is understood that he
has the right to make this request because of the ritual relation
which exists between his child and its spiritual father. It follows
that, in an important sense, the social relationship between the
natural and the spiritual parent is dependent on the ritual link
between godfather and godchild.
The wedding sponsor, in theory, has the right to baptize all
the children of the marriage. The Sarakatsanos, however, sel¬
dom wastes these opportunities by allowing a single godfather
to baptize all his sons. When the second son is born he tactfully
asks the godfather of his first son if he would mind surrendering
his right on this occasion because X has asked him if he might
have that honour. He may add that as X is an important man
he fears to give him offence. This, of course, is not true but the
lie serves its purpose. In this way a man may establish almost as
many links of spiritual kinship as he has children. If the first
child is a girl, the sponsor baptizes her but normally he must
also become the godfather of the first son when he is born.
However, if two or three girls are born in succession, he may be


SPIRITUAL KINSHIP 223
asked to waive his right before the birth of the next child in case
he is bringing bad luck by having an ‘unlucky hand’ (xaxop[£txo
XepOA man may sometimes ask a father if he can baptize his
child, and it is agreed that ideally this is the correct procedure.
However, since the prospective godfather is more often a person
of higher social status or prestige, it is generally the father of the
child who takes the initiative in establishing the relationship. It
is not easy for a person to refuse to ‘baptize’ a child, but a man
who is forced somewhat unwillingly into the relationship does
not generally become a useful or co-operative spiritual kinsman.
Yet the advantages of the relationship do not all lie on the one
side. A man who has ‘baptized’ many children has many clients
who are in some measure morally bound to support him whether
with votes, commercial custom, or in some other way. A man
with many dependants wins prestige amongst his equals. And to
stand as godfather is in itself a good thing, an action pleasing
to God.
Considerably more than half the spiritual kinship relations of
the Sarakatsani are with persons outside the community. The
occupations of these persons are various. They include cheese
merchants, animal dealers, village Presidents, members ofvillage
councils, village shopkeepers, other prominent villagers with
influence, transport lorry owners, veterinary experts, lawyers,
Members of Parliament, grammar school teachers, tailors, and
others. They have one quality in common that they all are able
in different ways to help or hinder the families who wish to
establish a link of spiritual kinship with them.
Spiritual kinship is not the only means of introducing an
element of moral commitment into a relationship with a person
outside the community, but it is the most effective. The ritual
sanction ‘locks’ the relationship. An accusation of ingratitude
may easily break well established relations of friendship of the
kind that are based on the exchange of complementary favours,
but it cannot destroy a connexion of spiritual kinship, nor is it a
justification for retaliation against the other partner whatever
the provocation. Although there are godparents who do not
alter their course of conduct after entering the relationship, this
is rare. Public opinion and a man’s religious and social con¬
science put some restraint on him. Naturally, merchants and


224 PATRONAGE
others are well aware ofthe motives behind the naive manoeuvres
of the Sarakatsani. But, as we have already said, they also gain
various advantages. They do not, except in the unusual case of
a very rich or powerful individual, become lavish patrons. Few
of them give away anything for nothing. But they become help¬
ful rather than hostile, they will exert their influence for their
spiritual kinsmen and in doing so they themselves win prestige.
A shared system of values regulates their mutual behaviour in
which friendship and trust replace hostility and suspicion.
3. VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE
In the villages authority rests in the hands of a council of five
members. From its own number it elects a President and Vice
President while the choice of the council itself is the result
of local elections which are held every four years. In these,
all adult villagers of both sexes, and those shepherd families
who possess citizenship rights in the village, are entitled
to vote.
For electoral purposes any person may form a party providing
he can present to the electorate a card with the names of seven
candidates. In practice village elections seldom produce more
than two parties, those who support the President in power be¬
cause they are his friends, and those who want a change because
they are not his friends. These parties are essentially personal
followings, not corporate associations, and there is not neces¬
sarily any direct alignment with the parties of national politics.
The citizens vote by handing in the party card of their choice
with four crosses against those of the seven candidates who are
preferred. The party which polls the greater number of cards
wins the election. The four candidates of the successful party who
record the largest aggregates of personal votes become members
of the council. The person amongst the candidates of the de¬
feated party or parties who claims the largest number of per¬
sonal votes is also elected to the council as the representative of
the defeated minority’s interests. The five members of the new
council then proceed to elect two of their number as President
and Vice-President. These men hold office for two years, at the
end of which period their authority may either be confirmed for
the remaining two years of the council’s term of office, or they
may be replaced by the election of new officers.


VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE 225
The powers of this council are wide. By a simple majority
vote it may institute any local by-law it pleases, providing this
does not conflict with the letter or spirit of national legislation.
Within statutory limits, it determines the local grazing charges
to be levied on the flocks of pastoralists. And it draws up its
own budget of future communal expenditure. These privileges
are balanced by the discretionary power of veto over budgetary
and taxation decisions which is possessed by the Nomarch, who
is the provincial administrator appointed by the central
Government.
The day-to-day administration of village affairs is the task of
the President, who receives an allowance in compensation for
the time he spends on community affairs. He is assisted in this
work by a permanent salaried village secretary who keeps the
registers up to date, deals with correspondence, and draws up a
variety of returns which are required by different Government
Ministries. Indeed, both these village officials act, not infre¬
quently, for the central Government in matters of routine
administration, instruction, and in the collection of information.
Although in the decisions of the council the President’s vote, of
itself, carries no greater weight than that of any other member,
his control over the administration of parochial affairs and his
intimate relations with the Government bureaucracy, whether
he is acting as a negotiator representing the interests of
the villagers, or as an agent of the bureaucracy, give him
in fact substantially greater power than other members of
his council.
For these reasons it is generally with the President that the
Sarakatsani must negotiate their affairs. In a number of impor¬
tant matters he has the power to affect their interests collec¬
tively or individually. In the first place, the council decides the
scale of grazing charges. The village is permitted by law to
charge, for summer grazing, up to two shillings a head for the
first 150 animals and up to four shillings for the remainder of
the flock. It may, however, charge less.3 And it is noticeable
that in those villages where the shepherd families are in a politic¬
ally strategic position grazing charges tend to be lower than in
other villages where this is not the case. Threepence or sixpence
a head difference in a grazing charge does not represent a very
3 The minimum charge is 4id. a head.


226 PATRONAGE
large sum of money, but to men who are already deeply in debt to merchants or shopkeepers, it has significance. For them, debt implies a form of dependence which is a measure of weakness. The Sarakatsani say that if a village President and council enforce all local laws without allowing some flexibility, it becomes impossible for a shepherd family to live. If, on the other hand, the President is willing to grant them various favours (pouacpexia, euxoXcec,), which take into consideration the effect of the law on personal circumstances, their position may be, at least, not entirely hopeless. In practice, all Presidents with Sarakatsani on their citizenship rolls relax certain regulations for the shepherd families which support them. The political skill of a President, even an implacable opponent of the shepherds, is that he grants just a sufficient number of favours to a few Sarakatsan families to detach them from the ranks of the opposition at the time of the elections. It is the President who decides each spring which area of the village grazing land shall be allotted to each family or co¬ operating ‘company’ of shepherds. At Skamneli, for instance, there are three main areas, Goura, Tsoumako, and Gyphtokambos. Goura has the best grass, Gyphtokambos the worst. It is the customary arrangement that each family goes to a dif¬ ferent area each year. Yet within each general area different sections are of different quality so that friends may still be re¬ warded and enemies punished in a way that touches them very closely through the milk yield and the condition of their animals. The President is often able to influence the actions of the village agricultural guard and forester. Both these officials, although they belong to a Government service, are dependent in various ways on the goodwill of the President, and if he is displeased with their work it is relatively easy to have them exchanged. By regulation, if an agricultural guard discovers a trespass on village land, or the forester finds animals grazing in forbidden areas, they must issue a summons against the shep¬ herd in charge of the offending animals. But if the President is able to have a word with the guard or forester before he writes the details of the case in his report book, and if no third person is present, he may be able to persuade him to ignore the matter.


VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE 227
The President has more direct control over the man who is
employed by the village to regulate the flow of water to the
village vegetable gardens. He is able to arrange matters so that
a fair share of water is given to, or withheld from, a Sarakatsan family.
For a number of purposes the Sarakatsani require the sig¬
nature of the President on forms, certificates, or passes. He may
be able to cause considerable trouble to a shepherd through
delay, or by finding technical irregularities in his documents.
These powers of the President are particularly feared. Although
some of the leaders of co-operating ‘companies’ of families are
extremely able and alert men, the ordinary Sarakatsan head of
family is completely bewildered by documents, printed forms,
and regulations, most of which are written in an official langu¬
age which he only half comprehends. A Sarakatsanos with a
large family and only 60 sheep lost six of his animals through
disease in the summer of 1955. He came to the village office to
ask the President to sign a form for a loan from the Agricultural
Bank to replace the dead animals. At the time he was in con¬
siderable difficulties, his family was short of flour, and on
account of his poverty, small flock, and deep indebtedness, his
cheese merchant would make no further advances of credit.
There was no doubt about the authenticity of his claim. The
agricultural guard had made a report that the animals belonged
to this man and that they had the unmistakable symptoms of
liver fluke. After ignoring the man’s presence in the office for
about three-quarters of an hour, the President suddenly pointed
to one of the many conditional clauses in the regulations prin¬
ted in small type. ‘You understand that yours is a difficult case.
It is only five days since you arrived here from the plains and
this clause says that confirmation of the details of the case must
be signed by the President of the village where the disease was
contracted. Obviously they became sick in the plains or on the
road; anyway, not here. Perhaps you must return to Philippiada
to have this signed. However, I shall write to the Ministry of
Agriculture in Jannina and we shall see.’ The man haltingly
explained his difficulties, referring to the plight of his family.
The President spread his hands and smiled benignly, ‘You
know that I always try to help you tent-dwellers (crx^vixec;) but
in this case,’ putting his thumb on the offending clause, ‘what


228 PATRONAGE
can I do?’ After the man had left the office the President ex¬
plained that he would sign the form in a few days. He was a
man who loved honour, he added, but it was necessary that
the men who had voted against him in the recent election should
learn that their interests lay in supporting him and not that
communist cuckold (a reference to the leader of the opposition
party).
The Agricultural Bank has been mentioned. Each year, the
shepherd applies to the bank for an annual loan, the applica¬
tion form for which must carry the President’s signature as a
guarantee that the information given by the shepherd is
accurate. Long-term loans are also available from this bank to
assist families which have lost their stock through disease. In
these cases, the shepherd must produce evidence that the animals
in fact died of a particular disease, and were not sold, or given
away as dowry. In addition, the application must be approved
by the local officer of the Ministry of Agriculture; and this
support will be hard to win if the village President has charac¬
terized the shepherd as spendthrift or inefficient.
Twice a year when the Sarakatsani leave the mountains, or
the plains, the local village President must sign a clearance
certificate which confirms that all their grazing charges have
been paid. This is required by the police before they will issue
the pass without which a family cannot move its flocks to another
district. These moneys are not paid directly to the village coun¬
cil but into a treasury in Jannina, whose official collector arrives
in the village some three weeks before the flocks are normally
moved to their winter pastures in the plains. If, as frequently
happens, a Sarakatsanos is unable to pay his dues, the collector
may send a demand notice to the police, and if this is not met
when it is presented, the shepherd is arrested. But in many
cases the President intervenes and persuades the treasury to
allow the defaulter six months’ grace until he returns in the
spring.
A man requires the President’s signature on his identity card.
He requires it when he applies for an allotment of free timber
from village forest land for the repair of his house, and on other
documents which it would be tedious to enumerate. In all these
situations the President may be the helper who makes all things
easy, or a deliberate and successful obstructionist.


VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE 229
There are other ways, less legal, in which the President may
sometimes help Sarakatsan friends. When the sheep are mus¬
tered for counting each spring on their arrival at the village, it is
relatively easy for the President to arrange that the total of
animals is underestimated so that perhaps 350 instead of 400 is
entered in the records for taxation purposes. Similarly, when
milk, meat or wool are sold to a merchant a tax of 2 per cent is
levied on the value of the sale. For a friend the President may
mark down the price actually paid over for animals or the pro¬
ducts they yield. With the connivance of the President and the
schoolteacher, a family which is short of labour may sometimes
take a child from school before the full term of its compulsory
education is completed. It is also possible for the President to
do some things to a Sarakatsanos which are strictly against law
or custom, because the man may be frightened that if he takes
the case to the courts, or the Nomarch, he may suffer worse in¬
justices in the long run. After Theodoros voted against the
President in the elections, his sheep were sent for the second year
in succession to the worst area ofvillage grazing land. Theodoros
could have appealed to the Nomarch but decided it was more
politic to settle his differences with the President by more in¬
direct methods.
The strength of the President’s position is apparent. In their
efforts to come to terms with his authority and influence, the
Sarakatsani attempt to draw him into some form of personal
relationship that will introduce a moral element of mutual con¬
sideration. Three methods are in general practice: spiritual
kinship, friendship, and gifts. The first of these has been dis¬
cussed. The second possibility is that the Sarakatsanos may be
able to align himself as the ‘friend’ (cpiXcx;) and political suppor¬
ter of the President, if he will accept him.
Here a brief digression is necessary to consider the nature of
friendship in Zagori villages.4 Between villagers ties of friend¬
ship relate persons who are, in principle, equals. All villagers,
without discrimination, possess the same legal rights in the
local polity. If a man is also honourable in his conduct, a good
neighbour, and legitimately born of Zagori parents, he is en¬
titled in the social life of the village to be treated with a degree
4 Friendship in Epirote villages appears to be very similar to the parallel institution in Andalusia. Cf. Pitt-Rivers, op. cit., chapter 7.


230 PATRONAGE
of consideration that represents a recognition of his social per¬
sonality. Persons who are equal in these respects must show
some concern for each other’s social sensibilities by avoiding
public rudeness and by a careful and courteous exchange of
greetings when they meet.
Friendship begins where one man accepts a favour (yap^)
from another. The person who gives the favour will assert that
he expects no return; it would be insulting to suggest that his
act of friendship had a motivation. It is, however, the very
altruism of the act, whether this is simulated or not, which
demands a counter favour. Default destroys the friendship and
provokes accusations of ingratitude. Although liking and sym¬
pathy are alleged to be the premises on which friendship be¬
tween village equals is based, it would be more true to say that
villagers who are able to do each other reciprocal favours some¬
times discover from this experience confidence in one another.
From these beginnings there may grow a relationship of inti¬
macy and warmth. But in essence friendship of this kind remains
a contractual relation, a form of co-operation in which services
of various kinds are exchanged and accounted.
The network of friendships of the President or of other in¬
fluential villagers becomes in reality a system of patronage.
Accountancy is then more difficult because the patron is able to
do more material favours for his client than the latter is able to
return. But although the character of the relationship is now, in
effect, asymmetrical, patron and client, because they are inter¬
acting in the context of village community relations where all
true villagers are in principle equals, they continue to treat one
another as if they were equals in the situation of their friend¬
ship as well. Both patron and client claim publicly that the
other ‘is my friend’. The patron says that he helps his client
simply because it pleases him to help those of his friends who
are in difficulties. The client explains that he is the friend of the
patron, not simply because he receives benefits from him, but
because he is a good man. In short, their friendship exists with¬
in the field ofvillage values where behaviour is evaluated against
the ideals of independence and love of honour.
In the Sarakatsan community the situation is different. There
is no co-operation between unrelated families and no estab¬
lished political authority in the shepherd community which


VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE 231
might lead to relations of political friendship. A relationship
which has many of the aspects of patronage exists between the
dominant family and the other associated families in a co¬
operating ‘company’, but these connexions are based on the
values of kinship, not friendship. When a Sarakatsanos says ‘I
have him as a friend’, he generally means that he has estab¬
lished a relation of mutual advantage with a person outside the
community who in most cases is in the superordinate position
of patron. The use of the word ‘friend’ by the Sarakatsanos is
not here encumbered with any theory ofequality or disinterested
motives. The fact that in terms of power he is the weaker part¬
ner in the majority of his relations of friendship is recognized
by the Sarakatsanos but does not immediately concern his
pride since these people stand outside his community. On the
contrary, the more effective relationships of this kind that a man
possesses, the greater his prestige in the community since it
proves him to be an able protector of his family and his flocks.
It is by no means certain that a President will accept any
Sarakatsanos as his political client. What the President has to
offer will be clear enough from the earlier description of the
ways in which he can help or hinder. The chief service the
shepherd is able to pledge in return is his vote and those of his
family and associated kinsmen. But to accept a man as a client
commits the patron to protection instead of exploitation, and
to that extent it is a restriction on the free exercise of his power.
A President generally prefers to assume these obligations only
to Sarakatsani with some influence. Naturally, more humble
families have vicarious access to his patronage through their
influential kinsmen, but the intermediate link which separates
them from the President’s beneficence makes it less likely
that their affairs will be settled with the same despatch and
satisfaction.
The extent to which a President needs to enter these commit¬
ments depends, of course, on the balance of the political group¬
ings in his village. In one village the President commanded
about three quarters of the village vote, but by his generally
uncompromising hostility he had driven the Sarakatsani into the
arms of the small opposition party. A month before the election
it appeared that he had no Sarakatsan supporters and that his
cause was lost. Conveniently the election was held in November,


232 PATRONAGE
after the Sarakatsani had departed to the plains eighty miles
away. The opposition party chartered a lorry to transport, as
they had calculated it, an adequate number of Sarakatsan
voters to assure their victory. But, in the event, the President
skilfully contrived a narrow majority by making secret agree¬
ments with two shepherd families. The five members of these
families who returned from the plains, ironically enough in the
lorry chartered by the opposition, were sufficient to give the
President victory and a new term of office.
After the election the two families received a number of
favours. In the spring the sheep ofone family were short-counted
by sixty and the flock of the other, which by right of the custom¬
ary rotation of grazing areas ought to have gone to an area of
indifferent grazing, spent a more profitable summer on the
village’s best grassland. In the face of the unusual solidarity of
the local Sarakatsan group at the time of the election, the action
of the two dissident families was described as treacherous. They
were branded as ‘The President’s men’, with an overtone of
meaning which implied that they were puppets dancing at the
command of the master, capable even of betraying their own
people. Yet as passions cooled and the months passed, evalua¬
tions changed perceptibly. At first the members of these families
were unequivocally ‘traitors’, but later they were considered
merely ‘cunning’ (by no means an entirely pejorativejudgement),
and eventually one sometimes heard grudging admissions of their
‘cleverness’. For it is recognized that each family is free to seek
its own protection and the political friends who can provide it.
Indeed, Sarakatsani believe that in the nature of the situation
favours and concessions are to be won only by some, not all
families. It is, therefore, the duty of each head of family to
scheme and intrigue for his own security. Only in the case of a
breach of faith between kinsmen is an accusation of treachery
seriously considered.
But the friendship which a Sarakatsanos achieves with a
village President, or indeed with any other influential person,
involves more than the exchange of specific material favours; it
establishes, also, an asymmetrical relation of sociability which
enhances the prestige of both men. A Sarakatsanos who has
friendship with the President boldly sits down with him at the
same table when he enters the coffee-shop. The President offers


VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE 233
him a drink, he stands him a drink in return. Meeting him in the
village square, the shepherd stops to talk for a few minutes about
this and that. Were they not patron and client, a curt ‘Good
day’ from each side would be the extent of their social inter¬
course. However, it is not a relationship of equals. The shepherd
belongs not only to a different community, but to a qualita¬
tively inferior one. While the President will say of a villager
who is similarly his client that this man is his friend, he will not
say this of a shepherd. If an explanation in his presence is
necessary, he may say, ‘George is a good lad, I help him’, but
behind his back he will simply say, ‘He is my man’. Yet, al¬
though they are his social inferiors, the President gains prestige
by being seen publicly with his shepherd clients. If he drinks
with other villagers who are his supporters, this is no cause for
comment. He merely keeps company with those who are his
social equals and natural companions. When he drinks with
four or five shepherds it draws attention to his possession of
power, to his ability to hold men who do not waste their time
drinking with ordinary villagers whom as a class of persons
they detest and despise. The Sarakatsanos accepts his position
of inferiority in the relationship because he must. He does not,
as most villagers would, address the President by his Christian
name; but he is not subservient in his manner. He speaks to
him courteously as ‘President’. When another person of impor¬
tance comes to speak to the President, and it is clear that he is
dismissed, he moves to another table, or with a ‘Good health,
President’, to which the latter replies, he leaves the shop. These
are the conventional terms on which these unequal friendships
are founded. What is important to the Sarakatsanos in these
situations is that other shepherds who do not possess this valued
link should see and envy him.
In asymmetrical friendship relations, since it is assumed that
the patron has more favours to offer than the client can return,
or that reciprocal favours are so dissimilar in quality that
accountancy is difficult, there is often greater stability than in
friendships between equals, which are very frequently bedevilled
by accusations of ingratitude. Yet, even here, there are many
complaints, the patron asserting that the client should be more
vocal in his gratitude, the client complaining that the patron
does very little in relation to the client’s worth and needs, and


234 PATRONAGE
the services he has rendered. In short, the patron wants more
honour, the client more benefits. The third widely practised method of placating or in¬
fluencing the President is to present him with a gift of cheese,
butter, or meat. Some families do this each spring as a matter of
general policy without having in mind any particular favour.
They hope that the gift may moderate his general attitude to¬
wards them in the coming months. More often, families wait
until they face some specific difficulty. A gift of cheese or some
other produce is delivered to the President’s home and then,
perhaps two days later, the gift-giver walks into the village
office and makes his request. The President may be helpful or
he may not. The assumptions of the giver and the recipient of
the gift are not necessarily the same. The giver hopes that the
gift will arouse some sense of obligation in the receiver. But the
latter, if he chooses to feel that the gift was forced on him against
his will, may decide that he is not obliged to feel grateful. If
he intends not to grant the favour, the refusal is never direct.
The many difficulties which stand in the way are elaborated
at very great length. He explains that he will see what can
be done, he will write to a friend in Jannina, he wants to
help. In fact he will do nothing; and the original gift is not
returned.
A gift is frequently offered to the President by a Sarakatsanos
when he meets with legal troubles. Stratos and a number of his
kinsmen were using 20 mules to transport wooden planks from
a saw-mill to the road below the village where the wood was
loaded on to lorries. The area for the grazing of Sarakatsan
mules and horses is an hour’s climb above the village and this
was very inconvenient for Stratos and the other muleteers. They
chanced their luck and grazed their animals at night in the
little-frequented village orchards close to their loading-point.
On the thirty-ninth night of their operations they were dis¬
covered by the agricultural guard who from his examination of
the length of the grass and some damage to young apple trees
was confident of a very successful case. Stratos was not able to
claim that the President was his friend, but since he was a law
abiding careful man his relations with the President had been
generally good. He begged for his assistance, explaining the
extreme difficulty the group would have suffered if each night


VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE 235
the mules had had to be released so far from the scene of opera¬
tions. He managed also to mention that he would like to help
the President in the current rebuilding of his house. It so hap¬
pened that he had two loads of timber which he did not require.
The next day, the President saw the agricultural guard and
warned him that, in his opinion, it would only be reasonable to
take into consideration the one night when he had actually seen
the mules. For the rest, who could say? There had been high
winds recently which often damaged trees, and he added that
he had noticed one of the agricultural guard’s own goats stray¬
ing one evening in the direction of the orchards. Accordingly,
the President received his wood, Stratos and his kinsmen escaped
with a small fine, and the agricultural guard’s dream of a
triumphant case came to nothing.
Two points must be stressed about this method of influencing
the President. Gifts must be presented with finesse. A man of
honour is not to be crudely bought by social inferiors if he does
not wish to lose prestige in the community. The shepherd must
give the lamb, butter, or cheese to the President as if it were
merely an expression of friendly respect, and in no way tied to
the favour he is about to request. Secondly, whether in relation
to these gifts of produce, or to other perquisites of his office, the
limited dishonesty and corruptibility of a President is not dis¬
honourable. ‘He eats money’ (rpwet roxpaSet;), others say with
envy. But they concede that this is the right of his office. His
allowance is not large, he too must live, he also has a family to
support. If a favour, even where it is entirely legal, involves
trouble beyond the ordinary routine duties of his office, why
should he weary himself for a man to whom he is not related in
any way, unless that man by a gift, or in some other way,
demonstrates the esteem in which he holds him.
We have now discussed in the order of their effectiveness
three ways in which the Sarakatsani attempt to influence the
President of their summer village—spiritual kinship, friendship,
and gifts. In principle, spiritual kinship binds a President to
help the shepherd in all situations. Ideally it is a diffuse relation,
there is nothing reasonable that cannot be requested, and the
right to expect this assistance is sanctioned by the ritual link
between godfather and godchild. Friendship of the kind estab¬
lished between a village President and a Sarakatsanos, is a


236 PATRONAGE
patron-client relationship of some stability over time, and the
range of favours which may be demanded is almost as extensive
as that between spiritual kinsmen, but the atmosphere of cal¬
culation is more pronounced. Confidence which is ritually sanc¬
tioned in spiritual kinship is more easily destroyed in the rela¬
tions of patron and client. Gifts given by a shepherd to the
President generally have a specific object in view and each gift
is effective for only a short period of time if, indeed, it is effective
at all.
The President is not the only man with power or influence in
a village; the other members of the council, the schoolmaster,
the priest, other villagers of wealth or reputation may have
these qualities in varying degree. When the President is par¬
ticularly severe towards them, the shepherds attempt, by the
same methods we have just considered, to attach themselves to
other persons in the village who are known to have influence
on the council, or personally over the President himself.
When the sheep of Theodoros were despatched by the Presi¬
dent to the poorest area of grazing for the second year because
of his active opposition during the elections, Theodoros did not
appeal to the Nomarch against this injustice. He went instead
to Vlachopoulos. Vlachopoulos is the Vice-President of the
village, and the President’s closest friend. He also owns the
older of the two village coffee-shops which is the one more
generally patronized by the Sarakatsani both for social gather¬
ings and for the many small purchases which they make. After
the bitter feelings aroused by the autumn elections there was a
spontaneous boycott of the Vlachopoulos shop by the Sarakat¬
sani and at the time when Theodoros approached him two or
three weeks after the shepherds had returned to the summer
pasture, only a few Sarakatsan men were to be seen drinking in
the old shop. For a week Theodoros assiduously made small
purchases in the shop. Finding Vlachopoulos alone one day, he
took the next step by remarking that he was not a man to dwell
on old scores and that he thought his return to the shop proved
this point. It seemed, however, that the President was still
governed by his rage and spite. This was surely unjust, and he
asked Vlachopoulos if he would not intercede with the President
on his behalf. Vlachopoulos agreed to do this. It is a fair assump¬
tion that he was especially pleased to see Theodoros who leads


VILLAGE FRIENDSHIP AND PATRONAGE 237
a substantial co-operating ‘company’ and has many other kins¬
men in the local group of shepherds. It was very probable that
if Theodoros returned to his shop to drink, as well as to buy,
the boycott would be over. This proved to be the case. Vlacho
poulos persuaded the President to rearrange the grazing areas,
and after a week or two of further delay to impress upon
Theodoros the misguided nature of his opposition in the pre¬
vious autumn, the President eventually effected the necessary
changes.
A Zagori village and the local group of Sarakatsani that is
linked to it through rights of citizenship, form a network of
friendship relations, some of which are symmetrical and others
of the patron-client variety. This network enables a man in
many situations to obtain a measure of satisfaction from a
person with whom he is in direct opposition. He achieves this
by indirect pressure because he is a client, or friend, of the
friend of his enemy. Villagers and shepherds are careful to
maintain friendship links with opposed political factions and
personages whenever this is possible. The implication is that
there are often inherent limits on the way in which the President
or other influential villagers may use their power against most
individuals, since, very probably, in any particular act of
victimization they are attacking the friend, or client, of one of
their own friends. Only very poor villagers, or Sarakatsani with
small flocks who are not attached to the co-operating ‘company’
of more powerful kinsmen, may be treated unjustly without en¬
countering some responding pressure through the system of
friendships; for these persons, having little to offer in return,
may not have patrons. But in other cases to ignore the pressures
received through the system of friendships may endanger im¬
portant relationships on which a man’s influence and prestige
largely depend. It is not suggested, however, that a man with
strategically aligned friendships is secure from all injustice. On
the contrary, Theodoros suffered a considerable financial loss
until his friendship with Vlachopoulos rescued him from further
punishment.
In the Zagori villages, as in the Sarakatsan community, a
dominant feature of the social system is the isolation of the
family and its struggle against other families, whether in terms
of the possibility of bare subsistence or of social prestige. The


238 PATRONAGE
more important social obligations are particular to the indivi¬
dual’s family, and these stand in direct conflict with the weaker
and more general responsibilities of good neighbourliness. The
notion of service to the community (euepyecna) exists, and is
honoured. But the service takes a form which honours the in¬
dividual, his family and the community in equal degree as, for
instance, in the foundation of a church or school. Such services
are never anonymous. The idea of service to fellow citizens of
the same community exists also, but it remains an ideal value
which is not realized in a society where familial obligations
have an absolute priority. The President and councillors of the
village are firstly heads of households and only secondly public
servants. A President does not feel under the same moral obliga¬
tion, even within the sphere of his formal duties, to help equally
a close kinsman, a spiritual kinsman, a friend, and a man to
whom he is linked only by common citizenship. It is suggested
that in this absence, for the most part, of universally applicable
values the system of village friendship and patronage in fact
achieves a distribution of various facilities which, although it is
never equitable, guards most families, even those of the hard
pressed Sarakatsani of Zagori, against complete exclusion. The
system of friendship and patronage achieves this, not by up¬
holding any general rights of citizenship, but, in a sense para¬
doxically, by an appeal to the individual and family interests of
a person in authority. For without friends a man loses all power,
influence, and social prestige.
4. LAWYERS AND GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
The Sarakatsani not only need to come to terms with the village
authorities, they must also adapt themselves to the laws and
regulations of the State, and attempt in their own interests to
influence the administration of Government regulations so far
as these affect their own affairs. This involves relations with
civil servants at various levels in the hierarchy.
Some State regulations are administered through the struc¬
ture of village authority which has been examined. In other
instances the impact of State administration is direct. In the
Zagori, as in other local districts, an agricultural officer of the
Ministry of Agriculture has an office in the capital village of
the district. Such matters as loans from the Agricultural Bank,


LAWYERS AND GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 239
permission to burn off grass, appeals against the various restric¬
tions on grazing in forest areas, advice about animal disease, and
free distribution of sprays to combat insect pests fall within this
official’s competence. But in these and other questions a shep¬
herd is often referred to the provincial office at Jannina, or in
winter at Igoumenitsa, Arta, and Preveza. The Greek police, a
paramilitary organization, have a central station under the
command of a captain in the capital village of each local dis¬
trict, but sections of police are also stationed in outlying areas
of the district, each section serving three or four villages. It
frequently happens that Sarakatsani are late in the payment of
their grazing dues. Although these are assessed by the village,
they are paid to the public treasury in the provincial centre.
When the police are informed by the treasury that a payment
has not been made, they must attempt to serve a demand notice.
If payment is again withheld, the debtor is taken under escort to
the public treasury and, if he is still unable to pay, from there to
prison. But the circumstance that these demands for payment
must be served on one individual in person, and not merely to his
home or a member of his family, results in a perpetual panto¬
mime of hide-and-seek between police and heads of shepherd
families. This causes irritation and bad feeling on both sides. It is
a common experience to find a man secreted under a blanket
in the darker corner of a kinsman’s hut when it is known that
police are in the village.
Sarakatsani are sometimes involved in difficulties with the
military authorities over conscription. A family with only one
son, a physically handicapped father, and without sufficient re¬
sources to hire a shepherd, may submit a case for the postpone¬
ment or abbreviation of the son’s term of military service before
a committee of appeal. This committee, however, is not thought
to be very liberal in its decisions.
The Sarakatsani face the jurisdiction of the State in their
frequent adventures in courts of law.5 The laws that concern
the Sarakatsani in their daily life do not generally favour them.
The interests of shepherds tend to be opposed to those of pea¬
sants or townsmen. For instance, there are many civil suits
between owners of private properties and Sarakatsani who claim
6 I am not considering here the many cases of animal trespass which are heard in local agricultural courts.


240 PATRONAGE
a disputed right of protected lease for their grazing. And, some¬
times, shepherds are plaintiffs in cases challenging the decisions
of a village administration. The regulations of village life differ
from the conventions of semi-nomads. And their adherence to
the traditional code of honour necessarily conflicts with the
laws of a modern State. They distrust legal procedures because
their pleas are frequently unsuccessful and in many instances
they regress into acts of violence which two generations ago
would have been the general response to the interference of
outside authority. Often a certain naiveti or simple ignorance
about what is legal, and what is not, leads them into trouble.
It is rare for a head of family not to be involved in some capa¬
city in at least one suit each year. In 1955 George Carvounis,
who was not exceptional in this respect, acted as a principal in
two cases, one civil, one criminal. In the first he was sued for
violent assault and defamation of character by a village woman,
whom he had rough handled when she attempted to pull dowm
a wall which she alleged had been set up by Carvounis on her
land. In the second case he was charged with forgery, having
found it innocently convenient to sign a document with the
name of another member of his co-operating ‘company’.
But the critical point of contact between the Sarakatsanos
and the bureaucrat is in the situation where his winter grazing
is in danger. Then, the leader of a stani must attempt to in¬
fluence the highest State officials in the Epirus if he is to face,
with confidence, the threat of exclusion from his winter
pastures.
Gifts and money bribes are freely offered in making ap¬
proaches to a minor State servant. Gifts of produce are generally
made to the agricultural officer; for, even if he is not a native of
the district, he becomes a member of the local village com¬
munity where he occupies a respectable position in the system
of village friendship; moreover, since he has some pretensions
to education and culture it might be insulting to offer money.
Gifts of produce are also preferred in dealing with a local police
sergeant. Not all policemen are venal and it is a serious offence
to offer bribes of money to a member of this force. Money
bribes are often effective in preventing agricultural and forest
guards from reporting the trespasses of animals, if the offence
has not been observed by a third party. These guards belong,


LAWYERS AND GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 241
generally, to poor families of low prestige, and in the Zagori
they are often villagers of gipsy origin. Such persons are despised
by the Sarakatsani, and they themselves are generally prepared
to accept money bribes without the least embarrassment.
To conduct business with minor public servants in the ad¬
ministrative offices at Jannina, Sarakatsani use small bribes.
Often at the doorways of these buildings there is a desk staffed
by two or three ushers. These men examine with a brusque
lack of sympathy the forms which the shepherd has in his hand,
or they demand to know his business, if only to ignore his ex¬
planation. He may wish to see a particular official to whom he
has been recommended. He believes that a gratuity of five to
ten shillings is essential if he is to find the right man. If he wishes
to submit an application form in the general office of the same
building, he hands it over the counter to the clerk with the
equivalent of a ten shilling note on the underside. The shepherd
hopes that this will at least ensure that the form is filed; and
perhaps nearer the top than the bottom of the pile. Here, the
relationship between the shepherd and the junior official is tem¬
porary and anonymous. The reputation of the man of higher
status, in the eyes of the man in the lower position, is not at
stake. The bribe is small, not necessarily effective, and it is not
discussed. It is passed secretly. And this saves each clerk from
losing the esteem of his colleagues who are themselves engaged
in the same practice.
But in affairs of great importance, which must reach the desk
of senior officials, the shepherd leader generally feels unable to
conduct his own affairs. It is difficult, in any case, for a humble
shepherd to penetrate to the offices of senior officials. If he does
reach this point, his rough clothes and awkward manners,
alternating between obsequiousness and effrontery, make pro¬
gress difficult. Sarakatsani say, with good reason, that in offices
nobody pays the least attention to a man without a collar and
tie. And they have little confidence in their own forensic abilities
in this kind of situation. As one Sarakatsanos said of himself and
his people, ‘Shepherds hesitate. If I can make five points in a
conversation, he (the official) can return twenty.’
Moreover, even the director of an office does not conduct
business privately. His secretary and aides have desks in the
same room. By the public transaction of affairs, and the display


242 PATRONAGE
of his power, he emphasizes his status before the eyes of his
subordinates and stresses their dependence on himself. To listen
patiently to the incoherent ramblings of a Sarakatsanos, the
name of whose very profession, shepherd (pXayo?), is a synonym
for stupidity, much less to take trouble and thought over assist¬
ing him, would be to lose prestige and betray the status of his
position, the validation of which lies in pride, not humility.
Generally such officials are curt, rude, and unhelpful, or to in¬
dulge their attendants, use the shepherd for a show of witty
mockery. Direct bribery is out of the question in the absence of
secrecy, and it is also dangerous, since the corruptibility of
officials grows less certain as the hierarchy is ascended.
Where he cannot reach or influence a high State official, the
shepherd turns to his patron or, if he is a man without influence,
to the patron of a more powerful kinsman. The patron may be
a man of any profession with political influence in Jannina, a
doctor, engineer, or merchant; but most frequently he is a
lawyer. The lawyer in Greek rural society is not only the man
who gives legal advice and attends a client in court, but he
also acts as an intermediary between the peasant or shepherd
and the State authorities. He acts in the general role of a profes¬
sional ‘fixer’.
Some of the difficulties which arise between the State and the
Sarakatsan community have their origin in the necessarily
general character of government legislation. Perhaps it is de¬
cided to protect the nation’s forests. A law is passed which
forbids the grazing of goats in forested areas. Incorporated with¬
in the general law are a number of conditional clauses relating
to the definition of various kinds of forest, the priority for their
protection, and the question of hardship to pastoralists which
may lead to a relaxation of the restrictions in certain circum¬
stances and in certain categories of forest. But the law-making
assembly cannot legislate for all possible local contingencies.
The administration and interpretation of the law lie in the
hands of the public servants.
However, within the public service there exists a certain
inertia and reluctance to delegate power. A senior official de¬
fines the unequivocal superiority of his status in the hierarchy
by forcing his junior officers to refer to himself every case which
involves the initiative ofjudgement and decision. In this manner


LAWYERS AND GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 243
he attaches junior officials to his own will since they cannot
move without his approval, and he enhances his prestige be¬
cause he is seen to be indispensable. At the same time, he
secures his power and nourishes his self-regard. But the con¬
vergence of so many cases awaiting decision upon a limited
number of senior officials in Jannina and Athens who cannot
personally know the detailed circumstances of a case except
through the exiguous details set out on printed forms, creates
interminable delays and inhibits the equitable administration
of government laws and regulations. In the Epirus, where many
villagers and shepherds live on the margin of bare subsistence,
these limitations of administration might prove disastrous for
many families, were they not able to put their affairs into the
hands of a lawyer or some other patron. For if, in the example
we have chosen, a man cannot graze his goats in the one area
where he has the right to do this, he must sell the animals which
provide him with his living. The lawyer is able to bring a case
to the direct notice of a senior official, to frame it to the best
advantage; and sometimes, if he has considerable influence, to
gain concessions for his client which are not strictly within the
relevant law’s terms of reference.
The significance of the lawyer’s position is his ability to face
in two directions. Because of the prestige and status of a success¬
ful lawyer in Greek society he may be able in a provincial town
to number amongst his friends, judges, army officers, doctors,
the Nomarch, and other senior officials of the Government
bureaucracy. With these men he sits and drinks at the tables of
the town’s more fashionable coffee-shops and in the lounge of
the best hotel. As a member of this professional elite he is able to
recommend the affairs of his clients to the attention of various
friends who may be able to help. They give this help because of
their friendship for the lawyer; they are relatively indifferent to
the worth of the client and the justice of his case. In return, a
lawyer is able during local and national elections to promise the
political support of his clients. He also assists his friends by legal
advice in their own affairs and in the affairs of their kinsmen
many of whom, often, are themselves villagers.
The Sarakatsani because of their many political difficulties
and disabilities are critical assessors of the personal abilities of
different lawyers. The profession is over-crowded and there is a


244 PATRONAGE
wide range of choice. It is essential for the Sarakatsanos that
his lawyer has influential affiliations with the leading political
parties. It is not fortuitous that the Jannina lawyer with the
largest Sarakatsan following in 1955 happened to be the secre¬
tary of the Epirus branch of the Government party. But the
secretary to the Liberal party also has many clients. Although he
supports an opposition party, Government servants do not
lightly refuse his requests for they are anxious to avoid questions
and ‘revelations’ in Parliament, and to secure some form of
reinsurance against the day when the Government changes.
In general, it is to the advantage of both the lawyer and the
Sarakatsan family head to make their association a personal
relationship with diffuse mutual obligations. The lawyer be¬
comes obliged to act as a general protector of the shepherd in
all his affairs, the shepherd as a good client must show esteem
and respect and give his patron the political support on which
his power depends. It is not unusual for lawyers to become the
godparents of their clients’ children. Clients, whether or not
they possess ties of spiritual kinship, cultivate the goodwill of
their lawyer by periodic gifts of cheese and butter, and some¬
times at Easter a lamb is presented. The nearer the relation
between a Sarakatsanos and his lawyer approaches that of a
patron and client friendship the more nominal the professional
charges of the lawyer for legal services become. But in the nature
of things it is easier for the leader of a substantial co-operating
‘company’ to establish an enduring friendship with his lawyer
and to persuade him to win important concessions. He has more
followers and more votes to offer. The lawyer does not lose pres¬
tige by attending to the affairs of simple men. This is his pro¬
fessional duty, and the more clients who throng his office and
call out greetings to him as he walks along the street, the more
political power he has, the more friends amongst the body of the
provincial Hite, and the more social prestige.
It would be tedious to present in detail examples of the many
successful interventions by lawyer patrons. An over-zealous
policeman in one village who made a speciality of arresting
Sarakatsani for alleged disturbances of the peace was removed
by the influence of a lawyer patron to a post in Mitylene.
Another instance is the abbreviation of the military service of
Christos Balatsos, an only son, whose family was handicapped


LAWYERS AND GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 245
by poverty and a father disabled by pleurisy. In this case the
lawyer was a friend of the chairman of the appeal committee.
In the many court cases in which Sarakatsani figure the
lawyers play a more strictly professional role. But there may
still be scope on occasion for informal action, especially in civil
suits which are heard before the bench without a jury. In a case
concerning a disputed right of protected lease which threatened
a Sarakatsanos with the loss of his winter pasture, the man in
desperation asked his lawyer to approach the judge with a gift
of £25. The lawyer took the money and the case was won.
Without exception, villagers and shepherds assumed that at
least half this money found its way into the judge’s pocket.
Villagers and shepherds have a simple faith that anybody, if he
is approached in the right way and with the right sum, may be
bought. In fact, there is no evidence that judges may be bribed.
It may happen rarely. It probably happens more often that a
lawyer friend is able to mention in conversation to a judge some
aspect of a case which comes before him. And it certainly
happens frequently that Sarakatsani put money into the hands
of their lawyers which they believe will be used to bribe a judge
or a senior government official, but which remains, in fact, in
the lawyer’s pocket.
Yet there is no doubt about the genuine assistance the lawyer
gives to the shepherd in his critical fight to retain his rights of
winter grazing. For instance, in the example already mentioned
in chapter four, a considerable ‘company’ of families that winter
their sheep in Thesprotia were able to counter the refusal of the
villagers to rent them grazing land by presenting their case,
through the influence of two powerful lawyer patrons, directly to the Governor-General of the Epirus. The lawyers pleaded
that humanly and politically it was impossible to allow eighty
men, women, and children, and two thousand sheep, to walk
the roads. As individuals moving in the same social elite, they
were able to present an argument immediately suggesting that
the Governor-General’s reputation for honour, and his political
interests, were in danger.
The Member of Parliament for a provincial district plays in
Athens a role very similar to that of the lawyer in the provincial
centre. More members of the Greek Parliament belong to the
legal profession than to any other. It is partly by possessing


246 PATRONAGE
many clients, and many friends with clients, that a man is
successful in national elections.
Since decisions of importance are rarely made by junior
officials it frequently happens that a man must take action in
Athens if he is to find a favourable solution to his problems.
The friend or client of a Member may ask him to use his in¬
fluence in the office of the Ministry which is handling his case.
When the Member visits his constituency his political friends
and clients of all social standings come to wait on him in his
office, or to drink with him in the coffee-shops. On these occa¬
sions he carries a notebook in which he writes down the details
of the favours he is asked to arrange.
We see that the Sarakatsanos in facing the hierarchy of
Government confronts persons of higher social status who share
with him no bond of kinship or community. As a rule only
nationality and common humanity link them together. In
Greek society this is not an adequate basis for the acceptance of
social obligations other than the common duty to defend the
nation against its external enemies. The indifference or hostility
of very junior officials may be bought off. It is a simple ad hoc
commercial transaction between persons almost entirely isolated
from one another in terms of social relations or morality. But
the indifference of senior officials cannot be directly countered
with bribes, nor is it easy because of the social distance which
separates them for a shepherd to approach successfully a senior
official. These circumstances are also related to the public
arrangement of business by senior Government servants and
the need to assert their status and maintain their prestige before
their colleagues and immediate subordinates.
The system of lawyer patronage, which is an extension of the
more strictly legal practice of the lawyer, makes it possible for
the affairs of villagers and shepherds to receive attention at that
level of the administrative hierarchy where decision and execu¬
tion are possible. A shepherd and a senior official are not
directly linked to each other by social obligation or morality.
A Government servant sees no reason why he should assist
some illiterate shepherd and many reasons why he should not,
such as loss of prestige before his professional colleagues. But
the lawyer, as the intermediary who stands between them, is
related by obligations of patronage to the first, and the duties of


MERCHANTS 247
friendship to the second. In this manner the shepherd, because
he is useful and necessary to his patron through the power and
prestige which his political allegiance and social attentions con¬
fer on him, is never entirely powerless to resist those administra¬
tive actions of Government which threaten his way of life. The
system of patronage introduces a flexibility into administrative
machinery whose workings are very often directed by persons
remote from the people whose fortunes they are affecting.
5. MERCHANTS
A further system of relationships, which cross the boundaries of
the community and relate it to the world outside, results from
the shepherds’ need to market the produce of their flocks.
They must sell this produce to provide the money required
for the flour used in their bread, for the payment of their
grazing dues, and for the growing list of luxuries which since
1938 through close observation of village life they have dis¬
covered to be essential to a family’s self-esteem. These luxuries
are for the most part articles of manufactured clothing, cotton
summer dresses for the girls at school, European as against
traditional shoes for men and women, tailored shirts for the
men. Ten years ago the homespun cloth for men’s jackets was
cut by the women; it is now sent to a professional tailor. Pieces
of cheap earthenware crockery and glassware begin to replace
the heavy pewter plates and drinking mugs. There is increasing
pressure to conform to village standards in these matters and
each year more money is spent on the clothes and other things
that have become prestige symbols. Each year, as the available
winter grazing tends to decrease in area, its cost rises. While
twenty years ago the whole community ate the yellow maize
bread, today almost all the families make their bread from a
more expensive brown flour which is largely wheaten in con¬
tent. Only a few very poor families continue to eat yellow
bread, and for this economy they suffer much ridicule. On all
counts, the minimum money income required by a family to
live in a style that will secure its prestige has greatly increased.
In the memory of living people the community has always
exchanged some of its produce for money, and like many other
pastoral and agricultural communities elsewhere it has always
lived on credit for part of the year, paying off the greater part


248 PATRONAGE
of its debt in the early summer when it has reaped the harvest of
milk, meat, and wool. The last twenty years, and especially the
years since the war, have seen a new situation in which the
shepherds have sold an increasing proportion of their annual
produce, have themselves spent more money (not solely on the
needs of physical subsistence), and have become, generally
speaking, deeply and permanently indebted to merchants.
Only three of the 42 Sarakatsan households at Neochori have
assets, which suggest that each summer they are virtually clear
of debt. Speaking very generally, for these details are hard to
collect and even harder to check, the average weight of debt
carried by each elementary family is about £100. Only when a
family of man, wife, and small children, has at least 200 sheep
is there generally the possibility of it being relatively free
of debt. But it is impossible to express the matter in a simple
numerical statement, much depends on the price a family is
forced to pay for its winter grazing. This may vary between
such wide limits as half a crown and ten shillings per head of
stock.
The need of the many semi-nomad pastoralists in the Epirus,
not only Sarakatsani, to find a market for their produce is the
merchant’s opportunity. The most valuable of these products is
the milk of the ewes. The constituent families of co-operating
‘companies’ of shepherds are generally so deeply in debt that
they are discouraged from the further heavy borrowings which
would be necessary for the rent or purchase of equipment to
turn their own milk into marketable cheese. And since there are
no large urban populations in the Epirus, the large quantities
of butter, cheese, and meat must find their principal outlet in
the Athenian market; but for the distribution of their products
in the metropolitan area the shepherds have neither the facilities
nor the knowledge.
The ewe gives substandal quantities of milk for six or seven
months in the year, between the time when it drops its lamb in
January and the establishment of its pregnancy once more in
July or August. The spring milk is sold in the winter pastures
between 1st of February and the 20th of May. After the ten-day
migration to the summer pastures the milk is again sold in the
Zagori between the 1st ofJune and a date within a few days of
the end ofJuly. The milk which is taken during the move into


MERCHANTS 249
the mountains, before the ist of February, and after the last
week in July, is made into a rough cheese and stored for the use
of the family.
In each area where a merchant collects milk he establishes a
cheese-maker ((j.toxt£o<;) with an assistant. These men are paid
and fed by the merchant, who also provides the necessary equip¬
ment, the cream separator, cauldrons, cheese boards, and rings.
The shepherds who bring their milk to the cheese-making hut
(fi,TOXT£apet,o) are responsible for its construction and for supply¬
ing it with water and firewood. It is not economical for a cheese¬
making station to serve less than 1,000 ewes, and the upper
limit beyond which the quantities of milk become too great for
a single cheese-maker to handle may be set at about 2,500 sheep.
The spring milk is three times greater in quantity than the
summer milk® and the more important merchants concentrate
their main activities and have their headquarters in the winter
pastures, but they also buy some summer milk in the various
districts of the Pindus mountains of which the Zagori is one.
Before 1945 the cheese merchants in winter or summer were
small entrepreneurs seldom controlling more than two or three
cheese-making stations. Between 1944 and 1949 currency in¬
flation and Communist insurrections ruined many of these men.
Only the stronger and abler merchants survived. The financially
strong merchant was able to steal the custom of his weaker com¬
petitors by offering more substantial credits at a time when the
shepherds needed a larger cash income than formerly, but were
also slipping farther into debt. Today in the winter pastures
there are a number of merchants with five or six stations but
few with less. The situation in the winter pastures, especially in
Thesprotia, is dominated by the merchant ‘X’ who controls
45 stations drawing on the milk production of 50,000 ewes. He
also has a wholesale agency in Athens through which his butter
and cheese have a secure market outlet to the metropolitan
consumer.
The establishment of a cheese station requires, in the first
* Winter milk production varies considerably. One stani produced 38 okes per ewe in 1945 and as little as 13J okes per ewe in 1954. Generally for the period 1950-5, milk production in winter has varied between 20 and 24 okes per ewe. Summer production is more stable at 7 to 9 per ewe. An oke of milk is equivalent to 2-35 pints.


250 PATRONAGE
place, a capital outlay of some £85 for the equipment, of which
the most expensive item is the cream separator. Working capital
for a spring station includes the wages of the cheese-maker and
his assistant at 12s. 6d. and 6s. 3d. a day respectively, the cost
of their food, and large quantities of salt for treating the cheeses.
Altogether it amounts to about £125. The normal advances on
the milk represent between one-third and one-half of its value
and involve the issuing of credits for some £500. Working
capital and the money for these credits is borrowed by the mer¬
chant from banks and private individuals. The bigger merchants
store a substantial part of the cheese and butter which they make
in the spring and summer and bring it forward on the metro¬
politan market in the later months of the year when milk pro¬
ducts are scarcer and their prices higher. The money which is
borrowed to give the August milk advances to the shepherds is
secured against the cheeses in store. But the rate of interest on
all these loans is unlikely to be much less than 10 per cent. In
general, a merchant expects to make a gross profit of about
3^.-4^. on every ‘oke’ of milk which he handles. Since the
pastoralist receives about is. 1 \d. for every £oke’ of milk which
he sells, it cannot be said that he suffers from an outrageous
exploitation. This is not the result of the merchant’s benevolence.
He is caught between two limits, the highest price which con¬
sumers in distant places can be persuaded to pay for milk
products and the marginal price to shepherds which will just
make it possible for them to live and maintain their flocks. For
if the flocks vanish, so will the cheese merchants. The margin
between these two limits is not wide. The prosperity of the
individual merchant depends on his cornering a very substan¬
tial supply of milk and aiding the shepherds who sell it to him
to maintain that level of production or even increase it. By the
extension of interest-free credits, which in fact are seldom en¬
tirely repaid, he binds the interests of the shepherd to his own
and assists him to maintain his way of life in the face of in¬
creasing difficulties. But the extension of credit also enables the
Sarakatsanos to assume a style of life which goes beyond the
absolute needs of subsistence. The Sarakatsanos has achieved
this at the expense of the merchant but also at the cost of bind¬
ing himself even more firmly to the merchant’s will. That it
pays a merchant of the stature of £X’ cannot be doubted. By


MERCHANTS 251
sustaining a burden of debt and advance payments of perhaps
£20,000 he makes an annual net profit on the spring milk alone of about £8,000.
The Sarakatsan financial year (see Appendix III) begins and
ends in August, when the shepherd takes the advance for his
winter milk, which represents between one-third and one-half
of the value of the estimated winter yield of milk. A man with
200 ewes would receive about £100. With some of this money he
is able to complete his payments for summer grazing. This he is
normally bound to do before the police will allow him to move
his sheep towards the plains in the autumn. He hopes to leave
the Zagori village in October with perhaps one-third of this
advance still in his pocket to tide his family over their general
living expenses in the early winter months. During the winter
months there is a constant struggle between the shepherd and
the merchant for further loans. The original advance is generally
almost exhausted by Christmas, especially if cotton-cake has
been bought to supplement the diet of the pregnant ewes. The
merchant tries to stave off further requests for additional ad¬
vances since he does not want to carry an unnecessary weight of
debt beyond the amount that is necessary to hold the shepherd
as a client. He keeps the shepherd physically alive by granting
him credit in the form of flour. In this way he checks luxury
spending by the shepherd at his expense and makes, on paper at
least, a small profit for himself by selling on credit flour of
questionable quality at a slightly inflated price. The shepherd
and his family exist as best they can, running up small debts
with the shopkeepers in the winter villages and towns who them¬
selves compete for his trade by offering credit which they hope
will make him a permanent customer. Eventually some crisis
occurs. He must have money to engage a lawyer in a court
case, or money to pay a doctor or to bribe an official. He goes
to the cheese merchant and explains the situation. The latter,
if he is astute, knows the critical moment when he must slacken
the reins; a further ad hoc advance is given.
Some weeks before Easter the financial outlook may improve.
There may be fifty or more male lambs to sell at about thirty
shillings each. Later, after Easter, the sheep are shorn and, if
there are no daughters for whose dowry blankets and cloth must
be woven, some wool will be sold. A shepherd tries to keep


252 PATRONAGE
these transactions secret from his cheese merchant but generally
with only partial success. In April the shepherds hurry to meet
the summer cheese merchants, conclude their agreements, and
take an advance on their summer milk which for 200 ewes will
be about £30. But this spate of spring revenue is often quickly
dissipated in paying the heavy costs of winter pasturage, pos¬
sibly of more legal wrangles, and sometimes of an Easter
wedding. The celebration of Easter also brings its expenses. New
shirts and shoes are bought for the family, cloth is sent to the
tailors to be made up into new jackets and trousers. For if the
family attends the Easter church service in old clothes it loses
prestige. Also it is believed that at the service on Easter Satur¬
day night each person ought to wear something that is new, to
honour the resurrection of Christ.
About the middle of May the heads of shepherd families visit
the merchant to agree with him the statement of their accounts.
Money advances and the value of the flour issued are balanced
against the value of the milk delivered to the cheese-making
station. In an average year the result is generally a small profit
or loss for the shepherd of perhaps £10 which is added to, or
subtracted from, the total debt owed to the merchant. But in
bad years when the grass has been poor, or many ewes have
not produced lambs, the loss may be more substantial and this
the merchant must bear if he does not want to force his client
into selling his stock. If the shepherd is in difficulties, he may seek
a further loan before leaving the plains. When the merchant
grants this favour, the shepherd must accept a slightly lower
price for his milk in the coming winter, about a farthing an
‘oke’ less than whatever proves to be the ruling rate for the next
season.
When the shepherd arrives in his summer village in Zagori,
he will generally have some money in his pocket. He imme¬
diately pays off the greater part but not all of the debt which in
most cases he left behind in the village shop the previous autumn.
This may amount to ^20-^30 in some instances. Having paid
off part of this debt he is in a better position to ask for credit
later in the summer when he may again become short of cash.
In the same way he will pay off some of his debts to winter
shopkeepers when he first reaches the plains in the autumn.
At the end of July the shepherd takes the balance of his


MERCHANTS 253
summer milk money, if he has not already been granted a second
advance. It is not usual for summer cheese merchants to carry
the debts of the shepherds who sell milk to them beyond some
very small amount such as £10.
In August the shepherd’s financial cycle ends and begins
again with the taking of the first advance on the winter milk.
Here we must mention the loans which are available to the
shepherd from the Agricultural Bank. Each pastoralist is en¬
titled to a loan renewable every six months. Up to fifteen shil¬
lings for each milking ewe may be advanced at a rate of 6 per
cent per annum. But it is a regulation that between the period
i st of July to the ist of October the loan must be repaid in
full with interest, for a period of twenty days. The shepherd
therefore repays this loan with the money of his August
milk advance. For the statutory period the principal remains
in the bank, after which the shepherd takes it out again.
On all counts it is evident that the activities of the winter
cheese merchant support the structure of credit on which the
shepherd lives. The many advances which he gives to the shep¬
herd make possible a continuous state of indebtedness to the
bank and to the shops. Clearly an important element in the
relationship between the cheese merchant and the shepherd is
the overwhelming economic power of the merchant and the
corresponding weakness of the shepherd. The ultimate sanction
is the threat to claim repayment of the debt by taking the
shepherd to law and obtaining a court order for the distraint
of his sheep. In theory, it is always open to a shepherd to leave
a merchant with whom he has quarrelled by selling his milk to
another merchant who will then lend him the money to cancel
his debt with his creditor. By the repayment of his debt he
severs the relationship and escapes from his bondage. But in
practice this is not often possible. In the first place, unless he
can carry with him a number of other shepherds so that he is
able to offer the milk of at least i ,000 ewes, he will not induce
another cheese merchant to open a station in an area where he
is not already established. Secondly, if he is attempting to leave
a powerful merchant, his debt may be of the order of £100 or
more, and a smaller merchant is unlikely to be able to sustain
long-term loans on this scale. The whole technique of a mer¬
chant such as ‘X’ is to draw the shepherd into an amount of


254 PATRONAGE
debt from which it will be virtually impossible for him to
escape.
Powerful cheese merchants have political as well as economic
power. A shepherd who quarrels with ‘X’ is likely to meet with
trouble in his dealings with Government authorities. Smaller
merchants are also afraid of‘X’. It is said that some years ago
a cheese station which was established by another merchant in
an area lying within ‘X’ ’s sphere of influence was mysteriously
burned down in the night and that the police showed no in¬
terest in making any investigations. In 1951, in a village of
Thesprotia, another merchant by offering a slightly higher price
succeeded in claiming the custom of three stanis which in the
previous year had sold their milk to ‘X’, who already had a
station in the neighbourhood. The latter showed no immediate
hostility to his competitor. Indeed, the next winter he suggested
that they should co-operate to manage one station since this
would make for economies on both sides. The other man agreed
and ‘X’ undertook to find a cheese-maker. It is claimed that this
man, on ‘X’ ’s instructions, systematically allowed the cheeses to
deteriorate by not treating them with sufficient salt. For ‘X’ the
total destruction of these cheeses was an insignificant loss; for
the smaller merchant it was a disaster. Whether or not these
allegations are true, the important fact is that he is believed to
be ready and able to deal with difficult shepherds and com¬
peting merchants in this uncompromising fashion.
In the hope of introducing some measure of restraint into the
merchant’s exercise of economic power over himself, and of
diverting its use from his exploitation to his own protection, the
shepherd tries to draw the merchant into a relationship of
patronage. In most instances, however, the latter is only willing
to adopt this role in a restricted sense. When clients come to
consult a merchant in his office the social atmosphere is one of
cordiality and equality. Glasses of ‘ouzo’ are not long in appear¬
ing. When differences arise in the discussion of business there
are appeals to ‘friendship’ from both sides, and statements such
as ‘You cannot believe that I should wish to deceive you’, are
frequently made. But these attitudes may be the fiction rather
than the reality of patronage. For patronage assumes a measure
of protective concern over all the client’s affairs. In most cases
a merchant prefers to restrict his role of protector to certain


MERCHANTS 255
specific contexts, that is to saving a shepherd from eviction from
his pastures and from the need to sell his stock because of his
indebtedness to others. If a merchant has a firm hold over a
man through the nexus of debt he does not want to assume
unnecessary obligations which may limit the range and flexi¬
bility of his economic operations. Cheese merchants who are
sometimes forced unwillingly into becoming godfathers to Sara
katsan children do not always make very satisfactory spiritual
kinsmen. On the other hand, in certain cases where an influen¬
tial Sarakatsan family is clear, or nearly clear, of debt a mer¬
chant may be very willing to enter into the diffuse obligations
of friendship if this will enable him to hold it to his custom.
There is a difference between the relationships which a shep¬
herd establishes with his lawyer and his cheese merchant. The
lawyer gives advice and support to a client over the whole range
of his affairs; the more complete his patronage, the more obli¬
gated the client and the greater the lawyer’s power over him.
The merchant’s interests in the shepherd are more specifically
economic; his economic success depends upon a certain flexi¬
bility in his commitments so that, for example, he may wish to
make smaller advances and grant fewer long-term credits
when interest rates are abnormally high. This seems to be an
example of a general difference between political and eco¬
nomic power; the former has a particularist and affective
quality, the latter is characterized by its relative generality and
impersonality.
But the relation of merchant and shepherd can never be
merely specific to the act of purchase or without some affective
content as in simple market exchanges. The merchant carries a
dead weight of debt; this he can only recover by a legal action
which would deprive the shepherd of the animals on which
depend the family’s physical subsistence and its social prestige.
Both sides realize that the existence of the debt, whatever may
have been the motives which encouraged it, has meant the
possibility of the family continuing to live honourably in their
traditional way of life. By the mere fact of having done a good
thing, even if without that purpose, the merchant is morally
obliged not to undo it. It is a remarkable fact that since 1945
the merchant ‘X’ appears to have called in only one debt by
recourse to the law.


256 PATRONAGE
The Sarakatsanos does not deny the obligation to his mer¬
chant. Two heads of family went so far as to say that they would
feel ashamed to leave, without just cause, a merchant who had
supported them not only with credits but also, sometimes, with
his political influence. But their feelings of obligation are ambi¬
valent. In other contexts hostility is expressed. It is alleged that
the merchant shamelessly exploits the shepherd and that all his
actions are moved by entirely selfish motives. ‘He, too, has a
burn on his bottom’ (exet x<xl to xa>Xoxa<jx|x6 tou), that is,
he, too, has his own troubles and interests.
Through the cheese merchant the Sarakatsanos is able to
dispose of the most valuable part of the produce of his flock and to
obtain the money he needs to pay for the pasturage of his animals
and the needs of his family which are related to prestige as well as
to bare subsistence. The system of credits provides the shepherd
with the means to survive years when natural or political difficul¬
ties would otherwise force him to sell part of the flock to meet his
commitments. It has also made it possible for the shepherds in
recent years to raise slightly their material standard of living.
The growth of debts has brought a certain stability and par¬
ticularism to relations between merchants and shepherds. Debt
provides a basis for a permanent balance of expectations between
the two parties despite the asymmetrical character of the rela¬
tionship. The merchant is assured of the supply of milk which is
essential for his prosperity, the shepherd is relatively assured of
credit and political support when his grazing rights are threat¬
ened. The powerful merchant’s ability to support a wide system
of credit brings him prestige and the right to move amongst
the provincial tlite\ the credit which he gives to the shepherd
provides the necessary material basis of the latter’s social pres¬
tige in his own community. Debts maintain these relationships.
They produce in creditors some sense of obligation coupled
with a determination not to allow the relationship to become an
affective and diffuse bond of patronage, in debtors a mixed
attitude of gratefulness for the support and protection they
receive and enmity because they cannot escape.
6. CONCLUSION
It is evident that the form and function of patronage connexions
are immediately related to the moral solidarity and isolation of


CONCLUSION 257
the family, and to the reciprocal hostility and distrust that exist
between families unrelated by kinship or marriage. In general,
there are few circumstances where his own wishes, or public
opinion, allow a Sarakatsanos to honour an obligation outside
the family at the expense of an obligation within it. Moreover,
with the assistance of some kinsmen or affines the economy of
each family is generally self-sufficient, and working co-operation
between unrelated men is seldom necessary or, indeed, practic¬
able. Families, within the community, compete for social pres¬
tige in terms of values which underline the particularist obliga¬
tions to the family honour. A man’s work, affections, and moral
obligations are almost exclusively contained within the one
small group. The commitment of energy, physical resources, or
deep affection to an unrelated person is a kind of betrayal. For
these reasons men do not associate, even within the community,
on the basis of any universal principle of fair dealing. Nepotism
is an obligation not a moral fault; and honour is opposed to the
canon of honesty.
Inhibitions against self-seeking conduct are yet more tenuous
in the relations of men who do not share the common bonds of
community. The Sarakatsanos expects to be exploited by the
merchant and ignored by the government official. The bureau¬
crat or merchant not only stands outside the local community,
he is divided from the villager or shepherd by his status as a
member of the urban middle class. The shepherd is aware of
the ill-concealed contempt of the ‘civilized man’ (6 7roXma(Aevo<;)
for country people and their ways; he knows of the official’s
meagre and insufficient salary, and something of his competitive
struggle to win prestige symbols (houses, clothes, cars, radios)
which validate the nuances of family status within this urban
middle class. He does not believe in the existence of any ethic
of professional bureaucratic service to the community. ‘They
are all “eaters’” (<paya8e<;),he says in sweeping condemnation. It
is thought that few officials will exert themselves over the affairs
of a man of lower social status unless he is offered some induce¬
ment. And generally it is believed that concessions and facilities are
seldom to be won on a broad front for the whole community but
only as exceptional dispensations to favoured families. In these
circumstances men consider it useless to conduct their business
with the State on the grounds of their general rights as citizens.


258 PATRONAGE
As I have already said, from his side a Government official
sees no reason why he should assist some illiterate shepherd or
villager and many reasons why he should not, such as loss of
prestige before his professional colleagues. Like the villager or
shepherd he has the same primary and categorical obligation
towards his own family and its status. He also owes a loyalty
to his service and his colleagues; but this is shown by marking
the distance between those who rule and those who are ruled,
by the display of arrogance, not service.
There are other, less personal, reasons for the distrust between
the bureaucrat and the villager or shepherd. One half of Greece
is a society of small village communities dependent on agricul¬
ture or pastoralism. To administer and physically control these
many discrete communities, and the small towns which serve
them, the central Government in Athens has erected a complex
and costly bureaucratic organization which links, in the formal
sense, the simple village community to the central body which
governs and legislates for the nation. This is not a structure
which has developed even in part from the villages themselves;
it is an organization which has been imposed from above by the
Government. Moreover, Greece is not, by European standards,
a rich country. For the greater part of her national history
taxation has been almost wholly absorbed in paying for the
luxury of maintaining the panoply of a modern state with its
full quota of Ministries and portfolios and in supporting sub¬
stantial armed forces. Under these conditions, the State (to
xpaTo<;) and its agencies must always appear to the villager or
shepherd as a body from which he is excluded, something
threatening and hostile, which takes away from the family and
returns nothing. It stands, therefore, in opposition to the nation
(t6 e0vo<;), the community of Hellenism for which every Greek
feels a deep and natural devotion.
Each family in a village, or in a shepherd community, there¬
fore attempts to establish an exclusive and particular relation¬
ship with persons in power. As we have seen, decision or initia¬
tive is seldom possible at the lower levels of the Government
service because of the reluctance of an official to delegate
power. To reach that level at which his affairs can be effectively
dealt with, he tries to discover a patron, generally a lawyer, who
in return for a man’s political allegiance, places his case before


CONCLUSION 259
a friend in the right place. The lawyer, or other patron, bridges
the gulf of hostility and indifference created by the absence of
relationship and the difference in status. And he introduces
some flexibility into the rigid and uncomprehending administra¬
tion of village life by a centralized bureaucracy.
In effect, patronage converts impersonal and ephemeral con¬
nexions into permanent and personal relationships; for in
Greek society it is, generally, only in established personal rela¬
tionships, of which the archetypal forms are found in the family,
that any considerable element of moral obligation exists. The
initial motive is utilitarian, protection and assistance on the
side of the client, political power and social prestige on the part
of the patron. But when such a relationship endures for any
length of time it takes on a strong moral quality. The patron
feels obliged to assist and take a general interest in all the client’s
affairs, and in doing so he is able both to sense his superiority
and approve his own compassionate generosity. The client is
conscious of a duty to support his patron politically without un¬
due concern about his protector’s party allegiance, and to give
free expression to his feelings of gratitude and indebtedness.
The role of patron is to give benefits; that of the client is to
honour the patron by accepting dependence. In a society where
the concept of honour is intimately connected with notions of
individual strength and prepotence, to abdicate one’s indepen¬
dence, even to a person of power who is not a member of the
community, is an act of renunciation of some significance. The
patron in accepting the dependence of his client, who thus
admits, implicitly, the inferiority of his status, himself recognizes
moral obligations towards the client. The dependence of the
client draws attention to the power of his patron, while the pro¬
tection of the patron suggests that the client is a man of some
standing and respectability in his own community. The first
consideration protects the patron from the accusation of weak¬
ness or foolishness which he would otherwise face if he casually
assisted a man of lower status with whom he had no particular
relations of kinship, friendship, or patronage: the second repre¬
sents for the client honourable grounds for the admission of an
inferior status which in other circumstances would betray the
honour of his community and his own manliness. The social
reputations of the two men are now linked. If a patron cannot


260 PATRONAGE
effectively protect his clients his prestige is diminished; and in
his own community the client, too, suffers for the incapacity of
his patron, since the potential of his strength from this source
is seen to be less than was supposed. But when the protection
is effective, both patron and client gain prestige from the rela¬
tionship. The colleagues of the patron envy him the power
which his control of a body of clients assures for him, other
families in the client’s community envy him his cleverness in
winning powerful patrons. But the Sarakatsan client will not
share with others the vicarious influence which patronage
brings him, unless they are kinsmen or affines. For he believes
that if he shares his advantage, he loses it. And this is a further
reason why relationships across the boundaries of the community
with persons of influence are exclusive and particular con¬
nexions established by the individual family.
We see that while the organization of administration stretches
down, as it were, from the central Government towards the
village community but loses power and the ability to take
decisions the farther it extends from its point of origin, the struc¬
ture of the system of patronage, which is based on social rela¬
tionships between clients seeking for a man with the ability
and friendship connexions to protect them and a patron who
accepts these duties in return for political allegiance, grows up¬
wards and through lawyers, other persons of influence, and
Members of Parliament, is linked to the legislative assembly.
Thus the organization of government and the structure of
patronage are parallel hierarchies. At any particular level the
two hierarchies are related through ties of friendship. The
shepherd or villager is excluded from the Government hier¬
archy, but through the structure of patronage he may be able
vicariously to submit his case before a senior official in the
public service.
Patronage is the means through which the local community
is linked to the wider national society. And it is significant that
the group which seeks this connexion is the individual family
and not the community. This is clearly the case amongst the
Sarakatsani, but even villagers do not co-operate in seeking
Government favour except where the interests of the whole
village as such are attacked. If the President of a village is able
to help a village friend by his influence in the town, he does so


CONCLUSION 261
in the role of friend or patron, not as President and leader of
the village. And in personal affairs a villager or shepherd may
often go directly to his patron7 in the town. The importance of
this is that the community is integrated piecemeal with the
wider society along lines of personal obligation and not
through membership of a large corporate group capable of
attempting an infinitely stronger resistance to the authority of
the State.
More generally, patronage links persons of different social
status introducing into their social relations a common area of
shared values which would otherwise not exist. In the context
of the Zagori village it links the shepherds to the more impor¬
tant villagers, enabling the former to come to terms with the
villagers’ hostile attitude and the latter to mobilize the voting
power of the shepherds in their own support. Since different
shepherd families support different village personalities, it en¬
sures that the latter continue to hold office and power even in
villages where shepherds considerably outnumber villagers on
the electoral roll.
Similarly, the patron-client relation between the lawyer and
the villager or shepherd relates members of local village and
shepherd communities to the professional classes in the small
towns and larger provincial centres. It gives political power and
prestige to the patron. It brings prestige to the client also but
above all it means that he is never entirely helpless in the face of
the impersonal indifference of Government action which
threatens the precarious balance of his economy. Patronage
relations produce a certain equity in the distribution of facilities
and privileges and place some check on the victimizing of in¬
dividuals. It achieves this by relating the universal franchise to
the personal, social, and political aspirations of individuals
competing for power and honour; or to put it more briefly, by
relating natural rights to personal prestige.
Finally, the bond of debt and the qualified patronage of the
merchant and the town shopkeeper brings the shepherd into
a permanent association with some of the leaders of town
7 In the case of a villager the ‘protector’ is very often a kinsman. See Ernestine Friedl, ‘The Role of Kinship in the Transmission of National Culture to Rural Villages in Mainland Greece’, American Anthropologist,
'959. vol. lxi. PP- 3°-38


262 PATRONAGE
commerce. It provides the merchant with an assured source for
his raw material and the shopkeeper with a stable clientele. It
gives the shepherd vicarious access to the metropolitan market
and to the credit facilities of the national banking system. With¬
out these facilities it is fair to say that he could not continue to
lead his traditional way of life.


X
THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE1
1. THE HIERARCHY
consideration of the bilateral kindred and the marriage
prohibitions associated with it has shown that the only
A ^relatively enduring kin group in the Sarakatsan system
of kinship and marriage is the elementary family. I have placed
considerable emphasis on the concentration of most of the
individual’s significant obligations within this group; and these
normally take precedence over any other moral commitments.
It is a feature of evident importance that the community is
fragmented into about six hundred of these exclusive corporate
family groups.
Within the community these families are jurally autonomous.
It is true that they must often co-operate with kinsmen or
affines in the management of their sheep. And in particular
though rare circumstances when the honour of the community
is in question, men who are unrelated may stand together
against villagers and others. Nevertheless, in none of these
situations is the sovereignty of the family compromised. More¬
over, unrelated families see their different interests as being
in fundamental and inevitable opposition. We have already
examined various attitudes and institutions through which this
mutual hostility is expressed, for instance attitudes of intense
secrecy and distrust, and institutions of sheep-theft and mutual
trespass. Hostility directed outwards is, of course, the counter¬
part of the immensely strong jural and affective solidarity of
the family. And both are conditions consistent with the system
1 In some respects there are obvious parallels with Homeric society, and I have benefited by the work of Sir Maurice Bowra, Tradition and Design in the Iliad, Oxford, 1930; Bruno Snell, The Discovery of the Mind, translated by Rosenmeyer, Oxford, 1953; M. I. Finley, The World of Odysseus, London, 1956; and Arthur W. H. Adkins, Merit and Responsibility, Oxford, i960. Anybody considering the values of a Mediterranean culture is under an obligation to J. A. Pitt-Rivers, People of the Sierra, London, 1954. Bichr Fares, L'Honneur chez les Arabes avant L'lslam, Paris, 1932, is an interesting attempt to discuss a somewhat similar system of values on strict principles of Durkheimian sociology.


264 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
of patronage that links each family individually to the wider
structure of Greek society.
But, clearly, there is a limit to the amount of openly expressed
hostility that this community is able to tolerate. Shepherds and
their sheep are vulnerable, and in practice prudence discour¬
ages the free expression of hostility. The reciprocal trespass
practised by shepherds who share a common grazing boundary
is generally confined to areas from which there is a secure line
of retreat; and in grazing disputes shepherds are careful to
fight with weapons which may cause unpleasant wounds but
are unlikely to kill. Wanton murders are discouraged through
the removal of the killer by imprisonment, voluntary exile,
or vengeance. By whatever agency this may occur, the family
is too small a group to afford the loss of a man, and only an
imperative obligation of honour justifies such a risk.
But this relatively limited display of active hostility is not
in balance with the unequivocal character of the oppositions
between families unrelated by kinship or marriage. These find
a more extended and satisfactory expression in competitive
behaviour and values which have been mentioned so frequently.
The sociological importance of competition2 is precisely that
it represents a kind of opposition which is often indirect. In
this instance protagonists compete for social prestige, that is for
something which in material form none of them possesses.
Where the prize has this intangible quality, direct attack may be
irrelevant. Indeed, since social prestige requires the favourable
response of the community to a man’s qualities and actions
after these have been evaluated in terms of the accepted system
ofvalues, it depends overwhelmingly on the opinions ofenemies.
To oppose successfully other unrelated families in terms of
prestige, men must compete to the limit in their adherence to
these values. They do this without causing one another obvious
material harm; and the more they oppose one another in this
way, the more they affirm their support of a particular system
of values and beliefs. In this context competition for social
prestige, while it clearly encourages that family particularism of
which it is itself a symptom, nevertheless gives to this competitive
complex a certain unity and coherence through a common sys¬
tem of values. These are, as it were, the rules of the game.
* Georg Simmel, Conflict, translated by Wolff, Glencoe, Illinois, 1955, p. 57.


THE HIERARCHY 265
It may be agreed (and, in general, correctly) that in a system
where a number of groups compete for prestige, a strong group,
if it is denied the social recognition it expects, may in frustra¬
tion turn from competitive action to direct violence and attempt
to establish its superiority by force; or it may attempt other
forms of direct opposition, perhaps through the use of eco¬
nomic power. But in relation to the Sarakatsan community the
family is small and weak. Its inability to make alliances outside
the kindreds of its members and their affinal connexions, and
the physical dispersion of the Sarakatsani which restricts the
activities of any family to only a small area of the total com¬
munity, are other factors which would tend to prevent a
family group and its allies from dominating the remainder of
the community; even if we leave aside the certainty of State
intervention if violence were used or threatened. Economic
or political control of the community by one family and its
allies is equally unlikely. Unrelated families do not co-operate
to market their produce and consequently there are no co¬
operative institutions whose officers might manoeuvre them¬
selves into positions of economic dominance. Similarly, the
community has no institutions of local government which the
members of a family and its kinsmen might infiltrate in the at¬
tempt to establish a form of political control. The pathetic
showing of the Association of Nomad Pastoralists illustrates
the concern of all families to prevent the delegation of any
effective representative power to others. Each family faces the
total community in a condition of dependence. The position
it is able to occupy in public life, the quality of the marriage
alliances it establishes, depend entirely on its social prestige,
that is, they depend on the favourable response of enemies;
or more accurately, on the inability of enemies effectively to
denigrate a family’s reputation.
Prestige (yoTjTpo) and ‘name’ concern the Sarakatsani in
every context of public action. ‘Better to lose your eye than your
name’, runs the common proverb. This intense competition of
families to maintain their prestige against the permanent threat
of denigration, and the continual evaluation of other people’s
conduct, which is fed by an insatiate and hostile curiosity,
result in a certain hierarchical ordering of Sarakatsan family
groups. In the local gathering of families which share the


266 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
pastures of the same summer village the hierarchy of prestige
is based upon a fairly precise knowledge of the genealogy,
wealth, moral character, and conduct of each family; but, in
the wider ordering of social reputations in the total community,
elements of prejudice and speculation play a greater part.
In either case, there is more general agreement about the
ordering of families at the two extremes, which define the
hierarchy, than in its middle reaches. A number of families
with the surname of Tsoumanis by their wealth and descent
from a few dominating personalities of the past three generations
are generally recognized to be the leading families of the com¬
munity; these are the families of ‘first lineage’. And certain of
the families who bear such names as Tangas, Myriounis, and
Ferendinos might be associated with them. On the other hand,
families with the names of Sultanos or Pistiolis are assigned
by general opinion to the lowest grade of social reputation;
for them, indeed, social prestige does not properly exist. For
the most part these families are economically poor and their
genealogies lack any mark of distinction.
The positions at either end of the hierachy are not only more
clearly defined, they also possess a fixity that is absent else¬
where. A family with the surname Pistiolis possesses large
flocks yet it remains a family of the ‘lowest lineage’. Its daugh¬
ters are virtuous but their hands have not yet been sought in
marriage even by men of indifferent social standing. However
closely such families may live in the spirit of the community’s
values others do not give them the just recognition of their
merits, so that certain of their number lose heart and are no
longer concerned to act honourably; for in their case virtue is
not its own reward. And the evidence of this reaction supports
the original evaluation of the community.
If it is scarcely possible for such a family to gain prestige,
it is at least difficult for the leading families of the community
to lose theirs. There are few instances where a member of a
family of the highest lineage has failed in a ‘question of honour’.
If a man is naturally timid he finds it all the more difficult to
resist the immense moral pressure of family and community
to act as he is expected to act. At the same time membership
of a leading family in itself protects the individual from gratui¬
tous slights. It is true that if a family of wealth and high lineage


THE HIERARCHY 267
loses its sheep through disease its reputation must fall, but in the
living memory of its past greatness it will retain a position of
some distinction. On the other hand, if their reputations for
wealth and honour are untouched, men of these families may
often commit breaches of social convention which leave little
permanent mark on their prestige. One tselingas of the ‘first
lineage’ married his daughter to her second cousin, a marriage
permitted by the Church but not by the customs of the com¬
munity, yet after the first shock of his action had passed, his
position in the community was essentially unchanged.
The families which fall between these two extremes represent
the greater part of the community, perhaps four-fifths of its
number. In their case, it is difficult to determine any order of
ranking that is objective since these families show few differences
in wealth, courage, and honour. Yet this level of equality is not
merely a residual category between the two extremes. How¬
ever subjectively it may be assessed, each family believes in a
particular and detailed ordering of prestige in which it must
continually struggle to maintain its position. Always action of
one kind must be taken, action of another kind avoided, ‘so
that you do not throw down your prestige’ (va [xy] pl£y)<;
to Y07)Tpo xaxto). It is precisely among these families of equiva¬
lent prestige that rivalry is greatest. For here doubt and
insecurity are considerable, and this is reflected in the display
of ostentatious pride, a touchy sense of honour, and a compul¬
sive attempt to conform to accepted standards of conduct. The
very intensity of this competition supports the stability of the
ranking order at either extreme. Other families in the com¬
munity have a common interest in refusing to accept any
claims of increased wealth or virtue put forward by families
of the lowest prestige. In this way they confirm their higher
ranking. Similarly they unite to deny the pretension of any of
their own number to be a family of ‘the first lineage’, or to
establish other grades of differentiation, since this would lead to
a relative lowering of their own positions.
In radical form, then, the hierarchy of prestige, considered
objectively, has only three ranks: there are those who are first
and those who are last, in either case they are few in number.
The majority are in the interstitial category from which pride
and their common interest against further differentiation


268 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
prevent any of their number from moving in an upward
direction. There is always the possibility of falling to the
category of those who are last, but the absence of any great
differences in wrealth, and the value given to the struggle to
protect personal and family honour, hold the majority of
families to an unwilling recognition of their equality in prestige,
which is seldom admitted in speech but is less precarious than
it seems.
2. HONOUR
The social reputation, whether of a man or a family, is a
composition of various elements, analytically separable in
description but with greater difficulty in life. Among these it is
convenient to begin with a consideration of the concept of
honour (ri[i.Y)) since this is fundamental to any assessment of
prestige. Indeed, it is doubtful if prestige may be said to exist
in its absence.
The translation of this concept by the English word ‘honour’
is useful if it is remembered that the analogy is only approxi¬
mate. In modern Greek usage is conferred as a sign of the
recognition of the excellence or worth of a person. It becomes
the respect or esteem owed to certain persons, for example, to
the heroes of the Revolution. From the point of view of the
receiver it is whatever raises him up in the eyes of another and
gives him reason for pride. In other contexts it may indicate
certain qualities or conditions on which the reputation of an
individual, or a group, is dependent. More specifically, it
refers to the sexual virtue of a woman. It also describes the
monetary price, or value, of an object or service. The last
instance points to the common element in these various con¬
textual uses. Ti[xyj expresses the idea of worth, whether this is an
economic value in a market, or social worth evaluated in a
complex of competing groups and individuals. Most Sarakat
sani would understand this range of use, but they restrict their
own employment of this word to the three last instances.
Among the Sarakatsani the concept refers particularly to
the honour of the individual and the family, these two points
of reference rarely leading to any conflict of loyalties since the
solidarity of the elementary family is so complete. The situa¬
tions in which this honour is typically violated or betrayed have


HONOUR 269
already been examined: homicide, the drawing of blood,
verbal insult, seduction, rape, and broken betrothal.
Honour, then, is a condition of integrity, of being ‘untouched’
by this kind of attack, insult, or betrayal. The integrity of a
family and its equality (at least) of status is recognized when
others take care not to give offence in these particular ways.
If they do gratuitously commit an outrage against a family,
they make it clear that they consider its social existence of no
account. In that case, whether the violation is accidental or
not, the outraged family must answer at once, and with violence,
if its reputation is to survive.
But honour is not only to be considered in terms of the various
external situations where it may be lost. The intrinsic principles
of honour refer to two sex-linked qualities that distinguish
the ideal moral characters of men and women: these are the
manliness (av8piqx6<;) of men, and the sexual shame (vtpotct))
of women. With the exception only of persons of the lowest
lineage, all Sarakatsani are assumed to possess these qualities
‘by nature’, although in the fallen condition of this world a
reputation for manliness or shame is easily lost. In this sense
it is not difficult for a man to move in a direction opposite to
the true inclinations of his nature. One aspect of honour, then,
is a struggle of self-discipline over cowardice and sensuality,
flaws of animal nature that continually threaten to limit the
natural nobility of man.
In general, the qualities of manliness are obvious and
familiar. ‘To be a man’ the individual must show himself to
be courageous and fearless. He must be strong in body and
spirit. But there is also a nuance of meaning peculiar to a
community where values are agonistic and social reputation
is frequently at risk. In these circumstances a man must have
boundless self-confidence in his own powers. Where few men
owe him more than conditional support, and the great majority
none at all, he must rely on himself. Manliness implies not only
the condition of being courageous but the ability of a man to
do something efficient and effective about the problems and
dangers which surround him. For in this complex of values
results count for almost everything and intentions for very little.
The physical characteristics of manliness are important.
A man must be p<xp(}aTo<;, that is, well endowed with testicles


270 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
and the strength that is drawn from them. The word also
describes a certain ruthless ability in any form of endeavour.
Here again we see the ‘efficient’ aspect of manliness. But
(3ap(3ocTos is in no sense a moral term, and in other contexts it
may describe the dishonourable conduct of a man who rapes
a woman or bullies weaker men. The manliness that is related
to honour requires this physical basis, yet it must discipline
animal strength and passions to its own ideal ends.
The quality required of women in relation to honour is
shame (vTpo7nrj), particularly sexual shame. Subjectively the
woman’s sexual shame is not simply a fear of external sanctions;
it is an instinctive revulsion from sexual activity, an attempt
in dress, movement, and attitude, to disguise the fact that she
possesses the physical attributes of her sex. Maidens must be
virgins, and even married women must remain virginal in
thought and expression. But honour is always something im¬
puted by others. In these matters the individual woman can
never retreat within her own conscience. Her honour depends
upon the reputation which the community is willing to con¬
cede, not upon the evidence of facts in any case difficult to
determine. Therefore she protects her honour most effectively
by conforming in every outward aspect of her deportment to
a code of sexual shame. The woman who succeeds in this is Ttp.ia
and -rtpLTrjfxevvj, honourable and honoured; but, if she fails, she
is a8tavTpo7a], shameless, and axuXAa, a bitch, a woman without
restraint, whose behaviour is compounded of the reflexes of her
animal instincts. She becomes ‘used’ ([ieTayetpicrfiivT)), if only on
the lips of men, and therefore ‘lost’ (^apiv?]).
The sexual shame of women is no doubt related to the ambi¬
valent attitude of the Sarakatsani towards sexual relations
even in marriage. But it is also consistent with the importance
of legitimacy as the essential qualification for membership in
the family group. The sexual, reproductive, and working
capacities of women belong exclusively to their families; and
there is no more certain way of defiling the honour of another
family than by seducing one of its women, particularly since
mixed attitudes of awe and shame surround the sexual act
and the reproductive life process. There is double cause for
shame. Something of intimate spiritual value is rifled and
desecrated by a stranger while at the same time the moral


HONOUR 271
blame for this loss is generally ascribed by the community to
the sensuality of the woman and, by extension, to the moral
weakness of her kinsmen.
This kind of shame is a quality that is thought to descend
in the female line from mother to daughter, but its loss always
implicates the honour of the men of the family, reflecting on
the manliness of the husband, and, more generally, on the
whole social personality of brothers and, particularly, sons.
The woman is soiled, Xepcofiiv/;, and blackened, piouvrCoupcoptivT);
and she marks with her dishonour all those who are close to
her through kinship or marriage. Essentially, sexual shame is
felt to be an inborn moral characteristic, part of a woman’s
personality. Conventional deportment requires training of
course; but however thorough her education the true character
of a naturally shameless woman is certain to emerge, for funda¬
mentally sexual shame is a question of heredity. If it becomes
known that a young maiden has been struck by her father or
brother because of some immodesty, people laugh and ask
rhetorically what good do they imagine this will do since the
fault proceeds from her mother.
Clearly manliness and shame are complementary qualities
in relation to honour. The manliness of the men in any family
protects the sexual honour of its women from external insult or
outrage. The women must have shame if the manliness of the
men is not to be dishonoured. We saw in an earlier chapter
how the dishonour of a mother cannot be remedied by the sons.
It is true that when a man kills a daughter who has lost her
honour he wins the grudging respect of the community; yet,
at the same time, the dishonour of the family is never entirely
forgotten. Even when the rape of a sister has been avenged, a
measure of dishonour remains, the dishonour of the girl’s
failure to preserve her virginity. The reputation for manliness
of the men of the family is a deterrent against external outrage,
but it cannot entirely repair the damage if such an attack
against its women proves successful. It is, then, not surprising
that the worst insult that can be aimed at a man is to use
the name of his sister, or mother, in an unpleasant sexual
context.
Honour considered as the possession by men and women of
these qualities is the attempt to relate existence to certain


272 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
archetypal patterns of behaviour. Female values are referred
to the ideal conduct of the Mother of God: modesty, virginal
attitudes, and selfless love. Male values appear in different
exemplars. Christ is the ideal of continence and selfless sacrifice
even of life for those to whom one is committed: the horsed and
warlike saints George and Demetrius present the pattern of
assertive courage, physical, spiritual, and invulnerable. Nearer
to the realities of a shepherd’s life, these two aspects of ideal
manliness meet in the legendary image of the klephtic hero,
a man who so refined his powers of courage and continence that
he partly transcended the limitations of the material world.
Bullets could not find their mark on Katsandonis. Shepherds
in Zagori know the place where he leaped his horse a hundred
paces across a chasm. Such heroes are both prepotent and
efficient. Whatever the odds, these men always defeat their
enemy, except in the final contest when only the pre-ordained
moment of fate and the presence of Charon succeed in taking
away life. The last struggle of the hero, although hopeless, is
heroic, a final flourish of his essentially human worth in the
face of fate. But, in the end, honour wins over death and the
hero fives on in the songs that commemorate his fame.
Men and women, then, struggle to attain these ideal modes
of being and conduct. Where they fall too far short in the effort
of identification honour is lost. As I have said earlier, honour
and the two sex-linked values of manliness and shame, which
are associated with it, are qualities that, in principle, the
majority of families are presumed to possess. It is the natural
birthright of most Sarakatsani to be manly and of their sisters
to have shame. Therefore, in the sense that ti(ay) is used by the
Sarakatsani, it is difficult to talk of competition to win more
honour than another man or another family. Honour is some¬
thing which most families are presumed to have, but which they
may very easily lose if they do not guard it with all their re¬
sources of courage and self-discipline. There is, rather, a constant
struggle to maintain an ideal state of equality in honour between
most individuals and families. And since the downfall of one
family validates and in some sense improves the status of other
families, men attempt by every means of allusive gossip and
criticism of conduct to deny each other their pretensions to
honour.


HONOUR 273
Even in the most favourable circumstances loss of honour is
unlikely to be entirely remedied within the living memory of
those who know of the affair. A man whose family has lost its
honour cannot in any real sense be said to possess prestige at all.
People say of a man who has allowed his father’s slayer to
remain undisturbed in the same neighbourhood, ‘We don’t
even say “good morning” to him’. In fact this is not true. People
do greet him, but formally and without enthusiasm. He is
occasionally seen in the coffee-shop, but he sits in a corner and
little attention is paid to him. He is tolerated but his prestige
is negative. Loss of honour does not mean direct social ostra¬
cism. The sanction is more subtle; it implies the withdrawal of
full recognition or response.
Although honour is an essential prerequisite of prestige it
is not itself entirely independent of it. Families which on quite
different grounds, such as poverty, have no prestige and are
classed generally as ‘lost’ families (xafjtivei; oixoyeveiei;), are
denied the imputation of honour even though no positive
accusation of dishonour can be pointed against them. Quite
small incidents, which are not in themselves exactly questions
of honour, are seized upon by the community to show pro¬
spectively that such a family, if it were faced by the duty of
defending its honour, would be found wanting. The family of
Costas Pistiolis is very poor. In the Sarakatsan view there must
always be something morally wrong with a very poor man,
and given their system ofvalues this is not difficult to understand.
A poor man is dependent on others for employment, or favours,
if his family is to survive. He is not in a position to insist upon
an equality in honour which, in any case, the community will
not allow him. One day I saw a youth pelting the little son of
Costas with pieces of dung in his father’s presence. Costas,
however, could do nothing since the youth’s father was an
influential member of the co-operating group which only
tolerated with difficulty the presence of the Pistiolis family
among its number. Another witness of the little scene swore
and told me that you could copulate with this man’s daughter
and he would stand by and hold your coat.
Any attack made on the family’s honour demands an im¬
mediate response. Failure to respond fatally damages the
prestige of the outraged group and all its members. Without


274 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
honour prestige is not possible. But also for those families, which
on other grounds have no prestige, honour itself is already lost.
3. THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS
The number of roles which the individual is required or able
to assume in this community is limited, and some description
of these has already been given in earlier chapters. Whether
or not the individual fulfils the more general expectations of his
various roles is a further consideration in the assessment of
his prestige. Therefore, in this section I shall discuss certain
values and qualities which are associated with the different
complexes of roles that are appropriate for men and women at
various stages of life. These are related to honour and the
concepts of manliness and shame but are not always entirely
consistent with them.
Together with age, the division of the sexes is the significant
discriminating factor in the system of social roles. The two
opposed but complementary categories of persons that result
from this division provide both a division oflabour and a pattern
of moral virtues and faults.
The division of labour is unambiguous but not rigid. Some
tasks which are normally performed by one sex are carried out
by persons of the other sex in an emergency. This does not
provoke criticism except where the reversal of roles becomes an
established feature of a family’s working arrangements. A
family which day after day sends a twelve-year-old daughter
to herd goats will certainly lose prestige. There are, however,
a number of tasks which are never attempted by the other sex.
For example, women never milk sheep or use a shepherd’s
crook; men almost never milk goats. Although men will lift
heavy objects to secure them to a mule, they never carry bur¬
dens on their backs. However sick or feeble his wife or daughter
a man will never help her with the intolerable burden of heavy
water barrels. These tasks have become diacritical symbols of
the two sexes; and to ignore them is to deny that one possesses
the essential qualities of one’s sex, manliness or shame.
"As we have seen in earlier chapters, companionship and
co-operation between people of opposite sex is possible only
within the family and the kindred. Outside these limits the
sexes (except in the case of the very old and the very young)


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 275
are rigidly segregated, and the categorical opposition is
evident. For in this context women are always a potential
threat to the honour of men whether the latter are kinsmen or
strangers. Thus unrelated persons of opposite sex seldom
speak except to exchange a curt and conventional ‘good day’
if they meet on a narrow path. Although a man calls out a
greeting to an unmarried girl, she keeps her eyes on the ground
and never replies. At weddings unrelated persons of opposite
sex, even though they are members of the same kindred of the
bride or the groom, may not speak to one another. On these
occasions the two sexes hold their feasting and dancing sepa¬
rately. In recent years at village festivals unrelated Sarakatsani
of both sexes sometimes dance in the same ring but a woman is
always flanked on both sides by men to whom she is related.
Within the group of related families which co-operate in the
management of sheep, there are occasions when this opposition
is expressed in accepted attitudes of sexual solidarity. If a
number of women are working together on a common task
such as the building of a hut, a group of men with nothing
better to occupy their time will stand about smoking while
they freely criticize their women’s craftsmanship, and even
revile them for their more general faults of ugliness and cun¬
ning. From time to time one of the more senior women will
attempt some reply. ‘Men’, she calls out, ‘are lazy good-for
nothings who do nothing but talk.’ These exchanges begin in
tones of banter but sometimes, in the later stages, they find
sharp edges. In family life a favourite topic of evening con¬
versation is a debate on the relative contributions and sacrifices
which are made by the men and the women of the family for
its well-being and security. This kind of talk is good-humoured
but serves to draw out and emphasize what is expected of male
and female roles.
Women face a hard and merciless routine of work and suffer¬
ing. Camaraderie and the consciousness of a common fate
help them to face it. This aspect of the solidarity of women is
often expressed in the frequent discussion among those related
by kinship or marriage of their common subjection to men in
sexual activity. There is a great deal of bawdy reference to the
male sex organs, and women constantly speak of their dislike
of sexual intercourse and the absence of physical pleasure they


276 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
find in it. A bride, during the last days before her wedding,
is kept company by those unmarried kinswomen who live close
at hand. They help her in the last feverish preparations of her
dowry. The girls sympathize with the bride, but say that they
will never leave their homes to submit themselves to a strange
man. The bride applauds their decision, and says that she will
secrete a knife upon her person and that when the bridegroom
comes to her she will castrate him.
Unrelated men, when they are gathered together, criticize
women in a general way. Wives, it is often said contemptuously,
need two things, copulation and beating. But men are not given
to obscenity except in oaths, and they do not discuss the
intimacies of sexual relations, since these concern their manli¬
ness in a very literal sense; moreover, any discussion of a
woman’s sexual qualities diminishes her honour.
The opposition of the two sexes is also reflected in a pattern
of sex-linked attributes which are antithetical but comple¬
mentary. Men are courageous, austere, possess manliness and
pride, but lack patience. Women are fearful, lacking in resolu¬
tion but have greater depths of love; they are sensitive to shame,
modest and patient. However, the masculine values transcend
this opposition and provide the ideal virtues of the total com¬
munity. Men must never in any circumstances be too modest or
sensitive to shame. But when their family is threatened with
violence and outrage, even women will find a pride and courage
of heroic quality, and for this they will be honoured.
If the female sex is opposed to the male sex, it is also inferior.
The Sarakatsani believe that man is a being created by God
for the highest and the noblest purposes. Since the Fall there has
been a legacy of sin in his constitution yet all in all he remains
noble. The flaws in the human condition are envy and sexuality,
for these are the thoughts and desires that particularly have the
power to turn men’s thoughts away from God and from the
struggle to draw closer to Him. Manliness has a physiological
basis but it only becomes a true manliness when it is disci
~ plined and spiritualized. Sexual intercourse, then, is not an
unmixed good. It is something which is ‘unseemly’ or ‘out of
alignment’ (dvdoroSo). In some way it pollutes ((jLayapt^ei).
After sleeping with his wife a shepherd ought to wash his
hands before milking sheep. A ewe is a ‘sacred thing’ (tepo


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 277
7rpa(xa), and mxppiapa, a disease which attacks the udder of the
sheep, is often attributed to the omission of this precaution.
Another illustration of this idea of pollution is the prohibition
of sexual intercourse on the eve, or the day, of an important
religious festival. Sexual activity is necessary in that it produces
children, who are God’s children, but evil in that some sensu¬
ality is unavoidable. It must be performed in the utmost
secrecy, without speech, and the woman must remain motion¬
less and passive. It is thought shameful for a husband to gaze
on his wife’s body.
In this situation, where man is noble (as indeed he must be
in a system of values that puts stress upon the concept of honour),
but where certain aspects of his propagation are matters for
shame, the discomfort of inconsistency is avoided in a kind of
sexual dualism. If man is nearly all nobility, a natural pre¬
disposition to evil (xaxta) is the most striking feature of the
female character. She is above all cunning, especially in the
sense that her cunning involves the corruption of another, that
is the man. She is a constant threat to his honour. IIov7)p6<;,
cunning, is typically the adjective which also describes the
Devil, and the Sarakatsani believe that the Devil has a hold
over women who are his peculiar emissaries dispatched to
provoke men’s hearts with sexual passions. Thus the whole
burden of the shame of sexual relations is shifted on to the female
sex. Since her powers ofsexual attraction are of this supernatural
order, man, in general, is unable to resist them. It is simply the
quality in a woman of being a woman which inflames the man.
She may lure him to disaster without even a glance or a gesture.
Once he advances on her she has not the strength to resist
him. In the Sarakatsan view, the power of woman’s sexuality,
the weakness of her will, and the physical strength of a man, are
the important factors involved in sexual activity. It is for these
reasons that the individual woman is expected by her kinsmen
to have ‘shame’, in the sense that in speech, gesture, attitude,
and dress, she must, as far as possible, cloak the existence of
this sexuality. For the same reasons the family watches over
its women with the greatest care; especially in the case of an
unmarried girl anxious eyes follow her if she must go to the
well or collect firewood unaccompanied.
These beliefs about the sexes are accepted by the women as


278 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
well as the men. They admit that they do not possess the intelli¬
gence of men. But they take a certain perverse and compensa¬
tory pride in their reputation for cunning and the ability to
deceive their men ‘forty times each day’. They agree that
women are weak, and that the fault in cases of seduction or adul¬
tery lies mainly with the girl or the wife. Therefore they accept
it as right that, in the first place, retribution should fall on the
woman. In customary behaviour this social and moral in¬
feriority is expressed in a number of ways. Women walk behind
their men when they are together in public and show them
respect. In church the women huddle at the back or line the
left-hand wall. Women agree that they are inferior to men in
every way, and they continually bemoan their fate that they
were not born into the other sex.
Nevertheless, through the possession of shame it is always
open to a woman to discipline and redeem her sexuality. The
inclinations of her nature, whether conscious or not, make this
difficult; but it is the prerequisite of honour. Virginity is a
quality which provokes the deepest respect and a sense almost
of awe. But the moral dualism of the sexes is finally transcended
through the paradox that from women are born the noble sons
who will protect the honour of the race. And, as the mother of
adult sons whose reputation for manliness is untouched, and
as a woman now past the period of her active sexuality, she has
almost overcome the moral disabilities of her sex.
***
This opposition of the sexes provides the frame for contrasted
ideal types of social personality for men and women at each of
the three stages of adult life.
For the unmarried but adult shepherds, the boys (to. 7rou8ia),
the pallikaria (toc 7raXX7]xapia), physical perfection is an im¬
portant ideal attribute. A youth ought to be tall, slim, agile,
and tough. Ideally, at least, a pallikari is never short in stature.
A certain regularity and openness of feature is desirable but with¬
out any hint of effeminate fineness. Swarthy complexions and
narrowly set eyes are deplored. Any kind of physical deformity
is fatal to the reputation of a young shepherd.
But moral qualities are also demanded of the young shepherd,
especially courage and strength of purpose. If in addition to


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 279
these qualities he also possesses the necessary physical attri¬
butes a young Sarakatsanos can fairly claim to be Xc^evr/):;
xal 7raXX7)xapi. The first of these terms is perhaps the more
composite, describing a youth who is handsome, manly,
narrow-hipped, and nimble; such a youth will distinguish
himself at a wedding by his upright carriage, restrained manner
towards his elders, and his agility in the dance. riaXX-qxap!. is
rather the hero warrior with physical strength and assertive
courage who is prepared to die, if necessary, for the honour of
his family or his country. Caution must always be foreign to his
nature.
It is also said that the young shepherd is free and independent.
This does not indicate a freedom from social obligation that
permits the indulgence of individual fancy. On the contrary,
it means an independence from the cares and duties of a married
head of family that frees the young unmarried man to give all
his thoughts to the defence and vindication of personal and
family honour. A head of family must consider what will
happen to his wife and children if through involvement in
some affair of honour he is killed or thrown into prison.
Since it is only in the years before he assumes the practical
responsibilities of parenthood that a man is both innocent of
the sexuality of woman and free to model his actions without
compromise according to the ideal pattern of honour, these
years of youthful manhood (xoc vtaxa) represent for the Sarakat
sani a time of perfected manliness when a man reaches as
high a point of moral refinement as the human condition
will normally allow. Speaking of his youngest unmarried
brother Elias, Demetrios Carvounis explained that he, as
leader of his family in a world where the majority of men are
without love of honour, was forced from time to time to acts
which his conscience did not approve. One day it might be
necessary for him to go into court, place his hand on the Holy
Bible, and swear falsely to save a member of his family, or his
stani, from a crippling fine. Another day he must forgo his
natural pride and obsequiously seek the aid of some Govern¬
ment servant. Deceit and lies are always needed in his work.
On the other hand Elias was every day with the sheep on the
high ridges in the clean mountain air, alone or with a single
trusted comrade. Evil could not touch Elias in the same way.


280 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
He was simple and innocent (txnXoq xod aOtoo^); not simple in
the meaning of an absence of intelligence but in a simple
singleness of purpose; and innocent in the sense of freedom from
guilt or the need to use guile. Such young men, Demetrios
added, since they do not know women, are 7taaTpixot, that is,
clean and pure. Male virginity is the ideal. And continence is
thought to confer a certain invulnerability on those who face
dangers, especially the danger of bullets in war or brigandage.
Of sex relations in marriage Aristoteles, a young man of 28,
who in every way conforms in conduct and person to the ideal
pallikari pattern, was able to say before other men that he was
ashamed even to think of them. Sex, sin, and death are related;
similarly virginity, continence, and life. The Sarakatsani antici¬
pate marriage with joy, but also with regret. The founding of a
family is wholly good, yet marriage, sex relations, and children,
inevitably foreshadow death. The pallikari, not the head of
family, is the ideal of manhood.
It is during these years of early manhood that the community
begins seriously to take stock of a man. His marriage will be
the means of linking two families in affinal alliance, and the
assessment of his manliness is one factor which, in part, deter¬
mines how other people will treat his family. When he is
twenty or twenty-one years old and shortly before he goes on
military service, he will grow a moustache, and his father, or
brother, will buy him a broad-bladed dagger. These are the
outward symbols of his assumption of the status of manhood and
of his pretension to be a pallikari.
The community will gradually form an opinion of his prowess
as a shepherd, his fearlessness on the high ridges, his devotion to
a sick or injured sheep, and his skill in grazing. It is difficult to
say how this opinion is formed, since unrelated shepherds
seldom work together. Possibly the estimate is sometimes
inaccurate. But the critical moment in the development of the
young shepherd’s reputation is his first quarrel. Quarrels are
necessarily public. They may occur in the coffee-shop, the
village square, or most frequently on a grazing boundary where
a curse or stone aimed at one of his straying sheep by another
shepherd is an insult which inevitably requires a violent res¬
ponse. In any case some account of the event becomes public
property. If the quarrel occurs before unrelated bystanders, the


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 281
community may obtain a reasonably factual account of the
fight. If it is not witnessed by an impartial audience, the con¬
testant with the fewer marks of injury and the greater number
of persuasive kinsmen wins the day. It is the critical nature of
these first important tests of his manliness that makes the self
regard (eyajicrpio:;) of the young shepherd so extremely sensitive.
It is not only the reality of an obvious insult which provokes him
to action, but even the finest of allusions on which it is possible
to place some unflattering construction. To direct the slightest
public mockery (xopo'iSeupa) against a young shepherd challenges
him to fight. It may be possible to recover from an early failure
of nerve and conduct, but a series of failures is fatal to a man’s
reputation. The more clearly his weakness is exposed the more
often he risks open ridicule, and only the careful protection of
brothers and kinsmen will save him from complete social
obloquy. In fact there are few failures. Few physically weak
children survive, and from an early age sons learn the meaning
of their personal responsibility for the pride and honour of the
family.
Sudden death stands close to the Sarakatsani and they are
continually aware of its presence. ‘He is behind our ear’ (tov
eyoupie cjto pt^acpTi),3 they say. Many children die in their early
years, childbirth is dangerous, shepherds miss their footing on
high ridges or fall into swollen rivers. But the tragic quality of
the death situation is most evident when the pallikari dies for
honour. For the young man will lose the perfection of his manli¬
ness if he will not on the instant give up his life in the cause of
honour. If men must lead their lives according to a pattern of
exemplary actions which express a system of agonistic values,
the meaning of existence is the freedom to struggle to realize
a certain mode of being and honour which, in the case of the
pallikari, the Sarakatsani believe to be as near perfection as the
determinations of the human condition will allow. Death
extinguishes life, and the ability to compete in terms of pride
and significance in social life at the very moment when the
pallikari is most fit to compete. Death also removes an indivi¬
dual who was closely bound to family and kin; this is part of
the tragedy expressed in the funeral dirge. But if death destroys
the individual in the pallikari it leaves untouched his ‘persona’,
* Cf. Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. po7j'.


282 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
that part of his personality which, shed of individual traits and
circumstances, relates him to the ideal type of manliness that
he has realized in dying for his honour. Dishonour can no longer
threaten the dead pallikari. He is free. And it is in their certain
knowledge of this that the women of his family will sing in their
dirge not only of their grief, but also of their pride.
After marriage the pallikari becomes the head of family.
Now the essential ability demanded of him is that he should
be an able protector of his family and his flock. Cleverness
(e^intvaSa) is the quality which he must possesss. It implies a
quickness of mind and a degree of foresight. Such a man is not
caught asleep or off his guard. It implies also the skill to plot
with guile and craft. This appreciation of cleverness is evident
in many stories and anecdotes which are told and retold around
the fire after the evening meal. There is the tale of the shepherd
who had scarcely returned to his huts with a stolen lamb when
he saw a detachment of police approaching along the path.
At once he threw the animal into a baby’s cradle, covered it
with a blanket, and ordered his wife to undo her blouse and
give it the breast.
Lambros, the leader of a substantial co-operating ‘company’,
has a reputation for craftiness. In 1937, in the winter pastures,
he shared a grazing boundary with a family of Albanian
Muslims who owned a property of 250 acres. Foreseeing that
at some time in the future these Albanians might be expelled
from Greece, Lambros filed a statement with the court of
First Instance to the effect that he had held a lease of protected
rights over this property since 1929. At the time there was no
reason for the clerk to verify Lambros’s statement, since any
attempt to implement a false statement would have been
repudiated with ease by the owners; and Lambros would have
faced a serious charge of perjury. Lambros’s foresight was
justified in 1944 when the Muslims fled from Thesprotia.
He was now able to produce his document and in a few weeks
he was duly confirmed in his rights of protected lease over a
property which in fact he had never previously occupied. It is
this kind of subtlety that wins for a man the reputation for
cleverness. It is conceded that a head of household must continually use
lies. Lies are not the same as purposeful cleverness, although


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 283
they are obviously involved in it. But men lie as a matter of
habit and principle to deny other people information. And it is
one way of expressing their mutual hostility. A head of family
who was sincere (eiXixpivr)?), or without cunning words
(vToixiTpos), would be considered foolish and neglectful of
his duty.
This is not to say that the Sarakatsani fail to understand the
virtues of truth and sincerity; indeed, relations between kins¬
men, or between man and God, are based upon them. But
between unrelated men the narrow limits of the human
condition, particularly envy and poverty, prescribe opposite
and meaner values. The essentially ‘fallen’ character of these
relationships is implicit in linguistic usage. Kaxo<;,4 bad or
evil, is sometimes used to indicate a skilful man, especially in
operations where cleverness or cunning is required. Ilov/jpo*;,
which means cunning in the sense of the worker-out of evil,
is very frequently used to describe a man like Lambros whose
cleverness has to be grudgingly admitted and admired by other
men. And, on the other hand, xaXo<;, good, in contexts of
character description often refers to a man who is merely weak
and irresolute.
But the truly clever man does not give the impression that
he is a threat to other men. Except where the interests of his
family are critically at stake, he is careful to appear as honour¬
able and well-intentioned towards unrelated men. There are,
however, men who practise a small kind of cunning in all their
actions. These persons are described as cunning in a sense that
is wholly bad. Mayxa^, which means a cunning untrustworthy
person, a bearer of mean and untrue scandals, is a word often
applied to this kind of man. In the Sarakatsan imagination
such a man is small, bent, thin featured, and with narrow close
set eyes. The cunning of these men is not the intelligent clever¬
ness of a Lambros, rather it resembles the sexual cunning of
women. Both corrupt. The latter corrupts the nobility of men,
the former society in general. Cleverness and cunning are
legitimate and praiseworthy where their object is the protection
or advancement of family interests, but not beyond these limits,
or for their own sake.
The heads of families whenever they are free from shepherding
4 Cf. Hoeg, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 168.


284 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
duties gather in the village square or the coffee-shop. On this
public stage the chief representatives of the families of part of
the total community appear, and by their attitude and bearing
and the recognition and response they accord to one another
they confirm or deny the ideal equality of one family with an¬
other. This equality is only maintained by a constant effort of
self-assertion. A family head must strut about as if his affairs
are of the greatest consequence. His expression is expected to
be severe and proud. Modesty in these circumstances is no
virtue but a sign of weakness. Ideally, the claims and assertions
of other men must be at least equalled, and preferably surpassed.
Yet care must be taken not to make a boast which can be
proved to be empty. The boaster whose bluff has been called
is despised. Conversation has a sharp, monosyllabic, contra¬
puntal quality. It is concerned with self-assertion, not with
communication or the exchange of information. On these
occasions a man must on no account sit quietly in a corner
unspeaking (cx[xlX7]to<;). To withdraw is to admit defeat. Card
games often supplement the drinking and the conversation.
Although they are games of chance rather than skill, they are
acted out with great seriousness. As each man plays his card,
this is struck down on to the table with the full force of his open
hand. Quarrels are frequent if one man wins too handsomely
and makes facetious or boasting remarks to the losers.
Yet a man ought to combine with this competitive behaviour
a generally sociable attitude. The essence of being one of a
company (rtapea) is equal sharing. Each man in his turn is
expected to buy a round of drinks for the others. Any hint of
meanness is enough to brand a man as tight-fisted (acpiyxo?),
a very serious charge. On the other hand, the man who moves
to the other extreme, who spends lavishly and indiscriminately
on entertaining others, or gambles recklessly at cards, is also
condemned. Such people are known as wasteful spenders
(gtoxtocXoi), without any sense of responsibility towards their
families.
Caution, moderation, and self-restraint are the qualities
demanded of the family head if he is to be a successful steward
of his dependants’ interests. We have already seen that in
questions of honour the head of the family is unable to hazard
himself as freely as his unmarried brother. For similar reasons


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 285
the self-regard of the head of family is not so sensitive as
that of the unmarried man. The man whose quick anger
before marriage was approved as showing the spirit of the
pallikari, is condemned as irrationally violent (£oupXo<;) if,
after his marriage, he draws a knife at the least imagined provo¬
cation. The underlying self-restraint of the head of the family,
and the fact that the more volatile unmarried shepherds are
isolated each with his own flock for the greater part of the year,
contribute to a relative degree of peace and order in Sarakatsan
communal life.
The family head must be able to cut a figure at a wedding
or a village festival. At a feast he ought to be able to drink
continuously without becoming either stupefied or aggressive.
To fall asleep even after long hours of dancing, feasting, and
drinking, is a mark of weakness. A repertoire of songs, and a
proud upright bearing in the dance, are necessary for a man’s
social prestige. Similarly his clothes and appearance on these
occasions are important. A man like Costas Pistiolis with his
unkempt appearance, clothes fouled with dirt, and his inability
to sing or dance, is a figure of mockery at the very few weddings
he attends. Graceless (dyapiaxo^), and unnatural (acpuaixo^), is
the verdict passed on this wretched man.
Finally, the degree of dependence on, or independence of,
others is a factor which differentiates the prestige of heads of
family. To be a tselingas, or a member of the dominant sibling
group of a co-operative association of families, carries the
greatest prestige. The dependence of a man without brothers
on more distant kinsmen is by no means dishonourable, but it
is clearly a situation of less prestige. But the family head who
is forced to watch the sheep of another unrelated Sarakatsanos,
or a villager, for a wage (poya) forfeits any pretension to social
reputation. It suggests that he is so poor that he cannot live
from his flock without the money supplement of the wage,
or that he has no relatives with substantial flocks with whom he
might co-operate, or that he is not acceptable to them. Custom¬
arily a shepherd’s wage is paid only partly in money, the balance
being given in kind, grain, and a pair of shoes for every six
months of service. The galling feature of becoming a wage
shepherd is the fact of dependence on an unrelated man and
the sense of being a kept man.


286 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
After a man retires from the active arrangement of affairs,
which he hands over to his eldest son, he is referred to as the
‘old man’. He is now expected to become a man who is digni¬
fied but quiet (rjauxcx;). He ought to be quiet in the very
literal sense that he does not attempt to cross the authority of
his son when the latter makes a decision or issues an order.
Quarrels between father and son detract from the dignity and
prestige of both individuals. But the old man ought also to
acquire an inward quietness of spirit, which follows from his
release from the worries and cares of leadership and the know¬
ledge that he has reached old age with his reputation for honour
untouched. For this reason he ought no longer to possess a
sensitive self-regard. For good, or ill, the record of his life will
have established his social reputation. Now he ought only to
be provoked by extreme insults. Such insults will in any case be
judged as wanton and dishonourable, and will rebound on
the reputations of those who level them. Normally there is no
shame in delivering insults, only in receiving them. But a man
of worth does not revile or pick quarrels with women, children,
or old men. These categories of persons are inviolable. On the
other hand, old men are expected to accept with dignity and
good humour the mild affectionate mockery which is directed
at them by their juniors.
But, although an old man is expected not to interfere in the
practical arrangement of everyday affairs, he is listened to with
respect in moments of moral crisis. He has passed beyond both
the excessive bravadoes of the pallikari, and the cautious
calculation of the family head. It is felt that the old man, now
near to death, sees the ultimate values in a situation of moral
conflict with a clearer eye than do his sons and men of their
generation.
- For women there are also three stages of adult life. The
first of these is the category of unmarried girls between the age
of sixteen and such time as they are sought in marriage,
generally when they are about twenty-five or twenty-six
years old.
It follows from what has already been said about the relations
between the sexes, that the critical quality demanded of the
maiden is shame. Just as the freedom from parental responsibi¬
lities permits the young man to live according to the values of


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 287
the pallikari, so the fact that she is not yet a wife and mother
allows the maiden to cultivate her shame which lies in her
seclusion from the outside world and the denial of her sexuality.
This is scarcely possible for a married woman. Not only must
she submit to her husband’s sexual embraces but her practical
duties take her to some extent into the world outside her huts.
The maiden’s cultivation of her shame demands that her
clothes hide her femininity. Her hair is hidden under a black
cotton scarf. A girl who by artifice or accident allows her
scarf to become frequently undone gains an evil reputation.
The only concession to the display of the hair is that girls grow
their hair long, plaited into pigtails. The length of these pig¬
tails, often artificially increased, is a point of pride and beauty.
Thick, black, homespun blouses and woollen cardigans are
buttoned to the neck and the wrists. The breasts are not sup¬
ported and the shapeless bodice of the blouse effectively pre¬
vents the least hint of a provocative contour. A black woollen
skirt is worn to the ankles. Generally as many as three thick
underskirts are also worn under this. The general impression of
the whole costume is one of shapelessness. The shame which is
felt at the exposure of the body, even when no other person is
present, means that undergarments are not changed for long
periods and the body between the neck and the ankles is never
washed. In contrast the hair is washed at least once a week,
and the face, hands, and feet once or twice each day.
After she reaches the age of sixteen or seventeen a maiden
must discipline her movements. No movement even in domestic
labour must be hurried. She ought to walk with a slow and
deliberate step. In the dance she must not lift her feet more than
an inch or two from the ground. A girl who is seen running
risks ridicule and a reputation for shamelessness. If, by evil
chance, she were to fall backwards ‘with her legs in the air’
(avacrxeXa) she would virtually lose her honour. A girl should
be proud but in a sense different from male pride. Thus she
ought to be tall with an upright carriage, but with a gaze which
is downcast, not level, and an expressive attitude which is
directed inwards, not outwards.
A maiden ought to be secluded, as far as this is possible, from
the gaze of the outside world. Not only does this guard her
name against slander but, if she is unhealthy or ugly, it may


288 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
help in deceiving possible suitors. But seclusion is also an
element in the cultivation of sexual shame which is essentially
hiding and turning inwards thought and facial expression which
otherwise become a threat to her own honour and that of
others. It is this knowledge of the powers of her sexuality that
causes her, out of shame, to lower her eyes and withhold a
greeting when she meets a man on a narrow path. It is often
through the eyes that a woman lures a man to disaster. The
attraction need not be consciously exercised. In keeping with
these ideas unmarried girls over sixteen years of age £o only
twice a year to church to communicate, at Easter and at the
feast of the Assumption. They are never guests at weddings
which occur outside the immediate neighbourhood and they
do not dance in public at village festivals. A girl in this age
grade is never sent to draw water at the well or to collect
firewood when a brother’s wife is available. Ideally, she ought
to spend most of her time preparing her dowry and weaving
cloth at the wooden loom. Such tasks keep her out of the
public gaze. If a girl is seen too often abroad it is soon suggested
that she is being shown off to catch a husband. And in Sara
katsan thought it is shameful for a girl either personally, or
through her family, to seek a man in marriage, or in any way
to attempt to provoke his desire.
Necessarily, the married woman and mother is not able to
have as much shame as the maiden. She cannot remain secluded.
From time to time she must leave the protective circle of the
huts to fetch water and firewood, milk goats, and rescue her
vagrant children. But this is not the same thing as saying that
she may ever act in a shameless fashion. Her clothes must be
as modest as the unmarried girl’s and her physical movements,
if they need not be as subdued, must still be carefully controlled.
A careful constraint is the quality she must display in her
public appearances. The Greek word acocppoauvr), prudence in
the sense of an inner control of feeling and action, although I
have never heard it used by Sarakatsani, seems to express
exactly what is required of the married woman in this respect.
Self-discipline is necessary precisely because she is allowed to
move about more freely and with less supervision. She must
appear modest (crepm)) and serious in disposition (ao(3aprj).
It may be remembered how the unrestrained joking of the wife


5- Sarakatsan Shepherd


I


THE HONOURABLE MAN: POSITIVE IDEALS 289
of Pistiolis provoked the criticism of other families. Women
must never show emotion in public except where it is con¬
ventionally expected, as at a death. A married daughter
meeting her father for the first time after a serious abdominal
operation from which he had not been expected to recover,
merely said in a matter of fact voice ‘How are you, father?’
A husband does not kiss his wife publicly even in farewell.
Sarakatsan women must never shout in public to each other
or their husbands as do the village women. In childbirth
extreme fortitude is expected. The woman is given a blanket
to bite so that she may not scream; and to guard against the
possibility of outsiders hearing her groans the other women
laugh and talk and, if necessary, beat tin cans. In general, any
lack of self-restraint in conventional behaviour suggests that a
woman may also be without self-control in respect to her sexual
virtue.
There is no need to elaborate again the behaviour expected of
a married woman in her roles within the family, qualities such
as devotion, humility, and a readiness to co-operate with other
women in the group. Physical strength and robustness, rather
than fragile beauty, are the physical characters admired in a
wife and mother. Without strength the woman is unlikely to
survive for long the immense strain of her labours. Health is a
question of deep concern for all Sarakatsani but especially for
the married woman. To be sick is inexcusable, unless it is an
illness that is easily diagnosed and rapidly curable.
As we have seen in an earlier chapter, the woman, especially
the mother, expresses the moral solidarity of the family.
Women become terrified when they see their men involved in a
fight, moaning aloud in their anxiety and continually crossing
themselves. But they are also quick to point the path of duty
when men hesitate. The scorn of a wife, mother, or sister, is
normally more than most men are able to tolerate. When a
man has failed to act honourably a portion of the blame falls to
the women of the family who are said to lack the courage to
shame their men into the right course of action.
But it is in her family that the community chiefly judges the
married woman. She must have sons, but one daughter is also
desirable. Her own virtues and deficiences will appear in her
children, and upon the manliness of her sons and the shame of


290 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
her daughters her reputation is dependent, just as the honour
of the children is itself contingent on the sexual virtue of their
mother.
The final stage of a woman’s life is the period between the
marriage of her eldest son and her death. She now gains a new
freedom both from the authority of her husband, who retires
about this time, and from the restrictions of social convention.
She goes freely into shops to make small purchases for the
family and may stop to pass the time of day with unrelated
men she meets. With a young bride to do the heavy work about
the hut she at last finds a respite from constant drudgery, and
her sons treat her with a new-found respect as the mistress of
the extended family. Such an old woman should have a kind
heart and treat the wives of her sons with firmness but justice.
She is their moral guide and practical adviser, to whom they
turn in difficulty or doubt. At childbirth she is the midwife who
delivers their children and gives them comfort and courage.
The reputation of an old woman is already formed on the
basis of her behaviour in earlier life. If she has passed through
her life without any questioning of her virtues, if she has sons
who are manly, and if she has a kindly personality, the com¬
munity probably approves of her. When she is above sixty
years of age, or if her husband is dead, the sexuality of woman
is considered to be spent and she is said to have a ‘clean soul’
(xaQapy) Such a woman draws the water and kneads the
bread which is taken to church at Easter. In these respects the
prestige of some old women is considerable.
But old women are also feared. Knowledge of magic tech¬
niques and remedial procedures for the evil eye are attributed
to them; and their curses are believed to be efficient ex opere
operato. Where old women have a good name they use these
skills in a socially approved manner to protect their families
from spiritual dangers. But certain old women have a reputa¬
tion for the evil and aggressive use of these powers. In these
cases there are often allegations of dishonour in earlier life. A
woman who surrenders to lust loses her soul to the Devil and
remains his familiar. Envy is often the motive ascribed to
her. Typically she is the woman accused of magically impairing
a bridegroom’s potency because he did not seek the hand of her
own daughter. The attribution of envy often rests on valid


THE HONOURABLE MAN: NEGATIVE RESTRICTIONS 291
grounds, for such women come, in the main, from families of
low prestige and little material prosperity where difficulties in
arranging honourable marriages are almost inevitable.
This completes the description of ideal types. Men and
women struggle to identify themselves with the ideal type
personality that is appropriate to their sex and time of life.
And if a man lives in conformity with these normative ex¬
pectations of social conduct, he is described as Tipuohonour¬
able. Clearly honourable, is a word with considerably
wider reference and less specificity than ti[iy), honour, since
it covers a range of qualities whose applicability is relative to
the age and sex of the person described as honourable; while,
on the other hand, the values associated with -u[zy) remain
always unchanged. If the head of a family fails to avenge the
breaking of his daughter’s betrothal because there is no adult
son, it may be argued that as an ‘honourable’ man his inaction
is due to his concern to protect his family. But if circumstances
of age and family commitments excuse to a degree the loss of
honour, nevertheless honour is lost. Opposition of the two
concepts ‘honour’ and ‘honourable’ is not frequent but, when
it does occur, the former is always the significant standard
where prestige is concerned.
4. THE HONOURABLE MAN:
NEGATIVE RESTRICTIONS
If the man who is Tifj.10q, honourable, must attempt to achieve
a pattern of ideal conduct, there are also certain negative
restrictions on action which he must accept. That these restric¬
tions concern, in almost every case, conduct that wantonly
threatens the integrity of the family life is not remarkable when
we remember on the one hand the spiritual and material
significance of the Sarakatsan family group, and on the other
the distrust, hostility, and competition which mark the relations
between families that are not related through kinship or
marriage.
Scandal which falsely questions the virtue of a maiden is
believed to be particularly wicked. It may be easily achieved
by only a few allusive remarks, whose author probably succeeds
in remaining anonymous. For this reason, perhaps, it is strongly
believed that God will punish those who spread lying scandals.


292 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
Sometimes, however, the identity of a scandalmonger becomes
known. John went to another village to catch a glimpse of the
daughter of George Carvounis whom he was considering as a
possible bride for his younger brother Demetrios. In the coffee
shop he casually mentioned the girl’s name to Michael Goulas
who, perhaps guessing the direction of the visitor’s interest,
told him that the girl was round-shouldered and absent
minded. At first John accepted this statement and without
further delay returned to his home: but later he was persuaded
by the marriage negotiator that he had been deceived, and
after a further visit the marriage contract was eventually
arranged. Goulas is relatively prosperous but already had a
reputation for meanness and taciturnity. Even before this
incident he was an infrequent visitor to the coffee-shop where he
was careful to avoid any large gathering in whose company he
might have to spend money. Meanness, envy, and unsociability
form a pattern of qualities related in Sarakatsan thinking to
evil and dishonour. The unsociable man is so because he has
something to hide, he hides what he lacks, and what he lacks
makes him envious of others. Meanness follows naturally
upon envy. Had the poison of his scandal been effective, the
crime of Goulas would probably never have become known.
In the event, he was condemned and avoided by those who
accepted John’s version of the incident, and people did not
hesitate to describe him as a man without honour (<£ti|jlo<;) .
It follows that an honourable man, when he covertly glimpses
a prospective bride, is careful never to disclose, except to trusted
kinsmen, the true purpose of his visit. For if he decides not to
ask for the girl’s hand, and this fact becomes public knowledge,
people will wonder what flaw he sees in the girl’s character
and qualities. More generally, it is evil to spread any false
scandal which may provoke insult, and response to insult,
between other men, and may lead to killings and orphans.
The hut or house is inviolable. No stranger may invade it
without an invitation. Similarly, whatever takes place within
the sanctuary of its walls is private and sacred to the members
of the family. This understanding makes possible the warmth,
affection, and easy intercourse of family life secluded from the
public gaze. It is a sin, and a source of the greatest shame, if a
man is caught with his ear to the wall of his neighbour’s house


THE HONOURABLE MAN: NEGATIVE RESTRICTIONS 293
or hut. It is, nevertheless, true that people are insatiably curious
about the details of domestic life and relations in other families.
The condemnation of eavesdropping, although ideally it points
to the recognition of the right of family privacy, in practice
merely places a negative sanction on one particularly blatant
method of obtaining information about other people’s affairs.
Men are not honourable who, possessing great physical
strength, use it to tyrannize others. They are men who without
cause or restraint attack others with insults, using their mothers’
or sisters’ names in offensive sexual contexts or uttering other
provocative blasphemies. Such a man, it is believed, purposely
stages an incident to humiliate another who must either lose
honour by not responding, or suffer a physical beating. It is
accepted that, in most instances, to insult another is neither
avoidable nor dishonourable. A sheep strays across a boundary,
another shepherd stones it, its owner insults him, blows are
exchanged. This sequence of events is to be expected in a com¬
munity where the interests of different families conflict and
each man must maintain his self-regard and the honour of the
family. But wanton and unprovoked outrage is evil.
There are, also, categories of persons whom it is always dis¬
honourable for a man to assault: women, old men, young
boys, and children, persons weaker than himself. A man who
interferes with women, or picks a quarrel with an old man or a
young boy, quickly loses his social reputation. It sometimes
occurs that, when grazing land is disputed, a family will send its
sheep under the guard of a young shepherd boy into the dis¬
puted area, knowing that the other shepherd will not improve
his case with the community, the villagers, or the police, if he
strikes the youth. However, this is a dangerous tactic since, if the
young shepherd is struck, honour demands retaliation.
There is one other category of persons that a man must not
exploit, the very poor. Whereas a Sarakatsanos will not hesitate
to trick or deceive other men, it is not honourable to take
advantage of a very poor man with only twenty or thirty ani¬
mals, particularly if he has a young family. It is the very fact of
his dependence on the generosity and forbearance of those of
greater power and prestige that morally prevents them from
exploiting him. In the face of the implicit admission of his
failure in life they cannot press home their advantage. Since


294 THE HONOURABLE MAN: NEGATIVE RESTRICTIONS
he has failed to provide adequately for his children, others must
assume a responsibility not to make their humiliating condi¬
tion worse. If men oppress the very poor of their own commu¬
nity, there is an element of hubris in their conduct that respects
neither God nor the family which is His institution.
In general, where the interests and honour of a family are
not affected, every effort ought to be made to avoid giving
needless affronts to others. When people pass in hailing dis¬
tance, conventional greetings must be carefully exchanged.
When he is asked for some information which he does not wish
to give, or when he is requested to do something which he does
not wish to do, a man ought not to reply with a curt negative;
rather he should answer in the one case with polite and elabor¬
ate evasions, and in the other with a declaration of his willing¬
ness to help, balanced by a list of insurmountable difficulties
which, nevertheless, he will struggle to overcome. Within the
limit of his pride a man ought always to appear sociable and
concerned. These prescriptions are not entirely prudential.
There is a consciousness of common humanity. Competitive
hostilities prevent men from expressing this feeling except in the
marginal areas of social life; but to ignore it entirely is not only
socially dangerous, but it denies the essential nobility and
generosity of man and provokes the anger of God.
The community, then, places certain bounds on the expres¬
sion of hostility. They are not very onerous limitations, but
clearly there may often exist doubt, in the evaluation of a man’s
conduct, as to whether he has overstepped the limit of permis¬
sible hostility and, thus, has lost his reputation for acting as an
honourable man. Inevitably the duty to further family interests,
and the limitation on the expression of hostility, conflict in
certain circumstances.
Ideally, it is maintained, a man ought to go beyond the
negative prescriptions contained in the notion of the honour¬
able man; he ought also to be positively concerned about the
interests and honour of an unrelated man, he ought to be
cpiXoTiji.o^, caring for, or loving, his honour. That is to say he
ought to be so intensely concerned about the nobility of his
own conduct that he takes into account how his actions affect
the honour and prestige of others. It is still an essentially self
regarding attitude, but the acute concern about the purity of


THE HONOURABLE MAN: NEGATIVE RESTRICTIONS 295
his own motives spills over into an incidental concern for
others. Such a man, it is said, will resist the approaches of a
woman even where she clearly wishes to be seduced, and where
there is no danger of discovery. He never uses lies or deceit to
trick another man, or takes advantage of a situation to make
another look foolish. A Sarakatsanos when defending his
conduct will often say, ‘I am a man who loves honour’. But
others will not accept this estimate of self. CHXo'Ujj.oq is an epi¬
thet never attributed by one Sarakatsanos to another un¬
related shepherd, because they believe that the responsibilities
which each individual owes to the family group absolutely
preclude his acting in this manner. On the other hand, it is
not infrequently used to characterize a patron whose protec¬
tion is effective; for here interests are complementary, not
opposed, and in the particular context of the patron-client
relationship it is possible for a man of power to appear to be
acting in this way towards his client. And, in a condescending
sense, it is possible for a patron to admit the same quality in
his client.
***
Three concepts, ‘honour’ (ri,[i.Y)), ‘honourable’ (ti|aio<;),
and ‘loving honour’ (<piXoTi[xo<;), have now been considered
in their relation to the community’s evaluation of a man’s
conduct and its implicit recognition of his prestige. Although
Ttpuoc, and cpiXoTtfxo^ indicate, in different degrees, some con¬
cern about other men, all three are essentially self-regarding
terms. In each case it is a question of a man attempting to
realize a particular ideal pattern of conduct. What interests
him is the success of this quest, not the effect of his actions on
others. The quality of being honourable has this in common with
honour, that most men are assumed to have it. It is not some¬
thing which must be competed for, but something which must
not be lost. Although there is certainly the need constantly to
re-achieve standards of conduct, the emphasis is on the fact
that most Sarakatsani have honour, and are honourable, but
that individuals, to a greater or less degree, may stray from the
path of normative virtue and lose their prestige.
Both the concepts of honour and of the honourable man


296 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
assume, ideally, a community in which all families are equal in
their possession of honour, and all men are equal in the honour¬
able discharge of the duties associated with their social roles.
Although a Sarakatsanos seldom explicity attributes prestige
to another, and struggles always to find some failings in
another’s character when he discusses him, yet by the recogni¬
tion that he gives another in public life, by the way he shares
conversation and drinking companionship, he may implicity
admit him to a position of equality. A man may also talk or
drink with a person he considers to be of inferior prestige, but
there are fine nuances of attitude which make this difference
between them very clear. If this evaluation of prestige is
acceptable to the general community the man who is treated as
an inferior will receive no public backing if he chooses to
interpret this treatment as a slight, and reacts to it violently.
The flagrant breaking of social norms leads to the withdrawal
of recognition and response, that is to a definitive loss of pres¬
tige. After it became known that Goulas had falsely denigrated
the daughter of George Carvounis he appeared even more
infrequently in public, an admission of his shame and humilia¬
tion. When he did enter the coffee-shop people greeted him
unenthusiastically, if an exchange of greetings was unavoidable;
but nobody engaged him in conversation, or bought him a
drink. His presence was tolerated, but he was tacitly expelled
from the intimacies of social life. He was no longer an equal
in honour.
Conformity is the chief defence against denigration where
people believe that the hostile criticism of others protects in
some way their own reputation. Moreover the precision of
this criticism is considerable since the social roles which a man
or woman assumes at any period of life are few in number,
and their implications are perfectly understood both by the
protagonists and those who observe them. Yet it would be too
simple a judgement to think that the concepts of honour and
the honourable man depend only on the external sanctions of
competition or mutual hostility. For the Sarakatsani believe
that these ideals and values, which breathe meaning, purpose,
and value into their lives, require no justification or sanction.
They are a way of life, not a code of interdictions.
But even social conformity does not necessarily protect


THE MATERIAL ELEMENTS IN PRESTIGE 297
reputations. Honour and prestige depend, also, on other
factors besides the possession, or apparent possession, of
personal qualities. We turn now to a discussion of these other
factors.
5. THE MATERIAL ELEMENTS IN PRESTIGE
The elements of prestige we now discuss differ from those that
have just been described in that they emphasize, not the ideal
equality of honourable men, but the inevitable inequalities
which differentiate families in terms of numbers and wealth
and certain other criteria. Whereas the concepts of honour and
the honourable man are purely social facts, the elements of
prestige we are about to examine are clearly not; they involve
demographic and ecological factors, and chance.
(a) numbers
’'Oyxoc, means mass and, by extension, social influence. The
Sarakatsani often use the word to refer to the numerical strength
of the family, particularly the number of sons or brothers. It is
noticeable that in folk-songs and folk-tales the pallikari is
typically one of five brothers, or more. The ideal type hero
is never an only son. To have many sons is the crowning pride
of a man’s life, and conversely, sterility, and to a less degree a
family of girls, is a mark of failure.
That a strong and united group of brothers supports a family’s
reputation is wholly understandable. They are able effectively
to guard its interests by physical force, they are not necessarily
dependent on others for co-operation in the management of
their flocks and, until the extended family is divided, there is
at least one unmarried brother prepared to revenge its honour.
Other men think twice before they offend a shepherd with
four or five brothers.
At the other extreme, the man without brothers, or the
father without sons, is weak. A man without a brother may be
killed with less fear of revenge than is generally probable, a
girl without a brother runs a greater risk of insult or a broken
marriage contract than do other unmarried women. For in
these circumstances the only person under any formal obliga¬
tion to retaliate is the father, a man of advancing years who
is isolated in his family without the active support of other men,


298 THE VALUES. OF PRESTIGE
and fearful that he may leave his dependants without a pro¬
tector. But although the predicament of a man in this position is
appreciated by other Sarakatsani, it scarcely mitigates the
loss of prestige. If a man has no adult son to protect his daugh¬
ter’s virtue, the fault is his. For weakness is despised. In itself
it tends to diminish the prestige of a family even before it has
led to dishonour. And men who are isolated without brothers or
sons are noticeably less proud, less confident, and in some cases
are, by Sarakatsan standards, pathetically diffident and ner¬
vous—overt personality traits which I have not observed in
men born into large sibling groups with a number of brothers.
(b) wealth
To (3io is the property owned by a family, particularly its
flocks of sheep and goats, the mules and horses. Although money
invested in other objects of prestige such as village houses is
important, animals in a pastoral community are the significant
form of wealth and a critical element in social reputation.
Today there are few families that own more than five hundred
sheep and goats. A household with more than 150 animals
holds a respectable position in the community, one with 80 to
120 animals is on the brink of poverty, while a group with less
than 40 animals is despicably poor. Yet the question of wealth
is not quite so simple as this arithmetical scale might suggest.
The Myriounis extended family of five brothers have 476
animals. Only the flocks of two other families in the Neochori
local group exceed theirs in size. So long as they remain a
single family with this large flock and five adult men to serve
and protect it, the family is clearly, in this respect, a group of
high prestige among the Neochori shepherds and indeed in the
total community. But when the family is forced to divide into a
group of autonomous families, each brother will possess only
80-90 sheep and goats; it may, therefore, seem that at a single
stroke they will fall from one end of the wealth-prestige scale
to the other. In fact, however, so long as the families of a
group of brothers hold together in a co-operative association,
folding their sheep together in a single flock (although with
different ear-signs), they continue to derive some prestige from
the aggregate number of their animals. Still it will now be said,
for instance, that Theodoros has only 80 sheep and goats of his


THE MATERIAL ELEMENTS IN PRESTIGE 299
own, but four children to provide for. As soon as people begin
to calculate in this manner, the inadequacy of his personal
wealth emerges, and to some extent his prestige falls. Men
with no brothers who are forced to join the ‘company’ of a
cousin or an affine gain some prestige and cover from the size of
the co-operating group of which they form a part, but the
size of their own flock is always very precisely appreciated
by outsiders. The worst situation is that of the family head
with only a few animals who is forced to become a wage
shepherd to an unrelated man, since in this case poverty
associated with dependence on a stranger destroys prestige.
Taken together, numbers and wealth are the necessary
material foundation for high family presdge. They imply the
independence of the family within the community, both eco¬
nomically in the sense that the group is viable (and possibly
free of debt), and technically in that it has enough manpower
to manage its flocks unaided. It suggests that the family will
possess powerful patrons outside the community and that in
the competition for winter pastures it will be in a better position
to rent grazing land. A village generally prefers to let an area
of reasonable size, and to negotiate with a prosperous group
able to provide a steady and profitable flow of bribes and
presents. Also, it is the family of wealth and numbers, with powerful
patrons and sufficient winter grazing, that draws to itself a
number of less fortunate kinsmen. The dependence and support
of these men make the protecting family the nucleus of a
co-operative association, extending yet further its strength,
influence, and prestige. It attracts many passing visits from
other kinsmen. Men do not often visit kinsmen of low prestige,
since such association only draws attention to a relationship
which is best forgotten: on the other hand, they take every
opportunity to pay a call on a kinsman of position and repute,
to cultivate a relationship that is a source of possible support in
future misfortune and, of itself, brings a measure of vicarious
prestige.
Men like Pistiolis, who are at the lowest level of the community
hierarchy of prestige, seldom receive a visitor from one year’s
end to another. Indeed, the number of visitors that a family
receives is generally a reliable index of its reputation. It is


300 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
always known in the neighbourhood when a family has had
guests (fj.ouCTa<pip?]8e^); their quality, relationship, and the
possible reasons for their visit are debated in detail by the other
families. Comment is often caustic, but the very interest which
is aroused is a recognition of the importance of the event. If
a family of numbers and wealth entertains a patron from the
town, this is a triumph which it enjoys to the full. Meat is
killed and wine is bought. Largesse is demanded of the family
which entertains many guests. And in some mysterious way
neighbouring families discover the measure of generosity, or
meanness, which a host has shown to his visitors; and criticism,
encouraged by envy, will not spare him. In hospitality
(cpiXo^evia), a virtue in which the Sarakatsani believe they are
naturally pre-eminent, there is always a strong element of
competition.
(c) LINEAGE5
Nxafxapi, lineage, refers to the quality of the kindred relation¬
ships which a man inherits from both his father and mother;
and the importance of this for prestige has already been dis¬
cussed in chapter three. If he possesses the surname of one of
the leading families, or is directly descended, preferably in the
male line, from a famous tselingas of the last century, this also
is a significant element in a man’s reputation. It might appear
to indicate that for the highest and the lowest families, at least,
reputation of lineage is patrilineally inherited. There is, indeed,
a bias in favour of relationships traced through the father
(particularly agnatic relationships) in the evaluation of vxapapt
in all families, and this is certainly accentuated at either
extreme of the hierarchy of prestige, where certain family
names are associated with the idea of high or low reputation,
but the inheritance of vxaptapt remains fundamentally bilateral.
In general, as we shall see in a discussion of marriage, men are
careful to marry their sons or daughters into families of equal
reputation. Where a member of a leading family takes a bride
of markedly lower lineage, the community withdraws from the
new family the recognition of the prestige associated with the
husband’s surname by the simple procedure of refusing to call
5 Lineage, here, does not, of course, refer to a unilineal descent group but to the quality of pedigree through all lines of descent.


THE MATERIAL ELEMENTS IN PRESTIGE 301
him by this name, and substituting some nickname, or
patronymic.
But the prestige of lineage depends itself on the attributes
of wealth and numbers which have already been examined. It
does not help a poor man to claim that his great-grandfather
was a famous tselingas with two thousand sheep. It is true that a
father, or grandfather, who had the necessary wealth to support
the nobility of his line is a saving grace for those who have lost
their flocks, but it is a small one. The children of a leading
family whose wealth has vanished suffer the same fate as the
children of a family whose father, although from a family of
the ‘first lineage’, has married beneath himself, that is they
literally ‘lose’ their name, the surname of the father. Lineage
refers to prestige in the past, while the essence of competition
in this community is concerned with influence in the present.
Therefore, a ‘name’, without the means to support it, is not
recognized.
This, in practice, is the mechanism that restricts the number
of families that can successfully claim to be of ‘first lineage’.
Not all the collateral relatives of a leading family are recognized
as equivalent in prestige, for without numbers and wealth they
cannot aspire to this. And it is inherently unlikely that they
will all possess these advantages. There are two important
limiting factors. With the rule of equal inheritance between
brothers, the size of the group of brothers which is necessary
to build and protect wealth and prestige, itself is the cause, in
the next generation, of the fragmentation of this wealth. The
second factor is disease. Twenty years ago sheep-pox, and
today liver-fluke, are diseases capable of decimating a flock
within a short time. However honourable a man, the loss of
his flocks must diminish his own prestige to some degree, and
that of his children more seriously.
(d) marriages
To CTUfi7ie0epi6 is the affinal relationship between two pre¬
viously unrelated families. It is in the early days of summer
that the families of men who wish to take wives in the following
year begin to consider the question of finding suitable affines
and, during these weeks, the gossip of the community is much
concerned with news and speculation about matchmaking.


302 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
The problem of choosing a bride or accepting a bridegroom
involves a consideration of the other family’s total prestige, the
personal qualities of the candidate bride or bridegroom, and
the question of dowry. The prestige that a family will derive
from the marriage depends-on these three interrelated factors.
For severely practical reasons a man may value certain ele¬
ments of the prestige of the family into which he is trying to
marry, more highly than others. He may seek an affinal
connexion with a family possessing abundant pastures, or a
group with a number of brothers, if he himself has none and
proposes to co-operate with them. A family rich in stock is
sought when the object is to extract a large dowry. Never¬
theless, whichever of these, or other motives, is in the forefront
of a man’s mind, he will not leave out of account, if he has any
self-regard, the reputation of the girl’s family for honour and
honourable conduct.
A man will not normally marry into a family he considers to
be of lower prestige. He often attempts to take a wife from a
family of somewhat higher prestige than his own, and such
is the haunting fear of a daughter remaining unmarried that
her family will sometimes allow a daughter without striking
attractions to marry a man from a somewhat inferior family.
This is so especially in a case where a man has two or three
daughters. For in the case where the girl’s lineage is distinctly
superior to the bridegroom’s, the bride’s family is unlikely to
pay any considerable sum in money or sheep in addition to the
traditional dowry.
But, in other cases, the gradual introduction since 1945 of
a system of dowry that includes the transfer of sheep and money
(dowry-wealth) as well as the traditional blankets, furnishings,
and clothes, may work against the slightly hypergamous trend
that was previously a feature of some marriages in the com¬
munity. To take a substantial amount of dowry-wealth is, now,
a point of prestige in itself, and also in the sense that it increases
the total wealth of the bridegroom’s family. Thus it happens,
more frequently than in earlier years, that a man will take
a girl from a family considered to be of a somewhat lower
prestige, if this short-coming is balanced by the advantage and
prestige of 50 or 60 sheep.
A large amount of dowry-wealth in sheep or money serves as


THE MATERIAL ELEMENTS IN PRESTIGE 303
a makeweight that balances various shortcomings in the bride
whether these refer to the prestige ranking of her family, or to
some personal inadequacy, or both. The virtuous daughter of
Leonidas Gogolos was the victim of a road accident when she
was a small girl. She walks with a limp, and her leg, below
the knee, is pitifully thin and ugly with scar tissue. But it
is generally believed that she will not remain unmarried if
her father is willing to give her to a man of undistinguished
family together with a dowry of 50 sheep.
In some instances brides are taken without dowry-wealth.
Necessarily, marriages between poor families are generally
contracted without dowry-wealth. And it sometimes happens
that a family of wealth, when it takes a girl from a less affluent
group, may, with a gesture of pride, waive the question of
dowry-wealth. Pride, however, may also work in the opposite
direction. A family of the ‘first lineage’ was asked for dowry
wealth of fifty sheep by a suitor of good repute. To show his
wealth, to make plain the superiority of his family, and to
place the groom under obligation to him, the father of the girl
gave a hundred.
It is always said in general discussions of the matter that a
girl who loses her honour, if she is not killed by her father, will
never marry. The few cases of such women in the community
do not support this statement. The wife of George Raftis was
the daughter of a family of high repute. It is alleged that
when she was a young woman she was seduced by a member of
a wealthy and powerful Tsoumanis family which pastured its
sheep on the land of the same summer village. The family
did not dare to attack this powerful group, nor did they have
the necessary resolve to execute the girl. Although the girl’s
family was of respectable lineage and some wealth, the loss of
her honour and the inactivity of its men utterly destroyed its
reputation. But finally, at the age of 39, the woman was sought
in marriage by Raftis, a poor man of no standing, a wage
shepherd with a handful of sheep whose wife had died leaving
him with two young daughters.
Marriage to a widower is always a possibility for women
whose eligibility for marriage is in some way anomalous. There
is little prestige in marrying a widower, and the fathers of
respectable families do not normally entertain the idea of


304 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
marrying their virgin daughters to widowers. Thus widowers,
in the main, are the means by which non-virgins, ‘used women’,
whether they be honourable widows or dishonoured maidens,
are fitted into the community institutions of family and marri¬
age. Naturally, the dishonoured amongst their number tend
to marry the widowers of lower prestige, and sometimes
bachelors who are of poor family or with some physical
imperfection. A widower takes a dishonoured woman as a
second wife when her remaining childbearing years are few,
and he takes care not to make her pregnant. In effect, she is
little more than a domestic slave caring for the children of
another woman. But any marriage, almost, is better than the
shame of‘remaining’. I have only one well documented case of
a healthy woman who did not marry, but the deep fear of this
fate is nevertheless very real, and often expressed.
(e) the display of pride
IlepiQcpavia, pride, is a sentiment that a man is entitled to
feel if he possesses the elements of prestige. But in the present
context we are considering a number of situations where men
and their families are expected, or are permitted, to give
certain expressive demonstrations of pride.
The importance of constant self-assertion if a man is to
hold his own in the coffee-shop oratory and boasting has
already been mentioned. This is the necessary minimum for
social reputation. But a successful display of pride demands
something more. Here, the etymology of the word u7tepY)<pavo<;,
proud, is relevant.6 From wrap and cpouvopai it is one who shows
himself above his fellows. In displaying pride a man must
behave in such a way as to show that he believes himself to
be superior to other persons. It requires a suggestion of pre¬
sumptuousness, a subtle air of arrogance, that suggests a man
is dominating the gathering, and yet does not proceed as far as
an insult or open challenge to others. It is an important ele¬
ment in prestige, but clearly it is also largely derivative from
it. A poor man of inferior lineage or low prestige cannot give
himself these airs without provoking ridicule.
Not only attitudes, actions, and persons are described as
•Cf. Archbishop Trench, Synonyms of the New Testament, London, 1871, p.96.


THE MATERIAL ELEMENTS IN PRESTIGE 305
‘having pride’, but also things. A shepherd’s crook with a
carved wooden handle is the privilege of respected heads of
family. It has pride. A tselingas of high lineage trains a horse as
a pravext, an animal that will trot with the foreleg and hindleg
moving together. Mounted on such a beast his pride is un¬
assailable by lesser individuals. Other men might, without
difficulty, train such an animal; a wage shepherd or a brother
without an independent household might easily strut about the
village square with a carved shepherd’s crook in his hand. But
these objects have pride only when a status has been achieved;
they merely produce ridicule when it has been usurped.
The migrations between the plains and the mountains
(particularly the spring journeys) are important occasions for
the display of family pride, for then the entire community is
on the road together with their flocks and their horses and
mules. This is an opportunity to make a direct physical
appraisal of a family, its bearing, and its wealth, in a way that
at other times is not possible. ‘For pride’, on these occasions,
horses and mules are decorated with coloured saddle-cloths,
the sheep are loaded with large and sonorous bells; and if the
spring shearing precedes the journey, one, two, or sometimes
three long tufts of fleece (cpouvre?) are left on their backs. One
or two late-born lambs that have been adopted as household
pets are gaily decorated with lengths of coloured woollen cord.
Despite the hardships of the journey, heat and dust in the
spring, often continuous rain in the autumn, the men and
women also give much attention to their own appearances.
The women wear their best skirts, bodices, and shoes, the men
are continually combing their hair and straightening their
jackets. If a family has taken a new bride during the previous
six months, this woman, decked in the finest clothes of her
dowry, leads the first mule in the train so that she may be
seen and remarked by all.
Similarly, a wedding is a setting for the display of pride.
Men show pride in the dance by the dignity of their demeanour;
each struggles to show himself first in skill and enthusiasm
(fi.epaxX7js). The visible pride of the riders in the bridegroom’s
procession brings prestige to his family, but also the individual
riders vie with one another in the quality of their horses and
accoutrements and the severity of their bearing. For pride,


306 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
again, the dowry of the bride is formally presented article by
article to the assembled guests, first at the bride’s home, and
afterwards at the home of the groom.
The display of pride is an important element in prestige but
it must itself be based on reality. The pride of a Sarakatsanos
may always be disproportionate in the view of other men but
when it is wholly false it leads only to mockery.
***
The elements of prestige have been divided into two cate¬
gories. The first category emphasizes the ideal equality, in the
community, of families and individuals of the same sex and age
group. Their ideal equality rests on the belief that most Sara
katsani have honour and are honourable, that they struggle to
achieve in their lives ideal patterns of conduct. These elements
of prestige require of the individual man or woman constant
effort and self-discipline. An idea of the essential nobility of
the Sarakatsani underlies them. The second category of ele¬
ments of prestige are factors which to a considerable degree he
beyond the power of the individual, or even the group, to
alter. They are all factors (numbers, wealth, leadership of
co-operating groups, opportunities to show hospitality, line¬
age, marriage alliances, and the effective display of pride)
which far from positing the ideal equality of families lead
inevitably to their differentiation in terms of prestige. And,
necessarily, they are caught up in ideas of fate, envy, and the
fallen condition of this world.
The two categories of elements of prestige are nevertheless
interdependent and both must figure in the evaluation of a
family’s total prestige. Without the imputation of honour and
the quality of being honourable, wealth and numbers only
represent a prestige which is, at best, equivocal. And weakness,
or poverty, draws in its train doubts about the honour of a
family, however socially conformist it may be.
6. THE SANCTIONS OF PRESTIGE VALUES
One sanction for the conduct, qualities, and achievements
that have been presented as elements in the prestige of an
individual, or a family, is the simple fact of the loss of this


THE SANCTIONS OF PRESTIGE VALUES 307
prestige, a withdrawal of recognition, a kind of social abandon¬
ment. But there are also important sanctions related to this
withdrawal of social recognition which are internal to the
social personality. I refer to the sentiments of self-regard
(eYGH(T[j.6<;)7 and shame (vTpo7r/]).
Fundamentally, self-regard is the inner necessity and obliga¬
tion to achieve identity with the image of the ideal self. This
image, of course, is a stereotype presented by society, there is
little room for individual speculation, nor would it occur to
most Sarakatsani to question its traditional content.
We have seen, in chapter seven, how a father instils in his
children a sense of responsibility and loyalty to the family.
They learn that in all their actions they are judged by others
as representatives of their family and that, therefore, they must
compete and hold their own with other children of the same
age and sex. A boy learns from songs and stories (and later at
school) to identify himself with the values of the idealized
heroes of the Revolution. He comes to believe in the super¬
human deeds of Katsandonis and Kolokotronis, and in the
ability of men to repeat them where the cause has sanctity and
men possess honour.
At a more prosaic level he learns, from the interminable
criticism of other people’s failings, what conduct is expected
of himself. The significant point about the image of the ideal
self is that it is directed towards what must be positively
achieved, that is to the ideal of a social personality with parti¬
cular moral qualities but also certain material attributes. It is
not concerned with a code of moral or ritual interdictions that
simply must not be transgressed. Failure to achieve what he
expects of himself brings self-disesteem and shame.
A man may feel the loss of self-regard even where his
dishonourable conduct, or personal inadequacy, is unlikely
to become known to others. But more often than not self
regard also has an external point of reference. A man is con¬
stantly anxious as to how his actions and qualities will appear
7 Although the Sarakatsani use the adjective <ptX6Tt.po(; to describe a person who ‘loves honour’, they do not use the substantive to <pi.X6Tt.po, ‘a sense* of this honour, which is a concept of popular thought extremely common in many parts of Greece. It is clear, however, that 6ywfop6i; is a close analogue.


308 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
in the eyes of others, and how their evaluation of himself relates
to the ideal image of how he would wish to appear. Clearly,
the more the publicity that surrounds any particular area of
social life, the greater is the efficacy of the sentiment of self
regard as a sanction of approved qualities and conduct.
A man’s self-regard is typically molested where he is in¬
sulted or defamed or believes himself to be so treated. When
another person suggests by even indirect allusion that a man is
dishonourable or weak he molests his self-regard (7rpoer(3aXXei
tov eyo)'i(7[i.6 tou). Or when a man by deed, or word, behaves
towards another in such a way as to suggest that he is not
worthy of consideration and recognition, he again molests his
self-regard; for a man only acts in this way towards another
when he considers him to be of lesser reputation and, by in¬
ference, less honourable. In such circumstances the core of a
man’s social personality is touched, his manliness and pre
potence are questioned. Then, the only remedy is to attack his
detractors with knife or stick.
There are many instances of such a situation. The stoning
of a sheep by another shepherd when it has strayed across a
boundary. An unguarded public remark which the recipient
judges others will consider to be an unanswered insult if he
does not retaliate. It is, in part, self-regard which urges the
abduction of a girl when a candidate bridegroom has been
refused by the girl’s father. Christos Kazoukas was refused
the hand of the daughter of Paschos. She was too young, the
girl’s father said, and as she was, indeed, only twenty-two,
Christos was prepared to accept this explanation rather than
undertake the dangerous business of abduction. But George
Carvounis, a second cousin to Christos, heard a different tale
that the girl’s family had refused Christos because it was said
that he was sexually impotent and inadequate. In fact, the
girl’s mother had dubbed him by a nickname, ‘Lame penis’
(xoi>Tao7rouT(roc), which referred literally to these supposed
short-comings. Christos had a smooth skin, fine features and a
strikingly high-pitched voice. Simply, he did not look the part
of a pallikari. There was, therefore, all the greater urgency
that he should reply to these damning allegations; for the
alternative was ridicule and shame. His kinsmen offered united
moral support and the unspoken threat of abandonment if


THE SANCTIONS OF PRESTIGE VALUES 309
he did nothing. In due course, the girl was abducted and
agreed to marry Christos out of terror at the threats made by
the Kazoukas family against her own people if she did not consent.
Self-regard is a subjective and personal sentiment. At the
same time the situations which provoke it are socially defined.
All those elements of prestige, whether of the individual or
the family, affect it and are sanctioned by it. A man’s self
regard leads him to conserve his honour, to act honourably, to
strive after wealth, to act proudly and arrogantly and so on.
Self-regard inhibits any conduct on which an interpretation of
weakness may be placed. For instance, the Sarakatsani seldom
accept or give apologies. ‘A pardon is not acceptable’ (Sev
7riaveTat. to 7iapvTov), it is said. Similarly, bargaining between
a shepherd and a livestock merchant is extremely difficult
because the self-regard of the seller will not allow him to accept
a price which he thinks other men will laugh at, even though he
may admit to himself that in relation to the state of the market
and the condition of his stock the merchant’s offer is not un¬
reasonable. For this reason a merchant employs a Sarakat
sanos8 who from his local knowledge advises him how far
each man may be pressed in negotiation. It is also his task to
assure the shepherd that he has made a good bargain. It is
self-regard, again, that prevents a Sarakatsanos from reaching
a settlement out of court when his animals have trespassed on
other people’s land. He prefers to go to law knowing in advance
that he must pay double the costs of a private agreement. Any
compromise would be an admission of weakness in a personal
confrontation. Defeat in the courts, on the other hand, is
merely defeat by the power of the impersonal State apparatus,
which in any case, it is agreed, is corrupt and inimical to the
interests of the community.
Self-regard is a kind of appetitive tension between what a
man is and what he ought to be. In this context, however, what
a man is depends on the evaluation by the community of what
a man is alleged to be, or to have done. The need of a man,
socially and psychologically, to identify the community’s
evaluation of himself with his own ideal image is so great that
8 Known as a xoXaou^o<;, a guide.


310 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
it leads, very often, to a greater concern with appearances
than reality. Or, rather, appearances become reality. In the
appearance of being a pallikari, he becomes a pallikari. There
is often a kind of unconscious cheating. A man boasts and
asserts himself the more when there is little fear that he may be
called on to prove himself. And knives are pulled with greater
bravado when it is certain that others are present to prevent
their use.
Ifself-regard is the need to achieve an identity with the image
of an ideal self, shame is the emotion experienced by an
individual when he clearly fails to do so. As in the case of self
regard, although a man may feel shame for short-comings or
sufferings that remain secret, it involves at all times some idea
of comparison with the achievements of others, and it is all the
more acute when a man’s inadequacy is publicly exposed. A
man may feel shame not only for his own short-comings, but
also for those of other persons with whom he is closely identified
in any situation. And it may also be a sentiment imputed by
others, when they make critical comments on a man’s behaviour
or condition. They may say that his conduct in a particular
situation is a matter for shame, that is, if he were an honourable
man, his sense of shame would have prevented him from
acting in the way that he did.
Like self-regard, shame is a sanction for all those elements
that are relevant to the prestige of a family, or an individual.
Thus shame relates not only to conduct which is morally bad,
but also to any kind of conduct which is only conventionally
deviant. And anything which leads to, or is the basis of, low
prestige is a matter for shame. Whatever may be the underlying
psychological character ofshame, its cultural definition amongst
the Sarakatsani is the sense or fear of failure. The failure exists
to the extent that a man does not possess some attribute re¬
quired by the image of his ideal self. When a man acts disgrace¬
fully he hurts himself. When he is poor or weak, by suffering
this condition he condemns himself. And the sense of shame,
an essentially internal sanction of action, is related to the
external threat of social abandonment, the fear that the com¬
munity will judge him to be ‘lost’ (xoc[iivo<;).
A number of examples illustrate the relation between
shame and failure. When Nasios attempted to seduce a


THE SANCTIONS OF PRESTIGE VALUES 311
married woman he showed that he was not honourable and,
further, by hiding in his hut he revealed his cowardice and
exposed his manliness to public ridicule. He failed to measure
up to the critical qualities required of a man; this was a matter
for shame. The young son of Pistiolis, who possesses only
sixty sheep, told me that on migrations the family is so ashamed
of its poverty that it delays its departure until a few days after
the other Sarakatsani have left the village. ‘Otherwise people
would see how poor we were and would laugh at us.’ Eleu
therios has a small son who is subject to fits. His brother
admitted that this was a matter for shame because people
would say that God was punishing the child for its parents’
sins. It is a mark of indelible parental failure if children are
spotted by any moral or physical blemish. A modest maiden
has shame in two respects. She is aware of the power of her
sexuality; in a sense she has already failed by being a woman
at all, and for this she ‘feels shame’. She is also a girl ‘with
shame’ in the sense that she carefully conforms to a strict code of
modest behaviour and movement. This expresses the fear of
failure in disciplining sexuality according to the ideal pattern
of maidenly conduct. Finally, a little child feels shame before
a stranger because it lacks experience of a situation it does not
understand. It fears failure and criticism. ‘The child is ashamed.
He does not understand yet,’ says the father.
These different contextual situations in which the concept
of shame is used are linked by the notion of failure, or fear of
failure, whether the emphasis on inadequacy is internal to the
social personality, producing feelings of self-disesteem, or
whether, as is more often the case, these sentiments are made
more acute through public loss of prestige. The laughter, ridi¬
cule, and insults actually experienced, or more often imagined,
are the marks of failure so far as the external reference of
shame is concerned. Between the two sanctions of right con¬
duct, self-regard, and shame, there is a close affinity. While
self-regard is the positive incentive to achieve what is expected,
shame is the fear, or the realization, of not achieving it. T'his
difference of emphasis is reflected in the fact that to some extent
these two sentiments are sex-linked. The idea of self-regard
contains the notion of a positive competitive attitude, especially
between men of similar age and standing. Women do not go


312 THE VALUES. OF PRESTIGE
out into the world and compete with one another. On the
contrary, their activities centre round the hearth where they
ought to co-operate with their kinswomen and, if they are
married, with their sisters-in-law and the wives of the husband’s
brothers. When a woman is said to have self-regard, this
generally refers to a touchy and unco-operative attitude with
other women in the extended family or co-operating group;
it is, then, not a quality for self-congratulation.
Conversely, where shame is the fear of failure or criticism
that demands a careful modest constrained demeanour, it is
said that women have more shame than men. The Sarakatsani
point out that since it is the sexuality of women which provokes
men and not the reverse, women have the greater need to be
constantly restrained in their thoughts and actions by a sense
of sexual shame. Furthermore, since men must battle with one
another in the community and show craftiness in their dealings
with prominent and useful people outside its boundaries, it is
clear that the restrictive regime, which an extreme sense of
shame imposes on an individual, is incompatible with the
social role of the head of family who must generally assert
himself and on occasion for the sake of his family may even be
forced into questionable actions. This is not to say that a man
does not equally feel shame when he is judged to have failed.
It means, rather, that unlike a woman he cannot remain always
in a state of shame, in the sense of guarding against imminent
failure by a careful restriction of behaviour and movement.
***
The fear of gossip and ridicule is closely related to the two
concepts of self-regard and shame. The prestige of an individual,
or a family, is constantly being evaluated and re-evaluated in
the community through gossip about personalities and events.
To be gossiped about is in most cases to be criticized adversely,
and since people enjoy this recreation they laugh at and ridicule
the object of their discussion. The knowledge, or the imagining,
of this ridicule and laughter is an important element in a man’s
feelings of shame. For if the outside world judges him to be a
failure he has also failed to live up to his own ideal image of
himself which depends on success.


THE SANCTIONS OF PRESTIGE VALUES 313
The laughter of other people is invited in all situations where
a man, or a group, has failed. ‘The world laughs’ (6 x6afio?
yeXaei) at a man when he fails to defend his honour; for instance,
when he does not reply to an affront. Equally, it laughs at
him when he makes some slip in conventional behaviour, or
when he is made to look ridiculous. It laughs at him if he does
not adequately fulfil his social role. Conversely, the need to
conform to social morality and etiquette is often supported
by the statement that, if a man does not act in a particular way,
‘the world will laugh at him’. To be ridiculous (yeXoio*;) is
to lack the recognition essential for social reputation.
The ridicule or laughter which a man suffers, or imagines
he is suffering, is seldom crudely inflicted to his face. The
sanction is more subtle. But he is not slow to sense that he is
being ridiculed. A man who is insensitive to the attitudes of
others (and among the Sarakatsani such men are rare) will
speedily be informed of the situation through some kinsman
who, because of their association, is anxious that the ridiculed
man should reassert his position, if that is possible, or, in a case
of moral delinquency, should mend his ways.
There are, however, certain situations where open ridicule
may occur. A man of very low prestige who is ‘lost’ may
sometimes be ridiculed to his face. On the rare occasions when
Costas Pistiolis is in any social gathering he is invariably asked
to sing, since this ability is one of the many social graces he
does not possess. Everybody laughs. Mild as such mockery
may seem, no honourable member of this community would
accept it passively. Open ridicule may also happen at weddings
when men lose their sense of caution. At one wedding a guest
who was addled and aggressive from his drinking called for
more ouzo. A bottle was brought to him. He poured a glass
and drank it, only to discover it was water. A roar of laughter
went up, a pointed comment on the weakness of a man unable
to drink and retain a measure of self-control. At once his knife
was out, but it was quickly wrenched from his hand and the
man was thrown bodily from the arbour.
Although the community is dispersed, news travels with
rapidity. Any interesting event is widely known throughout
the community within two or three days. Weddings and festivals
are centres of news exchange, but heads of families, and some


314 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
older women, are constantly in Jannina for business and
shopping. Here, most Sarakatsani eat and sleep at the Korakas
Hotel and this establishment is an important clearing-house
for business and gossip. The eagerness for news and gossip is
intense. The consciousness of being a community stimulates the
circulation of news which is all the more urgent because people
do not live in a closely settled community. In its turn the very
process of evaluating the conduct of other Sarakatsani is a
reaffirmation of the solidarity and indeed of the existence of
the community as such. Gossip and denigration are carried
out in terms of a system of values. Every criticism of a man’s
conduct, whether it is justified or not, is a restatement of a value.
Gossip within the family is uninhibited and subjective.
Fantastic allegations of wrongdoing are levelled against other
families of the community on negligible evidence. No doubt
this contributes to the group’s morale and suggests, by contrast,
its own integrity. Public discussion of a man’s conduct, for
instance in a coffee-shop, is more careful and somewhat more
factual. Vicious slander without a foundation of hearsay fact
merely destroys the accuser’s own reputation for being an
honourable man. Slander of this kind might be an answerable
provocation if any kinsman of the ridiculed man were present
at the time. If there is some, but not conclusive, evidence to
condemn a man, a spirited debate will take place and it is in
these circumstances that the presence of an articulate kinsman
may help to salvage a man’s reputation. But where a man’s
fault or failure seems to be clearly established the whole
assembly will unite with obvious pleasure to ridicule a man.
In this way they emphasize their own probity and prestige.
Then, even the presence of kinsmen will not save a man, and
if his shortcomings are sufficiently serious they may be driven
to abandon him.
Gossip never ceases and it seizes on the pettiest of details and
circumstances. In situations which especially shock or pique the
community’s imagination satirical songs are sometimes written.
Song writing, of course, is the work of individuals but it de¬
pends on the community whether the songs will be accepted
and remembered. This is a most feared sanction since the
ridicule lives on in the song. The song will not be sung to the
victim’s face, but he will learn of it, and be bitterly shamed.


THE SANCTIONS OF PRESTIGE VALUES 315
The songs are not, in fact, particularly daring or insulting
in themselves: therein, perhaps, lies their effect. Of Nasios
Karapheris the woman chaser it is sung, ‘Up at Kouphos
where they used to grow corn, Nasios is making a place to lie
down. Hidden away in the long grasses, he makes secret eyes.
Mitsos draws out his knife to kill Nasios Karapheris.’
A song may be composed about a man who, although he has
not erred morally, has been made to look ridiculous. For this,
too, is failure. Theodoros Kallis is a physically strong man with
a bullying character. He is wealthy and many people fear his
violent nature. They were not sorry, therefore, when he
suffered the following misfortune.
‘On the twenty-first of January went Theodoros, the poor
devil, to see his little mother-in-law. But when he arose in the
morning, “Oh dear oh dear, they have cut the tail of my horse,
dear mother-in-law!” Then cursed the mother-in-law, “May
two unmarried boys never live to set up their wedding
standards!” ’
A man’s failure in any respect may also be prolonged in the
community’s memory by giving him a nickname (izoLpxxao^xki).
Flattering nicknames are sometimes given to members of the
leading families. Costas Katsanos in his younger days was known
as ‘the flyer’ (cpevyocq) because of his great speed of movement up
or down hill. But more often nicknames ridicule a man. Thus
a man who was caught in the act of stealing maize from a
villager’s garden, was named xala.[m6xLoq, an adjective
fabricated from the Greek word for this grain. The name was
not a comment on the morality of theft but the indignity of
discovery and failure.
I have said enough to indicate how public opinion function¬
ing through gossip and ridicule acts to sanction the com¬
munity’s prestige values. Gossip and its outcome, ridicule, are
in a certain manner the external sanctions which support the
internal sanctions of individual action, self-regard and the
sense of shame. The subtlety of gossip and ridicule as sanctions
is that, since they do not generally operate in his presence,
they offer a man no excuse for violent response. He may
respond to the insult of an individual, but not to the laughter
of the community which he senses, but seldom hears.


316 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
7. A SYSTEM OF VALUES
Sarakatsan society offers men only three important corporate
memberships: in the family, the local community, and the
nation. Little conflict arises between the obligations created
by these different commitments. The interests of the family
are normally contained within the purposes of the community
when it faces other communities, those of the community
are contained within the aims of the nation opposed to the
rest of the world. In war, the actions of a soldier reflect simul¬
taneously on the honour of his family, his community, and his
nation. And in each instance the honour and interests of the
individual and of the group are mutually implicated.
Honour refers to an exclusive identification. The honour
of a group is opposed to the honour of another if only for the
reason that there is an implicit comparison between different
honours in reference to a pattern of ideal attributes. But
honour also reflects on the correct status relations between
individuals or groups. When two groups are in communication
the behaviour of the persons representing them implies, on
either side, a certain evaluation of the other group. If a man
suffers treatment that is less than his due, his honour, and the
honour of the group he represents, are diminished. But in the
experience of the Sarakatsani the interests and prestige of
families, communities, and nations are inevitably in colli¬
sion, and this must lead men to exploit others where they can.
Thus relations between different groups always carry the threat
of the depreciation of the honour of one for the benefit of the
other. Although relations between families, communities, and
nations refer, ideally, to an equality in honour, yet at each
level those who represent these groups must struggle with all
their resources of courage and self-discipline to maintain these
ideal status relations. These struggles are intense. And in every
significant context of action the world is necessarily divided
with dramatic definition into own people and strangers,
friends and enemies. Consequently relationship radically
affects the forms of approved behaviour. It is a virtue generally
to cheat, deceive, and lie to non-kinsmen, but the same conduct
towards kinsmen would be shameful and, often, sinful as
well. The values of honour and prestige are exclusive and


A SYSTEM OF VALUES 317
particularist. They have a moral content of their own but they
cannot be referred to any universal moral principle.
For the Sarakatsani, family honour is the chief concern.
Indeed, the honour of community or nation is, in their view,
a projection of the concept of family honour. This honour is
shared in two senses; intensively, by those whose reputation
is identified by their membership in the same family; extensively,
by the community of families sharing in common a system of
values by which they judge one another’s position and per¬
formance. Honour depends not upon the consciences of the
individuals in a family whose reputation is under scrutiny,
but on the concessions and reluctant approval of other families.
Most of these are unrelated and hostile. Since the threat of
denigration is continuous, it must be balanced by the repeated
exhibition of those qualities that support honour and prestige:
self-assertive courage in men, modest virtue in women. In the
one case by social convention, in the other by its negative
character, the presence of these qualities is more often revealed
by attitudes and appearances than substantive proof. There is an
emphasis on opinions and appearances, not facts. The con¬
sequences of action rather than the intentions behind it are
important. This does not mean that private shame for un¬
discovered failure does not exist. But, inevitably, ideas about
individual moral responsibility are blurred, and undiscovered
shame is not as morally serious as public disgrace.
Reputation is impossible without strength. Poverty is a
mark of failure, not a virtue. Strength in sheep and in men
encourages others to respect a family’s honour, it attracts
dependent kinsmen whose support further extends influence
and prestige. Honour and strength are linked. If a family is
without sons the call of honour may find a man in the dilemma
that if honour is lost the moral existence of the family collapses,
or if honour is vindicated his family becomes a leaderless
group of women and children dependent on the generosity of
kinsmen, a condition which must eventually affect prestige
and, perhaps, honour as well. Honour, and the obligation to
die for it, is the ideal value, but the sacrifice necessarily weakens
the family. Honour remains integral, but becomes more
vulnerable. A family needs at least one man in the role of
unmarried brother whose unreflecting courage guards its


318 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
honour, and one man in the role of married leader whose
prudence and self-control secures its material strength. This
possibility depends on the number of sons in a family and the
stage of its development. Yet in the critical and unfriendly view
of others a family must always be in a position to defend
itself against outrage. Weakness is shameful and circumstances
never excuse it. The corollary to this notion is that, within
limits, it is normally preferable to insult than to be insulted,
to exploit than to be exploited.
The emphasis on strength appears in the importance, in
moral judgements, of health, effectiveness (SpacrorjpioTT)*;),
skill and cleverness. Skill conserves material strength; animals
are less likely to become diseased, inferior pastures are not
chosen. A man ought to be ‘able’ in the sense of able to provide,
and he needs cleverness of the kind that foresees future threats
in time. Health is imperative in this scheme of things; chronic
sickness or deformity is inexcusable. There is little sentiment¬
ality. Questions of honour are not complicated by notions of
chivalrous conduct. An honour killing is accomplished without
warning by a bullet fired from behind cover, or a knife in the
back. This does not mean that Sarakatsani are cowards; they
are, in fact, immensely brave. But, continually, the accent is
on effective action, the achievement of success, the avoidance of
failure. Ends matter more than means. Consequently, those
qualities and attributes that are necessary for strength tend to
be considered as morally good, those that lead to weakness as
morally bad. Sarakatsani would condemn any display of
excessive altruism on the grounds that it inevitably weakens a
person’s own family and strengthens the family of another;
it would be, at best, imprudent, and in a situation where it
clearly damaged the interests of the family it would be immoral.
Strength and prowess, then, matter more than ethical good¬
ness. Indeed a man is only good when he is also by implica¬
tion, able and strong. Although aimless violence is dishonour¬
able there is no missing the pleasure it gives when a man is
forced to kill; nor the prestige which it brings him. For there is
no more conclusive way of showing that you are stronger than
by taking away the other man’s life.
The form of this system of values is related to three features
of the social structure: the first of these is the complementary


A SYSTEM OF VALUES 319
opposition of the sexes. It is consistent with the radical character
of this opposition that most virtues are sex-linked. Since the
sensuality of sex is a critical flaw in human nature, chastity
becomes an important element in honour, around which those
complementary virtues, the self-assertive qualities of the men,
the modest constricted virtues of the women, are organized in
defence. At the same time the moral superiority of the male
sex in this opposition allows the main burden of the responsi¬
bility for original sin to be borne by the woman in a way that
does not compromise the inherent nobility of man which is,
necessarily, a premise of a system of values based on ideas of
honour. And the complementary opposition of the two sexes
and their ideal attributes allows the introduction of those
quieter feminine virtues of love, modesty, and a disposition to
co-operate, without inconsistency in relation to the self
assertive male values, and in the context of inner family life
where they are most necessary to express the moral solidarity of
the family and support those who face a hostile and competitive
world.
The second relevant feature ofsocial structure is the solidarity
of the family, and the categorical nature of obligations between
its members. This solidarity is both active and passive. What¬
ever is done or suffered by one member equally affects the
honour and shame of the others. No actor stands in isolation
without reference to his membership in a family. He carries
always a weight of representative responsibility when his
actions are observed or even speculated on by others. And, on
the other hand, the family is a small group in which there is
no security of anonymity when other members fail. In these
circumstances, where there is individual responsibility but no
certainty of individual justice, important values are variations
on the theme of strength and weakness, success and failure.
Without self-confidence, prepotence, and skill, a man is ‘lost’
(^apevcx;), morally as well as practically.
The relationships of hostility between families unconnected
by ties of kinship or marriage are the third feature of social
structure. They are oppositions consistent with a particular
form of bilateral kinship system, and the absence of any forms
of political or economic co-operation other than those based
on relationship or patronage. These potentially destructive


320 THE VALUES OF PRESTIGE
confrontations are reconciled through the acceptance of
competition for prestige as the end of individual and family
purpose. For it turns men’s minds from thoughts of the physical
destruction of their enemies to the alternative of their social
humiliation, a form of opposition more compatible with the
vulnerable quality of the shepherd’s life. At the same time these
particular values, if they deny the practicability of uni¬
versal moral principles and individual justice, present an
image of man that is in some ways heroic and not ignoble.
Men must be brave and women virtuous to achieve ideal, one
might say mythical, forms of acting and being. They are
encouraged in the need to discipline their weaknesses by the
severity of their mutual criticism; roles are few, and values
unambiguous in a common field of experience. But judge¬
ments concern the effectiveness of the total social personality,
an amalgam of virtues, skills, and material attributes; and not
abstract qualities of moral excellence.
In competitive institutions, although feelings of hostility
may remain unabated, opposition becomes a form of mutual
dependence; the more men are opposed in this way, the more
they have need of one another. The values of prestige recom¬
mend the intense consideration of own interests and honour,
accentuating always the exclusiveness and separation of one
family from another. Yet they also impose the condition that
prestige depends on the attentions and opinions of others. They
separate; and, at the same time, they create a necessary and
close interdependence in the common membership of a
community in honour.


XI
THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
1. GOD AND SIN
I
do not propose to discuss in any detail the ritual practices
of Sarakatsan religious life, nor the peripheral complex
of magic techniques which are sometimes linked to religious
beliefs and sometimes not. My purpose is to indicate the general
character of Sarakatsan religious conceptions and to show in
what way a form of Christian belief may co-exist with the
values of honour and prestige that were examined in the
previous chapter.
In certain respects the relationship of the Sarakatsani to the
Greek Orthodox Church, as an institution, is tenuous. They
have never been regular churchgoers. Before 1938 their huts
were often far from villages and few adult men and women
would have been able to escape from the imperative routines
of family and flocks to make the long journey over difficult
country. And since they have come to live in or near the vil¬
lages, the almost open ridicule and contempt of the villagers
have discouraged the Sarakatsani from altering this traditional
pattern.
When a Sarakatsanos goes to church he normally does so
with the intention of taking Holy Communion, and this he
ought to do, preferably, twice a year. During Easter week
almost every man, woman, and child in the community will
find a means of attending one of the services, and the majority
will discover an opportunity to communicate again later in
the year on the feast day of the Assumption of the All Holy
Mother of God on 15th August, or at Christmas, or at one of
the other more important festivals of the Church.
The Eucharist, in the simple way that they understand it as
the sacrifice of Christ’s blood which overcomes the barrier of sin
separating man from God, is the central belief of Sarakatsan
religious life. Otherwise, when they attend a service they under¬
stand nothing of the structure of the liturgy, they do not know
that the liturgy is a symbolic representation of the life and
sacrifice of Christ. Only the shorter and more frequently


322 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
repeated phrases of the liturgy are intelligible to them. Yet,
although the Sarakatsani are not oppressed by any complexities
of religious belief, they have deep faith, and a simple but
relatively clear, if sometimes unorthodox, conception of God
the Father, Christ the Son, the All Holy Mother of God, and
the Saints; the divine archetype family, and those trans¬
figured human beings who through the self-discipline and
sanctity of their lives are the appropriate models for the gui¬
dance of weaker men, and the natural intercessors between
them and God.
I have met no Sarakatsanos who doubts the existence of
God. Such a question seems to them unintelligent. A man
takes out his watch and asks, 'Somebody made this watch, is it
possible that nobody made the world?’ God is the creator of
the universe and all things in it. And since this is so, anything
which is not explicable in terms of simple physical causation
tends to be referred to Him: or in the case of evil phenomena
to the Devil. He exists in and beyond the boundless space of
the sky. He does not descend to earth, yet from on high He
is able to see and hear the acts and words of men as well
as to know their unspoken intentions. Sarakatsani do not limit
their image of God by precise physical definition, He is a
‘certain power’ (xcfocoia SuvafAY)), who is nevertheless personal,
concerned with the acts of man, and capable, on a spiritual
plane, of the emotions of anger and love.
God has an absolute power to impose His will. God’s omni¬
potence and his own complementary dependence is the simple
model of the shepherd’s relationship to God. A Sarakatsanos
says, ‘All our work is with God’ (6X7) tj SouXeta pa<; elvai (xe
tov 0eo). From God derives life itself. He gives or withholds
children from a man, He sends the rain for the essential grass.
The sheep itself is in a peculiar sense God’s animal, a ‘sacred
thing’ (lepo 7tpafxa). A Sarakatsan folk myth tells how God
was with the All Holy One in a cave when she was bearing
Christ. He came out of the cave to find fire, and seeing a flock
of sheep and their shepherd He passed silently through, without
frightening them or rousing the dogs, approached the shep¬
herd’s fire and took a burning ember. As He retraced His
steps He blessed the sheep that they should be His own for
all time.


GOD AND SIN 323
God not only provides, He protects. He is the Father of
men who are His children, ‘God protects the people’ (6 0eo<;
cpoXaei tov xocrpio) they say. God is concerned about His crea¬
tures and, because they are dependent on Him, He is disposed
to have pity and compassion on them. ‘Lord have mercy on us’,
this simple and often repeated petition of the liturgy is well
understood. God’s mercy is a reflection of His love. And this,
since God is all powerful, must be an unmotivated favour,
except in the sense that a father loves his children simply
because they are his children. When a Sarakatsanos asserts
‘We believe in God’ (7uaTEuop,e arov 0eo) he means not only
that they believe intellectually in His existence, but that
they have confidence in Him. He is thought of as being at
once distant from men yet close to them. The absolute power
of God, and also His absolute goodness, place a great distance
between God and sinful men and this, perhaps, is reflected in
the notion of His dwelling in the infinity of the sky. But since
He created men with the potentiality of divinity, He remains
concerned with their affairs. Sarakatsani feel that they are
able to approach Him directly with simple petitions pleading
for protection from evil, sickness, or want.
But in His concern for the beings He has created God, also,
judges and punishes. He is a just God in the sense that no evil¬
doer ever escapes His judgement, yet the form this punishment
assumes frequently appears to men to be capricious and un¬
predictable. Sometimes vengeance is not immediate but falls
on the children of a guilty person. Very often misfortune seems
utterly undeserved by the sufferer himself and must be simply
ascribed to the will of God which passes his understanding;
even other men, who seldom find it difficult to refer a mis¬
fortune suffered by another to the sin committed, will some¬
times agree that the measure of God’s punishment is hard,
particularly when the life of a small child is taken. God the
Father, then, appears to the Sarakatsani under two aspects;
first as He who provides and cares, He who is merciful,
approachable and near at hand; but secondly as the judge and
avenger, distant and without pity. Under the second aspect
there is a sense of ambivalence, even resentment, in the atti¬
tude to God, not unlike the tension and strain that enters the
relations of a Sarakatsanos with his earthly father. He cannot


324 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
escape from the omnipotence of God and the futility of resis¬
tance, yet his humility is not entirely unconditional.
Man is noble but between him and God there is always a
barrier of sin. Sarakatsani express this in the idea of ‘a weight’
(hex. fitxpoc,) which depresses the spirit and in a literal sense
draws man downwards away from God. The Sarakatsani,
however, make a distinction between two kinds of sin, personal
sin (ol afxapTte? [hxq) and ancestral sin (oi apiapTizc, tou ’ASapi).
both divide man from God but while the individual is wholly
responsible for personal sins, he feels little sense of guilt for the
other kind of sin which he sees as a pre-existing condition of
the world into which he was born.
The sins for which a man is individually responsible fall into
three categories. The first includes those acts which are wanton
and personal insults to God Himself, acts in which a man shows
himself to be impious (a<re(3y)<;) through a denial or mockery
of God. Perjury is the greatest of these; for in this act a man
calls upon God to witness the truth of his words, that is, he
attempts the impossible task of implicating God as a collabora¬
tor in his lie. Although the Sarakatsanos lies as a matter of
habit and policy at other times, it is only in situations of great
difficulty that he will perjure himself.
The second category of personal sins relates to family life,
and especially to certain fundamental and axiomatic attitudes
and duties on which the moral solidarity of the family institution
is based. The family for the Sarakatsanos is not merely a human
and social group, it is a complex of relations divinely instituted
and sanctioned by God. On a transcendent and spiritual plane,
the Holy Family of God the Father, the Mother of Christ, and
Christ the Son, is the archetype for all earthly families. As
love, respect, compassion, relate the three Holy Persons, so
these qualities ought to regulate the relations of the members of
earthly families. Where this is not so there is a condition of
sin and God’s punishment may be expected. Thus this category
of sins includes the unnecessary brutality of fathers towards
small children; provoking a premature separation of sons’
households; laziness or dereliction of duty which leads a family
into serious want; in that sense, gambling or chronic drunken¬
ness; public insult to a parent by a son or daughter; mal¬
treatment of aged parents; striking a parent; physical violence


GOD AND SIN 325
between brothers; wanton cruelty to, or neglect of, the family’s horses, sheep or goats.
The third category of sins are those which exist in the field
of general morality in the behaviour of one man towards
another. A man feels little obligation to discipline himself in
his conduct towards an unrelated person, but there are limits
which ought not to be transgressed, and generally speaking
these limits are related to the consequences that immoderate
behaviour would have for the victim’s family. To exploit a
very poor man, or refuse charity to a beggar, is sinful. To
slander the name of an unmarried girl is a sin. In these in¬
stances there enters a hint of the idea of hubris, an arrogance
of act, or thought, overstepping bounds set by God and in¬
volving wrongdoing to others which threatens the moral or
physical existence of a family and is not excusable on grounds
of self-interest.
The essence of sin is that, in one form or another, it is wilful
rebellion against God and His institutions. And for such an
act of personal sin a man may expect to be punished by God
through sickness, death, or some catastrophe that leads his
family into want. Catastrophe or misfortune is by no means
always explained as the punishment of God, but where a man
is guilty of a known sin, any misfortune which befalls him, or
another member of his immediate family, will certainly be
recognized as divine punishment. As I have already suggested,
Sarakatsani are skilled in listing the sins of others. The sufferer
and his kin, on the other hand, will more often ascribe their
ill luck not to God’s wrath, but to the evil eye, a manifestation
of other men’s sinful and envious natures.
It must be stressed that the Sarakatsani visualize the punish¬
ment of God as being realized essentially in this world either
against themselves, or their children. Hell is a place of vaporous
darkness where sinful men suffer in cauldrons of pitch; Para¬
dise is a plain of well-watered grass covered with spring flowers.
These conceptions exist, yet seem to make little impression. If
an evil man dies unscathed, men are not content with thoughts
of the torments he may suffer in Hell; they concentrate their
attention on the misfortunes which will certainly overtake
his children in this world. The wages of sin is death. But it
is not the spiritual death which follows physical death which


326 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
holds any real terror for the Sarakatsanos, but rather the
spiritual death which precedes physical death. For sin interrupts
the communion between man and God on whose provision and
protection a man and his family are, in the final analysis,
entirely dependent. The consistency between this view of
divine punishment and the system of prestige values is clear
enough. In both cases it is the events of this life, and this world,
which are significant.
But the Sarakatsani do not expect to be punished individu¬
ally in the same way for ancestral sin. For this kind of sin refers
to the general human condition not to individual transgression
of particular interdictions. The two sins they particularly
include under this rubric are sensuality and envy. Both are
conditions which imply an attachment to material things which
leads man away from God. And it is equally inevitable that
every man must succumb, in some degree, to both these sins.
However, the attitude to sensuality and envy is not pre¬
cisely the same. The consequences of sensuality, as we have
seen elsewhere, destroy the integrity and honour of the family.
Sensuality is a condition which constantly threatens to under¬
mine this institution from within. It must, therefore, be dis¬
ciplined by all the strength and will of each man and woman.
But unlike the protestant puritan who attempts to win his
battle by destroying sensuality itself, and feels individually
responsible and guilty when he fails, the Sarakatsanos accepts
that sensuality is part of the human condition, but that he
must struggle to contain and discipline it. The important
restraints are essentially external. Unmarried men and women
who are not kinsmen or affines have few legitimate opportuni¬
ties to meet, and none to speak to one another. The unmarried
daughter seldom goes to the well alone, and when she passes
a man on the path she lowers her eyes. It is a tight prudential
control, collectively exercised. For, as the Sarakatsani say,
‘If you put your hand in the fire, it gets burnt’. A man of God
may win an individual and inward control over the condition of
sensuality, but ordinary men need the help of kinsmen and the
support of institutions in the unequal fight. Sensuality is part
of ancestral sin and as such a man or woman does not feel
individually guilty for its existence. But it remains a threat to
honour. And in this respect the struggle to control it is so


GOD AND SIN 327
fundamental to the belief in their own nobility that, in a com¬
munity where masculine values are paramount, it has led
the Sarakatsani to a form of sexual dualism in which women
must bear the main responsibility for this collective sin; a respon¬
sibility, however, which is not to be confused with individual guilt.
Envy does not threaten the family in the same way from
within, nor does it conflict with the values of honour and pride.
Indeed, the emphasis on competitive values, the need to achieve
identity with ideal types of social personality, the competitive
opposition of family groups, are social values and relationships
which inevitably breed envy. Like the fingers on a hand, all
men are not the same, Sarakatsani explain. Those who are less
fortunate, or less evidently honourable, must envy those others
who surpass them. Envy, they admit, leads directly to deceit
and cunning. In the form of the evil eye it is a force of psychic
hostility and wickedness that pervades the world, spiritually
separating man from man, and man from God. Focused
though the eyes of an envious man, it may create physical effects
of sickness and destruction. These things, it is agreed, are evil,
but they arise from the external conditions of a world of limited
resources and contrary human wills, not from the conscious
sinfulness of individual men. The force of envy is felt to be so
pervasive that it would be futile to struggle to control it, as
one must struggle to control sensuality; particularly since a
man may put the evil eye on another without conscious know¬
ledge or intention. All that an honourable man can do is to
avoid in his conscious actions the consequences of excessive
envy. For the observer the difference between the ancestral
sins of sensuality and envy is that while the former compromises
honour, the latter, in a certain sense, is a consequence of it.
Naturally, the Sarakatsani do not see the distinction in quite
this form.
The difference between personal and ancestral sin is not
unrelated to the distinction between the Sarakatsan senses of
guilt and shame. Both guilt and shame are internal states of
conscience but whereas shame is concerned with a man’s
failure to approach some ideal pattern of conduct, the reference
of guilt and personal sin is to the transgression of interdicted
limits. Shame relates to failure especially in comparisons with


328 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
the achievements of others. It has an external sanction in the
social abandonment which in some degree always accompanies
public shame. The sense of guilt, on the other hand, is the
consequence of acts which defy the commandments of God,
whether they concern the relations between man and God, or
social responsibilities that follow from common membership
in a group. The external sanction against sin is the punishment
inflicted by God and sometimes by a social group. An act may,
of course, provoke both a sense of guilt and feelings of shame.
Which term will be used depends on whether the act is more
generally regarded under the aspect of transgression, or of
failure to live up to an ideal pattern of behaviour. Ancestral
sin, however, arouses no sense of guilt. Sensuality and envy are
not individual transgressions. Yet the first of these sins must be
disciplined and the second, at least, prevented from becoming
the guiding principle of a man’s actions. But this discipline is
a matter of relative success or failure, and therefore of shame
not guilt.
In this way the Sarakatsani, through their view of ancestral
sin, reconcile the nobility of man with his sinfulness. Nobility
depends on the struggle of the individual to achieve ideal
patterns of being and behaviour. The sins which produce feel¬
ings of individual guilt and, therefore, qualify the nobility of
his nature, do not constitute an impressive list, and they are
transgressions which the Sarakatsani do not easily commit.
On the other hand, the ancestral sins recognized by the Sara¬
katsani are general forms of sin which the Orthodox Church
holds to be peculiarly grave and, moreover, sins which the
Sarakatsani are continually committing; in the instance of
sensuality because they are human, and in the case of envy
because the social institutions and values encourage it. Yet
the Sarakatsanos avoids any personal responsibility for these
sins by insisting that they are exterior to his individual will.
They corrupt the condition in which he must live, but not the
potentialities of his nature. Sensuality was the consequence of
Adam’s sin, not his. Envy was the sin of the Devil in his act of
rebellion against God. Many Sarakatsani are able to explain
these details, all are aware, at least, that these sins have been
part of the human condition since the moment of the Fall,
a condition against which a man must certainly struggle, but


GOD AND SIN 329
which does not necessarily compromise the nobility of his soul.
Nevertheless these are sins which separate man from God.
If they provoke no sense of personal guilt, a man feels a heavi¬
ness, a depression of his spirit, when he thinks of his need to be
near God, and of this inherited condition of sinfulness. In the
previous chapter I mentioned how the Sarakatsani think of
the years of youth as the time of moral excellence. Later come
responsibilities and the need for cunning, deceit, and lies.
There is grudging admiration for the expertise of the shrewd
leader but regret that the means to success must be these.
‘If only we had trust in one another’, is the most common
Sarakatsan expression of utopian values. In the face of the
many external threats to their way of life they are profoundly
conscious of their own disunion. They sense, also, the distance
between the heroic quality of their ideals and the often petty
quarrels, or hypocritical posturings, of everyday living. But,
they say, there is nothing the individual can do to alter the
corrupt forms and conditions of life in this world. In this situa¬
tion sin, for which they are not responsible, separates the Sara¬
katsani from God. It requires the grace of God, conferred
through the sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist, to make
communion possible. Inevitably if a child dies unbaptized,
innocent of the world but still implicated in the appalling
consequences of original sin, its soul is lost. The baptized Sara
katsanos is free of the original guilt, yet participation in the
world of sin again separates him from God and he requires,
therefore, the periodical renewal of his state of grace which the
Eucharist effects. The related elements in Sarakatsan religious
life, then, are simply these: the nobility of the Sarakatsani,
ancestral sin in the forms of sensuality and envy for which they
are not individually responsible, the consequences of this
condition of sin which separates them from God, the sacra¬
ments which reunite them to Him.
Ideas about fate are related to these notions of sin. The
Sarakatsani, in common with most Greek villagers, believe
that on the third night after the birth of a child, the three
Fates (Motpe<;), in the form of three old women, visit the infant’s
cradle and write the child’s fate. What they decree is unalter¬
able. In a number of folk stories the mother overhears the
words of the Fates and attempts to prevent some stroke of


330 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
ill fortune, generally an early death in predicted circumstances.
Her precautions, however, are inevitably unsuccessful.
If the Sarakatsani are pressed to give the provenance and
authority of these Fates, they reply that ultimately all things are
written by God. But it would be incorrect to suggest that the
Greek villager or shepherd faces all the events of his life in
terms of a simple determinism. They do not think that the
Fates arrange every detail of an individual’s life. Length of
life and amounts of good and ill fortune provide an external
framework within which man must still struggle to avoid
dishonour. These external circumstances tell nothing of the
individual’s moral worth; nor within the general limits set by
his fate is a man prevented from seeking the help and protection
of God. In practice, of course, the individual does not know
what the Fates have decided for him. But the knowledge that
something has, indeed, been decided encourages him to face
dangers with manliness and honour, since no bullet or knife can
reach its mark before the appointed hour of death.
When a man suffers misfortune, although different people
may variously refer it to God’s punishment or the evil eye, all
will agree that it was ‘written from God’ (ypa[j.[iivo outo tov 0eo).
Similarly, in commenting on differences of fortune they will
say, ‘God wills it thus, some are higher, some are lower’.
In Sarakatsan thought, existence in a world of external
necessity is inevitably involved with ancestral sin. The multi¬
plicity of contrary wills, the division of the sexes, the limitations
of time, space, and physical resources lead to acts which are
sinful. These conditions imply that the material circumstances
of men must be different. Instead of being united in their
respect for God, men are divided by their different personal
circumstances and their self-interested struggle to improve
them. Thus although Sarakatsani would not systematize their
thoughts in this way, there is implied a link between ancestral
sin and fate. The notion that particular events in life, and
the circumstances of an individual’s social position are ‘written
from God’ indicates not so much God’s detailed pre-arrange¬
ment of each individual’s life, as His prevision of what will
happen to each of His created beings caught up in the contin¬
gencies of sin and fate and yet still exercising in the struggle a
measure of free will.


THE DEVIL 331
We have already seen that the Sarakatsan notion of ancestral
sin releases the individual from any considerable personal sense
of guilt. The idea of fate is used, but with less success, to release
a man from the shame that accompanies certain kinds of failure.
In the struggle for social prestige men must have self-regard and
supreme confidence in themselves. They must believe that in
any situation they will be omnicompetent to meet and defeat
their rivals. The one fear of failure is the intervention of the
external event, the disease which decimates the flock, the
sterility of a wife. In almost every prayer, however short, a
Sarakatsanos prays for ‘good luck’. And when misfortune
strikes, a man’s helplessness before ‘what has been written’ is
used to soften the sense of failure both in the presentation of
events to outsiders and to himself. The element of external
necessity, the restriction of absolute free will, and therefore the
idea of fate, were introduced into the world through ancestral
sin. By his claim that this kind of sin, or failure, is exterior to
his individual will the Sarakatsan attempts to defend and assert
his nobility and strength.
2. THE DEVIL
Over against God stands the Devil, the agent and first cause
of evil. Most Sarakatsani are aware of his angelic origin and
his rebellion against God, the consequence of which was
expulsion from Heaven. Evil, they think, entered the universe
through the contrary will of the Devil, and particularly in the
form of envy. When God flings a thunderbolt to earth it
passes 40 fathoms into the earth. After 40 days it reappears
on the surface. It lies there for a moment, a splendour of gold,
only to be claimed at once by the Devil who in his envy and
fury urinates on the sacred weapon, turning it black and use¬
less. The sin of the Devil was anterior to that of Adam: already
in the form of the tempting serpent he led the first man to his
Fall. He knows that he cannot dethrone God, but in his envy
he attempts to destroy creation from within by turning human
freedom towards evil. His work is always to turn away human
souls from their natural path to God. The created world is not
evil but the Devil has corrupted it with the infection of his
evil. ‘The Devil has the earth, God the Heavens’, the shepherds
often say.


332 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
The object of the Devil, then, is the moral corruption of men,
or where this is not possible, their physical destruction. ‘The
Devil has many feet’, the Sarakatsani say, that is he works out
his evil in many ways, assuming whatever physical appearance
is suitable for his purpose. His power is immense, and parti¬
cularly in the wilderness of the mountains and forests outside
the circle of men’s homes protected by the grace of God; but
even these he sometimes enters. In keeping with his degene¬
rate nature, he appears frequently in the form of an animal,
particularly as a black dog, donkey or hare. Sometimes he is
half man, half animal, with the horned head of a goat or wild
pig. When he assumes human form it is generally as an old
man with a face black ‘like an Arab’s’, and lame. In one
instance he appeared as an Orthodox priest in red robes.
Often he pretends to be a Sarakatsanos.
Some manifestations of the Devil are plural and of either
sex. Bands of male demons (craTavapodoi) with their leader,
the black-faced limping Devil, sometimes surround and
torment a lonely shepherd. The female demons are referred
to as the ‘ladies who bring good luck’ (ot xocAoru^ep), a pro¬
pitiatory euphemism which indicates their power. Like their
masculine counterparts, these ladies prefer the mountain
tops and forests or a lonely meadow in the plain. Very often
they join the male demons in an orgiastic feast, the ladies of
good luck wearing long white dresses, the men in kilts of the
same colour. On a night when there is wind one often hears the
Devil’s music in the high crags. Otherwise, when they are not
feasting or provoking humans, they pass their time eternally
spinning and very occasionally one comes across a spindle
weight1 which one of them has dropped.
Devils come from and disappear into the air which is thickly
populated with spirits both good and evil, although in the
imagination of the Sarakatsani the evil forms predominate.
One of the tasks of Christ on earth was to cleanse the air of
evil spirits so that the souls of men could find a way upwards
to God. High winds, storms, whirlwinds are manifestations of
demonic power. Evil spirits of the air (t<x aepixa) may attack
men and animals invisibly or without taking a more definitive
1 On the sites of prehistoric settlements.


THE DEVIL 333
form than a passing shadow. Two considerable classes of these
spirits are ‘the shadows’ (xa Icrxicofiaxa) and ‘the things that
terrify’ (xa crxiaopaxa)2. After dark the former beat men and
women about the head and are the cause of pains in the head
and teeth. They take hold of your arm or foot and twist it
sharply. The latter often attack the sheep which in panic
rush in different directions, injuring one another and los¬
ing milk.
General disasters such as earthquakes and epidemics may be
attributed to the Devil. But his attacks are more often specific.
If the Devil falls on the sheep and mounts them, they swell,
bleed, and die. If he comes on a shepherd asleep, particularly
under a fig or mulberry tree, he presses down with great
weight on his chest and attempts to strangle him. The same
ladies of good fortune may attack a woman who goes out alone
to cut wood, with the possible consequences of paralysis, or
loss of speech. But the greatest peril is that you may step,
unknowingly, on the table (7taxa<; xa(3Xa) which a group of
male and female demons have laid for a feast. One woman who
had this misfortune was found unconscious on the mountain¬
side. She remained in a deep coma, shrinking physically,
until she died after 40 days the size of a small child.
But the persons who are in greatest danger from direct attack
by the Devil are ‘the innocent’ (aQcooi), particularly children
and young unmarried shepherds. For the innocent person
‘does not work in his heart’ (Sev epya^exou ctxyjv xapSia), he
does not require to plot or scheme against others; his being
is not seized by envy and jealousy, he is quiet, detached and
free. The Devil unable yet to corrupt them morally, turns in a
fury of frustration to destroy them physically. Two years ago
a child was found dead with its hands over its face and no mark
of injury on its body. It was not wearing a phylactery and
nobody doubts that this was the work of the Devil. A young
shepherd sleeping on a hillside awoke to see a Sarakatsanos
with a mule approaching him from a precipice where no man
or animal could pass. There was a moon and he saw that the
man’s face was black. He said he was Michael Raftis but the
shepherd knew he was the Devil. Fortunately he was using
2 Cf. Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. pX0'


334 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
a bag of salt for a pillow, an apotropaic substance of the greatest
value. By keeping his head on this pillow and refusing to speak
he passed the night in safety. In any appearance of the Devil
the essential precaution is to remain absolutely silent whatever
the provocation or enticement. Once a man has entered into
communion with him through speech he cannot resist his
will. The least consequence, then, is the loss of speech; but
more probably the shepherd is led to his death over the edge of
a precipice. These apparitions of the Devil are relatively
common and most shepherds claim to have had at least one
experience of this terrifying kind.
Fortunately God has provided the Sarakatsani with a variety
of prophylactic means to resist most forms of demonic assault.
Some of these are magic substances with apotropaic power,
others are symbolic objects, words, or rituals, through which the
grace of God confronts and defeats the power of evil. The Devil
cannot approach salt or pass through fire. The exorcisms of
St. Basil the Great and St. John Chrysostom are read by the
priest over possessed persons or animals. Thornbush, a cross
of box-wood, incense, are powerful repellants. The red egg that
is dyed on the Thursday of Holy Week, or the head of a viper
that has been sanctified at forty liturgies in church, is buried
in the sheep-fold to protect the animals. A powerful protection
for a woman who is approached by the ladies of good fortune
is a black-handled knife, particularly when formed as a cross
with its scabbard. A shot from a pistol or rifle when fired with
the left hand dismisses any apparition. In one instance a child’s
phylactery contained the dried blood of a priest shot by
Communists. But perhaps the most efficient protection, in an
armoury which this miscellany does not exhaust, is simply
the sign of the cross and the silent repetition of the thought, ‘I
see Christ, I see Christ, I see Christ’.
The Sarakatsani tell how the Devil hid himself in the Ark of
Noah and, when the waters rose, made a hole in the side to
sink it. But Noah, warned by God, ordered the snake to block
the opening with its head. The Devil knows that he cannot
accomplish the external destruction of the world, but he is not
convinced that he cannot destroy the relationship between
God and man by corrupting it from within. For the salvation
of this relationship depends, in part at least, on the desire of


THE DEVIL 335
man to maintain it. God and the Devil fight a pitiless and
continuing battle for the souls of men in which the three
elements are the grace of God, the cunning and subtlety of the Devil, and the will of man.
The Sarakatsani consider man’s nature to be a trichotomy
of spirit (jn/eupa), soul (^xh) aitd body (xoppt, atopa). Although
the views of different informants are not always clear about
these conceptions (for instance some people see no difference
between spirit and soul) nevertheless certain simple assumptions
appear to be generally accepted. Spirit and soul together form
a union with the body, yet between the first two elements and
the last there is a degree of tension. The body is a product of
material and sexual generation and is only redeemed when
it is informed by a nobility of spirit and soul. Conversely, when
the spirit and soul are dependent on the values and passions of
the body, honour is lost and communion with God is interrupted.
Spirit refers to the intellect plus the conscience (ouveiS^crr)). Its
natural inclination is to prompt a man’s will (QeXirjcnr)) to lead his
soul upwards to God. It is associated in a man’s mind with the
Holy Spirit ("Ayto Ilveupia) whose nature is imperfectly under¬
stood as some divine energy. Evil befalls where for one reason
or another the power of a man’s spirit is not guiding his actions.
Of a Sarakatsanos who shot his brother accidentally while clean¬
ing a pistol it was said that ‘his spirit was not concentrated’. And
it was added, ‘the Devil pulled the trigger’. The soul is the divine
element in the individual human personality. Perhaps spirit and
soul are the active and substantive aspects of the same thing.
Both tend in an upward direction, but if the individual as a total
personality does not incline his will towards God they become
corrupted by their union with merely material things; and this
is the end sought by the Devil.
It may be added that where a high value is given to the
related notions of honour, strength, and manliness, the body
cannot be considered as evil in itself,3 but only under the aspect
of its subjection to sensual passion. Man, then, who is by nature
noble, normally moves towards a closer communion with
God but is held back partly by the sinful condition of the world
* In this connexion it is interesting to note that the dualist Bogomil her esy made little headway in Greece.


336 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
in which he lives, and sometimes more seriously by the turning
of his free will away from God. God will come to a man’s
aid when he asks for it with a ‘good heart’, but he cannot enter
the struggle unless a man wills it. It is upon this contingency
that the Devil’s opportunity and power depend.
The Sarakatsani believe that if a man is willing to deny
Christ and surrender his soul to the Devil almost any material
favour is obtainable, poor men gain power and wealth, and
sterile women have children. The Devil keeps a ledger in which
these contracts are signed in blood. This is a somewhat melo¬
dramatic image of the general belief that any sudden or extra¬
ordinary material success can only be the result of communion
with the Devil. In the world as it is, occasional dealings with the
Evil One may be unavoidable, but too close a communion
represents the surrender of the soul.
Similarly, sexual temptation by the Devil is expressed in
the belief that the Devil is able to have sexual intercourse with
women in their sleep and that ladies of good luck, who are
peculiarly beautiful even if their hair is sometimes in the form of
snakes, try to entice lonely shepherds into ‘marriage’. These,
generally, are the explanations accepted for erotic dreams in
either sex.
One of the Devil’s chief concerns is to corrupt those relation¬
ships of kinship and marriage which are instituted by God.
His success is, of course, more likely where there are inherent
strains, particularly between the wives of brothers still living
in an extended family, and sometimes between the brothers
themselves. When a man attacked and nearly strangled his
brother, his kinsmen said, ‘The Devil has entered into him’
(jj.7aixe 6 8ia(3oXo<; piiaa) and they meant this in a quite literal
sense. When the shepherds hear of a case of father-daughter
incest among the villagers of Thesprotia, they only understand
this enormity as a plot of the Devil.
It must be emphasized that the sins into which a man is led
by the Devil’s temptation always possess a certain reference to
external agency. If a man has sinned in a way not easily
understandable it is said, ‘The Devil pushed him’ (tov ecnrpw^e
6 8ia(3oXo<;). A man, by not placing his whole trust in God,
inclines his desires towards material and sensual attachments.
He is, then, as it were, physically unable to resist the Devil


THE DEVIL 337
who chooses the sin, and sets the scene of temptation in the
knowledge that his victory is assured. But the sin by which the
man is corrupted is the work of the Devil. Through these modes
of thought the Sarakatsani are able to appreciate themselves
as an essentially noble and God-fearing community struggling
under the limitations of the human condition which, so far as
the physical and political environment is concerned, they are
able to represent as being, in their case, peculiarly severe.
The definitive loss of the soul to the Devil is the basis of
the appearance of ‘(3pux6Xaxe<;’, the bodies of dead men and
women which return from the grave in a hideous distended
form often to terrify members of their own family. They are
persons whose lives were corrupted in sin, committed suicide,
drowned or were unbaptized; or persons whose bodies were
not guarded by their kinsmen in the period between death and
burial, or whose bodies, although guarded, were leaped over
by a cat. In these various ways, and particularly in the first,
the soul is lost to the Devil. Instead of departing through the
mouth (as some imagine it in the form of a small bird) and
rising to God, it passes through the anus to the Devil. And since
the body and soul, whatever the internal tension between them,
form a unity, the body also falls into the power of the Devil,
remains undissolved in the earth, and possessed by his spirit
emerges from its grave to mock at the sacred institutions of
family life by attacking or terrifying those to whom it owed,
in life, the greatest obligations.
But, in a sense, the envy of men expressed in the belief of
the evil eye is the great triumph of the Devil; firstly, because it
implies a whole complex of vices including enmity, greed,
and deceit; and secondly, because without the Devil requiring
to set any particular temptations almost all Sarakatsani, in their
pursuit of the elusive and competidve ends of prestige with its
mixture ofspiritual and material values, are necessarily involved
in this form of sin. They succeed in avoiding individual guilt
for it, but they cannot deny their collective responsibility,
nor can they ignore the existence of the barrier which it
represents between themselves and God. The witchcraft or
sorcery of the evil eye ((Bacrxavia) is recognized by the Church
as one of the Devil’s weapons; and there are prayers which
may be read over the victim by the priest. By the Sarakatsani


338 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
themselves, it is said that a person known to have the evil eye
(to xaxo paxi), ‘has an eye infected by the Devil’ (exet jiaxi
SiaPoXefxevo).
A family attributes the majority of its misfortunes to this
evil force. The range of effects attributed to its activity is wide.
The diseases of sheep and other animals, almost all childrens’
illness and the sickness of adults, especially when it is accom¬
panied by the onset of sudden pains in the body, may all be
referred to the evil eye. A woman is anxious if another sees
her kneading the dough for her bread; for then, perhaps, it
may not rise. The impotence of a bridegroom may be the
result of the evil eye of a woman with an unmarried daughter.
The force behind this action of the evil eye is the attraction of
things which are envied (C/jXeuxa 7rpapiaxa). And it is signi¬
ficant that the two things most important for social prestige,
children and sheep, are the two things most prone to attack.
It is men who are prosperous, or more especially men, in a
sense, too prosperous, or lucky, who stand in particular danger.
It does not please a man to be told by another that his sheep are
in excellent condition. Praise and admiration, it is thought,
indicate the desire of the admirer, which is quite possibly
unconscious, to possess what is pleasing to his eyes. And since
that is not possible, frustration is followed by envy.
Since the evil eye may be exercised unconsciously nobody is
sure that he may not at some time affect other people, their
possessions, or even himself. A common and effective precau¬
tion is to spit three times at any creature or thing which excites
one’s admiration. ‘Spit on the child that he may not be be¬
witched’ (<pTu<fx6 raxiSl va (xtjv (3acrxa09j), demands a mother of
those looking at her small child. In addition, many substances
are used as protective charms in the phylacteries of children,
or are tied to the tongues of sheep bells. Some of these operate
sympathetically such as garlic, thistle, and pubic hairs.
Others like a small wooden cross of boxwood, incense, a cross
woven from flowers, or a candle taken from the representation
of the tomb during Easter week, are objects with sacred
connexions that mediate protective power. But even the magic
powers of garlic and other substances exist only by the pro¬
vision of God.
If, despite these precautions, a person (or sheep) is bewitched,


THE DEVIL 339
relief is generally found in a procedure which first identifies the
possessor of the evil eye and then counteracts its influence. A
bowl of water is taken and a hair of the bewitched person (or a
strand of the sheep’s fleece) is placed under the bowl. Small
pieces of wood carbon are taken from the fire and after the
surface of the water has been crossed three times the first
fragment about the size of a small finger nail is dropped into
the water. The operator, who is almost always a woman, puts
to the piece of carbon the name of a person she may suspect.
If the carbon floats the person in question is not guilty, if it
sinks one evil eye at least is known. If more than one eye is
suspected the process is continued. When the operator is
satisfied that the worst has been uncovered, the sick or other¬
wise afflicted person is crossed with the water in the bowl forty
times on the brow, the hands, the feet and the afflicted part
if pain or other symptoms are localized. Finally, the patient
drinks a little of the water from the bowl.
In putting names to the pieces of carbon the operator is
guided by various considerations. Who, to her knowledge, has
recently seen the afflicted person or animal ? And, of these, who
is generally noted for an envious nature, or has a reputation for
unconscious bewitching, or is simply disliked by herself and
her family ? If none of these proves to be guilty, other names
chosen at random are put to the carbon. But this rarely happens.
From observations on five different occasions and a certain
amount of personal experiment it appears that about one frag¬
ment of carbon in every five sinks. Therefore the guilty person
almost invariably is among those whom the operator considers
to be likely possessors of the evil eye. And this confirms the
validity of the procedure.
Most people are probably found to be guilty of unconscious
bewitching at some time in their lives. If the victim is a relation,
the bewitcher will generally co-operate to counteract the
influence of his eye by giving a hair which is added to the
draught administered to the patient. If the sufferer is un¬
related, he will probably not learn of the fact, certainly not in a
direct manner. Certain persons are generally believed by the
community to have a powerful evil eye which they exercise
from feelings of conscious envy. These persons may be of either
sex and generally come from poor families of low prestige whose


340 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
members have an obvious reason to be envious of other people.
They may also be persons from respected families who suffer
some personal disability or deformity; for instance, a powerful
eye is attributed to a prosperous Skamneli villager who has a
squint and a club-foot.
Generally, however, the question whether the evil eye of any
person is to be attributed to unconscious witchcraft or inten¬
tional sorcery depends upon his relationship to the victim.
Since small children are often bewitched, it is not remarkable
that in extended families the tensions which exist between the
wives of brothers are often reflected in the regular presence of
the name of the husband’s brother’s wife among those suspected
by the mother of a sick child. But it is always accepted that such
bewitching is of the unconscious kind, as indeed are almost all
instances of evil eye between kinsmen and afhnes. On the other
hand, where the bewitcher is an unrelated person the victim is
ready to ascribe more conscious motives to the possessor of the
eye that has hurt him.
It is not, of course, strange that the envy of the evil eye
is associated with the Devil. Envy is inherent in the material
world of limited resources and numerous contrary wills.
Lacking what another possesses and thinking of that rather
than of his relation to God, a man is easily led by the Devil
to destroy what he himself has not. This tendency is so inherent
in the nature of the situation that, as we have seen, even kins¬
men and afhnes bewitch one another, although such is the
strength of the moral element in these relationships that the
effects are not believed to be produced with conscious intention.
And it is interesting to note that of the elements of prestige
which were discussed in the previous chapter, those elements,
honour and the quality of being honourable, which tend to¬
wards the ideal equality of members of the community and the
conception of the Sarakatsani as men united in the desire
to live in accordance with honour, do not of themselves neces¬
sarily lead to envy between men, for they are essentially spiritual
values; on the other hand, those elements of prestige which
inevitably differentiate men and possess a pronounced material
aspect, wealth, numbers, lineage, marriages, dowries, and so
on, are precisely the values competition for which must
breed envy in those who are not successful.


THE WAYS TO GOD 341
3. THE WAYS TO GOD
That it is important for the Sarakatsani to be in a right rela¬
tionship with God, hardly needs to be emphasized. The margin
of security possessed by each family in its relative isolation is
narrow. There are many anxieties; the sickness of children, the
diseases of sheep, the scarcity of pasture, social prestige, and
personal health. These are matters which concern each family
separately, and each family in seeking to enlist God’s aid and
mercy attempts to establish a particular relation with Him
which ignores, in this context, their fellowship with other men.
In their simple and frankly pragmatic prayers it does not
occur to them to pray for other men, or suffering humanity.
The everyday religious life is essentially a family cult. On a
shelf, in the corner of the hut, or in a niche in the wall, are
one or often two icons before which stands an open glass
oil-lamp. The lamp is lit on the eve of each Sunday or important
feast-day and burns through the night. In front of this simple
iconostasis each member of the family stands for a moment
when he gets up and before he goes to sleep. The adult men,
except when they are in trouble, merely cross themselves
rapidly three times but the youths and most of the women
remain long enough to say a short prayer. Those who know the
whole or part of‘Our Father’ will recite this to themselves but
they will also make some kind of general petition. A mother
will say, ‘O God protect us, the little ones, and my husband,
and give us health and good luck (0ee (xou va (j.ac, (puXa^i; ra
(juxpa, tov avxpa [xou, va \ioiq 8d>cs7)<; yeia xal xaXi)
Through the day a man (or woman) will make the sign of
the cross three times when he finds himself in certain situations.
A man signs himself when he suddenly confronts some danger;
here it is an unspoken prayer for divine aid. He crosses himself
before undertaking any important task that without God’s
protection may not turn out well; an example is the milking
of sheep where there is always the fear of a small yield or finding
diseased udders; another is the moment of setting out on a
journey. After an important task is completed successfully a
man again crosses himself to express his gratitude and relief.
The sign of the cross is made before the members of the family
share in the communion of their common meal. The sign


342 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
expresses respect when an individual passes a church or any
other sacred object. And it is also used to repulse any assault
of the Devil whether this comes in the form of physical attack or
moral temptation. In the summer when for a few weeks the
villages have visitors from the towns, it is not uncommon to
see a young shepherd cross himself when he passes a girl
wearing a short-sleeved dress.
The sign of the cross is a remembrance (ev0u|ziov) of Christ.
‘If you make the cross, you remember Christ and he protects
you’, was one view which expresses the general belief. It is a
symbol, but also more than this. It is a channel by which
God’s power and grace descends to man by virtue of the
remembrance of Christ’s sacrifice, and it is a means through
which man’s gratitude and respect mount to God. But most
Sarakatsani insist that the sign, like the sacraments themselves,
is not efficient ex opere operato, as the theologians would say; but
only if a man repents his sins and has a ‘good heart’.
These are the simple everyday acts of direct communion
with God which in the main are general petitions for God’s
protection. But from time to time a man meets serious diffi¬
culties or misfortune. He is in great financial trouble, or his
honour is affronted; specific and considerable favours are
required of God. A direct petition is always possible but here
men think of two things; that God is the Father of all men, or
at least all Greeks; and that even if his judgements sometimes
appear capricious and difficult to understand he is neverthe¬
less, in principle, just and impartial. Yet God is asked for
particular benefits, the granting of which may exclude others,
in this respect, from the favour of God. It, therefore, seems more
prudent to establish a relationship with a lesser but more easily
approachable spiritual Being who will make an intercession to
God or use his delegated power on behalf of the suppliant.
These intercessors are the Mother of God and the Saints.
Borrowing from his social experience the Sarakatsanos, who
knows how patrons compete for the allegiance of a greater
number of clients, believes that the Saints of the Church must
be concerned about the number of their followers and the
richness of their votives. They have a motive for partiality
which God by the definition of his position and nature entirely
lacks.


THE WAYS TO GOD 343
On the other hand, the partiality of the Mother of God has a
basis of compassion rather than competition. Her importance,
as an intercessor, is her humanity. The idea of her immaculate
conception is quite foreign to the Sarakatsani (as also generally
to Orthodox theology). The miracle of the Mother of God is
that she is one human being who, through an act of her own
faith and will as well as the grace of God, has entirely con¬
quered sin despite her human condition. The iconography of
the Church shows her self-discipline, her compassion, a person of
her sex but drained of its sensuality. For the Sarakatsani
Eve and Mary are the two opposed images of Woman. Her
humanity and compassion allied to her Holiness makes her the
perfect intercessor between man and God. Moreover, the
Sarakatsanos, thinking as he necessarily does in terms of his
own social forms, finds it natural and sensible that as God’s
grace to men comes through Christ, men should seek benefits
from God through the Mother of the Son. For she is approach¬
able and has influence with her Son. The parallel with earthly
systems of patronage is clear.
The All Holy One is naturally the eternal image of mother¬
hood. And although petitions to her are of every kind, prayers
for a sick child are especially directed to her. It is felt that
however sinful the mother of the sick child may be the Mother
of God must feel compassion for her. A man may call directly
on his God to protect him in danger but suddenly faced with
the horror or shock of some loss, great or trivial, it is the Mother
of God who is invoked, flavayitx (xou. For the Sarakatsani
she is, above all, the comforter (IlapYjyopmcraa). She, too, has
experienced loss. And it is to her that the sinner appeals to
turn aside the just wrath of God.
The two Saints most popular amongst the Sarakatsani are
St. George (feast-day 23rd April O.S.) and St. Demetrius (feast
day 26th October O.S.). These feast-days both punctuate the
seasonal calendar at critical moments, in each case just before
one of the two annual migrations; both Saints are generally
concerned with pastoral life and both are warlike, horsed and
armed. On all counts they suit the Sarakatsani admirably.
‘We honour them because we are like them’, the Sarakatsani
say.4 To St. George especially they are attached, and petitions
4 See Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. pX£'


344 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
about diseases of the sheep, pleas to soften the heart of a
merchant who will not grant a desperately needed loan are
very often made to this Saint. On his feast-day a lamb is always
killed in his honour by every family except the very poorest,
an honour which is generally only accorded to Christ at
Christmas and Easter, and to the Mother of God on the feast
of the Assumption (15th August). ‘All the Saints look for us to
sacrifice a sheep to them’, the Sarakatsani explain, ‘but St.
George protects us’. Sarakatsani respect all the Saints but the
only others chosen for particular attention are the Prophet
Elias whose chapels are on hill-tops and who is associated with
the mountains and the wilderness, St. Theodore another
mounted warrior hero, and St. Paraskeve. Individuals, of
course, sometimes turn to the Saint whose name they bear and
to other Saints who are known to possess specialist powers.
If a man has a very important favour to request from a Saint
(or the Mother of God), he will not be content to present it
before his own icon of the particular Saint. He will worship
before the icon of the Saint in a church, preferably a church
or chapel dedicated to him. And in exceptionally serious matters
he may not be satisfied with presenting his prayer to the icon
of the Saint in his own village if he knows of an icon of the
same Saint elsewhere which has a reputation for greater
efficacy. The icon is not simply an image which serves to
remind the worshipper of spiritual realities, it is a material
object in which he believes divine energy is localized. He
believes that if he approaches this manifestation of the Saint’s
power with a ‘good heart’ and a suitable offering, he will help.
He agrees that it is the one Saint present in all his icons but he
insists that one revelation is more efficient than another. In these
ideas we see the refraction which even divine energy suffers
when it enters the material and sensible world.
A suppliant asks of his intercessor favours which are often
very specific and material. In return he makes some offering to
express his respect and attachment to the Saint; he may also
vow a further gift if help is granted. A Sarakatsanos feels free
to bargain with a Saint in a way that would be unseemly
towards God. The thought here is that even a Saint is open,
in some sense, to flattery and honours. He cannot be displeased
that he is honoured with more offerings of one kind or another


THE WAYS TO GOD 345
than other Saints. Makryiannis, a hero of the Revolution, tells
in his memoirs how, being very poor, he entered the chapel of
his patron Saint to offer a silver candlestick if only he might
be granted a set of fine clothes and pistols. Sarakatsani behave
similarly. Without the least embarrassment the approach is one of do ut des. The relations between Saint and worshipper
resemble somewhat those of patron and client. But although
it is easy to see how the Sarakatsanos projects to some degree
the experience of his social relations into his religious life, it is
also true that the latter transcends the former. You may bribe
a lawyer to act dishonestly but you cannot do this to a Saint.
He will not aid in wickedness nor where the suppliant, however
great the gift he bears, approaches without a contrite heart.
On this point all insist.
Man acquires help and protection not only through personal
petitions to the divine Beings in the spiritual hierarchy,
although this is the mode of communion which is sought in all
critical matters. It is thought that by the grace of God divine
power enters and issues from a number of material objects.
Contact with or possession of these sacred objects and sub¬
stances are believed to be defences against attacks of the Devil,
the envy of other men and general misfortune. The power
immanent in the Word of God is released when the priest
reads a passage over an afflicted person or when a worshipper
kisses the Book. The incense breathed in church, the possession
of a candle which burned on the representation of Christ’s
tomb at Easter, the sign of the cross on a sick man’s forehead
when made with oil from a lamp which has burned before an
icon, all these have ‘power’. Blessed water brought from church
at the feast of Epiphany is sprinkled over the sheep. Salt,
incense, box-wood when these have been blessed and ‘read
over’ by the priest during the service on the Thursday of Holy
Week, are kept throughout the next year—loci of divine
strength. Antidoron, blessed bread, which is the remainder of
the offered loaf after the seal has been cut from it for the
communion cup, is similarly conserved. However, these
materials are not simply charms. Their efficiency, as with all
the manifestations of divine aid, depends on repentance and a
‘good heart’.
God is in communion with men not only spiritually through


346 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
grace but intelligently through messages, generally warnings
of physical danger which may be avoided and premonitions
of misfortune or death which may not. Many men claim that
just before they escaped some disaster a Saint appeared to warn
them of its approach. Dreams, divination of a sheep’s shoulder
blade, the behaviour of various animals and birds, are all inter¬
preted as messages from God.
In all these modes of communion a man is concerned funda¬
mentally with establishing a relationship with God or His
spiritual subordinates in order to obtain help and protection
in the many difficulties which his family faces. If he is able,
he must raise himself some of the way towards God; for if he
succeeds in at least displaying his will in this direction there is
the hope that the power of God will descend to him. The
means of a poor shepherd to do this, immersed as he is in his
material troubles, are slight. He may achieve a small offering
and a day’s fast and sexual continence before presenting an
important petition to a Saint. Always he must represent to
himself that he repents his sins: and he must have a ‘good
heart’. A ‘good heart’ is the will to strain towards closer
fellowship with God. In this context, however, repentance and
a good heart imply only weakly and indirectly the idea of
fellowship with other men. As in social systems of patronage,
so in their everyday religious life each family strives to achieve
a particular and exclusive relationship with subordinate spiritual
beings and through them to draw down to their aid more of
the divine power than other families.
But the grace of God, the favour of God, comes to men only
through the sacrifice of Christ. It will not have escaped notice
how little His name has appeared in this brief review of cult.
Sarakatsani, at least, seem to direct few prayers to Him. In
their religious belief God has two hypostases or persons, Father
and Saviour. When they refer to God, Qeoq, they normally
mean the Creator, Father, Protector, and Punisher of men,
present everywhere yet separated from them morally by an
immense distance. Christ is the Saint, "At)<;, or the Master, 6
’Acpevx-/)^,5 that is God in the person of a man like themselves,
who sacrificed Himself that other men might overcome the
5 See Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. pX£'.


THE WAYS TO GOD 347
separating barrier of sin which was the original work of the
Devil and Adam. The first of these terms reflects the sanctity of
Christ, the second His concern for the well-being of men; both
refer to His life under the limitations of the human condition.
In their own experience the Sarakatsani see the reflection of
the sufferings of Christ. From the moment of His birth He
was persecuted and humiliated, yet He did not lose dignity or
nobility. Nor in similar circumstances, the Sarakatsani believe,
do they. ‘Christ is our brother’, they sometimes say. He made
the first shepherd’s flute (<pXoyepa). He rounded up the wild
goats, beasts of the Devil, and tamed them by placing His seal
on the joints of their forelegs. He stands always by their side.
They have only to think of Him and make the sign that
recalls His sacrifice. Similarly, they believe that the Sarakatsani
have always been the followers, worshippers, brothers of Christ.
When the gipsy forged the five nails of the crucifixion for the
Jews, it was the Sarakatsanos who stole one and drove it
up the offending blacksmith’s behind.
Christ is the key figure in Sarakatsan religious belief, and
the events of the ‘Great week’ of Easter are the transcendent
experiences of religious life. These I shall not attempt to de¬
scribe in detail, but something must be said of the dramatic
atmosphere which makes this complex of rites and customs
quite unlike any others in the religious calendar. Normally
villagers are exceedingly casual in church, and even the
Sarakatsani, who are more devout in the outward respect they
show to sacred objects, are quite pragmatic in their attitude
and remarks about religious affairs even when they are
anxiously presenting an important petition. In contrast, the
dramatic intensity of emotion which seizes the community both
in church and outside during this week makes an immediate
impression on the observer. There is an air both of anxiety and
anticipation. The historical events which the liturgy com¬
memorates on the different days of the week are not treated as
such. They are re-lived, people participate in them. They
know what will happen, He will rise again; yet they are
anxious. The women discuss the events in the present or perfect
tense as they would the local gossip at other times. As the drama
proceeds the women in chorus make their simple and troubled
comments, ‘They have seized Him’, ‘He is being judged’,


348 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
‘Now they are crucifying Him’; and finally, at the critical
moment of the service on Easter Day, ‘Christ is risen’.
The Liturgy on the Thursday has a particular sanctity and
significance for this is the day on which Christ is placed on the
cross. The older women, particularly the grandmothers who
may die during the year, together with the younger children,
always communicate on this day; for the Communion which is
received on the Thursday ‘lasts’ for a year. They take with
them to the church a sack filled with the various apotropaic
substances, some of which will be put into the phylacteries of
the children while the remainder is an armoury of divine
energy with which the family is able to face and defeat the
Devil during the coming year. This sack, which is for ‘the
living’, is blessed and read over by the priest and taken back
to the huts. They leave with the priest a second sack which is
for ‘the dead’. This contains boiled wheat (xoXXup<jc), incense,
candles, wine. For on this day the Sarakatsani believe that the
souls of the dead return to earth. As soon as the older women and
children return from church, the younger women knead the dough
and bake small breads (tpu/ouSia). These are at once taken to¬
gether with cooked beans and wine and are given to all the
neighbouring families, who receive them, one for each person,
with an expression of hope that God may forgive the sins of the
dead. In this way is symbolized the union of the quick and the
dead and their mutual forgiveness of trespasses committed.
On Good Friday the intensity of emotional feeling is scarcely
bearable. The effigy of Christ is taken from the cross and placed
in the representation of the tomb which is carried round the
village and returned to the Church as to the sepulchre. During
this service the atmosphere is heavy with grief; tears stream
down the faces of the women. Before 1950 the Sarakatsan
women used to make their own representations of the tomb
and the body of Christ which three of them guarded throughout
the day, their black scarves low over their faces, silently weep¬
ing, while one of them intoned monotonously the dirge of
the Mother of God for her only Son.6 Finally, the sendee which
begins after midnight on the Saturday is a transformation of
joy and exaltation. Christ who was crucified is risen again.
9 Cf. Chatzimichalis, op. cit., vol. i, Part A, p. p£8'.


THE WAYS TO GOD 349
The root of the involvement of the Sarakatsani in these
dramatic happenings lies in the simple belief constantly re¬
iterated, especially by the women on the Friday, that ‘he died
for us’. They identify themselves with the sufferings of Christ
because He has identified Himself with them. In becoming a
man like themselves He asserted the essential nobility of man.
In His death, His blood effected a union between man and
God which overcame the separating barrier of ancestral sin.
His resurrection has for the Sarakatsani the paradoxical signi¬
ficance that He lives to die again; for, particularly in the
events of the Great Week each year, and more generally in
the sacrament of the Eucharist, He continually performs the
miracle anew. In the cry, ‘Christ is risen’, is the knowledge that
His liberating blood will always be at hand to save men from
abandonment to the Devil.
The role of Christ in this situation, like those of the Mother
of God and the Saints in the everyday cult, is that of inter¬
cessor. But in this instance the act is on the cosmic scale, not
merely a partial and external relationship effected by a Saint
between a particular individual and God. It is the reconcilia¬
tion of all men to God and to one another. The fitness of
Christ for this role lies in his origin from God the Father on the
one hand and His human mother on the other. ‘He was a man,
then, like us’ it is said both in folk tales and in comment upon
the events of His life. From His mother the divine Son of God
took on a condition in all respects like that of man, except
that through His virgin birth he remained outside sin. Born
of a virgin, a virgin in His life, it needed the sacrifice of a Being,
divine, human, exposed to sin yet untouched by it, to bring
man and God together.
The Sarakatsani understand well the efficacy of virginity. It
is a condition which, temporarily at least, defies the corruption
of age and death. As it has been suggested in the discussion of
prestige values, the time of moral excellence in a man’s life is
the period of youthful manhood before his marriage, when he
is free to live by the ideal standards of honour and when, also,
he is ignorant of the sexuality of woman which is one conse¬
quence, in a world of sin, of the division of humanity into two
sexes. As the virginity of the Sarakatsan youth or maiden is a
partial and individual attempt to deny the consequences of


350 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
sexuality, so the virginity of Christ suppresses in His person
this fundamental division of humanity.
But men are also divided from God and from one another
by their mutual envy. This disunion is a more subtle form of
corruption which few men attempt or are able to resist. It
requires the sacrifice of Christ’s blood to redeem this condition
and to establish, even briefly, the ideal of the brotherhood of
men that makes possible a full communion between man and
God. That in their own social experience only an unmarried
brother would make this sacrifice of life and blood confirms
in the minds of the Sarakatsani the role of Christ as the arche¬
typal brother, in a transcendent sibling relationship where only
identification, and never rivalry, finds a place.
The idea of Christ’s brotherhood implies, at least, the brother¬
hood of the Sarakatsani of Zagori, and by extension (though less
certainly) the brotherhood of Orthodox Greeks. Christ sacrificed
Himself not for one but for all. Not the least miracle of Easter
is the measure of social goodwill. There is an easy warmth of
greeting and attitude between unrelated men which is entirely
foreign to the tense aggressiveness that is the formal idiom of
social life at other times. On Easter Monday each family visits,
and is visited by, all the Sarakatsan families who live within
easy walking distance, whether they are kinsmen or not.
Except at the summer festival celebrated by each family (very
often the feast of the Assumption) this is probably the only occa¬
sion during the year that a man penetrates into the home and
receives the hospitality of another unrelated shepherd. On the
Saturday of Easter instead of delivering their milk to the cheese
merchant the Sarakatsani give it away to villagers or the poorer
families oftheir own community. These simple gestures that might
be unexceptional in other communities are an impressive reversal
of normal attitudes. The union of men in Christ is reflected at the
level of social relations in an expression of ideal solidarity which
for a moment breaks down the barriers which isolate family from
family and community from community. At other times, the
notion that all the ills of the world derive from the view that
every man is concerned only for his own family is constantly
asserted, and as often deplored. There is always a yearning for
unity and goodwill in the community, but it is a yearning
accompanied by the knowledge that it can never be.


THE WAYS TO GOD 351
The Sarakatsani seldom communicate more than twice a
year. The most important of the possible occasions for taking
communion is, naturally, Easter. It must be stressed that this
communion is for the Sarakatsani not something which is
taken or received ‘at’ Easter, it is an integral part, the climactic
happening of the week’s events. During this time they have
watched Christ suffering, they have identified themselves
with Him as He in His sacrifice has identified Himself with them.
At the end of it all the miracle happens, Christ rises from the
dead and they in His blood partake of the life which He has
poured out to unite them again to the Godhead.
One can discern three, as it were, related ‘indulgences’
which Sarakatsani believe are conferred upon them through
communion. First they are released from sin. Sarakatsani are
not oppressed by a sense of personal sin and indeed, as we have
seen, the list of transgressions which constitute personal sins is
not imposing. But they are very conscious of the sinful condition
of the limited world in which they must live and in which the
nobility of men is, to some degree, inevitably compromised.
This sinful infusion into human nature, the inevitable mean¬
ness of everyday life, depresses their spirit in a very literal
sense, it turns their thoughts from God to material things and
against their fellow men. ‘We are all sinners’ they often say
with a dispirited shrug of the shoulders. These uncomfortable
sentiments are banished by the regenerating blood of Christ.
As my friend Aristoteles left the church, he smiled and said,
‘A weight has left me’ (pLoucpuye Iva (3apo<;). In saying this he
was not referring to personal sin.
The second of these indulgences conferred by communion
is that it both expresses the transcendent ideal of the union of
all men in Christ and it gives an opportunity, all too fleeting,
for unrelated men to show goodwill towards one another.
As I have said, the yearning for union with other men is always
present but it is inevitable inhibited by attitudes of pride and
distrust.
The third indulgence is more pragmatic. By removing the
barrier of sin which interrupts the communion between men
and God, Christ’s sacrifice makes it possible for men to draw
down divine aid for their protection in this life against the
attacks of the Devil, the envy of other men, and in their struggle


352 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
for physical survival. A man’s state of grace is never static,
always dynamic. He strains towards God but is ever pulled
downward by the weight of the human condition of sin; yet
periodically the saving grace of Christ’s blood allows him
again to approach nearer to God.
The receipt of the sacrament is not a passive act. Men must
give some pledge of their will to turn to God. At the greater
religious festivals, Christmas, Easter, St. George, the feasts of
Assumption and St. Demetrius, when they may communicate,
Sarakatsani sacrifice a lamb or sheep (0ucna£ouv, xavouv
xouppmxvi). Other occasions when sheep are slaughtered are
similarly religious as well as social events, weddings, baptisms,
or the dedication (xa^ipio) of an animal to a Saint if men or
sheep fall sick. Sheep are never killed for meat but only in the
form of sacrifice. Preferably the animal should be male and
‘clean’, that is a lamb, or a ram that has not mounted a ewe.
The sheep is believed to know its fate to which it goes quietly
and willingly. In describing forms ofsheep theft I have suggested
that the sheep which support the life and honour of a family
have a spiritual as well as an economic value. Of the white
Easter lamb they say, ‘we bleed it to honour Christ’ (to
fAaroavofxs va Ti(j.Y)aco|jie tov Xpurxo). A shepherd skins a sheep
with swift and confident strokes of the knife but his face is
strained and concentrated as he cuts into the artery in the
animal’s neck. With this sacrificial stroke he gives something
of himself. The Sarakatsani are conscious of this element of
reciprocity. As Christ pours out his blood to open a way be¬
tween men and God, so the Sarakatsanos pours out the surrogate
blood of his sheep to the same end. And since the sheep is the
means of establishing a partial relationship between man and
God, those who share its flesh are participating in a form of
sanctified communion. And, for the same reason, God chooses
to communicate intelligently with men through the shadow
markings on the shoulder blade and the condition of the
liver.
A man must prepare himself in other ways. He must fast
for forty days before the beginning of the ‘Great Week’, and
in this matter the Sarakatsani are more strict than many
villagers. Olives, cheese, eggs, milk, meat, fish are not eaten.
During Easter week itself even bread is abandoned and the


SOCIAL VALUES AND RELIGIOUS IDEALS 353
families live for the last few days on vegetable soup, beans, and
coffee. For this week, at least, the ancestral sins of sensuality
and envy must be suppressed. The community becomes conti¬
nent and unrelated men behave towards one another with
unaccustomed warmth and goodwill. A man must truly repent
his personal sins. Whenever a confessor is within reach, he
ought to make a confession of his sins before taking communion.
He must approach God with a ‘good heart’. In these ways a man
to a degree, loosens the hold which material things and the
senses hold over him and, in some measure, is purified so that
he may receive into himself the divine element. The Sara
katsanos believes that if he is properly prepared ritually and
spiritually to receive the sacrament, then his sins are forgiven.
The wine he drinks is indeed the blood of Christ (the body is
seldom mentioned) and it is considered a sin if any man
suffers a fit of vomiting in the 40 days which immediately
follow communion. It is also described as a remembrance
(evOupuov) of Christ. Thus the wine is at one and the same time
a symbol of the first sacrifice and a material substance in which
divine energy exists. It represents, and it is, the blood of Christ.
4. SOCIAL VALUES AND RELIGIOUS IDEALS
At the risk of some repetition, the problem of the opposition
of two systems of values, one social the other religious, has yet
to be explicitly considered. This community of Sarakatsani,
whose coherent and distinctive traditions suggest, in the absence
of any certain historical proofs, that it may have existed since,
at least, the late Byzantine period, possesses a body of social
values based upon a number of simple and unambiguous
concepts of honour, strength, prestige and pride. And in the
previous chapter I have emphasized the exclusive and parti
cularist form of these social ideals. Yet throughout this period
the community has belonged to an Orthodox Christian civiliza¬
tion. Allowing for its primitive material culture and geogra¬
phical isolation, it has clearly been profoundly influenced by
this wider membership as, for instance, even a cursory examina¬
tion of Sarakatsan wood-carving immediately suggests. Al¬
though it is true that the relationship of the Sarakatsani to the
Orthodox Church, as an institution, has been sufficiently
tenuous to result in a popular religious life that is a gross


354 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
refraction of Orthodox dogma and practice, yet the value of
the Christian ideal of the fellowship of all men in Christ, with
the universalistic ethical values that follow from it, is not to be
avoided. How is this opposition of values resolved or accom¬
modated ?
There is no great problem of fellowship between Sarakatsani
who are related by kinship or marriage. By associating The
Father, The Son, and the Mother of God in a Holy archetype
Family, the institutions and relationships of the Sarakatsan
family, even the concept of honour and the duty to defend it,
are given a categorical quality and a divine sanction; and by
extension kindred and affinal bonds receive a similar valida¬
tion. It is true that even within this restricted circle certain
Christian values cannot enjoy a general application. Modesty,
meekness, humility are values only admirable in women. Some
Christian prescriptions have to be entirely set aside. One
cannot forgive a kinsman who has betrayed his trust, at least
not until he is dead. And one avoids the company of a kinsman
who is despised for his poverty; the poor are not blessed. Yet
love (ayahr/)), mutual trust, truth, and altruism are important
Christian virtues which are the ideal values of family and
kinship life. Men would extend the circle of their application if
they could, but the conditions of life in a fallen world prevent
this, particularly limited resources, the divinely sanctioned
honour and interests of a man’s own family, the condition
of envy.
Yet in their commitment to the concept of honour as the
guiding principle of behaviour, the Sarakatsani cannot admit
themselves to be anything but noble; and this must be said not
only of the soul but the body also, for honour is related to
physical strength and manliness when this is disciplined and
spiritualized. The original guilt for sin must be placed else¬
where. This is the role of the Devil. Sensuality was the sin of
Adam but only after the sin had been thought of and presented
to him by the Devil with the assistance of woman. Envy, the
more fundamental sin, was originally the cause of the Devil’s
rebellion against God. ‘The Devil envied God’ (6 8ia(3oXo<;
CrjXe^e tov 0eo), the Sarakatsani say. In this way the Sara¬
katsani avoid personal guilt for their own implication in these
sins. Even in the case of personal sins for which individual


SOCIAL VALUES AND RELIGIOUS IDEALS 355
guilt is admitted, Sarakatsani would say that the fault of the
man was in the act of turning away from God, not in the sin
itself. For without the grace of God he cannot resist the Devil
who then leads his victim to the sin he has chosen for him.
However, just as children inherit responsibility for the sins
of their parents, the responsibility for the sins of Adam cannot
be avoided. The condition of sin in which a man lives, although
it is exterior to his individual will, interrupts his communion
with God on which life and honour depend. It is in this situa¬
tion that Christ comes to save men, pouring out the sacrifice
of his blood to reunite man with God, a salvation, however,
which is contingent on man freely turning from the Devil
towards God. In a certain sense, then, these forms of sin are a
kind of pollution, for which the Devil is originally guilty and
responsible, and from which Christ is the saviour. But this
analogy must not be pressed too far. This salvation requires
moral action on the side of man. In his daily life he must struggle
to discipline sensuality and he must avoid the ultimate con¬
sequences of envy. For, the fact that all earthly families are
imperfect copies of a divine archetype places a limit on the
amoral ruthlessness that unrelated men may show towards one
another in circumstances where such conduct seriously and
unnecessarily endangers the existence of another family. And
at certain periods of religious celebration, such as Christmas,
Easter, and the feast of Assumption, the sins of Adam must
be altogether suppressed through universal continence, good¬
will, and the symbolic sharing of food.
Although it is clear that the values of honour are not what
they are for any influence of Christian ideals, it would be
wrong to suggest, as it has sometimes been said, that Christianity
is almost entirely external to Sarakatsan life. Not only are the
Sarakatsani deeply conscious of their total dependence on
God, whether in the person of The Father or The Saviour, but
the family is seen as an image of the Holy Family, and Christian
values are the basis of relationships between kinsmen and
affines, the people with whom, after all, a man lives and works.
And at religious festivals men succeed, momentarily, in living
the ideal of a universal brotherhood in Christ. And although,
in the periods of profane living which separate these moments
of transcendence, men must admire the shrewd and scheming


356 THE VALUES OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF
leader and accept the need for lies and deceit, the ideal social
personality remains the unmarried pallikari, the ‘innocent’
(a0too<;), alone with his sheep, not yet fully implicated in the
ancestral sins of sensuality and envy.
These beliefs indicate, clearly enough, that the Sarakatsani
sense that all is not right with their world, a sentiment that is
Christian not heroic. When men quarrel and draw their knives,
an event that is the breath of life in an heroic culture, the
Sarakatsani say, ‘The Devil is dancing in the middle’ (yopeuei 6
8ia(3oAo<; picra). Indeed the Devil is the symbol and the efficient
cause of all those many tensions and hostilities which prevent
the Sarakatsani from living in the values of Christian fellow¬
ship. Not only is he the original cause of the miasma of ancestral
sin, the provoker of the evil eye and the tempter to sexual lusts,
but in his desire to injure physically where he cannot corrupt
morally, his action on the spiritual plane parallels the mutual
hostilities and social isolation which each family experiences
in social life.
When all this is said there remains an opposition between
Christian ideals and the values of prestige. Fortunately or
otherwise, the Sarakatsani do not see this; partly because the
two value systems either appear to be complementary as in
family or kindred, or in other areas of social life they are
relatively segregated in their incidence; and partly because
the individual thinking in egocentric terms cannot see that his
own honour, prestige, pride, and self-regard threaten another.
It is always the other man, and, behind, the Devil moving and
manipulating him, who corrupt society and provoke the anger
of God.


0
>—Z<
N
<
04 10
O *o
HXH
Q
X « PL,
PL.
<
z<
C/3
H<
<
<
c/3
u* O
C/3
►zOH
Ph P O Pi o
Hw>-* H < Pi « Pm
oOi
o
Pi w H
M Z
£
« X
z
Pi o X o o
zw
w o
<
H0-•
>
Pi
o0<
N
<
Pm o
C/3
Qz<
0
Pi s H
'DJ3 ‘SUIZUJS
J3*a!MJ° uoijeDoq uo sajo\[
SJBOQ puv dsaqs jo pnox
SJBOQ
d«MS
S3lnp\[ PUB S3SJOJ-J
IWi
]|JOM OJ 3(qB jou 3[do3d pjo pire uajpiyqQ
Apurej luojj Abmb Sui^joav spjaqdaqs 9Sb^\
JOOlpS AjfcpUOD3S suog
»3b jo sjeaA £ I J3AO S9|HlU3j 3unjJ04\\
»Su jo SJB3A £l J3AO S3[UUI 3ui^JO,\\
1UEJS 5qi JO japeaq jo ^sBSuipsx °* PI°H -dsnoq jo p«»H J° uopcp^
(pjoqasnoq papu^ixo u* ji) sjaipojg jo *o^[ »qx
o
CDOp/)
X
A
'% TVJ
JaD
aC3;
a
CL,
d
*n O
bo *2 .s -c
b/)TVJ
fulj ~o
*-> Qj
I2
^ CL
> •<-U
c --C
ll
J-s
H 03
O L»
to *
Et.2 £
Oug
SI 1
Vi dj 3
.2 SoT
1 8s
,P3 O <S
fa-< fa.
iu -n g J5 £ CL
He 1;
<3 Hi
m <N <y) M m co CO m
0 <N iO 0 0 coco m
CO CO a (N CO CO CO
C OOO000m
CO CO iO CO
"
<N 0 in co CO 0
<x CO w r^ m G) m
CO c< a Cl Cl CO
<N (N - ~ m Cl Cl
lO^O O G) COO
O c* Cl 0 0 CO
M - CO in f' M1 M" s
co ■<(• - n m- n ■- | w
«
«a
• Ow
~ u u c c tc &
£ « « « « ^ .a J
in M ;Cf>Qa
oo flj u
>cboc3o
bp to
C w- c
> 2 -S
wo4
b«
« ii Sg
flj HD buO *s
OV L—m
o2
* In this table I reserve the term Tselingas for the leader of a group with more than 500 animals.
■(• The numbered groups of households represent sheep management units.


•DJ3 *2uczbj3
jajujM J° uoij^Doq uo sajofsj
siboq pu« d»q§ jo p?jox
siboq
dwqs
Sdfnj^ puu sosjojq
F*°X
3JJOM Ol 3[q« JOU 3]dO»d pp pu« U3JPIJTJQ
Apuiuj ujojj Aum* JSoi^jom spjoqdaqs
jooqos AjcpuoD^s je suog
3S« JO SJ«3X Ci J3AO S3|BUI3J 8ui^JO^\
aSte jo SJB3A tl J3AO S3p?UI 2uI3JJO^\
iubis aqi jo jap*;>X JO *sf8ui|3SX oj ppq -asnoq jo pe^H J° *h>P*P>I
(pjoqasnoq papuajxa in* ji) sjaqjojg jo -ojyi aqx
uvp
<d P-t
TcC3Co3dO
V Xbo
2 -o £ Bo
.. .S 2
N CU
Cd 
h «S
bo.t: V. ^
~"S
Ia
£ jj
— t>
E2
tn to
c"
X^
O .*u>
.o
15 rt
2a
cd .
N CO -rl
>*H <U C
2 £ J2
QJ
.. >
bo 'X
.s °
*n jz;
cd *3
bO £
O C
£
OJ
>. bo
t: «
a; m %> s.g
-a
tcc
U rt rt
a
Sss
^c
w *3 I^ *
0^Of2f! (A
4a3>
cd co C .JJ
*C ra
p6 I *2-5
^O
.. x cboh
S g>l
bo- N f. cd -2
ii W) cj
C ^O <2 *4
c
mo m o mo m o o o o o
m r- co uo d CO m
CO »n ^ - X CO d X
coo oo oooo
ci CO
m o m •■n o o o o o
m o O X d o Tt* -'f
CO rf — CO d
a _ (N CO CO CO _ *“•
a> m - O X X X
9
6
m
da d
~ <N
o
9
d mM
II
NI
r*^ rf
II I I
IIII
M « « CO
« « cn w
oG X^
'aj u U 03
^o s
co
x in
HA H «cd
T3 .P
& »H
£«
Xfl5j cd *bcv
C4X4/633aJ
oaXj
C/D
D OX
V) <Ud CO +3 52 o O §J g
Z) +-j
CC<<3O.
J2 to 2 IS
X to
K o3
N^ 3
tx] cd C/3 >O<J
a cd o
o-b a a
O ‘X to
rx w Oo c
X 5J S 9
w <* o
o ++U c.oOi
o *♦—♦>
5 u.i » . o “S q.,9
Tf> ^ co V
t Indicates households in these winter groupings which do not graze at Neochori in the summer.


Gooolos Tscl. 2 2 — — 4 8 3 160 20 180 Winter grazing: Skoupitsa. Pasture leased
-bCe
TVJ
oo
foaa,
ja 2r £ CO c* fa. to
q00G
u
cg 3
fa, ■*-»
&i ga
*2
t2o I * 3
S e^
^ cj
‘JCS V
h6
*0c . bo .
V « Jj
■*-> fa. E ^ -g
fa, r> fa*
(f0NGa
•3 ' f3aS
T4G3J/
000
fa< j-t-st *->
bo
fa
C/3 O
3g
03 32*8G
D- 0
4COJ
g£§
'Be|
18 1
C/2 HC3 03 t; y 0
rt -s >
6 JZO
03 CC>OJ ^ so
be ^ _
and
/ in t
•a fa
03 0
buo
CcGG e
.S 2 &■ sss
w *3
9£
r* 2
iD3 Cl Q»
oc
S’i
Cou -C
H
bo £ *2
oG
■*-C» T3
ir c
£«
n3, ^
eS
OO N
-2 o3 bo
o o mmo oco cd r>. co
o o mo o
d a co co
o o o mo
m -o
^ — (N 
tf W CO Tt* CO
cn co moo
o co d co m
O 0 r*» O 0 CO O 0 d
co m CD CD CD O CD r^ CO
»— d >—> ** ►— CO rh M •— d
0 O OOO 0 O m 0
CO d m coco CO CD 1— d
0 r- 0 0 CO O m d
d rt-CO 0 d m co
d 1— M CO *
dd
2
2
O
CO - d
0 m co m *- r^ m co CO
Ci
O co N CO O _ CO 0
CO CoO
- d d d co d d ~ « ~ m co co m
m ~ d co
GC
oo
•^^
A? I- t
03 m 03 X
fa fa /
^ 03 03 03
. <C3
_• -J* c/3
«J 03
£ «S 03 fa
° -S Sg
3c CC «=
CG
.22 *
*C **
■ouGOj
co .23 u
J$= O
»n ♦♦ ♦♦
oc<owXX<
"C ToOJ3
boo
Go §o
ra t> *3 o «
C 60 V U g
s o eS c
w u o ,2
ioW<ODifl!i
ZDo?5
S
DCQooCO h
O '-S
03
fcOao,
»i -oa
CO
Demetrios Paparounas 4 Tsel. 5 4 — — 10 19 9 530 60 590 Winter grazing: Karterion. Former Muslim
Photios Gogolos Sis.Hus. 1 1 — — 5 7 1 50 o 50 land leased by villagers


*0j3 ‘SgtzbjS jajui^w jo uopeocrj uo sajofyj
sjboq puB daaqs jo pnox
SJBOQ
daaqg
S3lnW PU12 sasjopj
Fi°X
3JJOAV OJ 3jqB >ou 3[do3d p[0 puB usjppqQ
XjruiBj uiojj Acme Sui^jom spjsqdaqs 3Sb4\\
jooqos AjBpaooos jb suo§
38b jo sjbqA £ i J3AO S3[BUJ3J SUI^JO^W
38b jo SJB3A £l JO AO S3 [Bill Sui^JO^W
E -3
3C ^3 t; m £^
o £ t,
h#u .^ E
c£
.2 g 3
fc « "
~ ho v
« J2 £
^% a
bfi >
.£ M
*N _.
W^
S3
<- Ji 
CJ J2
T0US3i
(3
wa,
C T3
ir c
W
aWU
TC3
JS £
^fca3
CO
be
.5 2
NW
c3 be
t- c3
be fc >
g£
^o
w
be >*
O — "S
o3 C/3 TV3
£3
fCljL
.s c & 8 U -2
t- T3 ^ bo c c3
2 -So
COcWX
££H
0 0 0 0 #tp to 0 tO co 1 05 05 co co to (N Tt« Tt* Of 1 T*« « ££) <N CO - ~ I
O O O O O to 0 to O r^« LO 01 co *“*
O O 0 to 0 0 CO CO 05 05 rr* <N 05 1—1
to 0 (N — r^*
co 10 co to to 0 to tO ^ I --1
to 0 0 co
0
I
0
CO
CO
^ CO -- c« (N CO
Tf (N Il Tt« O I Cl 
TUBJS 3ip JO J3pB»X JO ,SB8uipSX oj pjoq -osnoq JO pB3p£ JO UOIlBp^J
c _• sc % .S3
f-. on
o' 5
O u« £ 03 IT
(pioqssnoq papuajxa co ire ji) uaipojg jo -o.m aqx
c/aj>
t/sow3 3 sO
H
z -C
< is
> a!
C/J
Vi O
2 "S
8 be
CN
H (3
K>
OJ U fa
«<
ctf *w < *? «§
C/23 <^
> 55
2£ 2 *s
Q on
(oA
fc/<a2
V)
1sCO5~3
"Jw□0S
H
2 C/3 o
05 o *c
(_< t- w
UI -g £
.s£ £
- W e« u
-Ph3 c<
Evangelos Loutsaris Leader 2 2 I ■— i 6 2 140 o 140 Winter grazing: Grammenitsa. Pasture leased
George Br. t 1 — — 4 6 2 140 o 140 with protected rights


CJ pCa
JC/c32j
*ac5s
bo
'.bnauso
Sacb2sjo
-ca
JD£
"faaS
cd .*5sc
c£a
Ui c£j
.. bo bo JS
G~ *N > a r
uE
bo o
CJ "V
tS 4;
•I c
£s
CDJ .
-C/C2
Teae3Sl
a _a
f1a5
bco
bo
u fc
cj y
~ bo S -5 >S
bo rs
.S >
*N aS o
ccUn
CoaJ
CuJ. pG
CaJ
oo
—^
T3 u
tM CJ
cj _c
-g fa
fa cj CJ *G pC ««
C/2 as
d E CUJ.
‘ L E aS E
aS 3 N g
S c/2 > 3
as CJ M
CbuJo
s-« fa >—di .. aS ^4 bO*G .s §
us»_ bO aG3
, 13 $.3
J3 JG
CbJo
2 J3
as r3
C/2 >
f<sfoc~da*
CEJ h
Tad3S
as 2
SP E
C u.
’n <2 2 ‘s
bO •*d^-»
fc- CJ ££
o o o o Tt* to to o o to
CO CO r>- to to os 1 os o
*■* *’•
o o o to o o
CO *** ~ w
o o o o to
CO to CO CO CO
*■*
CO to - - - Cl
10 CO os * 1 101 to ^ 1 10
o / CO 1 <N _
too
CO CO
CO I CO CO I CO
CO <o
z
<?
3 £>
< £ <
3
<
tHd Q<
CO
Q < fa
24 O co
o aO:
CO O Id (d 3 O 5
ooH Q P
as 2 (d O Id
o 0 5 Id 9
Id a
fa (d ~o ^ Q Si5
pz
O<>cS
u z Qo
.3
co* 5 « C/2


APPENDIX II
LAND UTILIZATION IN THE ZAGORI EXPRESSED
IN PERCENTAGES
0/ /o
Cultivated areas (including arable land and orchards) 2*16
Previously cultivated land, now barren 3-13
Open pasture land 25-74
Forest or bush pasture 26-05
Forests 36-65
Roads, ditches, village sites, barren land, etc. 6-27
Total 10000
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, 1956-7


APPENDIX III
A SPECIMEN FAMILY BUDGET 1954-5
This extended family possessed 350 sheep, of which 190 were
ewes in milk. They also had 5 horses but no goats. There were
14 members, 7 adults and 7 children.
In these accounts quantities are in okes (1 oke = 1,280 grams)
and values are in Drachmas (83 Drachmas to one pound sterling approx.).
Expenditure Drachmas
Winter grazing dues at flat rate of 14 Dr. per sheep,
28 Dr. per horse or mule, on village common land.
The stani of which this family is a member grazed the
land by virtue of a compulsory Government order
which also fixed the amount of payment 5,040
Owing to the small area and poor quality of this
winter grazing the ewes carrying lambs were given
supplementary feed in the form of cotton-cake. 17
okes of cotton-cake per ewe, at 3 Dr. the oke 9,690
Summer grazing in mountain village with citizens’
rights of pasturage at the rate of 8 Dr. for the first 150
animals, and 14 Dr. for the remainder 4,140
Salt for sheep in summer 400
Flour 1300 okes at 4 Dr. 5,200
150 okes of olive oil at 17 Dr. 2,550
15 pairs of shoes at 150 Dr. a pair 2,250
Account with local tailor for the cutting and sewing
of 6 jackets, 10 pairs of trousers and various other
clothes for children and young girls 1,500
Share of general expenses of the stani* at 14-54 Dr.
per sheep, 29 Dr. per horse 5,234
Miscellaneous purchases from village shop 3,066
Total 39,070
t
• This item represented the expenditure incurred by the stani in co-operative undertakings. In this instance more than half the amount was used for gifts and bribes, the remainder representing the cost of lawyers fees, fines for animal tres¬ pass, and the travelling expenses of the tselingas. The share paid by each member family is in proportion to the size of its flock.


364 APPENDIX III
Income Drachmas
190 ewes produced for sale on average 23£ okes of
milk per head at 4^ Dr. in the winter and spring 20,092
190 ewes produced for sale on average 7\ okes of
milk per head at 5 Dr. in the summer 7,125
Sale of 173 okes of wool (60 okes were kept for the
use of the family), at 26 Dr. 4,498
Sale of 78 male lambs at an average price of 120 Dr.
per beast 9,360
Total 41,075
This was a fairly satisfactory year for the family. But it has
to be taken into consideration that they have a debt of 5,000
Dr. to their winter cheese merchant and a loan of 7,000 Dr.
from the Agricultural Bank as well as smaller amounts of debt in
two shops.


A SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. ’Apa(3avTiv6<;, Ilavay.: Movoygacpla negl KovrooflXdxcov, Athens, 1905.
2. Capidan, Theodor: ‘Saracacianii’, Dacoromania, 1924-6,
vol. 4, pp. 923-59.
3. r£6>pyaxa<;, At)[a. : «riepi t£>v Eapaxaxaavaioov fr\q 0paxr)^»,
*AqxeZov Ggaxtxov Aaoyoacpixov xal TXojaatxov OrjoavQov,
i945-65 vol. 125 PP- 65-128, 1947-8, vol. 14, pp. 193-270.
4. Hdeg, Carsten: Les Saracatsans, £tude linguistique, 2 vols.,
Paris and Copenhagen, 1925 and 1926.
5. KaoofxouXTjt;, Nix.: ’Evdvfirnuara Ergaruouxa, vol. i, Athens,
1940.
6. AapTcplSTji;, ’Itoaw/js : 1Hnsiqurrixa MeXer^/biara, Athens,
1887-90.
7. Aoux67rouXo?, At)[x. : IJoiptevixa. rfjg PovjueXrjg, Athens, 1930.
8. SxacpiSa?, Baa.: «Ol XapaxaTaavaioi», *HneiQ(orixi) (Earla,
1955-6, vol. 4, pp. 782-92, 892-900, 1004-10, 1101-7,
vol. 5, pp. 56-62, 151-7, 276-9, 356-62, 458-65, 564-70.
9. Supax7]<;, ArjjjioaO.: «'H NopaSixy) Knqvoxpoipla ev 'EXXa8i»,
recoQyixov AeXrlov, 1925, vol. 12, pp. 651-777.
10. T£uxt£io<;, EuayyeXcx;: TgayovSta ribv Zaqaxaraaval'(ov,
Athens, 1928.
11. XaT^TjpnxaXT), ’AyyeXixYj: ZaQaxaradvoi, vol. i, Athens, 1957.
12. Wace, A. J. B. and Thompson, M. S.: The Nomads of the
Balkans, London, 1914.
Note: Although a number of anthropological studies of Greek rural communities have been made in recent years, little of this work has yet been published. Ernestine Friedl, Vasilika: A Village in Modem Greece, New York, 1962, is a short but perceptive study of a village in the Boeotian plain. Irwin T. Sanders, Rainbow in the Rock: The People ofRural Greece, Cambridge Mass., 1962, is a useful general survey by a rural sociologist.


INDEX1
Abduction, 129-31, 308-9 Adam, 328, 331, 354 Adkins, W. H., 263 n. Adultery, 152, 169, 199-200 Affinal relations, 124 et seq., 301;
consolidation of, 54-55, 134, 136-8; establishment of, 132; ambivalent character of, 135-6, 147; flexibility in range of, 138; the significant relation¬ ships in, 139-40; structural implications of, 145-9 Affines, 38; association with, in stani, 17, 93; non-kinsmen as potential, 50, 146; bride’s ex¬ change of gifts with, 60, 62-64; co-operation between, 94, 13940, 143, 146; difficulties be¬ tween, 105, 141-2; obligations of, 138 et seq.; restraint in behaviour between, 139-40; avoidance of offence to distant, 140; favour returned for service of, 144; breaches of trust between, 145; marriage pro¬ hibitions between, 145-6; neither kin nor non-kin, 146; quarrels between, 147; support from, 148; search for suitable,
301-2 Agnatic cousins, 55, 102-5 Agricultural Bank, loans from, 98, 227-8, 238, 253 — Court, cases of animal trespass before, 215, 239 n. — guard, 209, 226, 227, 234-5; bribes to, 240-41 — officer, 238-40 Agriculture, and pastoralism, 8, 214 Air, evil spirits in, 332-3
Albania, 2; looting by bands from, 13; flight of Muslims to, 15, 89, 282 Albanian Vlachs, 2-3 Animals, theft of, 206-9; ^ form of wealth, 298; sin of cruelty to, 325; Devil assumes forms of,
332 Aoos, river, 9-10 Apotropaic substances, 334, 338; blessed by priest, 348 Aravandinos, P., 3 n.
Arta, 7, 11, 13, 14, 239 Ascendant kinsmen, 56 Association of Nomad Pastoralists, 217, 265 Assumption, feast of the, 115, 321,
344» 350, 352, 355 Athens, 245-6, 248-9 Aunts, 105-6, 121
Baptism, 218-19, 221, 329 Betrothal, 124-9, 138; rite of, 52, 60, 133; feast, 126-7; refusal of girl’s family to enter into, 129; period between marriage and,132 — contract, 126-7, 134; breaking of, 127-8, 201, 291 Bilateral: filiation, 42; endowment of family, 45; extension, equiva¬ lent, 48, 50-51, 71, 93; kinship system, 46, 189, 319 Blood, idea of, 44, 185-6; loss of life seen as loss of, 193, 198; powers of, 197; vengeance for loss of, 198-9; loss of, seen as loss of honour, 269; of Christ,
349, 351-2, 355 — vengeance, see Vengeance killing
*1 am grateful to Miss H. Jerrold for preparing this Index.


INDEX 367
Boasting, 284 Body, relationship with soul and spirit, 335; in hands of Devil, 337; nobility of, 354 Bogomils, the, 335 n. Boundary disputes, leading to fighting, 97, 264, 293; leading to killing, 195-6; leading to young shepherd’s first quarrel, 280; boy sent to guard sheep in area of, 293 Bowra, Sir Maurice, 263 n. Box-wood, apotropaic power of,
334. 338, 345 Boy, pre-school life of, 156; begins working life, 159; adolescent, attitude to mother, 164; dis¬ honour in assaulting, 293. See also Children; Son Bread, symbolism of, 117; of the bride, 134; wheaten in place of maize, 247; for Easter, making of, 290, 348; evil eye prevents rising of, 338; ‘blessed’, 345 — and wine, presented to bride, 61; brought by guests to wedding, 116-17; exchanged by bride’s and groom’s families, 134 Bribery, 299; by gifts, 234-6, 240; by money, 240-42, 245-6 Bride, status of, 59 et seq.; leaves own family, 59-61; received into groom’s family, 59-64, 138; gifts to, 60, 62-64, 220; de¬ parture of, from home, 61, 135-6; period of seclusion of, 62-63; gifts from, 62-64; rou¬ tine of work of, 64, 67, 70; rights of, in husband’s family, 64; behaviour of, to affines, 64-65, 70; groom’s behaviour to, 65-68; of eldest son, 68; changed position on birth of first child, 69-71, 142; age of, 82-83; choice of, 104-5, n4> 124-5, 131-2, 292, 302-3; prepared for wedding, 121, 276; negotiator’s approach to
family of, 125-6; hidden from groom’s representatives, 126-7; trickery regarding, 127-8, 206; at betrothal feast, 127; attempts to see a possible, 128-9, 296; abduction of, 129-31; dances before leaving home, 133; ‘return’ of, 136-8; divorce of a sick, 186-7; shortcomings of, balanced by dowry-wealth, 303; new, displayed on mi¬ gration, 305. See also Wife Bridegroom, arrival of, to claim bride, 60, 132-4; hut of, 61-63, 66, 119; separated from family by bride, 65, 67; his attitude towards bride, 65-68, 70; fear of sexual impotence in, 66, 120, 137; age on marriage, 82-83; prepares for wedding, 120-21; breaks betrothal contract, 1278; manoeuvres of, to see possible bride, 128-9; rejected, 129, 308; visits of, to wife’s family, 136-7, 139-40; ‘going as’, into home of father-in-law, 144; spiritual kinship between wedding sponsor and, 218, 221; magical impairment of potency of, 290, 338 Bridegroom’s procession, 60, 116, 119-20; departure from bride’s home, 61, 135-6; warlike approach and reception of, 133-4, 138; as display of pride,
305 Brigandage, 14 Brother, eldest, head of extended family, 72-73, 176; leader of ‘company’ of brothers, 86, 93; duty of, towards sisters, 178. See also Family, head of; Son, eldest Brothers, forming nucleus of ‘com¬ pany’, 41, 88-89, 92-94; par¬ tition of joint household between, 44, 57, 298-9; co¬ operation between, after par


368 INDEX
tition, 58, 72, 86; and their wives in extended family, 69 et seq.; breach in unity of, after birth of children, 71-72, 78, 141-2; solidarity of, 72, 173-4, 191; different spending habits of, 75; separation of, 79 et seq their obligations towards sisters, 82, 84, 88, 101, 103, 128, 130,
i73» 178-9. 199-201; depen¬ dent position of man without, 94, 285; feelings of, towards sister and her children, 103; of bride, 132, 139; permanent estrangement of, 111, 175; danger of rivalry between, 174.-7> 184; quarrels between,
174-5. 177-8, 324-5; speciali¬ zation of technical roles of, 176-7; ties between sisters and, *78-9; trust between, 191; Devil’s responsibility for vio¬ lence between, 336 — unmarried, vengeance obliga¬
tions of, 84, 172-3, 194-5, 199-201, 317-18; sharing by, 174. See also Siblings; Sons; Wives of brothers Brothers-in-law, 103, 139-40 Burial, 197
Capidan, Theodor, 3-4 Card-playing, 284 Chatzimichalis, Mme., vi, 1 n., 3 n., 5-6, 65 138 n., 281 n., 333 n., 343 n., 346 n., 348 n. Cheese-maker’s station, 21, 28, 249; in summer, 23-24; transporting equipment and cheeses from, 205-6; capital needed for, 249-50. See also Merchant, cheese Cheeses, 21 n.; made for the family’s own consumption, 24,
29, 248-9 Chiftliks, 11, 13-15 Child, interests of, a first priority, 154; relations of, with siblings,
173; fate of illegitimate, 187; choice of name for, 220; fits in, a matter for shame, 311; shame felt by small, 311; fate of an unbaptised, 329; prayers for a sick, 343. See also Children — birth of, conflict of family obli¬ gations arising from, 59; change in husband’s behaviour to wife after, 70 Childbirth, 165, 289-90 Children, obligations of parents towards, 52, 54, 87, 100 (see also Parental obligation); cause of separation of brothers, 71, 73; cause of quarrels between wives of brothers, 71, 77; control of, in extended families, 79, 142; interests of, considered by father in choice of associates in stani, 93; visits of, to mother’s family, 103-4; securing ade¬ quate kinship support for, 139, 141-2; and parents, 154-72; behaviour of family to young, 154-6, 171, 181-2; unrelated, antagonism between, 155, 171; indulgence towards, 155-6, 171; education of, into com¬ munity life, 156-8, 171, 181, 183, 281, 307; experience re¬ sponsibility in representing their families at school, 156, 158, 182, 307; join in family discussions, 157-8; parental responsibility for wrong-doing of, 166-7; God’s punishment of parent through, 167, 311, 323, 325; infected by mother’s dis¬ honour, 169-70; known by reference to father’s name, 186; sin of cruelty to, 190, 324; learn to give evasive answers, 192; dishonourable to insult or assault, 293; Devil seeks to destroy, 333; diseases of, attributed to evil eye, 338, 340. See also Boy; Girl


INDEX 369
Chrism, 219-20 Christ, 346-53; taming of goats by, 26, 31, 347; male values related to ideal of, 272; the Son, 322; cleanses air of evil spirits, 332; sign of cross a remembrance of, 342; the Brother, 347, 350; identification with, 349, 351; the intercessor, 349; union of men in, 350-51; blood of, removes barrier of sin between man and God, 349, 351-2, 355 Christian ideals, in relation to Sarakatsan beliefs, 148, 354; opposed to prestige values, 356 — values base of family relations,
354-5 Christmas, 321, 352, 355 Church attendance, 321; of maiden, 288 Civil Servants, 238, 241-2, 257-8 — war. (1947-49), 195 Client, see Patron and client Clothes, of bridegroom, 120; of bride, 121; more money spent on, 247; new, for Easter, 252; of woman, 270, 277, 287-8; of family on migration, 305 Co-bride and co-bridegroom, 139 Coffee-shops, brawls in, 97; father and son avoid meeting in, 160; pallikari in, 160; meetings of non-kinsmen in, 210; Sarakat¬ san gatherings in, 216, 314; shepherd’s behaviour towards President in, 232-3; patronage of, used to obtain favours, 236-7; self-assertion of heads of families in, 284, 304; meanness shown in, 284, 292; treatment in, of man lacking honour, 296 Collateral kinsmen, 55, 95 et seq.; of parents may be non-kin to children, 48-49; and sibling solidarity, 49, 55, 121; mar¬ riages of, 49-50; weakening of relations with, on marriage,
49. 54~55> 122; favours and
obligations between, 42-43,
95~99» 121-2; avenging death of, 96-97; support for, in fight, 97; derive from pair of siblings, 107; isolation of family from, 145-6 Communion, 321, 352-3; blessed bread from, 345; at Easter, 348, 351; three ‘indulgences’ conferred by, 351; preparation for, 352. See also Eucharist Community: interests subsidiary to family interests, 217, 263; — values, support of kinsmen as sanction of, 40,112; prohibition of marriage in kindred a factor in support of, 147; of prestige, 263 et seq.; of religious belief, 321 et seq. See also Sarakatsan community Comnena, Anna, in. ‘Company’, 8; contractual relation between families of, 8, 92; com¬ position of, 42, 90-91; brothers the nucleus of, 41, 86, 88-89, 92-94; of related families, 88 et seq., 102, no, 203; in relation to winter grazing, 89-91, 93, 245; security aspect of, 89-90; quar¬ rels arising between kinsmen in, no; ‘patronage’ within, 231; prestige value of joining a strong, 299. See also Stani Competition, 39, 264, 320; between families, 9, 25; in shearing, 30; kinship system and, 87-88; con¬ versation between non-kin as form of, 100, 284; in fulfilment of obligations to affines, 144; between brothers, danger of, 174, 177, 212; between father and adult sons, 182-4, 212; in theft, 211—12; as form of oppo¬ sition, 264; for social prestige, 264-5, 267-8, 320; to maintain equality in honour, 272; hos¬ pitality and, 300; envy a corol¬ lary of, 327, 340; entering into


370 INDEX
approach to God, 342, 346 Confidence, see Trust Confirmation, 219-20 Conjugal solidarity, and sibling solidarity, 67-69, 87 Conscription, see Military Service Constantinople, Zagori notables in, 13 Continence, invulnerability con¬ ferred by, 280; necessary con¬ dition for taking Communion,
353 Conversation, between kinsmen, 100; between non-kinsmen, 100, 284; evening, in family hut, 275 Co-parents, natural and spiritual, 218-19, 221 Co-parents-in-law, 140 Corporate: kinship group, 36 n., 51, 71; descent groups, 47 Courage, 318; of shepherds, 26, 29, 278-9; relation of blood to, 185-6; shown in sheep stealing, 206; prerequisite of manliness, 269; need for repeated exhibi¬ tion of, 317 Cousins, 49, 71-72; agnatic, 55, 102-5; vengeance killing by,
55, 975 in kindred of man’s children, 100; relations be¬ tween, 100-5; private talk between, 100; social relations between male and female, 101; friendship between, 101-4, 122, 205; co-operation in work makes deep friendship difficult
between, 102-3, 105> 121-2; at weddings, 107, 118; sexual intercourse between, 110-11 — first, 49-50, 99-105; relations be¬ tween, 100-5, 121-2; friendship between, 101-4, 122; variations in solidarity between various categories of, 102-3; behaviour at wedding quarrels, 107; sex¬ ual intercourse between, 11011; assistance of, at weddings, 118, 120-21
— second, 48-50, 101, 106-8; first cousins preferred, 106-7; on margin of kinship, 107; be¬ haviour at wedding quarrels, 107; sexual intercourse be¬ tween, 111; marriage of girl to, 172, 267 — third, 50, 108 — fourth, 108 Cowardice, fight against, 269. See also Courage Criticism, hostile, 296, 320; of family’s entertainment of guests, 300; a restatement of a value,
3H Cross, sign of, 341-2; with oil from icon lamp, 345 Cross-cousin relationships, 104-5 Crucifixion, relived by shepherd families at Easter, 347-9 Cunning, of goats, 31; evil, of woman, 277-8; required by head of family, 282-3; a small kind of, 283 Curiosity, about affairs of others, 293
Dancing, at weddings, 62, 117-18, 119, 134; at village festivals, 115, 216, 275; at ‘return’, 1367; leading to quarrels between shepherds and villagers, 216; of men and women together, 275; youth’s agility at, 279; bearing of head of family while, 285; of maiden, 287; showing ‘pride’
in, 305 Daughter (s), father’s rights over, 53; sons, more significant than, 56; leaves own family on marriage, 59-61, 132; married in order of birth, 127; father’s relations with unmarried, 158-9, 172, 182; death for dishonoured, 159, 172, 271; father’s relations with married, 172; inheritance rights ofunmarried, 189; beaten by father, 190-92; public and private behaviour of, 191; god


INDEX
father for, 2 2 2-3. SVe also Sibling; Sister Davenport, William, 51 n. Dead, no belief in anger of un¬ avenged, 197; bodies of, pos¬ sessed by Devil, 337; offerings for, on Thursday of Easter week,
348 Death, of adulterous wife, 152; of dishonoured daughter, 159,172, 271; of husband or son, mourn¬ ing for, 168-9; °f illegitimate child, 187; associated with marriage, 280; sudden, Sarakatsan attitude to, 281-2 Debt(s), between families in Stani, 92; sheep theft establishing, 212; of shepherd families, 226, 248, 250-53; ties both shepherd and merchant, 255-6 Demetrius, St., 343; feast-day of, 7, 352; pattern ofmale virtues, 272 Demons, male and female, 332-3. See also Devil Descent, principles of, 47, 56 — groups, 47; non-unilineal, 51 Devil, the, 37, 331-40; goats the creatures of, 26, 31; threatens safety of sheep, 27-28; women the agents of, 31, 277, 354; pro¬ tecting new-born child from, 154; means of protection against, 165, 334, 342, 345, 348; exorcised before Baptism, 219; woman loses soul to, 290; cause of evil in world, 322, 331, 356; envy the responsibility of, 328, 331, 354; seeks to destroy man’s relationship with God, 331, 334-5; manifestations of, 332-4; communion with, 336; souls lost to, 336-7; evil eye a weapon of, 337, 340; responsible for sin,
354-5 Dirges, 168-9; f°r dead pallikari, 281-2 Disability or deformity, a cause of loss of prestige, 77, 122; a
37i
matter for shame, 311; evil eye associated with, 340 Distaff, 33; bride’s, 63, 65 Divination, 165, 346, 352 Divorce, 186-7 Dowry, 44-46, 82; belongs to ele¬ mentary family, 65, 81; bro¬ thers contribute to, 82, 85-86; increased for dishonoured girl, 111; display of, at wedding, 118, 306; not given after abduction, 131; acceptance and loading of, 134; saving on, at expense of daughter’s prestige, 172; daugh¬ ters’ right to, 188-9; question of, in marriage negotiations, 302; varies according to status of partners, 302 -wealth, 302-3 Drower, E. S., 117 Durkheim, E., 176 n.
Easter, 123, 355; visits to kinsmen and others at, 115, 139, 350; gifts at, 220-21, 350; renewal of state of grace at, 221; expenses of, 252; making bread for, 290, 348; sacrifice of sheep at, 344, 352; social goodwill at, 350; fasting during, 353 — eggs, 28, 221; as protection against Devil, 334 — representation of Tomb, 348; value of candle taken from,
338, 345 — Week, 347-9; church attendance at, 321; Thursday of, 345, 348 Eavesdropping, 292-3 Ecology, 34 Eggs, at Easter, see Easter eggs; barter with, 32 Effectiveness, 318, 320 Elementary family, see Family, ele¬ mentary Elias, Prophet, 115, 344 Emigration from Zagori, before 1912, 12-13; after 1922, 15 Emotion, married woman may not


372 INDEX
show, 298; intensity of, in Easter Week, 347-9 Enmity, see Hostility Envy, condition of, 276, 326-8, 354; and evil eye, 28, 62, 327, 33740; leads to practice of sorcery, 120, 290; disruptive conse¬ quences of, to family, 175-6; vices associated with, 292, 337; Devil’s responsibility for, 328,
33i» 337. 34°> 354; redeemed by blood of Christ, 350; man’s struggle against, 355 Epiphany, feast of, 345 Equality, implicit, of men and families, 151, 160, 267-8, 284, 296, 306; of reputation, in choice of marriage partner, 300; ideal equality, in honour, 316,
340 Equivalent bilateral extension, 48,
5°) 93 > distinctive consequence
of, 51, 7i Eucharist, the, 37, 321, 329, 349. See also Communion Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 19 n., 34 n. Evil, renunciation of, at Baptism, 219; Devil the cause of, 322, 331; spirits, 332-3 — eye, due to envy, 28, 327, 338; protection from, 28, 62, 338; as cause of illness, 165, 338; remedies for, 290, 339; and the punishment of God, 325; un¬ consciously exerted, 327, 33840; weapon of Devil, 337-8 Ewe(s), flock of pregnant, 19-20; sacredness of, 276-7. See also Milking ewes — lambs, 19,22; attempt to steal, 11 o Exile, voluntary, of homicide, 193-5,
202 Exorcisms against possession, 334
Failure, shame due to, 327-8; due to external events, 331 Families, co-operating, 16, 231; un¬ related, hostility and distrust
between, 16, 203—12, 217; ‘com¬ pany’ of related, 88 et seq.; differentiation of in terms of prestige, 266-8, 306; of first lineage, 266-7, 301; of lowest lineage, 266, 273; of equivalent prestige, rivalry between, 2678; honour of community of, 317; visits between unrelated 350 Family, 52; Divine archetypal form
of, 34. 37. 324. 354; as corporate group, 36-37, 71, 184, 185 et seq.; multiform character of, 37, 53; common property of, 37, 44, 187-9, 298; as religious community, 37, 341; affection and loyalties concentrated in, 38, 204-5, 212; faces hostile community, 38, 41, 184, 263; bilateral endowment of, 45; categorical obligations between members of, 53, 191-9, 319; cycle of development of, 59 et seq.; autonomy, solidarity and isolation of, 59, 148; division of labour in, 91, 274; financial arrangements of, with stani, 92; obligations of, to other members of stani, 92; interests of, come before those of collateral kin,
96-99. ”3. 121, 148; new, obligations of groom’s and bride’s families of origin to¬ wards, 134-8; only stable soli¬ dary group of kinsmen, 148, 263; as a system of roles, 150 et seq.; reputation of, dependent on virtue of mother, 169, 289go; interrelations in, 179-84; differences of age and genera¬ tion in relation to roles in, 179-80; separation of male and female roles in, 180; concept of blood of, 185-6; discussions, need for unanimity in, 189-90; influence of public opinion on, 190; rights of members of, 190g 1; relaxation within privacy of.


INDEX 373
191, 275, 292-3; loyalty within, 191-2, 204, 307; secrecy con¬ cerning affairs of, 192, 163; weakening of, by vengeance killing, 197-8; removal of trea¬ cherous member of, 199-200;
debt of honour to, 202-31 a ga‘n for one family means loss for another, 204; interests of, take precedence of those of com¬ munity, 217; protection of, against external threats, 217; increasing expenses of, 247; de¬ pendence of, on social prestige, 265; shamed by seduction of one of its women, 270-71; needs sons, 297, 317-18; wealth of, 298-300; on annual migra¬ tions, ‘pride’ of, 305; in rela¬ tion to community and nation, 316; sins relating to, 324-5; undermined by sensuality, 326; Devil’s attempt to disrupt, 336; approach to God, 341, 346 elementary, 36, 51, 58, 71, 263; bride and groom contribute property to, 44; isolation of, 52, 79, 87, 145-6, 181; solidarity of
53. 57. 181, 183, 193, 205, 268; parental obligation and sibling solidarity in, 54-55, 161, 172-3, 204; establishment of, 59-60, 65, 69-71; new, separation of from extended family of origin, 79 et seq., 142; association of, in ‘company’, 88-89, 263; obliga¬ tions of families of origin of man and wife to, 134-8; emancipa¬ tion of, from families of origin of man and wife, 142; importance of, in Sarakatsan community, 150; factors destroying unity of, 152-3, 183-4; friction between father and sons in, 161-3, 171, 183; role of father in, 170; rights and obligations within, 204, 263; debts of, 248; auto¬ nomy of, 263
— extended, 51, 57, 59 et seq.; parti¬ tion of property in, 44, 55, 58, 72, 81, 188; parting of sons from, 54, 57, 72, 79 et seq.; status of bride in, 59 et seq.; tension in, before retirement of father as head of, 68-69, 72> 87-88; brothers and their wives in,69 etseq.; instability of, 71-72, 79; based on consent rather than authority, 72; control of money in, 72-73, 75; examples of, 7379; growing disorder and in¬ discipline in, 78-79; children in, 79, 142, 154 et seq.; duration of association in, 79-80; marriage of sisters before break-up of, 80, 83, 85-86, 88, 188; association of, in ‘company’, 89, 91; rela¬ tions between cousins in, 102-3, 121-2; attitude to uncles in, 105-6; attitude to infant in, 154; status of mother of brothers in, 165-6, 289, 290; Devil’s work in, 336; evil eye in, 340 — group (s), 8; and community, 9, 217; honour of, 9,148-9; village life of, in summer, 24; only solidary kin grouping, 48; mut¬ ual opposition of, 148, 184; loyalty of both father and sons to, 161; solidarity of corporate, 184; equivalence of rights and obligations between members of, 190; factors preventing a dominant, 265 — head of, 37, 93, 318; father’s re¬ tirement as, 68-69, 72, 83-84, 159, 161-3; eldest son as, 68-69,84, 87-88, 161-3, 176; child’s acceptance of father as, 155—7; literacy important for, 162-3; position of, 176, 282; succeeds to an office not an estate, 187; limited authority of, 189-90; requires to scheme and intrigue, 232, 279, 282-3,
3*2, 329. 355-6; police search


374 INDEX
for, 239; in legal difficulties, 240; relations between lawyer and, 244; ideal attributes of, 282- 5; public demeanour of, 283- 5; dependence or inde¬ pendence of, 285, 299 — honour, see Honour of family — isolation of, 52, 59, 121, 148; connexion between prestige values and, 113; from collateral kindred, 145; in relation to patronage, 256-7, 260-61, 263-4 — of marriage, 42 n., 53; obligations within, 49, 53; and family of origin, conflict of obligations towards, 53, 70-71, 73, 75, 82,
87, i4!-2, 195-6 — of origin, 42, 51, 53; endowment of family of marriage with property from, 45; filiation of man or woman to, 47; and family of marriage, conflict of obliga¬ tions towards, 53, 70-71, 73, 75, 82, 87, 141-2, 195-6; effect of, on social standing, 56; relin¬ quishment of obligations to, 59; bride’s departure from, 59-61; groom’s position in, after mar¬ riage, 65, 67; wife’s visits to,
103-4, I39_4° — prestige see Prestige — solidarity, 148, 185 et seq., 212, 319; active and passive, 172-3,
!93-4. 198-9, 203, 319; vul¬ nerability of, 174-5, 212; and vengeance killing, 193-4, 203; in defence of honour, 203; re¬ sides in exclusiveness, 205; in relation to patronage, 256-7, 260-61, 263-4; outward hos¬ tility an expression of, 263 Fares, Bichr, 263 n. Fasting, before Easter, 352-3 Fate and Fates, 329-31 Father, identification of interests with those of children, 49, 100; his rights over daughters, 53;
retirement of, from leadership,
68-69, 72, 83-84, 159, 161-3; indulgence shown to infant child by, 155-6; authority of,
155- 6, 170-72, 180; conditional indulgence of, to young child, 156- 7, 166, 171-2; as disciplin¬ arian, 157, 170; relations be¬ tween unmarried daughter and,
!58-9, 171-2, 182; killing of dishonoured daughter by, 159, 172, 199-200, 271; relations between adolescent son and, 159-60, 180, 182; relations be¬ tween adult unmarried son and, 160-61, 170-72, 212; weakness of, leading to early retirement, 162; handicapped by illiteracy, 162-3; position of, after retirement, 163-4, 166, 182, 286; attitude of children to, in old age, 166-7, I71-2; role of, in elementary family, 170; his duty as protector, 170; attitude of married daughter to, 172; limits to authority of, 189; public and private be¬ haviour of, 191; seldom in¬ volved in vengeance killing,
194-5 J without sons, dilemma of, 297-8, 317 — spiritual, see Godfather Father-in-law, posi tion ofman dwell¬ ing in house of, 45, 144-5; rela¬ tions of man with, 139-40; powerless to interfere between daughter and son-in-law, 142 Favours, and obligations, 95 et seq.; gratitude for, 95-96; ‘free’, 9798, 121-2; conditional, 98-99, 121-2, 144; between friends, 102, 122; between affines, 143—4; sought from spiritual kinsmen, 222; friendship based on complementary, 223,229-30; of village President to shepherd families, 226, 229, 232; sought by means of gifts, 234-6, 240,


INDEX 375
244; asked of Members of Parliament, 246 Feast-days, celebration of, 115, 3434; sacrifice of sheep on, 352. See also Festivals Female sex, inferiority of, 56-57, 276, 278; limited male com¬ panionship for, 101; under authority of male, 179-80; pre¬ disposition to evil inherent in, 277-8; mainly responsible for original sin, 319. See also Woman Festivals, 8; village, 9, 25, 115; of sheep shearing, 30; gathering of kinsmen at, 114 et seq,; religious, 115, 352, 355; quarrels at, 216; prohibition of sexual inter¬ course before religious, 277. See also Feast-days Fights and brawls, 97; at betrothal feasts, 126-7; vengeance for loss of blood in, 198-9; during migrations, 211. See also Quar¬ rels Finances, in extended family, 72-73, 75; within stani, 92. See also Debts; Loans; Money Finley, M. I., 263 n. Firth, Raymond, 48 n. Flocks, 19 et seq.; size of, 15, 88, 91, 298; seasonal division of, into four, 19, 21, 88; labour force necessary to manage, 20; fol¬ lowing the, 25; dependence on, 31; condition of, and family prestige, 31, 40, 212; comanagement of, by kinsmen, 41, 98, 102, 299; partition of,
55. 59. 81, 298; co-manage¬ ment of, by brothers, after partition, 55, 58; common pro¬ perty of family, 72, 187—9, 29&~ 9; common service of brothers to, 173; only kinsmen co¬ operate in management of, 203; selling produce of, 204, 247 et seq.; neighbouring, not subject to theft, 206, 208; on the road
during annual migrations, 211, 305; deception over numbering of, 215; loss of, by disease, 301, 331. See also Sheep Flour, purchase of, 17; credit in form of, 251 Food, preparation of, at weddings, 118; and commensality, 151, 191 Forest guards, 226, 240-41 Fortes, Meyer, 42 n. Fratricide, 188 Freeman, J. D., 51 n. Friedl, Ernestine, 58 n., 261 n. Friendship, between cousins, 101-4, 121, 205; between non-kins¬ men, impossibility of, 205; based on complementary fa¬ vours, 223, 229-30; between villagers, sometimes a form of patronage, 224-38; pressures exerted through network of, 237-8; of lawyer, results ob¬ tained through, 243; of mer¬ chant, 254-5
Galaria, see Milking ewes Georgakas, D., 4 n. George, St., 343-4; feast-day of, 7,
II5. 352i exemplar of male virtues, 272 Gifts, marriage, 60, 62-64, 220; to affines, in return for favours, 143-4; to village President, 234-6; to State officials, 240; to lawyers, 244; to Saints, 342,
344 Gipsy: band at weddings, 117, 120; made nails for Cross, 347 Girl(s), pre-school life of, 156; be¬ tween school and marriage, 158; relations of, with father, 158-9; pre-marital love affair of, 187; as goatherd, 274; with¬ out brother as protector, 2978. See also Daughter; Maiden Glotz, Gustave, 193 n.
Goatherd(s), 22-23, 27. >591 girl as, 274


376 INDEX
Goat-pen, 22-23, 31 Goats, 7, 19; winter care of, 22-23; care of kids, 23, 31; creatures of the Devil tamed by Christ, 26, 31, 347; cared for by women, 31; difficulties in grazing, 242-3 God, 321-31; wrath of, visited on child, 167, 311, 323; sins form¬ ing barrier between man and,
263, 324, 326, 329, 337, 349, 355; the Father, conception of, 322-4, 342, 346; prayers to,
323> 33 G the judge and aven¬ ger, 323, 325-6; sins that are personal insults to, 324; man’s ‘fate’ in relation to, 330; help from, dependent on man’s will,
335-6; ways to, 341-53; every¬ day acts of communion with, 341- 2; indirect approaches to, 342- 5; power of Word of, 345; messages from, 346, 352; two persons of, 346; Christ’s blood removes barrier of sin between man and, 349, 351-2, 355 Godfather, 218-24; merchant as, 255 Good Friday, 348-9 ‘Good heart’, 346; division of house¬ hold with, 80-81; need for, in approach to God, 342, 344-6,
353 Goodness, ethical, 318 Gossip, 300-1, 312-15 Government, central, village Presi¬ dent and, 225; Sarakatsan ap¬ proach to officials of, 238,257-8; attitude of villagers and shep¬ herds to bureaucracy of, 258; or¬ ganization of, parallel hierarchy to structure ofpatronage, 260 Grace: of God, 37, 329; a free gift to man, 222; in material objects, 345, 348; comes only through Christ’s sacrifice, 346; gives power to resist Devil, 355 — state of, condition of honour identified with, 219; renewal of, 221, 329, 352
Grandfather, 164, 182 Grandmother, 118, 154-5 Grass stealing, reciprocal, 25, 30, 209-10 Gratitude, for favours of kinsman, 95-96; accusation of lack of, breaking friendship, 223, 230,
233 Grazing: rights, 7, 15-17; in Zagori, 10, 14-15,40; leasing of, 14-18; payment for, by co-operating families, 17; variations in qual¬ ity of, 20, 226; absence of fenc¬ ing, 25; at night, 27, 29; kins¬ men’s co-operation in, 40-41; gained by one family is lost by another, 204; shortage of, 209; charges for, 225-6, 228, 239; allotment of, 226; rewards and punishment in allotment of, 229, 232, 236-7. See also Boun¬ dary disputes; Goats; Mules — summer, 7, 10, 17, 29; trespassing on, 25, 209-10; management of flocks on, 91; extent of, taxing father’s strength, 162; village charges for, 225; paying for,
251 — winter, 10-11, 19-20, 24, 88; difficulties regarding, 8, 17-18, 88-89, 240; leasing of, 14-18, 299; communal negotiations for, 41; help of lawyer-patron in fight for, 90, 245; the ‘company’ in relation to, 90-91; assisting affine rather than neighbour with unused, 143; approach to authorities about threat to, 240, 245; cost of, 247-8; paying for, 252; rights of, illegally ob¬ tained, 282 Guests, 299-300. See also Visits Guilt, sense of, 324, 331; and shame, 327-8; avoidance of personal,
354-5
‘Halfwedding’, 52 Health, value placed on, 289, 318


INDEX 377
Hearth, 32, 151, 191 Hell, 325 Hoeg, Carsten, 3, 5-6, 63 n., 117 n., 283 n. Holy: Chrism, 219-20 — Communion, see Communion — Family, 34, 37, 322, 324, 354-6 — Spirit, 219, 335 Homicide, vengeance killing of,
96-97. 173. 193-8; driven into exile, 193-5, 202; prison sen¬ tence for, 194. See also Murder and manslaughter; Vengeance killing Honour, 19, 34, 268-74; of indivi¬ dual, 31, 268—72, 316; questions of, 39; defence of sisters’, 82, 84, 86, x 78; causes of lost, 111,
161, 193, 202-3, 271, 273, 292; concept of, 148-9, 257, 268, 286, 272, 295-7, 306, 316, 354; sibling solidarity in questions of, 172-3; strength and, 193, 197; constant struggle to main¬ tain, 193,272,306,3i6-i7;debt of, between families, 202; denial of, to villagers, 213, 216; of community unites shepherds, 216—17; patronage and, 259; intrinsic principles of, 269, 272; dependent on approval ofothers, 270, 317; loss of, destroys prestige, 273; behaviour to man who has lost, 273; impossible in family without prestige, 273-4; ideal pattern of, necessarily compromised by married man, 279; death of pallikari for, 2812; and ‘honourable’, possible opposition of two concepts of, 291; ‘loving honour’, 294-5; °f different groups in mutual opposition, 316; ideal equality in, 316; value of, exclusive and particular, 316-17; sensuality a constant threat to, 326 — of family, 9, 193, 268-9, 272-4, 317-18; involved in woman’s
dishonour, 111, 179, 183-4, 193. 199-202, 270-71; involved in broken engagement, 128,201-2; is honour of its blood, 186; de¬ fence of, 193 et seq., 197, 202, 273-4, 284; the honour of each member associated with, 203, 316; young shepherd free to defend, 279; women’s scorn as support of, 289 — of woman, 179, 199; penalty for losing, 100, 159, 199-200; lost, 110, 169-70,193, 212, 270-71; damaged by broken engage¬ ment, 127-8, 201-2; damaged by abduction, 130; damaged by discussion of her sexual quali¬ ties, 276; redeemed by sense of shame, 278 Honourable man, the, 291, 295-7, 306; positive ideals of, 274-91; negative restrictions on, 291-7; and ‘a man who loves honour’,
294-5 Horses, 27; pride in, 305; in bride¬ groom’s procession, 61, 133 Hospitality, 38, 97, 114; limited form of, to groom’s party, 133, 135; element of competition in, 300 Hostility, between non-kinsmen, 2526, 30, 38, 122, 203-12, 217, 319; between families of bride and groom, 126-7, 132-3, 137; displayed in wedding customs 133-6; between affines, 146; expressed in animal theft, 2069, 263; restrained, between neighbouring families, 210-11; during migrations, 211; re¬ ciprocal exchange of, 211-12, 263; between shepherds and villagers, 213-14; converted by spiritual kinship, 223-4; ex" pressions of, to merchant, 256; limits to expression of, 264, 294, 355; lying as expression of, 283; sin of immoderate, 325


378 INDEX
Hubris, 325 Husband, dwelling in house of father-in-law, 45, 144-5; and the obligations of parenthood, 70-71; role of, 150, 153; de¬ pendent on wife, 151; authority of, over wife, 151-3; public and private behaviour of, 151-2, 191; duty of, to kill adulterous wife, 152, 199; wife takes name of, 186. See also Bridegroom. — and wife, both contribute to wealth of elementary family, 44; ambivalence of early re¬ lationship between, 65-70; at the ‘return’, 136-8; comple¬ mentary roles of, 150-54, 157; differences in public and priv¬ ate behaviour of, 151-2 Hut(s), situation of, in winter, 20,24; situation of, in summer, 24-25; women’s work in, 32; built by women, 33; bride enters groom’s, 61; groom’s, 66, 119; building of, on partition of extended family, 81; reception of groom’s party at, 133; hearth of, 151, 191; arrangements in, for new-born child, 154; family relaxes in, 191, 292-3; cheesemaker’s, 249; inviolability of, 292
Icons, 37, 62, 341, 344 Ideal personality, male, 269-70, 272, 276, 278-86, 291; female, 26972, 276, 286-91; self-regard and struggle to achieve, 306-10; moral and material attributes of, 307; shame due to failure to achieve, 307, 310 Igoumenitsa, 98, 211, 239, 249 Illiteracy of head of family, 162-3 Illness, attributed to evil eye, 165, 338; attributed to Devil, 333; dedication of sheep to Saint at time of, 352 Impiety, 324
Incense, apotropaic power of, 334,
338, 345
Incest, iio-ii, 188; spiritual kin¬ ship and, 221; plot of Devil, 336 Information, kinsmen as source of, 38—39, 96; as service between kinsmen, 97; denial of, to non¬ kin, 192, 210, 283, 294; eager¬ ness to obtain, 313-14 Inheritance, 43-45; of physical and moral characteristics, 45, 56, 161, 166-7, 185; of blood, 185; of family property, 187-9; °f sexual shame by woman, 271; equal rights of, cause fragmen¬ tation of wealth, 298—9, 301 Insult, verbal, as attack on honour, 193, 269; involving honour of sister or mother, 271, 293; stone or curse at straying sheep re¬ garded as, 280, 293; to old man, woman or child, 286, 293; shame lies in receiving not de¬ livering, 286, 293, 318; but evil of unprovoked, 292-4; as mole¬ station of self-regard, 308; to God, 324; to parents, 324 Irrigation of village gardens, 215, 227
Jannina, under Turks, 11, 13; vil¬ lages in plain of, 13-14; pay¬ ment of grazing charges to treasury in, 228; office of Ministry of Agriculture in, 239; shepherd in administrative offices in, 241; news collected
at, 314 Jirec'ek, C., 4 n. Justice, 215; bribery in processes of,
245
Karaiskakis, 2 Katsandonis, 2, 272, 307 Kindred, 36 el seq., 42 n.; collateral limits of, 36, 48-50; maximum size of, 38; spatial distribution of, 38, 114,'147; as intelligence


INDEX 379
network, 38-39; importance of size of, 39; sense of security within, 41; bilateral extension of, 42, 46, 48, 87, 93; relations in, not corporate, 47-48; and marriages of collateral kinsmen, 49; prohibition on marriage within, 50, 87, 146; collateral relatives of, as distinct from family relatives, 59; importance of strong and devoted, 103; the effective, 106-13; flexibility of, 107-8; importance of quality of, 300. Kinship: group, corporate, 36 n., 51, 71; terminology, 42 n., 52; col¬ lateral, and sibling solidarity, 49, 121; system and competi¬ tive values, 87-88; rights and obligations of, 95 et seq.; distance as criterion measuring obliga¬ tion and responsibility, 106-7; second cousins on margin of, 107; withdrawal of recognition of, 111—12; solidarity, expres¬ sions of, 114 et seq.; importance of mediating link of, between families arranging a contract of marriage, 131-2; education of small child to patterns of, 155; system and vengeance killing, 196; a relationship of, affects pattern of expected be¬ haviour, 316; Devil’s attacks on values of, 336. See also Spiritual Kinship Kinsmen, 42 n.; in stani, 17; visits of, 25, 114-15, 299-300; co-opera¬ tion between, 25, 40-42, 94, 98, 121-2; significance of lineal de¬ scendants among, 36; support from, 38, 40, 95, 112, 148, 314; assist in marriage negotiations, 39, 131; consultation between, 40; obligations between, 41-42,
47 n > 95 et setl- > repayment of loans between, 42, 99; equal obligations towards maternal
and paternal, 42-43, 46, 48, 55—56; relative importance of paternal and maternal, 43, 5557; attendance of, at weddings, 46, 114-16; corporate associa¬ tions of, 46 n.; obligations to¬ wards relations of, 47 n.; ascen¬ dant, 56; bridegroom’s pro¬ cession of, 60-61, 116, 119-20; prestige value of support from, 96; private talk between, 100; and kinswomen, relations be¬ tween, 101, 122; friendship between, 101-2, 122; second cousins as marginal, 107; dis¬ tant, forming relationships with, 107-8, 122-3; withdrawal of support from, 112-13, J22, 314; gatherings of, 114 et seq.; pleasure taken in meetings of,
122-3; °f wife and brothers’ wives, differences in relation¬ ships, 141-2; breaches of trust between, 145, 232; non-kins¬ men opposed but complemen¬ tary to, 148, 318-20; of seduced woman, moral weakness of, 271; behaviour to, contrasted with that to non-kin, 316; prestige value of dependent, 317; evil eye from, 339-40. See also Collateral kinsmen Klephtic heroes, 2, 272 Kolokotronis, 307 Koutsovlachs, 2-5; language of, 2; Zagori villages of, 7; stealing sheep from, 208
Labour, division of, between sexes, 31-32, 150-51, 274 ‘Ladies who bring good luck’, 332-4,
338 Lambing, 8, 20-21, 27-28; woman’s role during, 32; dishonest kins¬ man at, 110 Lambs, sale of male, 21, 251; ewe, 22; sacrifice of, 252 Lampridis, J., 12 n.


38° INDEX
Law(s), different attitude of shep¬ herds and villagers to, 215; general character of, 242-3 Law-suits, of stani, 92; Sarakatsan involvement in, 239-40, 245,
309 Lawyers, 242; aid of, in retaining rights to winter grazing, 90, 245; as patrons, 242-7, 258-9, 261; political influence of, 2434; relations of shepherd client with, 244, 255; bribery through, 245; as Members of Parlia¬ ment, 245-6 Legitimacy, importance of, 186-7, 270 Lineage, 300-1; families of first, 266-7, 301; families of lowest, 266, 273, 299 Liturgy, 321-2, 347-8 Liver-fluke, 98, 227, 301 Loans, between kinsmen, 40-42, 9899; between cross-cousins, 104; between unmarried brothers, 174; from Agricultural Bank, 227-8, 238, 253; from cheese merchant, 251-3 Loyalty, between members offamily,
191-2, 204
Maiden (s), work of, during lambing, 32; behaviour and deportment of, 158-9, 287, 326; shame of,
158, 286-7, 3115 faces death or dishonour for loss of virginity, 159; anxious watch over, 277, 326; ideal qualities of, 286-8; clothes of, 287; kept in seclusion, 287-8; sin of spreading scandal about virtue of, 291-2, 325 Maine, Sir Henry, 37 n. Makryiannis, 345 Male sex, greater value placed on, 56-57, 102; female subordin¬ ation to, 179-80, 276; moral superiority of, 319 Man, limited female companionship for, 101; ideal moral qualities
of, 269-70, 272, 278-86, 291; natural nobility of, 269, 276-7, 306-19; life of, 274, 278-86; criticism of women by, 275-6; corrupted by woman, 277; role of, in age, 286; facing scorn of women of family, 289; unsoci¬ able, 292; without brothers or sons, weakness of, 297-8; ‘lost’, 319; barrier of sin between God
and, 324, 337, 349, 3555 wil1 of, in battle of Devil for his soul, 334-6; need for ‘good heart’ in, 342; struggle of, for redemp¬ tion from sins of Adam, 355-6. See also Honourable man Manhood, outward symbols of, 280 Manliness, 39, 170, 269-70, 354; inheritance of, 45; and sexual prowess, 66, 269-70; loss of, in living in home ofwife, 144; need of young man to give periodic proof of, 160, 164; as protection against dishonour, 193, 271; ‘efficient’ aspect of, 269-70; complementary to shame, 2712; conception of, 276; youth the time of perfected, 279-80; as¬ sessment of, by community, 280-81 Marriage, 132 et seq., 186; as con¬ tract between hostile groups, 39, 103, 124-5, 135, 137-8, 146, 186; prestige of parties to, 43
44. 59. 146, 300, 301-4; with parent’s second cousin, 49; separation of kinsmen through, 49; with third cousins, 50,124 n., 131-2; ceremony, 52, 58, 218; differentiation of siblings by, 54,141; patrilocal, 57, 104,122; customs, 59-65, 116-21, 133; consummation of, 63, 66, 150, 187; of sisters, 82, 173; age at, 82-85, 88; arrangements, 8283, 124-5, 13*; sexual relations illicit outside, 100-1; of dis¬ honoured girl, hi, 128, 130,


INDEX
159, 303-4; between second cousins, hi, 172; a union of noble youth and virgin maid, 119; religious sacrament of, 124, 136, 186; consent of parties to, 124; refusals of offer of, 129, 146; following abduction, 130; between families with mediating link ofkinship or marriage, 1312; period between betrothal and, 132; ambivalence of some customs of, 133-6; strength of, 150, 153-4,186; complementary form of, 150-1, 153-4; retired father’s consent needed to, 164; daughter’s breach with father over, 172; of siblings of same sex in order of seniority, 176, 178; of brother postponed until vengeance killing is effected, 195; outside community, 214; difficulties of girl from family of lowest lineage, 266, 291; ambi¬ valent attitude to, 280; with woman of lower lineage, 300-1; into family of superior prestige, 302; of widower, 303-4 — negotiator, 39, 125-6, 143; refusal given through, 129; ideal, 131 — prohibitions, 146-7; between kin, 50-51; between affines, 145-6; between families of spiritual kinsmen, 221 Match-making, 39, 43-44, 124-6, 301-2 Maternal kinsmen, importance of,
43 Mating oframs and ewes, 24, 30 Mauss, Marcel, 212 n. Meanness, 284, 292 Meat, sale of, 17; at wedding feasts, 117-18; eaten at visits of man to wife’s home, 140; sweetness of stolen, 207; served to guests, 300; sacrificial, 344, 352 Members of Parliament, as patrons, 245-6 Menstruation, impurity of, 31
381
Merchant(s), 247-56; shepherds’ debts to, 248 — cheese, sale of milk to, 20, 205, 248-9; station of, 21, 30; appealed to, for assistance in securing grazing, 90, 256; in¬ formers to, 94; control of many stations by one, 249; profits of, 250-51; credit system of, 250-52; summer, 252-3; binds shepherd by debt, 253-4, 256; power of, political and econom¬ ic. 254-5; patronage of, 254-5, 261-2; recourse to law by, 255; shepherd’s relations with, 255-6 Metaxas, government of, stops sheep theft, 15, 17, 206, 209 Metsovo pass, 9 Migrations, seasonal, 7,28-29; under Turkish rule, 5; behaviour of shepherds during, 211; passes needed before, 228; family pride displayed on, 305; poverty visible during, 311 Military: fiefs, 11, 13 — service, 160; abbreviation of, 239, 244 Milk, sale of, 17, 20-21, 23-24, 205, 248-g; of stani, 92; production, summer and winter, 249 n.; normal advances on sale of, 250; gifts of, at Easter, 350 Milking, 28, 30; of goats, women’s work, 31, 274; of sheep never done by women, 274; washing hands before, 276-7; making sign of cross before, 341 — ewes (galaria), 19-20, 28; feeding of, 21; shepherds of, 26-27, 91; care of, in stani, 91-92; sacred¬ ness of, 276-7 — pens, 22; summer, 23-24; pro¬ tection of, from evil eye and Devil, 28; temporary, 29 Misfortune, rejoicing at another’s, 204, 210, 217; attributed to God’s wrath, 323, 325-6; attri¬ buted to evil eye, 325, 338


382 INDEX
Mitsikeli, mountain, 9 Modesty, 319; virtue in woman but fault in man, 276,284,288; need for repeated exhibition of, 317 Money, control of, in extended family, 72; loans of, between kinsmen, 98-99; growing need for, 247-8; included in dowry, 302. See also Debts; Finances; Loans Moral characteristics, inheritance
of, 45, 56, 161, 166-7, 271; of ideal man, 269-70; of ideal woman, 269-72; ideal, of young shepherd, 278-81 Mother, expressive role of, 32, 165; of adult sons, status of, 150, 165- 6, 182-3, 278, 290; indul¬ gence shown to young child by, 155—6; as comforter, 157, 181; and unmarried daughter, 158, 168; relations of, with adult son, 164-6, 168, 180; adolescent son’s attitude to, 164, 168, 180, 182-3; physical and moral centre of extended family, 166, 168, 181, 183, 289-90; child¬ ren’s attitude to, in her old age, 166- 7, 290; unmotivated love of, 168; as mourner, 168-9; family’s integrity dependent on honour of, 169-70, 181, 271; reversal of roles between father and,181-2 — of God, 37, 183, 322; female values referred to, 272; feastday of Assumption of, 321; approached to intercede with God, 342-3. See also Assump¬ tion; Holy Family Mother-in-law, reception of bride by, 61-63; wives of brothers working under direction of, 76, 165; control of, over sons’ wives, 78; man’s relations with,
139 Mourning, 168-9, 281-2 Mules, 27; loading dowry onto, 134;
trespassing of, 215; regulations for grazing and watering of,
215. 234 Mule-trains, 29; carrying cheeses and equipment, 205 Murder and manslaughter, in brawls, 97; as blow to honour of dead man’s family, 193, 269; dis¬ honourable motive for, 193; discouragement of, 264. See also Homicide; Vengeance killing Murdock, G. P., 48 n.
‘Name’, prestige and, 265, 300; loss of, 300-1 Name(s), wife takes husband’s, 186; choice of, for child, 220; family names, of high and low reputa¬ tion, 300 Neochori, Sarakatsan households of, 91, 248; winter dispositions of shepherds of, 92; marriage between families living in, 147; political skill of President of, 226 Neolocal residence, 57 Nephew, 105-6 News, circulation of, 313-14. See also Information Nicknames, 300- x, 315 Niece, 105-6 Nobility, inherent in man, 269, 276
7, 306, 319, 327. 3545 and sin, 328, 337; of spirit and soul, 335; of body, 354 Nomarch, 90, 225, 229 Non-kinsmen, 122, 146, 148; hosti¬ lity between, 25-26, 30, 38, 203- 12,319; as potential affines, 50, 146; difficulties of co-opera¬ tion between, 95-96, 205-6, 217; conversation between, 100; children of second cousins be¬ come, 107; absence of moral consideration between, 148; 204- 5, 257, 283; distrust be¬ tween, 203; only forms of inter¬ dependence between, 204; mu¬ tually destructive interests of,


INDEX 383
204, 257; slanderous vilifica¬ tions of, 210; competition be¬ tween, 264; behaviour to, con¬ trasted with that to kin, 316; goodwill between, at Easter,
35°-5i Numbers, 297-9, 3DI
Obligations, favours and, 95 et seq.; of kinsmen co-operating with their flocks, 102; of affines, 138 et seq.; of children to
parents, 166-7. $ee a^so Parental obligations
Old age, in man, 163-4, 166-7, 171-2, 182, 286; in woman, 181-2, 290-91 Onians, R. B., 34 n., 152 n., 185 n. Origin, family of, see Family of origin Original sin, see Sin Orthodox Church, marriage service of, 52; divorce in, 186; relation of Sarakatsani to, 321, 353-4; and Sarakatsan notion of an¬ cestral sin, 328; recognizes evil eye, 337; Mother of God in, 343 ‘Own people’, 38; and strangers, division of world between, 316
Pallikari, 160, 356; relations with father, 182-3; ideal qualities of, 206, 278-81; outward sym¬ bols of manliness of, 280; death of, 281-2; isolated with flock, 285 Paradise, 325 Paramythia, 15 Paraskeve, St., 115, 344 Parental obligations, 52, 54, 183; and sibling solidarity, 54-55, 121, 142; in conflict with attachment to family of origin,
59,7b 73, 87, 141-2; and assist¬ ance to collateral kin, 96-99, 121; and affinal relationships, 139, 142; effect of, on marriage,
154
Parent(s), maintenance of, by youn¬ gest son, 44, 53 n., 81, 188; some collateral kinsmen of, not kin of children, 49-50; daugh¬ ter’s separation from, on mar¬ riage, 60-61, 132; of groom receive bride, 61; visits of mar¬
ried daughter to, 103-4, !39, 142; of wife, man’s relations with, 139-40; bridegroom liv¬ ing with wife’s, 144; and child¬ ren, 154-72; complementary roles of, 157, 181-3; anxieties of, 166; obligations of children to, 166-7; responsible for wrong¬ doing of children, 166-7; avoid favouritism in relations with children, 175-6; authority of, 180; .share of, in family pro¬ perty, 188; relations between natural and spiritual, 218-19, 221-2; not present at child’s Baptism, 219-20; and choice of name for child, 220; blemish¬ ed child a matter for shame of, 311; sin ofmaltreatment ofaged, 324. See also Father; Mother Pastoralism, agriculture and, 8; transhumant, 14-18 Pastures, see Grazing Paternal kinsmen, greater signifi¬ cance of, 43, 55-57, 300 Patrilineal descent: groups, 47; and reputation of lineage, 300 Patrilocal: marriage, 57, 104, 122; extended family, 71 Patron (s), village notable as, 230, 236, 260-61; lawyer as, 238-47, 258-9, 261; cheese merchant as, 254-5; prestige value of visit from, 300; Saints as, 342, 346; Mother of God as, 343 — and client, 23; spiritual kinship
between, 223-4, 235, 244; ‘friendship’ between, 230-4, 236, 244; moral quality of relationship, 259-60; men ‘who love honour’, 295


INDEX
384
Patronage, 14, 213 et seq.; mutual prestige value of, 109, 223-4, 232, 259-61, 299; in spiritual kinship, 217-24, 235; in village friendship, 224-38, 261; need of, in approaching higher officials, 242-3, 246-7, 258-9; structure of, a parallel hier¬ archy to organization of ad¬ ministration, 260; links local community to wider national
society, 260-2, 264 Perjury, sin of, 324 Phillpotts, Bertha, 46 n. Phylactery, to protect child, 165,
333-4. 338, 348 Pindus mountains, 9-10; Koutsovlach villages in, 2 Pitt-Rivers, J. A., 50, 58 n., 152 n., 229 n., 263 n. Police, 239; abduction of bride and, 130; prevent vengeance killing, 194; and payment of grazing charges, 228, 239; gifts to, 240 Poverty, 88-89, 354; loss of prestige through, 109, 122, 266, 299; a bar to patronage, 231, 237; morally reprehensible, 273,317; but a sin to exploit, 293-4, 325; estimated in number of sheep, 298; leading to loss of name, 301; shame due to, 311 Praise, evil eye and, 338 Prayers, 323, 341-2; for ‘good luck’, 331; to Mother of God, 243; against evil eye, 337; to Saints,
342, 344-5 Premonitions, 346 Prestige, hierarchy of, 9, 263-8; sheep the prerequisite of, 31, 212, 267, 298, 301; competition for, 39, 264-5, 267-8, 320; lost through kinsman’s wrongdoing, 40, 112-13, 122; transmission of, 43, 56; of marriage partners,
43-44. 59. H6. 3oo, 3°!-4; of having sons, 56, 297-8; of manliness, 66; lost by married
man continuing to live under father’s direction, 68-69, 87; lost through child’s disabilities, 77, 122, 311; size of dowry and, 82, 111; obligation to non-kin and loss of, 96; lost through poverty, 109, 122, 266, 299; potential threat to solidarity of most relationships, 112-13, 122; lost by ridicule, 113, 160, 182; lost through refusal of offer of marriage, 129-31, 146; in¬ volved in affinal relations, 137; of letters, 162-3; lost through failings of mother, 169-70, 181, 271; child’s realization of im¬ portance of, 171; winning of, at expense of brother, 174; lost by misdemeanours of head of family, 189; of higher civil servant, 242-3, 246, 257; of successful lawyer, 243-4, 247; material symbols of, 247, 256; of merchant, 256; depends on opinions of enemies, 264-5, 320; families without, 266, 2734, 299; honour and, 268-74, 291. 295; behaviour to man who has lost all, 273, 296; head of family’s social, 285; lost through service as wage shep¬ herd, 285, 299; attitude to man of inferior, 296, 308; material elements of, 297-306; dimin¬ ished if man has no sons or brothers, 298; vulnerable after division of flock, 298-g; pride and, 304-6; loss of, 306-7, 311; evaluation of, by community, 312-14; a system of values, 316-20; of honour killing, 318; impossible without strength, 317; evil eye of families of low,
340 — value(s), 263 et seq., 306, 316-20; of giving and receiving favours, 96; of patronage, 108, 223-4, 231, 233, 238, 259-61; of


INDEX 385
kinsmen’s attendance at wed¬ dings and other functions, 11416, 120; importance of, 181, 183, 264; of wealth, 298-300; of visitors, 299-300; of lineage, 300-1; of marriage partners, 300, 301-4; sanction of, 30615; exclusive and particularistic, 316-17; opposed to Christian values, 356 Preveza, 7, 13, 14, 98, 239 Pride, personal and family, 25; of maiden, 287; amount of dowrywealth a matter of, 303; display of, 304-6; ‘having pride’, 305 Priest, exorcisms read by, 334; prayers of, against evil eye, 337; blesses apotropaic substances,
348 Prohibitions on marriage. See Mar¬ riage prohibitions Property, family as corporate group and, 37; transmission of, 43; contributed by both husband and wife, 44; partition of, between sons, 44. See also Wealth Protected lease, rights of, 15,17 Puberty, relations of parents and children during, 164, 168, 180, 182-3; relations of brother and sister after, 179 Public disgrace, in relation to shame, 310-11, 317 — opinion, influence of, on family, 190; and vengeance killing, 197-8, 201-3; and killing of dishonoured girl, 200; and reputation of young shepherd, 281; effect of, on self-regard, 307-10; functioning through gossip and ridicule, 312—15
Quarrels, at weddings, 43, 97, 107, 114, 118, 198-9; of brothers’ wives, 71; involving trustworthi¬ ness of kinsmen, 109-10; at be¬ trothal feasts, 126-7; over bride’s
departure, 135-6; between affines, 147; between brothers, 174-5,17 7-8; in public, 280-81; between father and son, 188, 286; between shepherds and villagers, 215-16; young shep¬ herd’s first, 280-1; over cards, 284. See also Boundary disputes Quasi-affinal relationships, 139
Rams, flock of sterile ewes and, 19, 21, 23; run with ewes, 24 Rape, vengeance for, 173, 200-1, 271; an attack on family honour, 193, 200-2; incurring loss of honour, 269, 271 Refugees, settlement of, 8, 14-15 Religious: community, family as, 37, 341; festivals, 115, 277, 352, 355; experience, 123; belief, values of, 321 et seq.; ideals, social values and, 353-6 Reputation, see Prestige Respect, shown by wife to husband, 151; shown by daughter to father, 159; shown by son to father, 159-61, 167, 170, 172, 180, 182; shown by child to godfather, 222 ‘Return’, the, 136-8 Ridicule, 212-13; prestige lost by, 113, 160, 182; threat of, 143; young shepherd’s vulnerability to, 281; at false display of pride, 304-6; by song, 314-15 Rivalry, between brothers, 174-7, 184; absent between sisters, 178 Rivers, W. H. R., 48 n. Rumania, interested in Koutsovlachs, 3; Zagori migrants in, 12
Sacrifice of sheep, 344, 352 Saints, 322; approached to inter¬ cede with God, 342-6; warn¬ ings of, 346; dedication of sheep to, in case of illness, 352 Salt, purchase of, 17; for sheep, 29;


386 INDEX
as protection against Devil,
334. 345 Sarakatsan: dialect, 5-6; art forms, 5; conception of time, 34; atti¬ tude to death, 197, 281-2; religion, 321 et seq. — community, 1, 9, 215 et seq.; transhumant economy of, 1, 4, 6, 14; local gatherings of, 7, 9, 214; social groupings in, 8; hostility between villagers and, 9, 16, 23, 28, 89-90, 215-16; weakened by strength of family groups, 9, 217; co-operation between families in, 16; distri¬ bution of wealth in, 18; in¬ herent vulnerability of, 18; social life in, winter and sum¬ mer, 24; significance of kins¬ men in, 36 et seq.; population of, 7, 38; solidarity of, 50-51, 214-16; geographical disper¬ sion of, 114, 147-8, 214; frag¬ mented character of, 122, 214, 263; particularistic primary values of, 148-9, 257; attitude to old age in, 163; method of succession to wealth and status in, 170; no trader or shopkeep¬ er in, 204; theft and counter¬ theft within, 211—12; a closed group, 214; lacks organized co¬ operation, 214-17, 230; social exclusiveness of, 216; powers of village President over affairs of, 225-6; financial year of, 251-3; leading families of, 266; circu¬ lation of news through,313-14; opposition between social and religious values in, 353-6 Sarakatsani, and other Vlachs, 2-3; origins of, 3 et seq.; of Zagori, 7 et seq., 213 et seq.; village citizenship of, 7, 9, 16; grazing rights of, 7, 18; three chief concerns of, 19; on wives and their quarrels, 71; occupy land abandoned by Muslims, 89;
secrecy of, 192, 210; their notion of the ideal man, 214; may have no permanent neigh¬ bours, 214-15; means em¬ ployed by, to influence autho¬ rities outside the community, 217 et seq.; ‘friendship’ between village authorities and, 230-31; codes and conventions of, in conflict with State laws and regulations, 239-40; at dis¬ advantage with high officials, 241-2, 246; growing need of, for money income, 247; live largely on credit, 247-8,250-53, 255-6, 262; expect to be ex¬ ploited and ignored, 257; bro¬ therhood of, 350. See also Shepherds Scandalmonger, a man without honour, 291-2 School, 156-8; President’s conniv¬ ance at early removal of child from, 229 Secrecy, 192, 210 Seduction, and loss of honour, 269
7i Self-assertion, necessary male attri¬ bute, 180, 183, 304, 319; of head of family, 284; need for repeated exhibitiort of, 317 Self-confidence, 269 Self-discipline, of co-operating kins¬ men, no; in dealings with affines at weddings, 132; shown by unmarried girl, 158; con¬ sequences when lacking in wife and mother, 169; struggle of, over cowardice and sensuality, 269; of head of family, 284-5; of married woman, 288-9; necessary to protect prestige, 306 Self-regard, 307; of head of family, 152, 285; sensitive, of young shepherd, 281, 285; of old man, 286; and love of others’ honour, 294-5; affected by


INDEX 387
public knowledge of failure, 307-10; molestation of, 308-9; inhibits display of weakness, 309; and shame, 311-12; a virtue in man but possibly a failing in woman, 312 Settlement of pastoralists, 15-16 Sexes, moral qualities of, 26, 45, 56-57, 274, 277-8; division of labour between, 31-32, 150-51, 274; opposition of, 32, 275-8, 319; male superiority to female 56-57, 276, 278; segregation of, outside family and kindred, 1 o 1, 274-5; complementary attri¬ butes of, 179-83, 276, 318-19; verbal exchanges between groups of the two, 275 Sexual relations, impurity of, 26, 31, 276-7; between bride and groom, 66-68, 70; illicit, associ¬ ated with visits to the well, 86; illicit outside marriage, 100-1; between cousins, 110-11; ambi¬ valent attitude towards, 270, 276-7, 280; women’s alleged revulsion from, 270, 275-6; shame of, rests on woman, 277; with Devil, 336 — shame, inheritance of sense of, 45, 271; as defence against dishonour, 193, 270; of women, 269, 270-71, 277-8, 312; maiden’s cultivation of, 287-8 Sexuality, of women, 31, 271, 2778, 311—12, 327; man’s attempt to discipline, 269, 319, 326, 355; maiden’s denial of, 287, 311; spent, of old woman, 290; and sin, 326-8, 354; destroyer of family honour, 326 ‘Shadows, the’, 333 Shame, 310-12; of accepting help from non-kin, 40; bride’s feel¬ ings of, 62, 65; of family for kinsman’s wrongdoing, 112-13; of virtuous maiden, 158, 286-7; 311; of woman, 270; of family
for woman’s seduction, 270-71; complementary to manliness, 271-2; a virtue in woman but sometimes a fault in man, 276, 312; woman’s redemption by, 278; sense of, in failure to achieve ideal patterns of be¬ haviour, 307, 310-11, 317; and self-regard, 311-12; and ridi¬ cule, 312-13; and guilt, 327-8; idea of fate and, 331. See also Sexual Shame Shearing of sheep, 29-30, 33; of goats, 31 Sheep, 19 et seq.; number of, 7, 88, 298; wethers as leaders, 19 God’s animal, 26, 34, 322; characteristics of, 26; bells, 28, 305, 338; protection of, against evil eye, 28,338; shepherds’ soli¬ darity with, 30-31; prerequi¬ site of prestige, 31, 212, 267, 298, 301; care of sick, 31-32, 280; women and, 31-32, 276; ear-signs of, 81, 208; increase in numbers of, in Zagori, 209; trespassing of, on village land, 215, 226; loan for replacing lost, 227-8; counting of, for tax purposes, 229, 232; buying winter feed for, 251; included in dowry, 302-3; decorated ‘for pride’, 305; attacked by evil spirits or Devil, 333; sacrifice of, 344, 352; spiritual value of,
352 — disease, 28, 277, 301; loss of sheep from, 98, 267, 301; caused by evil eye, 338 — theft, small-scale, 206-7 > largescale, 208-9; during migrations, 211. See also Flocks; Milking ewes Sheep-folds, 20-22, 27, 32 Shepherd(s), 26 et seq.; wage, 16, 88, 285, 299; improved conditions of, 17-18; shelters for, 20, 22; summer life of, 24-25, 30; iso


388 INDEX
lation of, 25, 285; hostility be¬ tween unrelated, 25-26, 30, 214; ideal moral character¬ istics of, 26, 29, 206, 278-81; of milking ewes, 26-28; specialist skills of, 27, 176-7; solidarity of, with sheep, 30-31; bride¬ groom, 66-68; visits of, to family hut, 67; boundary disputes be¬ tween, 97, 195-6, 264, 280, 293; value of home comfort to, 151; lack of co-operation be¬ tween unrelated, 203, 214-17, 319; transportation of cheeses and equipment from mountain by, 205; sheep-stealing by, 206-9; conflict of interests be¬ tween villagers and, 215-16; combine against villagers in questions of honour of com¬ munity, 216-17; debts of, 226, 248, 251-6; and trespass by their animals, 226; and loans from Agricultural Bank, 228; arrested for failure to pay graz¬ ing charges, 228, 239; their means of obtaining President’s favour, 229, 231-6; at disad¬ vantage before higher officials, 241-2, 246; marketing of pro¬ duce of, 247-8, 256, 261-2; advances on sale of milk paid to, 250-52; bound to merchant by debt, 250-51, 253-6; yearly profit or loss of, 252; distrust between bureaucrats and, 258; polluted by sexual intercourse, 276-7; assessment of man’s prowess as, 280-81; relation¬ ship of, with God, 322; Devil attacks young, 333-4; killing of sacrificial sheep by, 352. See also Pallikari Shepherd’s crook, 274, 305 Shopkeepers, debts to, 251-2; pat¬ ronage of, 261-2 Sibling group, kindred structure centred on, 46-47, 49; dis¬
appearance of common in¬ terests of descendants of, 50; effect of marriage on, 54-55,59, 141- 2; arrangement of mar¬ riages for, 59, 176; after birth of child to member of group, effect on, 70, 141; modes of separation in, 80 — solidarity, 54, 172-3; and col¬ lateral kinsmen, 49, 55; and
parental obligation, 54-55, 121, 142- 3; and conjugal solidarity, 67-69, 87; and marriages of sisters, 88 Siblings, 173-9; the bridge between two classes of kinsmen, 52-53; differentiated by their mar¬ riages, 54, 70; collateral kin¬ ship bonds originating from, 107; of wife, man’s relations with, 139; relationships with husbands and wives of, 139; of married pair, relations be¬ tween, 140-41; identification of interests of, 172-4; of same sex, equality of, 175; order of marriage of, 176; specialization of technical roles of shepherd, 176-7. See also Brothers; Sisters Simmel, Georg, 264 n. Sin(s), of incest between first cousins, 111; of violence or insult to father, 161, 324; sepa¬ rating man from God, 263, 324, 326, 329, 337, 349, 355; ‘weight’ of, 324, 329, 351; personal, 324-8, 354-5; an¬ cestral, 324, 326-31, 349, 3512, 354-5; God’s punishment for, 325-6; original, and Bap¬ tism, 329; Devil’s responsibility for, 336-7, 354; release from, through Communion, 351 Sister(s), marriage of, 80, 82-86; brothers’ obligations to, 82, 84, 88, 101, 103, 128, 130, 173, 178-9, 199-201; duty of aveng¬ ing honour of, 84, 200-1; with


INDEX 389
out unmarried brother, 85; safeguarding honour of, 86, 178; behaviour of brother to, 101; relations between married, 104; quasi-affinal relations be¬ tween husbands of, 139; en¬ trusted to care of affine, 145; emotional identification of, 173; equivalent rights and duties of, 175; ties between unmarried, 178; ties between brother and, 178-9; guardians of family honour, 179; possible duty of brother to kill, 199-200 Sister-in-law, marriage between man’s cousin and, 104 Skill, importance of, 318 Slander about unmarried girl, 291-2,
325 Snell, Bruno, 263 n. Social: conformity, importance of, 296; recognition, withdrawal of, 296, 307, 310; structure, three relevant features of, 31820; values and religious ideals,
353-6 Sociability, need for appearance of,
292, 294 Socialization process in family life, pre-school, 155-6; during school years, 156-8; pre-marriage, for girl, 158-9; pre-military service,
for boy, 159-60 Solidarity, community, 50-51, 21416; conjugal, 67-69, 87; of women, 275; ideal of, at Easter, 350. See also Family, solidarity of; Sibling solidarity Son(s), importance of, 19, 56, 297, 317-18; relation of young, to father, 159-60, 170-72, 180, 182; sins through violence to father, 161; relation of, to retired father, 163-4, 172; relation of, to mother, 164-8, 180, 182; customary rights of inheritance of, 188; expected to avenge father’s killing, 194-5;
godfather of second, 222; learns personal responsibility for family honour, 281; dilemma of family without, 297-8, 317 — eldest, marriage of, 68, 83-84; replacement of father by, 6869, 84, 87-88, 161-3; wife of, attitude of brothers’ wives to direction by, 165 — youngest, maintains parents, 44, 53 n., 81, 188; remains in original family hut, 81; delayed marriage of, 85, 178-9, 200-1; maintains unmarried sister, 189 Songs, wedding, 118-21; of groom’s kin at bride’s home, 135; prestige value of repertoire of, 285; satirical, 314-15 Sorcery, precautions against, at wedding, 120; old women’s reputation for, 290; and evil eye, 340 Soul(s), battle of God and Devil
for, 334-5; conception of, 335; lost to Devil, 336-7; of dead return on Easter Thursday, 348 Spinning, 33; bride’s symbolic, 63, 65; by bride on visit to parents’ home, 142; competition be¬ tween sisters at, 178 n.; of ‘ladies who bring good luck’,
332 Spirit, of man, conception of, 335 Spiritual kinship, 217-24; exacting behaviour pattern of, 221-2; mutual advantages of, 223-4; occupations of persons sought for, 223; with village Presi¬ dent, 235; with lawyer, 244; with merchant, 255 Spitting, as protection against evil eye, 338 Standard-bearer, 119 Stani, 8, 17, 91-92; winter, 17, 2023; summer, 17, 23-24; un¬ separated flocks of, 19; illustra¬ tion of value of large, 89-90; financial arrangements of, 92;


39° INDEX
involved in law-suits, 92; in¬ formers within, 94. See also ‘Company’ — leader of, qualities of ideal, 93; and threat to winter grazing, 240; and lawyer patron, 244. See also Tselingas Sterpha (sterile ewes), 19, 21, 23; shepherds of, 26; amalgamation of, with zigouria, 91 Strangers, 38, division of world between ‘own people’ and, 316 Strength, essential to prestige and honour, 317-18, 354 Summer, community life in, 8; organization of stani in, 23-24; pastures, composition of ‘com¬ panies’ grazing, 90-91; cheese¬ making, 205. See also Grazing, summer
Taxes, connivance of President in avoiding payment of full, 229,
232 Theft, of sheep, 29, 206-9, 211-12; of grass, 30, 209-10, 212; reciprocal exchange of, 211-12 Theodore, St., 344 Thesprotia, Muslim population of, 15,89; obtaining winter grazing in, 89-90, 245; powerful cheese merchant in, 249, 254; obtain¬ ing Muslim land in, 282 ‘Things that terrify’, 333 Thompson, M. S., 2 n. Thornbush, apotropaic power of,
334 Thunderbolt, Devil and, 331 Time, Sarakatsan conception of, 34 Toasts, at wedding festival, 117 Transhumance, 1, 4; in classical and Hellenistic Greece, 6; factors encouraging, 14; threatened by disappearance of winter grass¬ land, 15; and impermanence of local gatherings of Sarakatsan families, 214-15 Trench, Archbishop, 304 n.
Trespassing, reciprocal, across grazing boundary, 209-10, 264; of sheep on village land, 215, 226; of mules, 234-5; difficulty of settling out of court, 309 Trust, between kinsmen, 38, 95, 98-100, 203; lacking, outside family and kindred, 92-93; destruction of, 109—12; appear¬ ance of, between affines, 145; breaches of, 145; absence of, prevents community organi¬ zation, 217; Sarakatsan ex¬ pression of wish for universal,
329,350-51 Tselingas, 16-17, 41, 93, owning grazing in excess of needs, 89; settlement of accounts by, 92; qualities of ideal, 93; prestige value of status of, 285, 300; trained horse of, 305 Tselingato, 17 Tuberculosis, leading to divorce, 186-7 Turkish rule, 11-14; seasonal mi¬ grations under, 5
Uncle, presides over division of flocks, 81; relations of nephew or niece with, 105-6 Unilineal descent, and the Sarakat¬ san extended family, 72
Vengeance killing, 193-9, 318; limits to responsibility for carry¬ ing out, 41, 54, 55, 70-71, 96-97, 195-6; for homicide,
96-97, 173, 193-8, 201-2; con¬ sequences of, 96-97; counter vengeance for, 96, 130, 201; for breaking betrothal contract, r 28, 201; after abduction, 130; kinsman not surrogate for murderer in, 173, 194; for rape, 173, 200-1; low incidence of,
I94_51 example of, 195-6, 198; limit to, 196, 201-2; a duty owed to family, not to dead


INDEX 39i
man, 197; paradox of, 197-8; of woman for loss of her sexual purity, 199-200, 202; interval between original killing and, 202-3 5 honour lost by avoidance of, 273. See also Homicide; Murder and manslaughter Village: citizenship, 7, 9, 16, 215 festivals, 9, 25, 115, 216, 275, 285; renting grazing from, 14, 299; community, 18; winter life of Sarakatsani in, 20-23; summer life in, 23; restrained hostility towards non-kin in same, 208, 210; conflict of values in, between inhabitants and Sarakatsani, 213-14; con¬ flicts of interest in, 215-16, 238; administration of affairs of, 215, 224-7; friendship and patronage in, 224-38, 260-61; secretary, 225; men of in¬ fluence in, 236; neighbourliness and service to community in, 238; patronage links between Sarakatsani and, 261; gathering of heads of Sarakatsan families in, 284 — council, 215, 224-5 — elections, 9, 141-2, 224; influence of Sarakatsan vote in, 225-6,
231-2 — President, 224; duties and powers of, 225; powers of, to help or obstruct, 226-9; political sig¬ nificance of favours of, 226, 228, 231-2; Sarakatsan ‘friendship’ with, 229, 231-4, 235-6; villagers’ friendship with, a form ofpatronage, 230, 260-61; gains prestige as patron of shepherds, 233; gifts to, 234-6; dispensing favours a right of office of, 235; head of family first, of village second, 238 Villagers, concern with commerce and professions among, 12-14; antipathy between shepherds
and, 9, 16, 23, 28, 89-90, 21316; refuse winter grazing to shepherd stani, 89-90, 245; ideal man among, 213; marriage between Sarakatsani and, 214; legal advantages of, 215; social exclusiveness of, 216; local electoral rights of, 224; friendship ties between, 229-30, 237; social equality of, 229; family comes before com¬ munity among, 237-8, 260-61; distrust between bureaucrats and, 258; links between shep¬ herds and,261 Vinogradoff, Sir Paul, 187 Violence, of son to father, 160-61; Sarakatsani resort to, 240, 269; weakness of family discourages, 265; only answer to molestation of self-regard, 308; dishonour in aimless, 318; between brothers, sin of, 324-5 Viper’s head, 28, 334 Virginity, 278; importance of preser¬ vation of, 130, 159, 169, 178, 270; ideal, of male, 280; of Christ, 349-50 Virtues, concept of honour in relation to Christian, 148-9, 354; of truth and sincerity appear only in behaviour be¬ tween kinsmen, 283; sex-linked,
319 Visits, between kinsmen, 25, 114-15, 299-300; of wife to family of
origin, 103-4, I39> 142, H75 of husband to wife’s family, 139-40; prestige value of re¬ ceiving, 299-300; Easter, be¬ tween unrelated families, 350 Vlachs, 1-6; Albanian, 2-3
Wace, A. J. B., 2 n. Wage shepherds, 16, 88, 285, 299 Warner, Lloyd, 42 n. Washing, the body, shame of for women, 287


392 INDEX
— of clothes, by bride, 63; use of springs for, 215 Water, carried only by women, 32, 274; carried by bride, 63; for irrigation, allotment of time for supplying, 215, 227 Weakness, impossibility ofadmitting, 309; shame of, 318 Wealth, conferring opportunity for protection of kindred, 96; lead¬ ing to an extended ‘effective kindred’, 108-9; conferring prestige, 208, 298-301; frag¬ mentation of, by inheritance, 298—9, 301. See also Dowrywealth; Property Weaning, 155 Weaving, 33, 288 Wedding(s), 8, 132-6; kinsmen meet at, 25,46,114-20; quarrels
at, 43. 97, 107, 114, 118, 196, 198-9; ceremony, 51-52, 60; customs, 60-64, 116-21, 218; gifts, 60-63! departure of guests after, 62-63; standard, 63, 119; feast, 117-18; women at, 118, 275; songs, 118-21; of widow, or widower, 119 n.; clothing, 120-21; rings, 126; segregation of bride’s and groom’s kin at, 133—4; retired father’s position at, 164; grief of bride’s sisters at, 173; duties of sponsor at, 218, 220-21; behaviour of youth at, 279; head of family at, 285; maidens kept from, 288; display of pride at, 305-6; open ridi¬ cule at, 313. See also Marriage — procession, see Bridegroom’s pro¬ cession — sponsor, 218-24; bride’s gift to, 62, 220; relation between groom and, 218, 221-2; his duties towards children of marriage, 218-21; gifts of, 220. See also Godfather; Spiritual kinship Well, bride escorted to, 63; illicit sex¬ ual intercourse linked with, 86
Wethers, 19 n. Widow, father’s rights over childless, 53; remarriage of, 119 n., 304 Widower, marriage of dishonoured girl to, hi, 128, 130, 159, 3034; wedding of, 119 n. Wife, choice of, 43-44; sheds obli¬ gations to family of origin, 53; of eldest son, effect of first pregnancy of, 68-69; visits of, to family of origin, 103-4, 139-40, 142, 147, 168; tale¬ telling by, 147; husband’s authority over, 151-3; public and private behaviour of, 151-2, 191; adultery by, 152, 169; punishment of disobedient, 152; hard life of, 153; increasing significance of, with passage of years, 153; takes husband’s name, 186. See also Bride; Wives of brothers Wife-beating, 142-3, 152-3 Will of man, turned towards God or Devil, 335-6 Wine, symbolism of, 117; Com¬ munion, 353. See also Bread and wine Winter, geographical dispersion of Sarakatsani in, 7-8; conditions in Zagori, 10; organization of stani in, 17, 20-23; social life in, 24; composition of ‘com¬ panies’ in, 90-91. See also Grazing, winter Wives of brothers in extended family, 69 et seq.; quarrels between, 71, 77-79; attitude of, to each other, 72-73; co-operation be¬ tween, 75; chastisement of, for making trouble, 78; quasi¬ affinal relationship between, 139; attitude of, to mother-inlaw, 165, 290; evil eye from, 340 Wolves, 19, 27-28 Woman(en), 31 et seq.; building
work of, 21-23, 31-33. 2755 nature of, 26, 277; on seasonal


INDEX 393
migrations, 29, 305; sexuality and sensuality of, 31, 271, 277-8, 311, 327; agents of Devil, 31, 277; and sheep, 3132, 274; goats cared for by, 31; water carried by, 32, 274; spinning and weaving by, 33, 142, 178 rt., 288; reception of bride by, 60-64; importance of virginity to, 100-1, 169; mar¬ riage of dishonoured, 111, 128,
i3°> !59> 303-4; at wedding celebrations, 118, 121; dis¬ graced by remaining un¬ married, 128, 151, 304; do not eat with men, 151; work until moment of childbirth, 165; loss of honour by, 169-70, 193, 199-202, 212, 270; role of, in family, 180, 275-6; old age of, 181-2, 290-91; weak link in chain, 199; conversation among unrelated, 210; ideal moral characteristics of, 269-72, 276, 286-91; dress of, masking sexual attributes, 270, 277, 287; be¬ haviour of honourable, 270, 286-91; shameless, used and lost, 270-71; various capacities of, belong exclusively to family, 270; potential threat to man’s honour, 275, 277-8; occasions of solidarity between, 275-6; hard work and suffering of, 275, 288; criticism of, by men, 275-6; show pride and courage, 276; accept their inferiority, 277-8; redeemed by sense of shame, 278; stages of adult life of, 286-90; married, ideal qualities of, 288-90; serious demeanour of, 288-9; physical
qualities desired in, 289; judged in her children, 289-90; dis¬ honourable to insult or assault, 293; self-regard in, 312; during Easter week, 347-8 Wool, sale of, 17, 251; treatment of, 33; profit made on buying, 76; need for best, for sisters’ dowries, 85-86; wife forbidden to spin parents’, 142
Youth(s), ideal attributes of, 278-81; Devil seeks to destroy, 333; efficacy of virginity of, 349-50. See also Pallikari
Zagori, Sarakatsani of, 7 et seq., 213, et seq.; sheep villages of, 7-10; physical and climatic conditions in, 9-10; grazing in, 10, 15, 40, 209; history of, 1118; general intendant for, 11; emigration from, before 1912, 12; villagers of, 12-14; emigra¬ tion from, after 1922, 15; an¬ tipathy between villagers and shepherds of, 16, 23, 213-15; summer grazing rights in, 91; dispersion of Sarakatsani over, 114, 147-8; Sarakatsan en¬ campments of east, 143; shep¬ herding in, 176; over-grazed land of, 209; different values of villagers and shepherds of, 21314; solidarity of Sarakatsani of, 215; nature of friendship in villages of, 229-30, 237-8 —- confederation, 11-13 Zigouria, 19, 21, 23; shepherd protecting, 26; amalgamation with sterpha, 91


.
8889




Date Due
4 41>0ft
j—-ktOu MAY j 5 i *98
s%gn MAY 1 4 1996
v J VVv
tec'd ^ l 2>3 j)f%
MAR i 5 ; !004 • b4993
!/
3»C3L.-..-*==: -
FE 3 Ob 1991
-Ml
: i ir. .
_


pSjaSL,: 010101
o 1 63 0202758 0
TRENT UNIVERSITY
I
HQ628 .C3 1974 Campbell, John Kennedy Honour, family, and patronage
DATE ISSUED
/!
279786