THE ROLE OF THE MILITARY IN GREEK POLITICS
1909 - 1936
George Dertilis
Thesis submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Department of Political Theory and Institutions. University of Sheffield
September 1976


BRITISH
mryan
ETHOS
Boston Spa, Wetherby
West Yorkshire, LS23 7BQ www.bl.uk
BEST COPY AVAILABLE - VARIABLE
PRINT QUALITY.
TEXT CLOSE TO EDGE OF PAGE 
SOME CUT OFF


;
ERRATA
PAGES 52, 55, AND 54 (TABLE VII)
TO BE OMMITTED BECAUSE OP ERROR IN
CONVERSION OP DRACHMAE TO GOLD FRANCS
TABLE VIII IN P.55 TO BE REPLACED
BY THE NEW TABLE VIII.


Contents i
PART I : BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF ECONOMY AND SOCIETY IN PRE-I909 GREECE
A. THE DIASPORA AND THE RELATIVE WEAKNESS OF THE LOCAL MIDDLE CLASS
1. The Problem 11
2. Economic functions of the diaspora 14
3. Political functions 20
-6. Greek capitalism from the 18th to the 19th century: retrogression or divergency? 22
B. BASIC ECONOMIC ACT SOCIAL STRUCTURES IN THE 19th CENTURY
— 1; Notes on the landownership system and the rural social structure 32
— 2. The delay in the advent of capitalism and in the rise of the local middle class 36
2.1 Statistical Tables, 1870s-1930s 39
-3. Economic and social structures, their nature and .relationships • 74
"4 . Greece’s failure to industrialise 77
— 5. The alleged conflict between middle classand landowners 81
Part II: IDEOLOGY. POLITICS AND MILITARY INTERVENTION
C D POLITICS ACT POWER
1. The relative' autonomy of politics against class-structure and social conflict — historical background 88
2. Autonomy and patronage 96
3. ’ Patronage, State functioning and politicalpower 101
4. The distribution of power
4.1 The Crown 106
4.2 ’Protection’ by the foreign powers 107
4.3 The diaspora 108
4.4 The dominant classes < 110
D. THE- MILITARY COUP OF 1909 . "
^ “ 1. Introduction: summary of events 112
2. A survey of viewpoints • . 115
3. Internal army causes for the coup
3.1 Humiliation in relations with Turkey 121
3.2 Officers' class origins 123
3.3 Officers' demands and policies: military pre-occupations and populist pretensions 124


4. The alleged strife between middle class and landowners in the context of the 1909 period 126
5. Unrest among the urban lower classes 129
6. A tentative synthesis
6.1 The military 137
6.2 The role of the middle class in the 1909 revolt 138
6.3 The middle class after 1909 140
E. REVOLUTION AND THE FALL OF THE DYNASTY, 1922-24
1. Introduction
1.1 Brief summary of events 1912-22 145
112 Main events of the revolutionaryperiod 1922-24 149
2. The ambiguities of the 1922 coup 154
3. Radical republicanism among the urban lower classes 156
. 4. A comparison with 1909: Intensification of a division within the middle class 161
— 5. The long-term effects of Venizelos’ conservatism 165
F. THE FIRST REPUBLIC, 1924-35: THREATS OF RESTORATION AND FASCISM
1. Introduction: summary of events 169
«'2. Military intervention in the inter-war period a two-fold classification . 173
■— 3. End of the 1922-24 revolution and the new autonomy
•of politics ’ 176
•• ''“ 4. Social conflict as the framework of political strife 178
■'"‘5.■ The near-fascist episode . 185
-""6.Party tactics and theresurrection of the royalists 188
Appendix 1
1. Comments on the peasant ideology and the lack of an agrarian movement 195
2. Comments on the evolution of the bourgeois ideology 204
Appendix II: METHODOLOGY IN THE STUDY OF MILITARY INTERVENTION
1. A review of methodologies 211
2. Testing the functionalist connection between patronage and military intervention . .
2.1 General comment - - 216
2.2 The social roots of intervention — a recapitu- > • lation 219
Footnotes ..222
Bibliography 296


/
FOREWORD
This work is an attempt to bring together what in the wri
ter's opinion is the most significant historical information on
the subject, and on that basis to propose a synthetical explan
ation of social change and military intervention in the politics
of Greece from the turn of the century to the inter-war period.
This is not an historical work in the strict sense of the
term, this being a field very ably covered by other students of
military intervention. Nor is it an attempt to classify a pleth
ora of coups according to a theoretical model of taxonomy of
civil-military relations. In my final chapter-on methodology 
which, incidentally, may be read first — I give the reasons un
derlying my personal preference for a much less mechanistic ap
proach. More on this subject is made explicit here and there in
my main discussion, and still more is suggested implicitly. What
I tried to do, as well as I was able, was to understand the in
terrelations and shifting movements of the fundamental forces
within the Greek economy and society between the turn of the cen
tury and the 1930s, relate them to the major currents of polit
ical conflict, and then trace the officers' action, via the pro
cess of politics and back again to the roots of the conflict:
the economic and social structures and their interaction with
the social actors. I believe that such endeavours lie outside
considerations of success or failure. Empirical research in
cites explanatory synthesis, this in turn indicates the dark
areas where new research is needed. Thus the relations between
events, their explanation, the critique of the explanation, the


4
new understanding derived from the critique, and the-new infor
mation derived from a better-oriented empirical research are re
lations dialectical in nature and the process is endless — and
so is'doubt over the long-term validity of every single contrib
ution to the process^.
The approach chosen, therefore, allowed only limited re
search into primary sources; simply because the period investig
ated is so long and the area for synthesis of economic, social
and political information so wide that consistent research .into
historical sources becomes impossible. Moreover, the sort of in
formation needed in a venture of this kind is of such a general
nature that very selective use of only really relevant material
is the sole means to avoid getting swamped by details. For ex
ample,' whereas data on the evolution of the number of factories
between 1880 and 1930 are absolutely essential for pinpointing
the period of true take-off into capitalism, the breakdown of
these figures by geographic regions or even by manufacturing
sectors is much less so, if at all.
Normally, such important information is available in the se<
ondary sources, but in the case of Greece this is not always
sc; and even if such material does exist, it is scattered ove
a discouraging number of books or articles. This is not surpri
sing: even elementary social works, such as a social history or
an economic history of contemporary Greece, are lacking. So th<
was a need for some research in primary sources after all, to f
the many gaps in basic information. I therefore had to look in
the Annual Series of the British Foreign Office Consular Report


for between 1886 and 1910; and the Special Report submitted to the
British Government (henceforth referred to as Law’s Report) on
the economy of Greece up to 1893, the year the Greek State went
bankrupt; (shortly afterwards an international financial control
commission on Greece's resources was imposed; to my knowledge,
this is the first time this report has been investigated.) I also
exonlned the writings of certain foreign travellers, visitors to
Greece during the 1880-1913 period, especially French and Eng
lish: Martin, Deschamps, Girard, Lewis Sergeant, for example;
certain statistical works compiled around the turn of the century
and containing comparative data on various European countries 
Mulhall's admirable Dictionary of Statistics, as well as the
works by Webb and Sundbarg; and, very selectively, certain Greek
pamphlets and periodicals of the 1900-09 period, during which
there was an upsurge of the kind of cultural activity which often
goes hand in hand with social change. Finally, in the absence
of an economic history of nineteenth to twentieth-century Greece,
I had to rely very intensively on the editions of the National
Statistics Bureau of Greece, especially those dated between 1920
and 1938.
Many are those who helped me, and long lists of acknowledge
ment are not customary in the foreword to Ph.D. dissertations.
However, I could not omit thanking Dr Spyros Asdrahas, Ecole Pra
tique des Hautes Etudes, Université de Paris; Dr Constantine
Tsoukalas, Université de Paris-Vincennes; and Dr (Oxon.) Thanos
\
Veremis. I also wish to express my gratitude to my supervisor, .
K.W.Watkins, University of Sheffield, for boldly and timely
criticising, and above all for encouraging me. to understand


6
history and then respecting ray way of doing it; and to Dr Nicos
Moucelis, London School of Economics and Political Science, for
having tolerated my ignorance and been patient enough to erect
on it whatever ability 1 may now have for thinking in social
terms and for doubting — especially my own dicta.
##*
I final note to explain the organisation of the text.
facilitate the reader, I have relieved the main argument of too
many details, references, empirical observations and figures and
tried to keep it to essentials. This may, at certain points,
make the argument appear formalistic, yet it is precisely such
comparative simplicity which may help the non-specialised reader
to grasp more easily a' complex totality by not being unduly dis
tracted from the main text. Disregarding footnotes without as
terisks, which are bibliographical references or minor comments,
he may wish to give his attention only to footnotes marked with •
an asterisk which contain more important information, comments oi
arguments, and this can easily be done after the reading of each
chapter-section. Needless to say, the expert on Greece or the
academic reader may well choose to read text and footnotes to
gether -- but even he, I hope, will be facilitated by the above
arrangement.
**#
The following Chronological Table for the years 1864-1909
is meant to help those readers who may not be familiar with Cre
history; and to list the main events and relate them, if schem
atically, to major economic and social changes.


Tables of Chronology


POLITICS
1S63
1864
1881
1897
1909
1910
1910'
1912
1915.
1918 1919
1920
1922
1922
1922
1923 1924 1924
1924. 1925. 1928 1928:
1929 1931 1933
1935
1935
Military revolt with active popular following over throws Bavarian dynasty. New Constitution. Danish Prince appointed King George I. Annexation of Ionian islands. Annexation by treaty of central Greek provinces Thessaly and Arta. War against Turkey, defeat of army led by Crown Prince Constantine. COUP with overwhelming popular support. Parliament tele-guided by army for one year. Election of reform-Constituent Assembly. 40$ of seats won by politically unstructured "Independents". Venizelos appointed Premier only to proclaim new elections. Forms new liberal party and assures landslide victory. •1920 Venizelist governments. Intensive modernisation in all areas. 1913 Balkan Wars. Annexation of northern Greece, Crete and other Aegean islands.
1917 Conflict between Venizelos (pro-English) and King Con stantine (pro-German) over Greece’s participation in World War I. Venizelos proclaims Republic in northern Greece. Constantine dethroned with armed support from Entente. Creece enters war. Communist Party formed. r Treaty of Sevres makes Greece major Mediterranean power, . but Turkey continues war to regain Asia Minor. Venizelos loses election and officially withdraws from politics. Constantine returns. Military debacle and massacre of Greek population in Asia Minor. About 1.3 mill, refugees cross the Aegean. COUP by Venizelist and royalist officers. Popular sup port. Five royalist politicians and a Field Marshall executed as responsible for debacle. 1924 Monarchy in question. Venizelos indirectly supports King. Interruption of his self-exile and his brief premiership in 1924 fail to save monarchy. COUP by royalists fails. Elections. Victory of Venizelists and republicans. .PRONUNCIAMENTO requests abolition of monarchy. Compro mise forces King to leave country to await result of referendum. Republic proclaimed by 70$ vote. •1928 SERIES OF COUPS and other interventions. ■1926 bictatorship by General Pangalos, latently fascist. Venizelos returns, wins elections. ■1932 Venizelos government. Political and economic stability despite critical international conditions. Anti-Communist law deals with 3-6$ C.P. threat. •1932 Serious economic difficulties shrink Venizelos' following COUP by Venizelists after royalist gains in elections. Venizelos withholds support and coup fails. COUP by Venizelists after open royalist effort to re store monarchy. Supported and led by Venizelos. Fails. Widespread army purges. •1936 Restoration of monarchy. Communist MPs arbitrate in formation of government. King unconstitutionally appoints Gen. Metaxas as Premier. Metaxas proclaims dictatorship.


9
ECONOMY AM) SOCIETY
1871
1864-1909
1866-1890
1890-1910
1879
1889 1909
1910
Distribution of State land, but landowners keep their properties. Gradually ascending rhythm of urbanisation. Forma tion of large, parasitic petit-bourgeoisie. Growth of the State. Peripheral pre-capitalist mode of pro duction. Comprador ideology inside Greece, irredentisra outwards. First phase of economic development. Railroads, mining, areas of commercial agriculture, some factories. Two-thirds of invested capital is foreign. Relative economic stagnation. Peasant unrest, armed demonstrations, minor revolts. 89 factories, 7,000 workers, approx. 5-6,000 bourgeois population; urban pop. approx. 200,000, total pop. about 1.6 million. 145 factories. 15-20,000 workers, bourgeois pop. approx. 7-9,000, urban pop. approx. 450,000, total pop. 2.6 million. Peasant revolt in Thessaly suppressed by government.
1920 492 factories, 999 small manufacturers, 60,000 workers, total pop. approx. 5 million.
1910-1930 Capitalist mode of production becomes truly dominant. Sharp economic growth. Spectacular growth in shipping. Rise of bourgeoisie, economically and demographically.
1923-1924 Land reform. Installation of 6-700,000 refugees in rural areas, 650-700,000 in urban areas. 1923-1928 Consolidation of capitalism. Growth of industry based on the 1.3 mill, refugees as labourers, consumers, even investors. «31-1932 Crisis in the economy and public financing. 1923-1936 Rapid urbanisation. Rise of bourgeoisie. Creating of a working class, and a Lumpenproletariat of urbanised peasants and refugees. Radicalisation towards republicanism in the 1920s, leftism/communism in the 1930s. After the 1922 debacle, irredentism is followed by a vacuum. Cradual emergence of anti-communism as dominant and official ideology.


RITISH
an
CÛ
IMAGING SERVICES NORTH
Boston Spa, Wetherby West Yorkshire, LS23 7BQ
www.bl.uk
BLANK PAGE IN ORIGINAL


11
PART I
■l
BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF ECONOMY AND SOCIETY
IN PRE-1909 GREECE
Chapter A
THE DIASPORA AND THE RELATIVE WEAKNESS OF THE LOCAL MIDDLE CLASS
1. The Problem
The size and formidable economic power which the Greek dia
Pora had acquired by the nineteenth» century has led to certain
m isinterpretations of its role within — or rather towards 
independent Greece. These interpretations either do not dis
tinguish at all between the locally dominant social classes and
the diaspora, or make only a very blurred distinction. By pre
senting the diaspora as a local bourgeois element, the signifi
cance of the Greek middle class is flasely inflated to appear as
a determinant economic, social and political factor, whereas ac
tually much of its vitality reflected foreign economic activity
exercised through Greek-speaking merchants and financiers estab
lished abroad. Concomitantly, the overrated economic role of
the bourgeoisie may erroneously ascribe to this class a corres
P°ndingly important political role.
The explanations for these misinterpretations are to be
found in the way historiography has been influenced by the his
toric past, by the y e a rs before 1821 when generations of diaspora
Gtceks had functioned as the main agents of Ottoman trade with
the Vest, whilst helping to keep alive the Greek nation's lan
®>Ua6e, its culture, and its hope for freedom. The preponderance
°f the pre-independence approach has obscured the otherwise ra
ther obvious fact that the diaspora should be studied using a to
tally different methodology when the post-independence period is .
Ul»der consideration.


12
Indeed, the historian of Greece during the years of Ottoman
rule finds himself to be studying not the history of a society
defined by its own sovereign organisation within a clear geogra
phic delimitation, but the history of a nation. The difficul
ties for an approach based on class-analysis are obvious, but a
certain flexibility is still permissible. The diaspora Creeks
living inside the frontiers of the Ottoman empire were undoub
tedly members of the local middle classes; at the same time
they were also the bourgeois element within their own enslaved
nation. On the other hand, those members of the diaspora who
lived outside the empire certainly did not belong to the Ottoman
social structure; nevertheless, the historian of the Greek na
tion may legitimately, though perhaps with some important qual
ifications, treat them as part, of the Greek nation’s class stiuc
*3
ture. This approach, however, is almost instantly invalidated
when it comes to the period in which part of this nation acquired
its independence, enclosed itself within well-defined geograph
ical frontiers, organised its own political system, and formed
that overwhelming social catalyst which is the State.
Thus the fresh sovereignty of the Greek State, however lim
ited it may have been; thus the new pyramid of internal power re
lations; the obscure but decisive role of the new national cur
rency and the game of its parity; the customs duties levied at
the frontiers and the taxes imposed within the State territory;
the economic incentives, privileges and protective measures ex
tended to certain groups and classes called upon to fulfill the
essential roles of trade and industry; more generally, the struc
turing and functioning of this new-born totality, of the new dy
namic system of economic and social structures within the re
cently established frontiers, in short of the new ’social forma
tion'; all these elements require that independent Greece be ‘
examined separately not only from other societies, but also from
groups which may always have been ethnically, culturally, and
even economically related to her own population, but were now
living outside her geographical, political and economic borders.


13
Unfortunately, because of the preponderance of pre-indepen
dence historical research and the concomitant scarcity of stu
dies on 19th- and 20th-century Greece, the methodological break
between pre-independence and post-1821 sociological analysis is
not clearly pointed. When qualifications are accepted at all,
they concern the functions of the diaspora, such as its changed
economic role for example, but leave untouched its erroneous
classification as a part of a local class.
Yet even the change of functions alone would justify a
change in the structural classification of the diaspora. Its
contribution before independence to the preservation of Hellen
ism, its cultural bonds with Greece, and its active role in the
revolution against the Turks did not mean that when independence
finally came it had to be willing to confine itself within the
borders of the new State and to assume the role of a n e w ‘social
class: to strive not only, that is, for economic dominance, but
also for local capital accumulation; not merely for political
influence protective of business interests, but also for virtual
domination of politics. With criteria such as these, would it
not be misleading to consider the Jewish diaspora as part of the
Israeli middle class? Are the Greek immigrant workers in Ger
many of the 1970s a part of the Greek working class? Are the
late 20th-century Greek shipowners of London and New York, whose
fleets sail exclusively under Liberian and Panamanian flags,
*4 members of the Greek grande-bourgeoisie?
This is no mere exercise in semantics. An understanding of
the historical evolution of Greece very much hinges on whether
or not the bourgeoisie is seen as an economically powerful and
long-term oriented class, politically selfconfident and ambitious,
and this in turn depends on whether one considers the diaspora a
local element or a sui generis actor — important, but nonethe
less foreign.


14
By excluding the term class, the diaspora can be treated as
the phenomenon it actually w as: as a culturally coherent but
socially and geographically dispersed set of individuals doing
business with, or rather against, Greece. Their comprador and
financial activities in the country may, of course, be treated
as an economic whole, but this is essentially a problem of econo
metrics. The concentration of data under one heading on the eco
nomic level does not make obligatory a similarly uniform approach
on the social level.
This differentiation not only prevents misinterpretations,
but is in itself a source of reasoning and explanation. Thus the
economic strength of the diaspora is subtracted from the falsely
padded economic image of the Greek middle class, and the bare
skeleton that suddenly appears, the true local bourgeoisie, has
little resemblance to the imaginary creature that usually puzzles
Greek historiography with the contradiction between its borrowed
economic vigour and its relatively unimportant social and polit
ical action.^
'3» Economic Functions of the Diaspora
The very meaning of the Greek word diaspora — signifying
dispersion — suggests a notion sufficiently wide and varied to
demand an analytical approach. A dispersion cannot be treated as
a cohesive and easily definable whole, not even if the purpose of
the examination were to describe its static image rather than to
explain its practical manifestations. While examining the nature
of the social and economic relationships between Greece and the
diaspora in the 19th century, one should not pay too much atten
tion to all parts of this dispersed whole, but only to those that
were actually related to Greece. The first step, then, must be
to subtract from the diaspora those members who had no substantial
relationship with the Greek economy and society. This will pre
vent the most schematic of all apperceptions of the Greek hour


geoisie: that which is confused into attributing the total econ
omic power of all diaspora elements to the Greek middle class.
A second deduction is possible at the other end of the
spectrum, where one can pick out the only diaspora elements that
can indeed be classified as Greek bourgeois: the so-called het
erocthones. Although most of them had not transferred all of
their interests from abroad, they all had at least established
themselves permanently in independent Creece.
This process uncovers a third category, situated somewhere
between the other two, and consisting of people who were neither
altogether unrelated to Creece, nor physically and economically
established in the country. From their foreign base, and in ad
dition to their extra-Greek activities, they conducted some kind
of secondary business related to Greece, usually banking; mining,
or foreign trade. This group may be divided into two sub-catego
ries. ,The first includes the few magnates who invested inside
the Greek borders, mainly in banking or mining; they were also
sporadically involved in big trade transactions. Another, larger
category consists of entrepreneurs whosé peripheral interests in
Greece were usually in foreign trade. Occasionally,'and gener
ally indirectly, they too invested loially in banking or mining,
through loaning funds to concerns run by the magnates.
Most members of these two sub-categories had even more im
portant foreign interests than th^ heterocthones; in fact, the
bulk of their interests remained abroad. Many had second res
idences or lived only part of the year in Greece where, like the
heterocthones, they conspicuously spent small portions of their
incomes (which seemed like fortunes to parochial Athens). Their
foreign.assets and extravagant spending, though indirectly and in.
a complementary manner, also contributed to the common fallacies
°f interpretation by creating a front of bourgeois life and the '
impression of a large and thriving local bourgeoisie.*^


16
None of these groups can be made to fit into the social
structure of Greece. The less important businessmen, those who
conducted a sideline in trade and occasional money-lending trans
actions with Greece, were representative members of the bourgeoi
sie of the countries where they had established themselves, but
certainly not in Greece. The typical business firm of this group
was set up and taxed outside Greece's frontiers. The owner had
his residence abroad and usually kept his non-Greek passport. He
would buy from, or sell to Creece like any other Austrian or Rus
sian merchant, for instance, or lend his money in the Greek cap
ital market like any foreign financier; but his secondary resid
ence in Athens, his often bad Greek, and the fact that his second
passport was sometimes Greek, did not make him a member of the s(cO local middle class.
Not only did the people in this category lack any local
physical establishment, but the bulk of their interests was con
centrated outside the country, without any wish or practical rea
son for transferring these interests to Greece. Yet they might
be considered as a.part of the middle classes if one could ex
plain their collective behaviour in terms of class conflict,where
the major, if not the only, strategic objective is political
power. ..Dut it was inconceivable that these people, dispersed all
over the world and presenting such a variety of origins, inter
ests and ideologies, would ever, seek to obtain full political
power in Greece. It is also inconceivable that they would ever
strive for full political power for and on behalf of the locally
established bourgeoisie who in fact were their actual or poten
tial business competitors.
As for the magnates who staged the big financial coups, ex
ploited the mines and bought thousands of acres in Thessaly (be
cause the departing Turks were selling them at bargain prices) ®
they bear a strong resemblance to the 20th-century multi-national
jet set. The Italo-American broker who spends his summers i n 
Italy and gambles with his Eurodollars at the Milan stock ex
change is no more an Italian financier than they were members of


17
the Greek bourgeoisie. Their investments in Greece had certain
common characteristics that are quite illuminating. Some were
suitable for easy, safe liquidation and transfer of capital out
side Greece in case of danger. Some yielded an unusually high
rate of depreciation, thus minimising the length of the risk per
iod. Others, which did involve a certain risk, were potentially
very profitable on the typically speculative pattern. There were
big commercial deals in a free-trade country, an activity which
meant little local involvement, easily transferable capital, and
large profit margins. There were mining concessions at excellent
terms, and banking in a virgin and capital-thirsty market where
interest rates of 30-36$ were common practice. There was ship
ping, where a change of flag is a safeguard in times of local
crisis"and a tool of blackmail in times of euphoria. There was
urban real estate acquisition in a capital city with an amazing
demographic growth, and huge rural properties purchased at very
low cost. It is significant, on the other hand," that industry,
the characteristically bourgeois and capitalist sectorwhere
long-term depreciations, normal risks and profits are the rule,
saw no major investments by diaspora magnates.
There is one more element suggesting that these two groups,
and to some extent the heterocthones as well, played a role
clearly different from that of a typical bourgeoisie: their reluc
tance towards consistent local reinvestment. Of course, such
might also be and indeed was the attitude of the local middle
class. There is nevertheless a vital difference. The cash accum
ulated by the indigenous merchants could not be hoarded indefin
itely or conspicuously consumed and illegally transferred outside
the country. Partly because of the concomitant need for debouch
ments, partly because of their everyday interaction w’ith the .
Creek market which made investment opportunities more visible, ..
thè local compradors were thus condemned to invest in the market
sooner or later. Conversely, the diaspora entrepreneurs had the
immense advantage of also operating in other markets where their
future activities could be oriented and into which they could
safely reinvest even the profits from their activities in Greece.


IS
This was how a large proportion of the amassed money capital,
part of which had been accumulated in the secondary sector, was
transferred outside the country — and, incidentally, this out
ward movement of accumulated capital contributed largely to the
delay in Greece’s take-off into capitalism.
Moreover, the accumulation transferred abroad was propor
tionally even greater than it would normally be in a peripheral
country: the profits were not always shared between local pro
ducer or merchant and foreign buyer. However exploitative such
a transaction, it leaves at least a certain part of the accumul
ation in local hands. Irt Greece, however, the local exporter of
agricultural products was frequently a diaspora merchant , which
is to say a foreign capitalist. Where mining was concerned, as
often as not even the producer was a diaspora magnate who also
exported his own produce.
In all these cases, then, the larger part if not all of the
profits could be transferred into non-Greek pockets. Further
more, they could be converted into foreign currency and shifted
abroad, which was perfectly legal since Greece was a free-trade
country and the drachma was freely convertible until the 1920s,
and equivalent to the gold franc until 1885. Even if currency
transfer out of Greece had not been easy and straightforward, '
there existed other legal means for this purpose: the buyer '
abroad, the local exporter, and even the local producer often
being one and the same diaspora firm, an almost complete control
over the mechanism of prices was possible.
In the 1885-1905 period, the method for transferring surplus
became even more indirect but not really any more difficult: it
could comfortably be done by purchasing Greek exports or by in
vesting locally with overvalued foreign currency'. As if this ‘ ?
were not enough, the diaspora merchants did not content themselres
with exploiting the existing rate of devaluation; it seems they
consistently endeavoured to increase it by direct manipulation. :


19
According to a British diplomatic report of 1893,"... half a
dozen speculators (were) able to control (currency) rates arbit
rarily".*^
It lies outside the scope of this work to establish by de
tailed empirical research to what degree this transfer of sur
plus, this evident and feasible opportunity for the diaspora en
trepreneurs, was actually exploited by them. In any case, it
would do no more than prove the obvious. The 19th century was an
age of uncontrolled and ruthless competition; no big businessman
capable of doing such things legally could afford to omit them
and thus place himself in an extremely unfavourable position to
wards his competitors. Even supposing that these men were ruth
less business operators in all other respects but affected by
naivetl or sentimentalism when looking after their Creek affairs,
the question remains: if they did not transfer their profit
abroad, what did they do with it? It is highly improbable that
they chose-to put it into a Creek bank — in fact, it is quite
impossible they should have done so after Greece's bankruptcy in
1893?‘1:J The remaining possibilities were very few. Until 1S73,
as long as the great international boom lasted, their profits
from trade with Greece could 'be reinvested abroad at excellent
terms; therefore, they had no reason to reinvest them in Greece
and indeed they did not.14 It is not by chance that their Greek
investments in mining, railroads and banking began mainly after .
1873, when the great recession had already led European capital
0n its international hunt for good returns.1^ Some of their pro
fits, along with freshly imported capital, were then reinvested
in these projects. The depression also had the opposite effect,
however, deterring a good many of them from investing in risky
Greece — and their reluctance could only have been enhanced by
the country's diplomatic entanglements in 1878-81 and 18S5, and
thereafter by its ever-increasing financial difficulties. Although
some chose nevertheless to accept those risks in view of the huge
Profits involved, it seems that many of them were finally led to
wards investment in shipping, which may partly explain the amazing
recovery of the Greek merchant marine after 1893 and especially
i


in the 1900s. Yet massive investment in shipping again meant, in
reality, that capital accumulated outside the Greek frontiers -
a foreign flag could easily be hoisted in an emergency.
, To summarise, then: the scarcity of business savings and re
investment inside Greece throughout the pre-1909 period suggest
that, parallel to the small part of the diaspora profits which was
conspicuously spent in the country, a substantial share served to
part-finance the private investments in mining and the big public
investment projects of the 1880s; but the greatest part was
transferred abroad, either directly through the mechanism of com
modity prices and currency parities, or through reinvestment in
shipping between 1893 and 1909.
3. Political Functions
Another reason for the diaspora having been confused with
the local dominant classes is the political activity of certain
heterocthones. Here again, some distinction must be made. The
first to be differentiated from the bulk of the diaspora are the
Phanariotes, previously established in Istanbul. These profes
sional administrator-politicians eventually ceased offering their
services to the Porte and entered Greek politics for many reasons
unnecessary to enumerate here, since none of them was related to
any hypothetical collective interests of the diaspora which they
might be supposed to represent. After all, this distince Phana
riote group was born in unique historical circumstances and was
not at all representative of the typical Greek entrepreneurs of
Vienna of Alexandria.^
Another group of heterocthones politicians who must not be
considered as members of the diaspora were those whose political
involvement sprang from their militant and often military role
in the war of independence. In fact, they were not even heteroc
thones in the literal sense, since they had lived and been deeply
involved in Greece for decades. By the middle of the 19th cen


2
tury these families, like those of the Phanariotes, were dccideJ
ly part of the local population, and their only similarities with
the diaspora are their previous residence outside Greece and, in
some cases, the maintenance of occasional economic interests
abroad. If one separates off these two categories, then -- the
politically active families of the Phanariotes, and the active
participants in the 1821 struggle — it will be very difficult
to find other Greek politicians who really belonged to the dia
spora (such as for example the international magnate Zografos,
who was also a landowner and an MP in Greece).
The real question, however, was not the degree of the alleged
infiltration into politics, but its objective: could this really
have been the domination of Greek politics by that familiar mon
strous construct, the hypothetical bourgeoisie which included the
diaspora? In order to transact their business in Greece, did the
diaspora entrepreneurs need to establish political dominance of
a whole local class to which they allegedly belonged? Or were
individual connections, patronage and bribe enough to affect such
vital but occasional decisions as really did matter to them? A
discussion in Chapter C will show the relative'autonomy of Greek .
Politics from the social structure and social conflicts, and the :
role of the State as a distributor of spoils and as an agent of
Power. Here it suffices to say that whatever linkage existed _
between diaspora and political power was simultaneously one of
the symptoms and one of the causes of this autonomy. The men of .
bhe diaspora, like all such quasi-colonialists, did not neces
sarily depend on the local bourgeoisie and often not even on the
Politicians to keep or promote their advantages. They only needed
■the State, the Crown, and the foreign powers' indirect support.*
*pl.
~~ ic reader who is not specially concerned with Greek 18th and tu- rciM u r y history may prefer to skip the following section nich is mostly methodological.


4. Greek Capitalism from the 18th to the 19th Century:
Retrogression or Divergency?
Treating the diaspora as a foreign group separate from the
local middle classes has an unexpected side effect on another prob
lem of Creek historiography. This is the controversy as to whether
or not Greece had advanced into some kind of capitalism by the be
ginning of the 19th century. This controversy continues, despite all
the opposed opinions — whether they classify the Greek system as
capitalist or not — being unanimous on at least one point: on the
underdevelopment of this system. The uninitiated will thus sooner
or later meet with this paradox in Greek historiography: the system
of socio-economic structures that prevailed before 1821 and even well
into the 18th century, as described by the historians of that period,
often seems to have been more advanced than the one that prevailed
after independence and until the end of the 19th century, as described
in works on this later period.
1 ; , ■ ; • . . . . . . - ; ■ ! v."- ■
The subject is immense, and related "to this work only indirect
ly j mainly as a methodological problem of assumptions. Hence(this
discussion will not attempt to deal with its essence, but will simp
ly try to clarify method and taxonomy. ,It will not empirically tpst
and answer the question of whether there was a retrogression from a
relative development, perhaps even dominance of capitalism in the.
late 18th century to some form of pre-capitalism in the 19th; it will
merely examine whether this comparison is possible and fruitful; and
if not,whether a juxtaposition that will show the two non-comparable
entities in opposition may prove the controversy, though not ttepri-*’
lem itself, irrelevant for the student of the 19th century. 
' t # * * ' , .r,(i.
The controversy may, of course, be partly the result of differ
ent methods of analysis. There is the well-known argument that a
backward society at the periphery of a capitalist system dominated
by the metropolis is ’by definition’ capitalist also. .This argument,
on which more is said elsewhere in this work, may be seen as a mat
ter of definitions, of the degree of analysis, and the areas chosen
for the empirical observation. Notwithstanding these methodological
considerations and restricting the argument to the degree, nature,


23 l
and quality of development — or backwardness -- within the society
examined, even when separated from European capitalism, the paradox
remains: if capitalism was, as early as the 18th century, advanced
and perhaps even dominant within the ’social formation’ of Greece,
how can later scholars claim that a comprador pre-capitalist ’mode
of production’ was still dominant in the nineteenth?
The paradox is, at,least partly, an optical illusion due to
the difference in focus. As already mentioned, the scholar writing
on Greek history before independence is concerned with the history
of the Greek nation; the student of the post-1827 period examines
the history of Greece as defined by her new, strictly drawn frontiers.
Hence most comparisons are false o r .impossible, and the resulting
contradictions only apparent ones.
Of these potential fallacies, the most simplistic is again
caused by the diaspora. Greek historiography on the period of Otto
man rule is invariably concerned with an ethnic group, of which large
sections had by the end of the 18th century become a thriving dia
spora. Thus, the nation being examined had extended centrifugally
in three concentric rings -- the closer to the centre, the higher
its demographic proportion compared to the other ethnic groups. in
bhe Hellenic peninsula itself, in the Balkans, and in the European
and Asian territories alongside the great trade routes and surroun
ding the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. Under such wide horizons
could thrive not only the ’conquering merchants’ of Romania and
Hungary, Trieste and Vienna, but also the small industrialists and
the corporatist manufacturers of Macedonia and Thessaly, or.the
shipowning sailors, captains and tradesmen of the Aegean islands.
Of these pioneers of Greek capitalism, as has been explained
already, those residing inside the frontiers of the Ottoman State
became the core of the Empire's entrepreneurial middle classes; those
residing abroad were a substantial part of the local bourgeoisies 
Austrian or Russian, French or Hungarian. This is not the only clas
sification possible: the historian of the Greek nation, seeing these
people as members of a specific ethnic group, may well classify them
as the bourgeois element within this group. The history of the post
•independence period, however, can no longer be centred on the nation,


but rather on a society formed by a part of its members confined in
the southern end of the Hellenic peninsula and deprived of the vast .
areas that had traditionally served as the nation's economic hinter
land. Failure to make this distinction may have one or both of the
following two effects. Firstly, it may falsely inflate the impor
tance of 18th-century'Greek capitalism' by including in this vague
term the activities of all the diaspora entrepreneurs, whether estab
lished in Hungary or Istanbul, London or Egypt. Secondly, it makes
any significant comparison with the 19th century impossible: if the
false assumption of the whole diaspora as a local element continues
to be held, then the deadlocks occur already described in earlier
sections of this chapter; if not, the above-mentioned paradox of re
trogression is encountered — but in this case as the result of a
methodological trap: an assumption having been accepted for the
earlier period and dropped for the later one. This. . . is one of
.the causes of;the optical illusion; there are others, however, much
.more difficult to pinpoint. , - ; ....... :i_
When meeting with the concept of capitalism in 18th-century
Greece, two definitions are asked for: what is meant by ^capitalism'
when such comparisons are attempted, and what exactly is being desig
nated by the term Greece. ,At the above simplistic level of analy
sis, ’capitalist' is merely an adjective affixed to certain individu
als or groups, not to a system of social and economic structures.
This does not make the term a particularly helpful analytical tool.'
The angle of observation must be changed and more rigorous procedures
applied if a clear picture is to emerge of what really matters: the .
differences and similarities, not of individuals or of demographic
groups, but of social and economic totalities. Such large entities
are, firstly,.the 'modes of production' prevailing in each economic
sector or geographical region -- and, of course, a mode of produc
tion is not a clearly perceptible and definable concrete reality, but
rather an analytic category. At a more comprehensive level of analy
sis, there is the overall system that embraces all the 'modes' as well
as the ideological/ political forces that keep them together, the
specific society as a dynamic whole,:the 'social formation'; in con
trast to the mode, which is an analytical category, this is a concrete
category, in the sense that it corresponds to a clearly definable ;.
reality. These, then, are the criteria for answering the first ques


tion about what is meant when the term 'capitalism is used in a
diachronic comparison. To collate the degree to which capitalism
had developed in each of the two periods and to assess comparative
ly whether or not it had become dominant, one must work at two dis
tinct levels. The one is the level of analytic category, the mode of
production prevalent in the different regions and sectors during each
of the two periods compared; the other lovel is the concrete catego
ry of the societies as entities: of the social formations. It remans now
to be seen what is meant by 'Greek' society in the 18th century -
for in the 19th, the frontiers of the new State make the definition
quite obvious. _
Clearly, comparisons between regions, sectors or whole societies
are possible only when the entities in question are defined with such
Precision as to make the comparison truly meaningful. One criterion
for such precision is geographical, another could be termed qualita
tive. The geographical dictates that in a diachronic examination of
capitalism in one of the regions or economic sectors, the precise
geographical limits of this region or sector must be strictly drawn.
In other wrords, the socio-economic structures and relations of provinces
°r sectors in independent Greece may not be compared with those of _
different regions or geographically defined sectors in the 18th cen
tury. The mode of production in 19th-century Thessaly, for example,
cannot be compared with that of 18th-century Macedonia; and the
m °de dominant in Peloponnesian agriculture in the later period may be
compared with its earlier counterpart in the Peloponnese but not with that of Euboea.
When examing the northern regions of 18th-century Greece' , for
example, one may well speak of a certain development of capitalism
in agriculture. For in the large'landholdings of these • areas- •
agriculture then was reasonably commercialised, but also incited some
capital accumulation which naturally vent hand in hand with seme use
of wage labour. Conversely, independent 19th-century Creece did nôt
contain these northern regions; on. its own territory, the percentage
of small independent peasants was higher and went on increasing,.so
that the development of capitalism in the agriculture of this terri
tory was not as pronounced as it had been decades earlier in the nor
thern regions. Clearly, it would be an error to say that here there
was retrogression in the degree of capitalist development in agricul


ture from the one period to' the other. If the agriculture of 19th
century Greece has to be compared with some counterpart in the 16th
century, this should be the agriculture not of the northern, but of
the corresponding southern regions.
Yet such comparisons, though legitimate and useful, are ade
quate only as descriptions of regions and sectors and especially of
their momentary.images, not for a synthetical examination of their
articulation with the whole social system. This is where the qual
itative criterion is important. The notion of mode of production is
inconceivable without that of a social formation. It may be used
independently only as a tool for an initial abstract classification,
but once the definition of a mode dominant in a sector or region is
established, it should be incorporated into the analysis of the wider
category, the social formation. Otherwise the comparison will merely
be one of analytical categories, mere sterile theorising without
empirical foundation or at least empirical testing ground, without
relevance for,.the concrete reality that is society. Moreover, compar
ing 'capitalism in Greece1 in the 18th with that of the 19th century
must finally raise the fundamental question as to which mode was do
minant in the social formation as a whole — for without an answer the
existeuce and functioning of the regionally or sectorially dominant
modes can not be confirmed and properly understood. Although it would
be possible, therefore, to examine the paradox of the alleged retro
gression region by rcgion.or sector by sector, the basic questions
would not be answered without a simultaneous comparison between the
earlier and the later social formation. Can this be done?
In. moving from the analytical level of mode to that of social
formation, and .the need fbr rigour being as great as ever, the geo
graphical criterion,must again be applied. No 13th-century social
entity can be compared to independent Greece unless the former con
tains the Ottoman provinces that correspond to the regions of the lat
ter. Thus, such an entity cannot be the Hellenic peninsula as a whole,
it cannot contain Thessaly,'Epirus, Macedonia, Roumelia, Thrace, Crete,
the Ionian and quite a few of the Aegean islands. This, however, is
not what historiography means when speaking of ’Greece' in the 13th
century. It follows that' the elementary rules of rigour, as applied
26


27
to the geographical criterion alone, make the comparison impossible
and prove the paradox to be a mere illusion. ' ‘
When based solely on the geographical criterion, the argument
may seem somewhat formalistic; but it is singularly reinforced
when tested against qualitative criteria. .'Greece1 of the ISth cen
tury is invariably an arbitrary construct, erected on the historians'
culturally-based apperception of a people living in the Hellenic pen
insula under Ottoman rule. A comparison of this totality with in
dependent Greece of the 19th century is excluded by quite a few major
methodological impediments. It is excluded by the submission of.this
entity to the overwhelming factor that was the Ottoman-State, a factor
that can neither be ignored nor, of course,compared with the Greek State
in its functions and effects; by its institutional and legal connection
with the other Ottoman regions; by its Hscal contributions farming an out-
ward flow rather than an internal circuit; by its monetary and eco-'
nomic articulation with the other provinces of the Empire — in short
by its fusion with the Ottoman social formation. ’For this fusion was ,
So intricate as to defy distinction, and possibly may prevent the
scholar altogether from using the term of social formation for the .
Greek provinces as seen in isolation -- doing so w-ould after all re
duce the concrete reality that is a social formation to a hypotheti
cal construct, an analytical category. " •
A brief survey of certain characteristic conditions in the two ..
Periods will confirm this impossibility of comparing them. .In the
i3th century, agriculture in the south of the peninsula served to
transfer surplus to other sectors thriving in other regions: manu
facture in the north, shipping in the islands, trade in the wider
areas dominated by the diaspora, (incidentally, agriculture in the
north contributed not only to a similar,transfer, but also -
because of the capitalist character of its large landholdings ~
to some capital accumulation in the agricultural sector itself, though
less extensive than in manufacture, shipping, and of course
in trade.) Without,this substantial transfer from agriculture, the
secondary and tertiary sectors would never have been developed. Yet
the transfer would have been insufficient if it had come exclusively
ftom the peninsula's agriculture, simply because the productive
capacity of this limited area was relative low. The transfer was


effective in the accumulation process as it occurred within the
wider area of the three concentric rings, because the merchants,
shipowners and industrialists could draw their profits — and the
concomitant investment funds — not only from the agriculture of
the peninsula, but also from that of the other two rings where they
bought and sold. With such qualifications, one can well speak of "
some development of capitalism in the peninsula as a whole before
1821. Going one step further, one might even consider such capital
ism as indigenous, because of an accumulation that occurred locally
ir. part — but the fact that it was only partly local and the difficul
ty of defining what accumulation was local and what was not must give
rase to some scepticism. Finally, going further still, a particularly
bold scholar might eeen consider that because of the above-mentioned
extensive transfer, capitalism was dominant also — although, again,
transfer is cot the only pre-condition of dominance.
, Conditions were radically different after"the war of indepen
dence. The debilitating effect of the war, but mainly the pre-1321
international economic crisis and the devastating competition of a
western industry just emerging from the industrial revolution, were
fatal to Creek manufacture and shipping. But there was a more
important reason still, apart from these destructive exogenous •. •
factors, why the new Greece would have been radically different from
the old.. When the revolution ended, the treaty which strictly de
limited the country's frontiers also indirectly deprived Creece of two
vitJ sources of accumulation. The first was the surplus tradition
ally transferred from the agricultural activity of the two outer con
centric rings. The other was whatever capital was being accumulated
by the diaspora businessmen operating in the other productive sec
tors of this wider area -- for Greek enterprise was mainly estab
lished outside the'new country's frontiers and the bourgeois diaspora
elements controlling these interests simply did not transfer their
bases to Creece. This split from the diaspora; the discon
tinuance of surplus transfers; the concomitant decreases in capital
accumulation; and the abrupt separation from the vast Ottoman mar
ket --' all these factors .were inevitably set to condemn free Greece’s


29
manufacture and shipping either to short-term disintegration through
low profitability, or to a long-term degeration through lack of in
vestment funds and the concomitant obsolescences. And this would
have occurred even without the debilitating results of the war,
the economic crisis, and foreign competition, simply as an effect
of the above, new conditions inherent in the totally new entity
that was the social formation of independent Greece.
The conclusion to be drawn from this discussion now begins
to emerge. Although, when investigating the evolution of capital
ism in Greece from the 18th century to the post-independence period,
it is legitimate to collate regions or economic sectors with strict
ly defined geographical limits, no valid comparison is possible
when it comes to Greece,as a social entity. The early 'Greece*
is an arbitrary configuration of provinces which, at the level of
dynamic-historical analysis, is inseparable from the Ottoman so
ciety, whereas independent Greece was a distinct social formation.
These two totalities exhibited no generic similarities which would
allow a comparison, but only a tangential one, permitting merely a
juxtapositional study of the contrasts and an understanding of the
dialectical relationships between the slow disintegration of the
Ottoman social formation, and the divergence of the modes of pro
duction prevailing in the Greek provinces of the Empire towards
the modes that prevailed in independent Greece — a divergence
through a historical process which, furthered by multifarious con
verging factors, gave birth to the new social formation that was
Greece after her liberation.
The 'paradox' can finally be solved. Seen as a totality, the
Hellenic peninsula of the 18th century may well have seen the emer
gence of a primitive capitalism.A bold scholar might even see it as
a distinct social f/armation within the Ottoman one, and then consider,
also somewhat daringly, that the dominant mode within this construct
was capitalist. But this neither permits this mode's comparison
with that prevailing in independent Greece, nor does it necessarily
make it the first of an evolutionist deterministic succession of in
stances. Hence it can well be termed capitalist if one so wishes;
whereas in independent Greece, as will be shown in the subsequent
chapters, the dominant mode may nonetheless have been pre-capitalist
-- and, even though later in chronological terms, have been less
developed than its alleged predecessor.


30
Chapter B s
THE BASIC ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL STRUCTURES IN THE 19th CENTURY
1. Notes on the Land-Ownership System and the
Rural Social Structure
Although all through Ottoman rule the role of agriculture
was vital, to describe in detail the complicated land-ownership
system then prevailing does not lie within the scope of this work.
This introduction will merely set out the basic elements of the
system, and explain briefly its important changes until the com
pletion of land reform in the 1920s.
The Turkish system of land-holding was different from wes
tern feudalism in that one of its basic features was that the land
remained formally the property of the State. The Turkish land
lords, the minor Creek landowners, and the small independent peas
ants cultivated their land against payment of taxes and contribu
tions, but were not its proprietors in the strict sense of the
word. • " " ......
Over the centuries of its evolution this system lost much of
its rigidity,' and in many cases the right of use was in reality
little different from outright ownership. Nevertheless, the in
stitutional foundations.of Ottoman landholding account for three
basic characteristics of Greek landownership after the revolution
had driven out the Turkish landlords. Firstly, there was a pre
ponderance of small independent peasants in certain regions} sec
ondly, a significant part of the land became the property of the
Greek State; thirdly, the Ottoman system was officially replaced
by Roman civil law and the Byzantine Codes. In many Creek pro
vinces these ancient legal sources had, indeed, remained in use
parallel to the law of the conqueror. So the important change
after the liberation was not so much their official reinstatement
as rather their new ideological, ethical, and constitutional ba
sis: the principles of .the French Revolution on the inviolability


of property rights. One of the important effects of these ideo
logical and legal changes was that rich Creeks, who had held
large acreages under the non-property provisions of the Ottoman
system, became propertied landowners (tsiflikades) after the lib*22
eration.
The Turkish system had extracted a 10% tax on annual gross
production. Jhis was continued after the war of independence,
and in addition the Greek State imposed a rent of an extra 15%
on the gross product where peasants were cultivating national
lands. The combination of these two payments, tax plus rent,
amounted to 30-45% of the peasants' annual output. It was in
theory entirely up to the individual peasant whether or not to
rent national land, thus making the payment of rent supposedly a
matter of free choice. But this was true only for the propertied
peasants who wished to cultivate additional acreage. For the
vast unpropertied majority the choice was from from free: they
could either refuse to rent land and die of starvation, or rent
and survive in near-starvation. It must be admitted, however,
that to impose a land rent was one of the few fund-raising possib
ilities open to the new State.
The existence of the national lands was a continuous source
of complication of the peasant problem. The landowners demanded ••
openly that these lands should be sold so they might buy them, and
found a convenient basis for their argument in the newly institu
ted principles of freedom to hold, acquire and use private proper
24 .
ty. The peasants, on the other hand, expected them to be shared
out freely. The State, however, could not give away one of its
basic sources of revenue without an imaginative policy of public ...
finances and relative liberation from the stranglehold of foreign
economic dominance.
The issue was further confused by two land-distribution meas
ures taken by the Greek State. A law of 1833 provided for free
distribution of land to those who had actively participated in the
31


32
revolution* Two years later, the ’Law concerning the Dotation of
Greek Families' (May 1S35) provided that land would be distribu
ted against small annual payments over a period of thirty-six
years to cover amortisation and revenue tax. This law was virtu
ally boycotted by the peasants and failed. The landowners were
probably responsible for much of the poopaganda and rumour . t
against it.
.The issue of the national lands was finally solved in 1871,
by a law passed by the Koumoundouros government. This still re
quired payments to be made, but they were smaller and the law was
26
implemented more or less successfully. Appropriation of the
private landholdings, on the other hand, was not attempted until
1916, when Venizelos’ government passed four decrees on land re
form with indemnity for the landowners. These decrees were not
implemented. The royalist government led by Gounaris amended the
decrees by Law 2922 of 1921, but this was not implemented either.
It was not until after the 1922 military revolt that reform was ';
finally carried through.
For a whole century, then, before the implementation of land
reform in the 19?0s, there were two distinct peasant classes: in
dependent small landowners, and unpropertied peasants and farm la
bourers. The relative positions of these two peasant classes vis
it-vis each other and the remaining social groups varied according
to regional differences in economic and social structures and in
*27
their dynamics. A comparison of Euboea with Eleia (Peloponnese)
is instructive. In the first period, Euboea's normal pattern of
landownership was large landholdings, with a relatively weak group
of small tradesmen and a large number of farm workers and unprop
23
ertied peasants. In Eleia, there were very few large landhold
ings, small property was the rule, trade and small manufacture
were flourishing, and the unpropertied peasants were few. These .,
differences as against Euboea were reflected in the economic con


33
ditions prevailing in the Peloponnese: the share of small indus
try (mainly silk, wool and cotton mills) was 28$ of the total
value of the 1804 production of the Peloponnese,' as against a
mere 12$ average for the whole of southern Greece including Eu
29
boea. Other areas of the Peloponnese and Sterea — mainland
Greece -- fell in between these two extremes.
The above conditions did not remain static, of course. They
gradually changed during the first few decades of independence,
so that by the middle of the 1880s the overall picture of Greek
society was quite different. One of the basic changes, for ex
ample, was the acquisition of Thessaly in 1681. In contrast to
the mainly mountainous, not always fertile old provinces with
their great variety of crops, this was a large, rich region with
the plain of Thessaly the most extensive in the'Hellenic penin
sula, given over chiefly to large-scale cultivation of cereals.
In contrast to the fragmentation of the old provinces, this was
a region where economy and society were structured almost uni- '‘
formly along the lines of big rural property.' The acquisition of
Thessaly thus suddenly changed the demographic, economic and so
cial picture of Greece, but the abrupt nature of the change can
be a source of error. • •
The relocation of frontier posts and the change in statis
tical Tables does not mean that Creek society had immediately,
changed as a whole. This was merely a formal unification under
the umbrella of common institutions of two distinct societies.
The commonalty of institutions, the identity of language and cul
ture, above all the unifying effect of ever-augmenting State pow
er, suggest that these socially distinct regions would, in the
long run, most probably have converged towards integration any- .
way- The emphasis here is on the long-term nature of such a pro»*
cess. A merely institutional merger did not immediately make
Thessalian society less •quasi-feudal*, nor indeed Greek society
any more so.
i


2, The Pelay in the Advent of Capitalism and in the Rise
of the Local Middle Class
At the end of what is generally considered the first phase
of Greek industrialisation (from 1860 or.'70 to about 1910), the
percentage of capital invested by the local bourgeoisie was lam
entable. Even disregarding the immense public debt which should
have been but never was considered as a (tax)liability chiefly of
the local business world, the participation in 1909 of local owner
ship not only in industry but in all other sectors as well, was as
low as 6 4 % . ^ Many of the apparently local firms must, however,
have been partly or even wholly owned by diaspora Greeks. Beside’s,
more than half of this 'locally'-owned 64% was invested in trade,
i.e. much of it in very small merchant firms whose owners really
belonged to the petit-bourgeoisie. It would be realistic to say,
therefore, that the local bourgeoisie held less than 40% of the
total capital invested in the country. And as this total itself
was extremely low due to the country's poverty, the said 40% share
in it of the local bourgeoisie was low not only as a percentage
but also as an absolute figure.
The picture is not much brighter if looked at from another
angle. The share of the national income yielded by bourgeois
and petit-bourgeois activities, i.e. by small manufacture, in
dustry, shipping and commerce, was about 24% in 1825, still 24%
in 1875, up to 32% in 1900, and 38% in 1910 — fourteen percen- !
tage points, not a very significant growth for a period as long
as eighty-five years. Moreover, the bulk of this — 12% of the
fourteen — was the result of an increase in trade, largely a
petit-bourgeois activity.^ ' J


These figures indicate the low rate of capital accumulation
and reinvestment. The following Tables will confirm this indica
tion and prove some other important points: the economic weak
ness of the middle class in all sectors of the economy but espe
cially in industry; its demographic weakness; its low propen
sity to invest; its stagnation, along with that of the economy
in general, during the 1885-1910 period; and its spectacular rise
in the two decades from 1910 to 1930, which can thus be considered
as the phase of true take-off for the economy of modern Greece
and of the real capitalist transformation of Greek society.
These points are particularly important, for they disprove the
commonly held view that the pre-1909 period was the one noteable
for its developing capitalism and the rise of the middle class.
Concomitantly, they provide the basis for an analysis of the 1909
coup and its aftermath, which disproves the equally common' view
which lumps these events together under the term ’bourgeois re
volution'.*^ *
2.1 Statistical Tables . . ,
^Station: All values are in gold francs unless otherwise speci
fied. Sterling ~ G.Fr. 25.2215 (before 1926). G.Fr. - G.Drachma,
See Table I for paper-drachma fluctuation. All figures given by 
the sources in other currencies have here been converted to gold


36
francs unless otherwise specified. For the post-1910 period,
conversion is usually to price-indexed drachmae, because the
fluctuations of gold and currency rates depended on factors only
rather remotely relevant to the Greek economy.
d = derived: If this follows a footnote number, it means that the
figure is derived from data given in the source mentioned by the
footnote; if it stands alone, the method of derivation is quite
obvious from the Table itself.
Rounded-off figures: Figures have been rounded off to the nearest
decimal, tenth, hundreth etc.— e.g. 4.24 to 4.2, but 4.26 to
4.3; mill. 68.76 to 68.8, but mill. 68.74 to 68.7.
* : An asterisk attached to the footnote number indicates that
special explanations are contained in the footnote.
ave; The abbreviation 'ave' denotes that an average figure is
given for the period indicated by the column. E.g., if the in- '
scripticn 'ave 7.8' appears in the column for the period 1805-99,
this ,7.8 is the average for those five years inclusively. Whether
averages are taken directly from the primary sources or derived
is not separately specified; usually they are derived.
Statistical Yearbooks; To*avoid repetition, only one reference
is made and no page numbers given, e.g. "Statistical Yearbook
of Greece 1939". Since footnotes are not normally used, the in
y i a y A9 YA 7
dication usually reads ’ ' etc., next to the figure
given in the Table column.
Census : Only the dates are given, e.g. C70, C07, C20 for the
censi of 1870, 1907, and 1920 respectively.
Population and area: NO reference is given for these data, as '
their sources (mainly censi) are quite well known. ‘ ,
Footnotes: Except for population and area, all figures given in
the Tables, including those derived from censi or Statistical
Yearbooks, are provided with their source. To avoid having ev
ery single figure followed by a footnote number, however, the


37
footnote by the top figure of any one Table-column remains valid
for all subsequent figures down this column, until replaced by
another. For example:
1880 1.395"* 1883 1.418 1891 1.091 1893 1.561 1897 1.417"* 1903 1.617 1907 1.471
where footnote 113 refers to all figures from 1880-93, and foot
note 114 to the figures from 1897-1907.
In some Tables, this system functions not vertically but hor
izontally, and is then indicated by an arrow — e.g.:
1880 1883 1893 1897 1903
1.395“’1* 1.418 1.561 1.417“* * 1.617
Finally, if a footnote covers figures both vertically and
ay v
horizontally, arrows are used for both directions: 131+ .


RITISH
an
CÛ
IMAGING SERVICES NORTH
Boston Spa, Wetherby West Yorkshire, LS23 7BQ
www.bl.uk
BLANK PAGE IN ORIGINAL


Statistical Tables
(in series centred upon the period 1881-1928)
The Tables to follow have been compiled from a
great variety of primary and secondary sources
(see also Foreword and Introduction to Biblio
graphy), so that their material varies in relia
bility and presents some long chronological gaps.
The non-Greek reader should remember that there
is no economic or social history of Greece, that
material and statistics are scarce, and that
these Tables are probably the first attempt to
form a synthetical statistical image of Greece
in a series ranging from 1881 -1928.


40
Footnotes - Table I
1 Zolotas, "I Hellas eis to p. 157.
2 Charitakis, "Le mouvement ...", p. 237.
3 Oikonomiki .kai Logistiki Encyclopaedia, Vi. Ill,
p. 340, and Vol. "Hellas", p. 121-23.
4. Andreades, "Les’ effets économiques ...", p. 285.


I ■ir
TABLE I : BAS C r15 JRE5 FOR STATISTIC AL INDEXING
YEAR COLD FR YEAR GOLD FP. £ 3 • PRICE GOLD DR GGLD_DR j____ IN DEX__
1834 : H ,uuCG 1912 -I .COGG - 25. 22 i
'! ? T f .
4 85 1.35GO 13 -. I.GOOD . 25. 22 1 {
86 !‘ 1,2225 14 -1 1.OOOO: .'25. 16 2 ; - 4 100 ;
87 ;••1.2623 15 - ;-i.0101; 25. 01- '} 5.35 * ri7 j
- .88 ' •1,2733 16 j 1 .0000 24. 72 •j 5.21 * 159 ;
89 : .1.2230 .17.._i_i.0000. .' 24. 60 . 5.13 :. 156 .
1693 : 1.2250 • ia : 1 .0000 24. 77 r 5.13- : • 356 ;
.. 91- -1,2533 • 19 -- 1 .0633 - 24. 54 ■-' 5.53
t , 323 •
. ..’92 !.1.4253 1920. 1 .3513. .. 34. 24 | 9.55 351 :
93 ' 1.6077. 21 ; 3.4483 70. 91 •13:29' :
4 393 V
94 ; 1,7492 22 1' O/.6567:- 166. 50 - 37.15 •! 535
.'95 ! 1,3321 •23 12 .5000 +*r\cf•67 " .64.60 ..1131
. '96 • 1,7232 24 “11 .1112 247. 35 ' • •: “ 1225
* 1 «• »•
-*97 ■ 1.6757-■ *25 12 .4000 312. 74 ; 1 ‘ 1414 :
- 98 : l,4?41i 26 - i
1
i • 23S3 lit- •: -! ' : 1533 ’
9 9 ; 1,5550 27 i
i : t * : 1750 | .
I5GO : 1,6432 - 23 >. 11 " 375 1
;773 tr •; 1563 •
01 1,65S0 r29 ,L . . 11 • 375 : : 77 l 1923
■. . .02 . .1.6272 . .1530 1- *
1
j .. 375 . * 77 ‘ ‘ 1682 !
C3 •• 1,5555 • 31 \ 252 . t 77 [ ; 1671 ■’
- 04 • 1.3520 ;32 i 375 147 f * 1773
. . 05 ; 1.0532 ... 33
J * — * ; T V i?c3 !
C o | 1,05=2 '• *24 i
... . . 
. ' . 1 • 1 1541 :
: 07 • 1,0578 - 35 1. ! I • ' r : 1950 ’
- oa . . 1.0232 .36 t i £40 j r 2013 .
09 . 1,0315 37 1 i
1 t ■ 2191 :
1913 v 0,9933 -23
1
(
j - 125.71 : '‘SliEfflELD
.11 1,0000• • 39 1 550 125 r • .UN:VrR$!TY
...
%
- - . -LIBRARIES
• 03 PARITY Or POUND STERLING WITH. GOLD DRACHMA BEFORE:'


42
Footnotes - Table II
1 Charitakis, "I helliniki viomichania.,.", p. 21.
2 .Mwlhall's "Dictionary of Statistics", p. 624
3 'Papagaryfallos, "Oi georgikoi.. , pp. 124-49.
■NB. I did not include as urban populations the inhab
itants of agglomerations of 2-5,000 people. The comparative
value of the series and the evaluation of its evolution are
not significantly different whichever classification is
preferred for these villages, as the percentage of their
total population has been fairly constant around 8% ; ■
throughout the period examined.


II-i
4 "?
A b_L E _ IT :_BASTC_GE0GRAPH7C
- PGPU PO?UL> LATIQN URIAN
•i(T H ) ^ *
YEAR
939
; ! i 824 :
• 1 ¡907 _
• '1«063 '
Y72
AREA,
TH,S3» -KM__
47,5
.AREA, ■ CULTIVATED, TH.ACRES'- •
1,097 ■!i;
1,458
1821
1839
1048 ...
1855 .
I860 “
IE6I - 47,5
1055 50,2
' .1,579Y30 ’I9.0Y30° 1879
i--: .2,187Y72
II.6 1 1370 r;
-- IQe I — •63,6’
T
2,434
■I*■; r— •
.’2^632.
_ 12,‘6 _
•11,9‘
1689 _____ _ .
1893
1696 ";
" -1358 • - £3,2
5,531Y30
^ 5,900
6,100 i
i’.6;205 '
Y38
, .6,600
’•*i t-*
-1...
.14,7.„.,1. ...I?07
. . 1915
IS 17
•’ * ■* • ; 1919
¡33,5. . 1920
1922
1926
'33,3Y38d '1923
— '--- -— _— _J930
. 1933
132
8 i o :2
2,C90
2,340
2,654*
3,365
3,433Y38
3,077 .
4,Oil
.4,396.__
5,143Y3fl
(J tl


44
Footnotes - Table III
*ld Law’s Report, p. 29. (* students who passed examin
ation only, based on one year; therefore it is not possible
to obtain even a very approximate 4-year average compar
able to the series; either the number of failures was too
high or the official figures are exaggerated)
*2d For the post-1926 inter-war period there are figures
available, but they are misleading as they do not include
the students of the University of Thessaloniki, opened in
1926. • •
^ d Law’s Report, F.O.Annual Series 1893, p.29.
Percent of conscripts, therefore male; hence the next fig
ure in the series, 66% of the total, based on the rather
unreliable 1907 census, seems highly improbable: it implies
an inexplicable amelioration in-the literacy percentage
among the female population in just 14 years.
4 Papagaryfalios., ."Oi g e o r g i k o i . p p . 124-43. ;


-*rr
ii
T'A | _ L _ E _ jBIII_tti=_EDUCATION
[ u n i v e r s i t y .s t u d e n t s •
I2i222-£22ykñII2ü
¡-ILLITERACY
4— >
i
f
-L I
1852-57 .... .2*00
1857-62 2,25
1862-67 '2,5
-1867-72- — ;-2;5
Y30d
1672-77— :3,0..'— ....
1877-82 4,0
1802-87 ’ 4,0 . ' ‘
iI
i'
1687-92--- 5,0'
t
1893 . .2,0
1892-97 _;-5,0
1697-1902 i 3,25
1902-07-- 4^0’ “
Ó ... .
!!.
[- -a-I9D7-I2'.,:_- .4,75 .-r~
M
1.
-V
: a,5*
1922-26 6,4 »;i
2d
i!.i ii
% OF POPULATION . . ¡1
-IB70 82_Y30.
. IB79 61
..l
1Í: .
3d
;.1893 _70 1 '
.t ) f
;:1907 ■f i f i TM - " — r It1.:
-r. .i
r 1920 \ SB ;. i..
Y38- - ;-r
,.1928 .50 i
,i j 1940 40
t-1
1i
TT
■-1
i.■ t
. , , --- -r— )-- •Ii t •
tI--t
i i* v I
Il


46
Footnotes - Table IV - •
1 Evelpidis, "Oikonomiki.. , p,86; percentages in total working population. * *2 Moskof, "I ethniki...", p.155. Landowners, only 1167 living in Athens and 10 in Syros; total for Greece prob ably not much higher as most landlords lived in Athens. All figures are for Athens (1879) plus Syros (1870), and should be considered indicative, though figures for urban professions should be very close to total for Greece. "Liberal professions" may include workshop owners. *3d Figure not reliable. From Boyadjoglou, "Contribution á l’etude de l'économie de la Gr¿ce", Paris 1957, p.49. Moskof ("I ethniki...", pp.118 and 142) gives a figure of about 2000 large landholdings in 1910, of which twothirds were allegedly purchased, mainly after 1881, by diaspora Greeks. 4d From Stavrianos, "The Balkans...", p. 677. 5 Gevetsis, "I exelixis. . , pp. 5 and 211, based on the Mansolas. Tables compiled in the 1870s. 6 Dakin, "The Unification...", p. 249. 7 Evelpidis, "Oikonomiki..i", p, 94. 8 Tyrsos Encyclopaedia, Vol."Hellas", p.145 (text, 1st col.) 9 Dakin, "The Unification...", pp. 316-19. 10 •Mulhall, "Dictionary of Statistics", p.520. 11 Vebb, "Dictionary of Statistics", p. 398. 12 Girard, "La Gréce en 1883", pp. 45 and 135. - , . 13 Law’s Report, F.0¿Annual Series 1893, p.89 . 14 Admiralty (Creat Britain) Naval Intelligence "Handbook of Creece", p.170 *15 The figure (from the 1879 census) probably includes rural workers and/or domestic servants and/or some workshop owners. It is not comparable with the figure under "Em ployed in manufacture & handicraft, incl. owners"»because the latter might not include mine workers, whereas the
former may, *16 The figure is the very approx, total of industrial wor kers only,'derived by deducting the 1907 total of mine workers (11,900) from a hypothetical total of 25,900 for mining and industrial labour, based on the total of 26,200 which actually existed four years later (see fig.for 1911). M established this figure to help my investigation of the evolution of Creek industry (Tables X and XI). *17 Gevetsis, "I exelixis...", pp.211 and.55. Difference from 1675 due to the use of three original statistical Tables with different bases for excluding very small manufactu rers (two Tables by Mansolas, one by Demathas).


T A B L E IV i EMPLOYMENT 4 7


48
Footnotes - Table V . .
1 ; Anastassopoulos, "Historia ...”, Vol.II, p. 748.
2 ; Mulhall, ’’Dictionary of Statistics”,' p. 37.
3 j Papagaryfallos,"Oi georgikoi.1.", pp. 124-49.
*4d From Statistical Yearbook 1938; average for 1909-13
5 Webb, ’’Dictionary of Statistics”, p. 12.
6 Sundbflrg,;”Apperçus statistiques. pp. 171-72.


49
TABLE
-4-J_ iI !
!I '!
-îMr.
|i
—i
. i PRODUCTION OF CONSUMPTION PER CAP f:F
WHEAT •WHEAT,KGS CURRANTS YEARS WHEAT : SUGAR . corrEE
r-TH.TONS-! PER ACRE — MILL.LIT. BUSH.--; KGS — HECTOPR
1 f “ * * *•^ •" •
p-l . . , .-j — t — . — ; 7 9 . 2 - 1 - - . 1 8 6 4 * :--- ; ■ •
! i 1 2 0 . 0 2 1 0 3 5 •4 * 
; I ■ ; : : : ■ 2 5 0 . Q 1 . 1 6 8 8 • • _ i *• * • . i
. 3.60~6
■ : 1891-98 "5.30
t...j , , - • - : • — ~t“ * 1 8 9 6 - 0 0 - 5 . 1 0 ;5 3 . 0 1 - - 3 . 9 0
•1 i. 1 ■
’ 190, 2 ! ; . '81 4d
I900-C5 _ 5 . 2 0 _ 3.55 6.50
, L 1910 »
•i
-1--
1.
566
710._:_l L . J 4 „
770 , i 1 70
• ~ T " P7 " 624- 56
. I.'.î. ! ' ' 45
1!
851
' | : 66 •
64~
. ' * T" 71* ! . 66; 713 1 ! , 62
7 5 9 ' 1 !” ' 47 "
775 • -------- ; 50 ;
465 > • 77
772 ‘ 1 111
699 88
740 I~
1•
f
CO
!
■t •
532., _ _1...!_' 6 4._
nT
15- 
17
1920
""T 22
— 23
_ _ 24.
'; 25
“ 26"
27
28
! 29
' Ï930
-- 31
:___ 32_
33
T 34~
3 5 _ . ----------
36 t~ 


50
Footnotes - Table VI
Ratios and averages derived from my Table I,
"I Hellas eis pp. 155-57,'and Dertilis
publique des États balkaniques”, pp. 111-13,
Values in mill, drachmas, approximate.
from Zolotas,
P., MLa dette
esp. 131-33.


T A B L E VI t FOREIGN-DEBT SSRVICE, TRADE-BALANCE DEFICIT.
AND RATE OF MONETARY DEVALUATION.
_ : YEAR FOREIGN PUBLIC DEBT
• t1- V o m INAL REAL NETT l C A P H A L _ CAPITAL. PROCEEDS
1
■~T '• . - . . . . , . . _
¡ 1867 : 1 <
¡ 1681 •

4. 180 • 133 1
! 1884 ' 280 203 "
1 1886
• i 1887 :
** ♦ t 415 . 294
A
1 1893 . 640 ' 468 ' 389
■ —• - •- * *
RATE OF DEVAL.
*r
0
0
.0
18.5
DECADE AVER CF ANNUAL
AV£=.ANNUAL
FOR.DEBT
31.5(1863-72)
39.5(1873-82) T, »21.6 (1879' : -1893)
: BANKRUPTSY
1895
■ I9Q3 :
I 1904 ■
! 1905 .
21.5 '
37.8 31.B(IB83-92)
44.5 ■'i
• .. . . . . I
36.3 37.2(1893-1902)'
21.1 ': ;
• 8.8 ...... - .1
!
j
NB,I » All values'in,Million Drachmae,
•W3..2 _i .Allocation of inputs from foreign public borrowing» 
. ‘ Railroads ” 120 .... .... _ ... _ .
- — .— • - - - • • Military expenses « 103 Miscellaneous “ 25
........... . "245
— To-notB that at least past of these expenses is 'included in ' figures showing deficit of balance of trade. .. _ _ __..
_NB,3 s Total servicing expenses cT public debt » ^79-1693^ “ 470 ffil. _
‘■“ ifI“


52
Footnote - Table VII
NB. This Table was necessary because the Statistical Year
book for Greece 1938 erroneously presents figures for
1885-1909 as ''values‘in gold francs” without having calcul
ated the conversion. This is proven by comparing these
figures with those included in Consular Reports. Not un- 
expectedly, the error, is repeated by Andreades in "Les
effets...”, p.~274, and Evelpidis, "Oikonomiki kai koino
niki.,.", p. 95. As these books have been used as sources
by many authorsgreat care is necessary whenever foreign
trade figures and especially statistical derivations are t
« , •
encountered in the Greek bibliography. :


.T- A B L E VII : FOREIGN TRADE, CONVERSION TO GOLD
la R B e B tissa a B e B B B B B a siiisssB ssB B B S c se B S K a v sB B sssiia !
FRANCS (THÊUSfII
iCBsarses:,
T1. IYEAR ’
<« » « M M INP0RIS EXP0RT.S I0TALS_ YEAR_ ’ IMPORTS EXPCRTTS TJJIAl
ii ” ; 1081; . 116,294 69,887 186,182 "l90I " 84,744 ‘ 56,691 T4 Ij <
l
. " T •02; ■ 142,554 - - 7 6 , 3 4 4 - 218,899 — 02 -• - 04,329 -48,954 133,2
! 03; 121,340 82,643 1 203,983 ’__ 03 _ . 87,604 .54,746 142,3
! -m .34 : ; 115,953 73,621 189,574 •04 101,343 66,950 168,3
■ •i 85‘ 108,084'" 72,647 180,731 : 05 129,434 76,416 205,8
*r!— ■ i- 86; ' -94,734- : 64,175- 158,909 — 06 — -131,703 • 112,480 244,3
ti Í ®7; . 104,290;. _81 ,26 1 ! 185,551 1 . 07. . J.37,036 . 108,126 245,1
; 88 ! ' 85,721 ■ 75,123 ' 160,844 ' 00. 142,742 102,200 244,8
•
1
■
• 89 1107,848 87,624 195,472 09 133,348 '98,582 231,5
7 ' • 90 97,802: • 77,564 • 175,366 •1910 • 160,697 144,715 ■305,4
~!- DECADE . ____________ _ DECADE • ,
1 a v e r .' 109,462 76,089- 185,551 AVER. 119,298 86,990 206,5
. , I XB9I‘
" i î I92;
Î D 8 ,III
...
H 93
03,065
"56,904
82,793
57,273
54,758
1* 1 ~i~i ?4; 62,862 .i.42,471
\
M“
>915• ! *59,878 . 40,603
•» ! i .; ¡96- 66,894 41,697
'r !97; '169,‘441 '' 48,761
«■1» •! j9B '1 93,796 •59,848 i
’"7* ' 199'
... . •83,872 59,938
i! 1900 ' 79,957 62,524
¡ f decade '..
1
~AVER__ , 76,478 55,067
ii
•| •
190,903
140.333
111,662
105.334
100,481
108,591
118,203
.153,645
143,810
142,401
131,545'
|. . : ■i
! h
TTh'
M'-h


54
Footnote - Table VIII
NB. On the basis of Statistical Yearbook 1933, as amen
ded by conversion to gold francs in my previous Table VII.
My figures per capita for the decades 1861-70 and 1871-80
do not correspond exactly to the averages of the Yearbook,
most probably because of the different average population
figure used in the calculations. .\ .... .


J
I•
TABLE VIII : FOREIGN TRADE, decade averages,- 1870s-1920s •
1871-80 1RS1-90 91-1900 1901-10 1911-20 1921-30
Imports 91,959 122,081 120,257 144,042 561,537 716,64$
Exports 56,827 85,981 86,419 103,iy6 263,249 367,30y
Total 148,7S6 208,062 206,676 247,^38, 824,786 1,083,y55
Imports per cap 58 57 50 55 126 118
Exports per cap 36 41 36 40 sy 60
Total per cap. 94 98 86 95 185 178
Exp % of imp 62 70 72 72 47 51
(Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 193S. Gold drachmae)


T A B L E VIII : FOREIGN TRADE, DECADE AVERAGES IN DRACHMAS AND IN GOLD FRANCS (THOUSAND)
■esesess: >
icassetisssaBSBBrseasess i.
CK8B33BSCCBtisEssceeBcnnmrncarBCSKtBSBSlcri*nrnMCi:nct:vosxr>BEB=ca %
1051-60 I8CI-70 1071-00 loni-9 0 ' 1091-00 I901-10 I9n-2n I9?I-30__ »
29,034 60,072 91,959 122,081 120,257 144,043 620,437 .0,001,042 IMPORTS, DRS 15,010 32,162 56,027 05,981 86,420 103,196 201,785 4,457,400 EXPORTS, DRS
44.044 92,234 • 149,766 208.062 206,677 247,239 902,132 13,258,530 • TOTAL,’DRS " .........*
29,034 60,072 . 91,959 109,462 76,478 199,298 561,537 716,646 IMPORTS, GOLD FRS - »
15,010 . . 32,162 . 56,827.... 76,009 55,067 86,990. 263,249 367,309 EXPORTS, GOLD FRS. :
44,044 92,234 148,706 185,551 131,545 206,280 824,786 1,083,955 TOTAL, GOLD FRS
27.50 47.04/45.5 58.61/57.8 52.12 31,42 45,08 140,38 117,48 IMPORTS PER CAP.,GOLD FRS 14,98 25.19/24.4 36.22/35.7 _ 36,23._. 22,62 33,46 . . 65,61« «60,21.: ..EXPORTS PER CAP,,GOLD FRS
42,40 72.22/69.9 94.03/93.6 88,36 54,04 ' 79,34 206,20 177,70 TOTAL PER CAP,. GOLD FRS:
54,5 53,5 61,0 70,4 ' 71,9 *71,6 ■ 46,9 51,3 EXPORTS, "p OF IMPORTS
1,050
1 '( 1.277 1,569 . 2,10Q .
r^
2,434 '
i ‘. , 2,600.
%
1
4,000 •i
j
: 6,ioo
^ ^ j .1__
AVERAGE POPULATION USED , BASIS FDR CALCULATION
• ll


56
Footnotes - Table IX
Footnote numbers refer to figs, on the same line, not ver tically down the same column (unless otherwise specified by vertical arrow). 1 Dakin, "The Unification...", p. 316-19. 2 Andreades, "La marine marchande Crèque", pp.6 and 19. Sail over 30 or 60 tons (but not specified); steam most probab ly over 100 t, as Andreades’ main source was Lloyd's Regis ter. (He also acknowledges Percy Martin, but this is al most certainly only a gallant gesture.) 3 Girard, "La Grèce...", pp.208 ff. Ships over 30 t. Noted difference with Dakin's numbers, which thus seem to include even smaller sailing vessels, but steamships of much high er minimum tonnage. 4 Eleftheroudakis, Encyclopaedia, Vol.V, pp.449 (sail over 30 t, steam over 100 t). 5 Pyrsos, Encyclopaedia, Vol. "Hellas", p. 201 6 Law's Report, F.O.Annual Series 1893, p.26 7 Vebb, "Dictionary of Statistics", p .570; Lloyd's figures. 8 Lloyd figures reported by Zolotas, "I Hellas eis..", p.56. 9 Ditto, vessels of over 100 t. 10 Consular Report (1909), F.O.Annual Series N° 4484, Piraeus. The Consul refers to a Table issued by the Greek Ministry of Merchant Marine. ... .
NB.l There is an abundance of statistics on shipping. I chose not to use those including very small ships and to com" pute this Table with data given by Andreades and the Eleftheroudakis Encyclopaedia because the)’ can be used . in series, having both more or less the same statistical bases; Lloyd figures whenever I found them quoted; data reported in Consular Reports; and figures given by reli able contemporaries (e.g. Girard).
NB.2 One of the reasons for the decline of Greek shipping seems to have been a French law of 1572 taxing Greek ships (Girard, "La Grèce en 1853", p.?0S). However, I suspect this was only a minor reason, not merely because the French trade was only part of the Creek shipowners’ activity, but also because the crisis which broke out only one year later, and mainly the backwardness of the Creek merchant fleet (see slow evolution of steamer fig ures in the Table and discussion in Chapter B, section ’ on railways) had such overwhelming impact as to relegate ;other unfavourable factors to subsidiary positions.


M
i
» B l E IX » SHIPPING
**■*««*C»TCa5KC**tH33*Bí**
YEAR TOTAL TOTAL STEAMERS —— VESSELS ■- T H .----------
.1321 . . . 6C0l ~ _ 150_____ , _ L — , .
I860 __ I2 I2 2 -* 234 ..
1866 . ,166B1 »4dH'_277 ________ l l 1 ."*
~.I875___175L2 d ^ _ .3 5 6 __________282- t
,1533 .14773-* , . 250 ...... . . . 73
1292 . . 18432d** . 267 . . 1042
.1053 ....................... 2706* ! . .103
1901 . . 11232d'* .306 _____ ___ 1982
1903 ____ __ _____ __________ 2102 "
I9 C 6 ..........................4267- _ 
1907. 13302 ,4 d "*. 436 1 _____ 2852 .'
•.1908___ . . _________ L..3001
•i
STEAMERS SAIL , SAIL AVER. ! AVER.
TH .T----------- r . ------ TH.T - TONNAGE- TONNAGE ___ ______ . ____ STEAM^S TOT.FLEET
250 ld
’ — ____ 600 150___ — . i I
1212 .234 Ì . . 1932d
I
____ 5 ____ L16574 -. 272 ... 455ld * .1661,4d
8____1733___ 34¿ :_294___ L..\2022d _
3d
.1 .. .33 • - .1 *0 4 - • 217 . . . 4B3Z/4 ¿ 2 3d. }69
61 . . .1739 : -206
-T- 5B“ ' .211
587 
_,,6d ’
,563 •— 4
1492d
—____ 161.. ! i . 925 - - 145 . . B57‘ • 2722d
.. .202 _ .
..:2 3 6
_L. ..:_962
I ; .:
..........1—1190-!—.-----r 
: _ ; _ .2 8 9 .- : - l D 4 5 4 - 1 4 7 ^ - m 2 Í ; L< 3282' 4d
— 296 -• -**.•
t'
.... - 9 8 7 d-j— • •I
I;
ik'
- -rr T
•• l - A Y * i ¿ :
íT
. . . -4 I'
I ' 57
YEAR TDTAL ' TOTAL STEAMERS
———
i VESSELS f TH. •
________ r [ l a a s 
1911 T . " ' i V ¡ ’ ;
iT * ’ 15 . / k i T ^ L 933 •
ia gOS4* * ^ 41,1-5
Ï9 e 4 0 \ t j - 295 !
1920 1338 i ! 563
-:• 7 21 1414 ; . j . . 633
IM
4M
' 1533 ■ 'l ' BOT
■: 1
" steamers -T H ..T
SAIL SAIL
TH.T
-1- 343Z
4334
' 23
! 24
. 25
' 26
27
»
28
1933
i’
i_ 205 _
*i
1 200 ^
- ,282 
’ 335
J_ 440 _
8
15402 ; i . 859/B598. 419 _
.i
. . . -,
,2-* !
. 7517 . 1
■9
1 890 t , L
1214
Î
. 1230
■ 125T5?-' 
933 I . L . 417 
,2 "^ s 1170 . ...L 504 i
c *5
1315® . . 528 _
AVER. AVER. . TONNAGE • TONNAG
SlldiilS. l ü l i l l i
388 _1130 2 J. t
4d-* ■ >
823 ’784 XIO 1901 ___ L 767
291 700 120 14194d**._l 454_
180 640 . 115, 9°o2r :-i 351.
430 1056__ 133. _ 1525 ! 421.
494 1079 !.. 138 .1475 - _ i 448.
_685____ 1093__ 152. 1557 .J
* 1 546.
_737__ ... 1121__ 122. . .1759.____ : •i
_ 558
1
: ■ _ _M .~.
„934 .. . 737 60. _ 1958. ___ -763
1111.. ! 726___ .59. 22C4. ___ ..9El.
1257..
'• 1 . 729 
'i
. 59. 23805d”: ...1046.
\
- - • ■- - - 4- ’ ' «..
«
.t
» i * - --- — .
t
i.
■I • !
t •• t « '»--t __ _,
‘
4
(«jli


58a
Footnotes - Table X
21
3
4 Zolotas, "I Hellas eis ...", p. 108. *5 Evelpidis, "Oikonomiki...", p.82; figures on corpora tions denote total, not merely industrial corporations. The tremendous increase in the total of sociétés ano nymes, especially after 1920, is somewhat misleading. It was partly due to the favourable taxation compared with that of personal companies, and the lack of re striction on minimum capital. This situation was only partly met through the new legislation on the capital market and Law 2190 of 1922 on the sociétés anonymes; even in 1929, parliament discussed the subject of im- • posing a minimum-capital legal requirement for the formation of banking corporations (Venizelos' speech of 17 March 1929, in Stefanou (ed), "Veniielos...", Vol.II, pp. 490-91). *6 Kordatos, "Historia...", Vol.XIII, p .15; total corpo rations, not just industrial ones; figs, not altogether reliable; author does not refer to his source. *7 "Value of industrial installations" in gold drachmas; Tyrsos Encyclopaedia, p.129. Comparison with the series for the previous year, showing capital and not value of installations, is possible if one is interested in the productive capacity of industry rather than its capital in the strict sense. Moreover, there is no danger of underestimating the value of fixed capital employed by the industries in previous years. Their installations could not have been of a value much higher than their capital: it was only much later that Creek industry began using borrowed capital to any large extent. 5 Law's Report, F.O.Annual Series 1893, p.8 6 , Table F.VI. 9 Webb, "Dictionary of Statistics", p. 398. 10 Charitakis, "Le mouvement...", p. 233. 11 Pyrsos Encyclopaedia, Vol. "Hellas", pp. 129-46. 12 Vebb, "Dictionary of Statistics", p. 407. *13 Evelpidis, "Oikonomiki...", jj.407 (1939 edition) pp.6 6 69. Figures for 1877 industrial production should be used with care: they are most probably based on a total of manufacturing establishments which includes very ..small workshops. *14 Anastassopoulos, "Historia...", based on 1917 census, therefore rather unreliable (in Zolotas' opinion). 15 Statistical Yearbooks 1930, 1934, 1938, 1939. 16 Zolotas, "I Hellas eis...", p. 149.


58 p
*17 Evelpidis, "Oikonomiki..." (1939 ed.) p.94; his fig ures on industry in 1 9 3 6 are lower than Anastassopou- . los' for 1930, clearly because of different criteria. Evelpidis refers to larger factories, as suggested by the average HP; this makes his data better suited for comparison with previous years. 18 Charitakis, "Le mouvement...", p. 727. *19 Consular Report N°4484, F.O.Annual Series, Piraeus 1909. Figure refers to factories in Athens and Piraeus only. The total number of factories in the whole of the coun try could not have been much above 300-350, which con- . firms the figure of 35S factories in 1909 which 1 de rived indirectly from two other sources (see below, fn. 27) to cover the gap in information for the crucial 1900-1910 period. The 243 listed here do not include /. the following, also reported by the Consul: 17 confec tionary "factories", 6 manufacturers of artificial flow ers, and 15 bookbinders. The Consul faithfully report ing such units indicates why his total 1909 number (281) is so much higher than that given by Charitakis for 1910 (92): the Consul includes workshops, whereas the Greek author is concerned only with more important establish ments . *20 Anastassopoulos, "Historia...", Vol.II, pp. 1021-24. Comparison with Charitakis’ figures for the 1880-1917 series, which cover large factories only, suggests that almost certainly both authors derived their information from the same source: the report written in 1921 by the high-ranking employee of the Industry Ministry, G.A. Voudouris. I derived my figure for 1921 by adding the 61 new "large factories" of the Athens area to Charita kis ' figure of 120 for 1917. 21 Gcvetsis, "I exelixis...", p.55. 22 Gevetsis, "I exelixis...", p.2 1 1 . *23 Statistical Yearbook 1930, p.143. Increase of 50 fac tories between 1876 and 1889 represents, essentially, 44 new flourmills and 4 new olive-processing "factories"; The low significance of these impressive increases is obvious. But increase of HP in the existing factories is. substantial, although it may be due to different statis tical methods. The reliability of statistics on industry before 1920 is doubtful. According to the 1930 Statistical Yearbook of Greece, the figures chosen for that edition are the least unreliable (p.143); they appear in my Tables with proper reference-to their source, as a guide for comparisons with data from other sources. The 1917 figures for industry are also very unreliable; this applies to all data derived from the 1917 census which was conducted in a period of war and political up heaval (Zolotas, "I Hellas...", p.20).
(CONT'D, PG.60 a.)


T A B L E X I INDICATORS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH, AND CAPITALIST DEVELOPMENT
NUMDCn OF
CORPOR.
CAPITAL CAPITAL MINING MINING OF IfJD. OF INO. PROD. PROD-.
INO.PROD MILL.DRS CORPOR. CORPOR. TH.T. MILL. .YEAR. PRICE
MIJMRCR
OF
MILL.DRS MILL.DRS INDEXED
DRS -INDEXED -PIRAEUS
1062
. 1867
1070
[ 1875
1876
1877: 146
1880
13*
22 18
295Bd 13,47B°dI807
134- . 52.54 30.24d
MOvlTCXSU *©L*
•l>W - t » 1
20 64.7 4 7 . 8 ,
l**» - ..
— - ' 263 ■" 14,564 'IBBa'” -’
— r-----282 14,383 - 1889--- :---
361 15,543 1090' :- .
, 300 14,492', 86-90 '
; : ; . ' , ■ 1893. ; ;
- IB96. - .
I ; ...1___ .1900; ^ ’____
1904
63
21,1861 2 I 9 0 6 j
VIJMPER TOTAL TOTAL OF HORSEPWR MANPOWER FACTORIES TOTAL
TH. .TH. . ....
2 2 Y 3 ° 0. 29 6Y 3 0 :. ..
3921 ,
95Y3° ■ • 2.0Y3° ’ ' 6.928* 129 22
■— --------
■ ; 3.722
14 52 -3 * ; ;5.6Y 3 °
1
2082 5.52
1
»
l
4505 1907 L 
* 1I
29
T<>Vk^ (148.0)5* (148»0’)?iiU-i*<v
5*
• 1909 1 _ _ (243) ' ,18
19* 35527*
(40.0)'
(270.0)6d*(270<i0)6d*
57910 .
1910
1911 i
-I9I4-:
92
26.229 ,
470
56 169.6 46.3?d
I:
130
tMV 549.6
1 19 IS
1917 (558) 14d ¡24d*-
120 ( 70.0Y3Q 24.32,4dl
t 1 38i;
356
44.5— -473 lOd
494 T«>TAU
(4B82)5* -(273.0)?*
i
(200)^ .
U B 7 0 );•
(382) 29211
880 .. tvtm.
»1
1910 ■ * . . • ! . . • i l ! • • *
1920 - --------- *----- ------ •■ - 290523d* 6 0 .3 25d- 6 0 .02 5 
T T" -- __1921 , 27215d_ ; _ . 1532 0 d * j l , ; .____ _____
1922 * : 1
1923 4 6 6 1 6 d ; ; V ’ ............... ‘ ; : : .1 • ' 1924 ’ * . , ‘ ' ,
.. 1925 . .. T... s . . ................ . _____..
1927 ■ 1 1 f ’ ’ t 1
■1 1920 380l l d 1
---- : 1929 • 3751 7 d -. • ■- , 400017- ' 2 3 0 .O17 ‘ 1 1 0 . o 17 •
t 1930 39415d . ' . . . 5947Y 3° - 1 5 6 .5C,30
1932 ■ ■
* ; 1933 ' 423l l d • ' t * •- ' m - . o 2 6 '
1934 ' 510 •
. .. 1936 S8617d . . . : .
> 451217* . 267.017* .. . - L. . . ...
.... (*: ••*-:
1:
1—.. .u 
t
'1
“ti
• : -i ■


60.«
(CONT'D FROM PG 5B.0 - FSS/TABLE I)
*24 Figures for old provinces (pre-war Greece), Charitakis1 analysis of the 1917 census, but fairly reliable precisely because they are local figures. Very use ful for an assessment of the real industrial growth between 1870 and 1917. *25 Derived from 1920 census. Only factories above 6 wor kers are included here; though this distinction was not observed for previous years, I think it necessary for the evaluation of an industrial sector which, by the * 1920s, was no longer in a primitive stage. Average la bour power in factories employing fewer than 6 workers was, after all, only 2.6, and average HP just 1.21; this classifies almost all the 31,987 "factories" in this category listed in the census as very small work shops. Comparison of 19th-cent.HP evolution between Greece and Belgium, another small, but truly advanced country, is illuminating. In Belgium, the HP of steam engines alone increased from 11,000 in 1830 to 30,000 in 1838 and to 66,000 in 1350. In Greece, total HP increased from about 2,000 in 1875 to 5,500 in 1893 and 60,000 in 1920. In 1909 it could not have been much above 15-20,000 if one considers a total number of 355 "large" factories (as above fn.19, based on 1909 Consular Re port, and below, fn.27), an average HP of 35 (as indic ated by the averages of 38.4 in 1889, and 26 in 1904; 20.8 in 1920; 43.6 for factories with over 26 workers in 1920), plus an additional 5-6,000 HP used in very small workshops, to make comparison in series possible. 26 Pyrsos Encyclopaedia, vol."Hellas", p.145 (1st col.text) *27 Anastassopoulos, "Historia ...", Vol.II, p.1021-24. Very . approximate figure, derived from the number of large factories (6-25 and 25+ workers) in 1920, reduced by the 137 "large factories"Voudouris reports as estab lished between 1910-1920. Up to the day of publication ■ of this work I have been unable to locate Voudouris’ report. *28 Gevetsis, "I exelixis...", pp. 55 and 211. Difference with 1976 due to the use of three original statistical Tables with different bases for excluding very small manufacturers (two Tables by Mansolas, one by Deraathas). 29 Dakin, "The Unification...", p. 249.


Footnotes - Table XI
1 Gevetsis, "I exelixis. . p. 211. *2 See fn.23, Table X. 3 Law's Report, F.O. Annual Series 1893, p.82. 4 See fn.27, Table X. 5 See fn.24, Table X. *6 See fn.26, Table X. *7 Derived from 1920 census. The average 76 manpower for the 492 factories should be read with care. A very few large enterprises employing hundreds or thousands of workers raise the average considerably and may mislead as to the size of the bulk of the 492 factories, which was quite small, indeed near the limit of 26 workers. 8 Zolotas, "I Hellas eis...", pp. 19-20. *9 The range includes factories with 6-25 workers, but the 9-workers average per factory suggests that distribution tilted heavily towards the smallest units (below 9 wor kers). To yield an average of 9, the smaller-than-9 fac tories must have been the rule, and most of them were family workshops as in the category of 1-5 workers. This is confirmed by the extremely low average of 6.9 HP per unit. For comparing the 1920s with the preceding de cades, therefore, the truly significant category is the next one (over 26 workers), where the number of facto ries is 492. The reader might want to increase this num ber by a small part of the 2,413 factories of the "6-25 workers" section.
NB. Number of factories or total HP, as has already been mentioned in the footnotes of the preceding Table, in dicate quite clearly that the period of take-off for the Greek industry occurred not before but after 1909, and especially after 1920. This is even more clearly indicated by the evolution of labour force,, the true in dicator of "exchange of labour for money", the criterion par excellence of capitalism. This developed from about 7.000 in 1875, and 26,000 in 1911, to 60,000 in 1920 and 190,000 in 1933. If the number of 10-15,000 mine workers is deducted, which remained stable over the whole period, the evolution is even more significant: from about 14,000 industrial workers in 1911, to over 170.000 in 1933. (I assume the stability of mine workers from the fact that mining production was at the same level in 1932 with 292,000 t as in 1887 with 295,000 t, . peaking at 450,000, 579,000 and 470,000 t in 1907, 1915 and 1917 respectively.) * The above conclusion is confirmed by all other indica- ' tors of capitalist development: the rate of capital ac cumulation, indicated by the growth of industrial cor- r porat.ion capital from 30 mill, gold drachmas in 1896 to 148 mill, in 1910, and 382 mill, in 1932; the rate of growth in the other capitalist sector vital to Greece, i.e. shipping(356,000 t in 1875; 436.000 t in . 1907; 837,000 t in 1922; 1,657,000 t in 1933); by the evolution of foreign trade, an excellent indicator of capitalist- development in the mercantile sector (de cade average value of foreign trade 1881-90: 186 mill.; in 1901-10: 206 mill.: in 1911-20: 825 mill.; in 1921- " 1930: 1,084 mill.); and finally, by the demographic growth of the bourgeoisie (see Table XII).


II
i¡ ; • , '
i ' : T A B L E. XI : INDUSTRIALIZATION
1 ■i I,
1867 i 1875 ' 1876 ! ! Í889 1 ' 1904' 1909 :1914
Bssasns . csszsccsess •bsssbss' ’rsBssrsasaB
T917 ! 1920
IBSCBBS ' SaCBCSG
1929 ____ 1930
B B S S S 3 3 IBtStBCSSSSGX
1933 1936
f a c t o r i e s , TOTAL .
HORSEPOWER, TOTAL
MANPOWER, TOTAL
HORSEPOWER, AVERAGE
m a n p o w e r , AVERAGE
:y 3o r i"ni*" <" :z* r , '
, ion* ' 1’ -r-fc I 2 D g
• :a.3' n I Z 1 !
I 1 2 9 . ! j 1145* - , -i- j | - 6Ìy 
7 7 :"i í
; { 7 6 2 )^ i 29056d* : 400010 ¡' 5947C30 |
; ( 7 0 . 0)'12 ' ;6 0 . 312 2 3 0 . 012 ! ;
TT* 4 5 1 2 Ai
Í3.5Y30d;20:7Y30d .V3dd
3 E .4 26
‘ ij 1 1
14.0 (24.3) '60.0 1 IllO.O ' 156.5 ! 191.012
28.5'
^CTORJES, 6-25 WORKERS ‘ ' <
IQ-25 — ; ;
26+ ~ » - i ! . . ;
FACT#5J3F 6-25 W: HP TH : Í
"“"~r _7,26+ Wj hp j h
6-25 Wj HP A V E R . ' '
W: HP AVER. !■
6-25 Wt MANP.AVER.
Wi MANP.AVER.’
"f—* T
It
I i •I I , '20.86d, 57.51Dd Í ,
i - * 1I
' ¡ £31.9) 20.6 ' ’ 2 7.b
I......^ ~~~ 1 ! 2.413 i
i Ii
,355 ; I :
! 2 6 . 7 C 3 °:
1552C30d '
,7* • ;
- -j ¿-j— 1
-t—i i - ;
II
.Bd
9. 3 7 I
76.28d|
'i O .0
1
104.5
267.0
59.2
12
lOd
i:!
I1
T'T I t- r . r .
!II
!i i
^
1
11
i .' i
~+— t!1,
1 1 i , ! T LL
i '. I
fI
!•


62.a
Footnotes - Table XII
1 Evelpidis, "Oikonomiki.. p. 113. 2 Statistical Yearbooks, 1930, 1938. *3 This is the total number of cars in 1922 for the whole of Greece (Statistical Yearbook 1930). From then on the .. f i g u r e becomes statistically insignificant for the pur pose of assessing the number of upper-class members, as it includes buses which in the provinces were in a proportion much higher-than in Athens and thus distort the Greek total for the above purpose (though not the total for Athens).
NB.l I propose that telephone ownership does indicate uppermiddle class population in the initial phases of dev elopment in telephone communications. If the number o f ’ ■ telephones hardly exceeds the number of businesses, main city shops and professionals, as in the case of Greece, then the upper middle class population is clear ly very small. NB.2 Total bourgeois population, if it can be measured sep arately from the petit-bourgeoisie, can be a very good indicator of capitalist development. Figures in this Table suggest that the bourgeois population of Greece grew from 5-6,000 in the 1870s to about 7 - 9,000 in the 1910s and 1S-15,000 in the 1930s. : The figure for the 1870s can be assumed on the basis of Table IV*s occupational breakdown of the Athens popula tion in 1697, and that of Hermoupolis in 1870. These cities were then the industrial centres of Greece,where most of the bourgeois population had already concentra ted. The breakdown is as follows: 1,177 landowners and people living on unearned income; 126 ’’important capit alists” , 390 high-ranking officials, 1,984 merchants, and 1,607 "practitioners of liberal professions", e.g. doctors and l a w y e r s , but also plumbers, carpenters or tailors. The total number is then about 4,300 people, which should be substantially reduced to obtain a real istic figure for the bourgeoisie and landowning pop ulation of these two cities. This reduction, which should bring the number down to about 2,000, is ne cessary if one considers that most of the merchants had small, one-man businesses, and that most of those in the "liberal professions” should be classified as belonging to the petit-bourgeoisie. Thus the total strength of the bourgeoisie in the whole of Greece in the 1570s could not have been more than 4-6,000 plus 1,000 landowners. These numbers may be verified by.an unusual but accurate method. According to the official census, there were 5,735 maids in 1870. It was incon ceivable for a Greek upper-class family not to have at least one maid, who usually was given food and shel ter but no payment, and there were maids even in petitbourgeois or rich propertied peasants' households. It is interesting that in 1851 Britain, with a popul ation sixteen times that of 1870 Greece, there were' about 674,000 people classified as "general domestic servants", i.e. about 120 times as many as in Creece.vor



Total middle-class membership in Britain is calcula ted at about 340,000 for this period, also about 60 times that of Greece (Hobsbawir^ "The Age of Revolution,pp 363,371) The use of the "domestic servants" indicator suggests again that the 1870 bourgeoisie numbered no more than 4-6,000. Disregarding for a moment the controversial 1900-10 period, the indicators for the 1920 and 1930 suggest a bourgeois population of about 1 -15,000. I would not give so much weight to columns A,B,C and Table XII, .. showing 900, 3,502 and 9,550 persons in the three top income-tax brackets in 1938, simply because of a taxevasion practice that may have concealed quite a few thousand very high incomes, and also because dividends were traditionally taxed at the source and therefore not individually declared (in other words, income for which corporation tax has been paid in Greece is not taxed again, as a personal income, by income tax). However, the 1929 figure of 8,958 houses classified at the top of the house-tax scale is quite indicative. Again, it is necessary to increase it by a few thou sand to compensate for the inevitable evasion by the most impudent tax-payers who declared flagrantly low values for their luxurious houses. The figure thus as- • sumed, about 12-15,000, is confirmed by the figures of about 8,000 passenger cars in Athens and Piraeus alone in 1929 (about 10,000 in the whole of Greece), and even the 8,000 telephones (total for Greece). The sub sequent rise in the number of private cars for Athens alone (excluding Piraeus) to about 8,000 by 1931, and of telephones to about 14,500 by 1933, and to 36,500 by 1936, are also confirmative. • Returning to the 1900s with these later figures in mind, it becomes obvious that Moskof's hypothethis of about 12,000 bourgeois in Athens in 1909 is either exaggerated or based on different criteria for clas sification under the term "bourgeois" (Moskof, "I ethniki...", p.lSl). That the figure is indeed too high is also confirmed by the information about Piraeus tradesmen in 1910 containéd in the British Consul's Annual Report (Consular Report N° 4484, F.O.Annual -* Series, Piraeus 1910). This gives a total of 4,900 tradesmen. Of these, however, the majority were shopkeepers and small traders, petit-bourgeois par excel lence. Piraeus was rather more commercialised than Athens at that time. Thus, even if one adds the big traders of Athens and those very few important mer chants established in the two or three larger provin cial towns, and even after the few hundred of indus trialists and shipowners are included in the computa tion, the total strength of the true bourgeois popul-t ation of Greece could not have been much higher than 7-8p00.


Vû
!I
T A B L E X I I : INCOME INDICATORS FOR UPPER-CLASS POPULATION
I! II;
h : '■ I i
:■ ■ 1 ! [ ! i \ 5 T 3 5 C 7 n .
,Y31d
II
. _ !.. • * 2 6 3 2 4 0 2
4 3 0 ? “ 2 9 0 1 Y31d .. : : 27 ,4254 ■
;:I
1 : 28 5052
1 , 8958YjUd 29 6326 i
436 • *
1 4 1 7 5 ;"7 j " ; 1 9 3 0 7 2 5 8 ■
; 31 .7744
■ 1 ! -' ; 1 ! i , j ì '| : ; i 3 2 7 9 7 3
; ' i ! ! 33 7896 '
L--,39.76^.....Li 4-.L
! • ‘ ^ ! ! I 1 ‘ ? ! ; ■■ i i ‘ 5604 I ‘ 3748 I : ' : ;
______ . __ .
7 ’ 8 1 5 2 1 ; " 4 5 7 6 T ‘ •"” ' =' T
I •> i ; ! ' ! : ( ' ! ;
r-î’-r r -5324-; : ■ : *
,2
i ■! I ! t I ’ :
... : j : 6 6 2 5 ; :
I ! > ■■i :
1 : 7498
f -• * ! ii
i
■""! rri.......
•I
i!I
‘ 3 4 “ 7 8 3 5 ;• 7 :
_ ! ___ 3 5 . - . 7 9 0 6 _ . L .
! 7842
r r r ;"T~ri” 9 6 2 0 *
• .10913 : j
I ' 1 1 7 6 6 !_■
! i1 4 4 6 4 i I ; I .1 ■ ■
T ~ - 2 0 1 5 3 !'•; :
1-25420 ..
' I•
900
1i
1
1
35021 ' 95501 ■ i ■1
36
37
38'
1
1i
1 i 1 ! 30988
136401 ; ; ,
1t
!1 I
A t . N u m b e r o f p e r s o n s / f a m i l i e s t a x e d o n a n i n c o m e o f o v e r 1 1m i l l i o n d)rs ( £ 2 6 7 0 i n
1 9 2 8 a n d 1 9 3 0 , "£ 1 8 5 0 i n 1 9 . 3 8 . ) " ‘ .... II
-B- D i t t o - f o r o v e r - d r s 4 0 0 0 . 0 0 0 ( £ 1 0 7 0 ) i n 1 9 2 8 - a n r f - 1 9 3 0 r - d r o - 5 0 0 . 0 0 0 - f f : 9 2 5 ) ' - i n -- ;
C:
1938. i t i l i \ 1 i I -f— :— i— b
D i t t o for over drs 150.000 (£400) in 1928 and 1930, drs 280.000 (0520' in 1938
( C o l u m n , C i s m o r e i n d i c a t i v e o f h i g h - i n c o m e p e r s o n s , c o n s i d e r i n g 'b h n w i d e s p r e a d
- p r a c t i c e — o f - t a x — e v n c i o n — t h r o u g h - d e c l a r a t i o n ~ o f ~ p a r t ~ o f ^ i r r c n m e “ D n i y )T !--- :— 
I I II
. B u i l d i n 0 s . y i e l d i n g .on i n c o m e ( a c t u a l o r . t a x a h l ^ J o f o v e r . 5 0 , 0 0 0 . . d r s . ( 0 1 3 3 ) . J
f- n* , ‘ | i ' •t : P a s s e n g e r c a r s , A t h e n a
" F T ‘ .......... P i r a e u s ^ !” “ ■! : • . ' |'
0 : All motor-cars, total Brecce- (becomes non-significnnt after 1925, brcaiae of
______ p r e d o m i n a n c e ° f _ u t i l i t y m o t o r - c a r s )________
* J;
:H : P r i v a t e t e l e p h o n e s , t o t a l G r e e c e * .
*1 : N u n b e r o f s e r v a n t s , m a i d s e t c .
II
I i !1I I
•■ > I ! I I . i I • .I
: ; I I i : ! ■ ! I ! ;. ! ; i
I > i ; =• ' i !


RITISH
an
CÛ
IMAGING SERVICES NORTH
Boston Spa, Wetherby West Yorkshire, LS23 7BQ
www.bl.uk
BLANK PAGE IN ORIGINAL


o
• T A B L E XIII » DEVELOP:- !'¡T'•CF ROADS A’.D RAILWAYS
R s e s s s s ? e c 3 s tis B 9 t :e s s s s s :r s s s s s 8 s e B r ;e s s * e e 7 is s s s :B C a
I
1875
TRACK IN KH5
-ICCO +I0C0
l... » ...
I- h
... i
x.ii
xI
ii
KY.5 CF TRACK PER 10,000 S3.MILES
1880
1000+. •
.750-999
500-749
1
250-499
100-249
50-99
50-99
10-49
• 10-49
Greece
Dclniun •
n.'\j
Gnri-iny.f.'rtherlrnris »Saitzcrlcnd . .
Austria,Dcnn',Tk,FrTcci Italy
Cube,Portugal, Rournnia,Spain,Sweden
Chile,Trinidad,Turkey,Victorin
Jryn,0./chinad .
Alrjnrin,Tahiti • ’
*renntinn ,.~^ypt, Peru,S,*frica
10-49 { "■•’'•-de,Centn Picn, C r y , o~, Fin'-n-J
Indie, J;-,rnice, Prue. r r — y / I . P . V i o - *
Rur.r in," ,;-.rtrlir,
V x r r ilj'rxico
^erivn-t frer d-r+.n rcmt"’<ned Jn provir"«; Tabien r.rri freír !'cbnb
I "The A.-c of Cnnitn.V’ -r> 54-5 red 3D=i *
i ** T *
• YEAR ROADS,' RAIL, HILES^ MILES I
•' 1830 8
t
• 1852. 102 i
-■ 1
’ 1882 150 ; J11
18671 247 _ • 1.
’• 1372 312. . i
1882- 697 ; j
1883' i3 ;
1892 2043 " 540 : Dekin
• 1912 2380 , 950 ;
1921 4000 1478
Lew.''6
1927 6185 1603 . no 26
■' i
'1 K . •
i ' -1 - - ' . . . .
"Thn IJ-ificrticn ,..^" -p
Report, F.O Annual öerie3 1292,
nnd 32,


Footnotes - Table XIV
1 Mulhall, "Dictionary of Statistics", pp. 441 and 787.
2 Girard, "La Grèce en 1883", pp. 45 and 135.
3 Mulhall, ibid., p. 118.
4 Law£ Report, F.O.Annual Series 1893, p. 89./
5 Admiralty (Gt Britain) Naval Intelligence, "Handbook
of Greece", p. 170.
6 For Greece, figures from Law's Report of 1893, p.88
(years 1888 and.lS9l), and from Papagaryfallou, "0i
georgikoi...", p.80 (years 1901 and 1911). For all
other countries, figures from Mulhall, ibid.. pp.458ff.
Averages derived.


67
T A B L E XIV » STATE-DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS
1876 1881-06
6 3 1II.I4
* 03:55.0
1892
29.0
7.443d , 4 --
1696 1907
2d
11.2
50.0 4d
.I2_Î_î 86:13.0.___
23 ' 8 6 : 20.0
01:29.0
- 81:39.0
_I4
29
12.5
47.4
5--
5d
CIVIL SERVANTS:
U.K., total, ’ _
U.K., per 10.CEO po**ul.
Greece, total
Greece, per 10.000 -cpul.
POLICE-GENDARMERIE p/I0,G20
Ennl^~d
03:21.4 2d
Ireland
London
Paris
Greece
TELEGRAPH STATIONS IN I8B8, TOTAL AND PER 10,003 POPULATION
Germany 13,400
CO
•
f\l
GREECE ' 176 0.82 (1901:234/0.53
Belgium * 1,520 ; '2.59'
. . . ; 1911:642/2.23) 
Trance — 0,000 • •2.09 Roumanie 250. 0.67 *. ,.•. M .. ...
M.k 7,030 1.80 Servie lia 0.60
fondinovi« 1,560 1.79 Portuçnl’ 275 0.53
AVERAGE 1.43
- Saain .950- • 0.54 ...
Eu r o p e . Rjspia _ 3,7E0__ 0.43
Holland 600 1.37 Bjlgaria 106 0.34
Italy ' 4,nsn " 1.36" . . . . 
Austria-
Turkey
•5*240 
5T0 ...
•1.31
_i.in
1 • —— * ~ — ••— *** “ * ^ ■•


68
Footnotes - Table XV
1 Dakin, "The Unification...", p. 316
2 Mulhall, "Dictionary of Statistics", p. 72.
3 Law's Report, F.O. Annual Series 1893, p. 28.
4 Dakin, ibid.. p. 316, given as approx* by this author. ,
5 Dakin, ibid.. pp.316-19; no indication whether budget
figures are in gold francs or drachmas.
6 Dakin, ibid.. pp.316-19; average defence budget
excludes year 1885. •‘
7 Eleftheroudakis Encyclopaedia, Vol. "Hellas", p.452 for
1878 and 1879 (actual expenditure); Dakin, ibid.,p.319
for 1876 and 1S77 (budget, but probably quite near ac
-*tual expenditure, as suggested by comparing Dakin's
gures with the very similar ones reported by Andreades,
'"Ta dimossia oikonomika...", p.52; Andreades seems to
have been one of Dakin's sources.)
8 Eleftheroudakis Encyclopaedia, Vol."Hellas", p.452.
9 Law's Report, Table D.I.
10 Law's Report, Table D.IX. i .i
11 Statistical Yearbooks for 1930, p.377; 1933, p.350,
1937, p. 345.
KB. Averages for 1882-88 exclude 1885, for which figures
are given separately.
Averages for 1894-99 exclude 1897, as above.


! T A B L E XV t ARMED FORCES AND DEFENCE EXPENSES
é=>XBnB=s=3iBisii:Exz28ixrscircczekxess kc=z 3bbc=st2S==*a
I
1 army army, navy
TH ---- WAR - - T H -----' MEN FOOT- MEN
' ---- ING ... .... 
jld— r
- U - - _ ______.l
...___
I
; 14 2
*"i2 - k o l d
; 31___ _ __
31 85 2
2.9
I
1052 .
14.2 3
'4
YEARS DEFENCE ACTUAL ARMY NAVY
- -- .------- BUDGET“ EXPEND- BUDGET - -BUDGET~
MILL. OR OR - --- DRS —- ................... " EXPEND. " EXPEND.;
1840 ~ 6 .4 5 d * - - - : ---- - -- - “• r---- - ------
1858 - —. 6>5 ------------ - i - ■--4.9 , u o ^ - 1 .6 — "
1861 ^ 9 .0 . 7 .1 * :. 1 .9
65-69 9 .8 8,2i._L_ ■1 .7
1870 10.0 ■ a .o ; ‘ ■■2 .0 ' ' • 7 1 -7 4 —- 9 .2 • - - . • — - 7 .4 — -;
1'
f
CO•
H
1875 . 9 . 6 ________ .....7 .8 —L-LJ - 1 .8 :. 76-79 11.8 2 4 .47 9 .4 I_; " 2 .4 - ' 1880 75.3 5 0 .58 . . 64.2 l i . i • ! ! 1881 — 7 9 .3 "' 1 68.0 * 7 4 .O' , * 5 .3 -"77 1884 .... : •;
1885 58.8 ■ 5 5 .19 4 2 .l i ■
: ", 1 6 .7 82-86’ ........’ 2 6 .5 9d
82-88 - 26.96d --'2.9.5 64
6ut>Cr 1 .86-91
1889
. . . . - 26.510d .
1890 26.4Sd • : 18.4 Ï* ■* ■8.0
8U60 91-92 ' 23.4 ' r " ~ 17.2 4- 1 •6.2
1893 . 19.7 ; r .... . 14.6 r ! - 5,1 •
94-99 23.7 17.6 6.1
*- ' 1897 74.7 • 61.7 ' 13.0
1900 ■'2 5 .8 7 ; “ 7~ ' 18.0 "** ~7Vb '!'*; '
ARMY TH MEN
56:—T
I
53
70
.I
r—:
I « . 1 :' * - ì <
t
II
69
ARMY, NAVY YEARS DEFENCE ACTUAL ARMY NAVY À IR -F . MINISTRY OF
WAR — TH---- ----- - .—BUDGET "EXPEND.' BUDGET BUDGET '“ BUDGET*“ AGRICULTURE,
FOOT- MEN MILL. OR BR OR ACTUAL ING
1
~7~ - DRS ' '■- ' EXPEND* EXPEND. “ expen d ;* ■EXPENSES
1504 : “ n P " 1912 400 S4 ! - j
200
,I
‘I
J __ _ ‘
Ii
iI
2204 T ;
-leuLL..
I -li
— 14 :*
:_is !..
1920
: 2i .
r 22 
_23
-58.46 51.^3
lid U4-*
54.96 tup 3.50 47.86 * 3.37
1.63
2.65
lid
! ■ 26 : . . 30.10 24.91 5.19 1 3.04
— * ' * . • ......
1 « i ' 27 23.79 18.28 5.51 1 2.67
1 • —t—: , ~ r 18.22 * ’12.75;" 5.47 '” . - — »"’*'*** "'2.'29
r"|- i . ...29 - — 11.57 ... 8.64- 2.93 — -— --- 1.89
* 1 1930 i 16.77 2.0.31.. .4.65 . 1 . 8 1 ^ 2.80
'■ i ; ■ 3i ; ; 14.89 10.28 ■ 3.25 1.36 4.02 ■i— f-~
T ■7 " : 32 t *“ ;*‘ 18.36 ' 12:67"' 4,02 " 1.67 2.82
~~T 7- : -33 ■-T - • 18.49 •11.50 5.26 - "1.73 — 2.75
1 ' . 34 ' 13.80 13.66 3.55 .J. 1 .5 9 _ .3 ,1 7
' ' ' 35 ! i , 20.06 . 13.05 4.88 2 .1 3 : 3.38
, * n -T - "36 ‘
t i " : 31.38' "24.07* 5.01 ' ~ 2 .3 0 "*'"* 2.03
7 • 37 ,~j <-• 31.06 ■ 1 8 .2 3 - 7 .6 7 - 5.16 - 3.45
r.
—r
.
•i : • ' !'
I! ;
■ • ’ ; 1* • ■■ <
\• j
■i . i : '
j • 1 ".
t


70
Footnotes - Table XVI
1 I have retained the French grade-nomenclature, as in
the inter-war period the Greek armed forces were still
organised on the basis of the French system. Rough equi
valents -to pre-1926.English army/navy grades are: Gen
eral, Colonel, Commander, Captain, lieutenant Commander,
Lieutenant, Ensign.
*2 Andreades, "Les finances publiques...", pp.28-33. Values
of certain complementary earnings in kind by the officers
are not available and not included: value of cfaily food
rations in 1923-24, for example. They were about 15-35$
of salaries, the higher percentage applying to the lower
ranks. • '
*3 Kallitsounakis, "Legislation ôuvriêre...", pp.206-11.
Averages derived from daily or monthly earnings in 2-5
important categories of skilled labour in each industry.
1926 figures derived by augmenting 1925 averages by 17.5$,
therefore approximate. (Kallitsounakis reports increases
of 15-25$ over 1925.) Merchant marine figures are wage
averages for first, second, and third mechanics.
i


71
T A B L E XVI t AVERAGE EARNINGS, Armed F o r c e s , E x e c u t iv e & C i v i l S e r v i c e , J u s t i c e , I n d u s t r y (1911' .26)
;= I= n s z 2 6 n ic is s 3 3 I satt3Bfl5BSCa*c»*s5S**B
(monthly earnings, in drachmas-see next table for conversion t o indexed.drs end for indices) ----- — 
1 4 -1 6 1 6 -2 0 19 11 1914 ,1 9 2 0 ; i 9 2 I :; i 9 2 2 i . I 9 2 3 _ I 9 2 4 1925 _ 1926
750 _1000-r
590 580 :
440 440
'310 "'300"
180 — 210.
160 1 '190
110 140
-1500- 1950.
1000' 1300
! 800 1080
•-( ! 600 877
----- .--500 •— 700
45.0
325
630
455
2878-6800..
2026 5200
1663 '4400
‘1371 '3600'
-1213 -3200;
_1092 _2800_
'823 ^2000
6324
4836 ,
- • •- •'T“ 4092 ;
3348 v
2976:
2604 ;
1860 ‘
7624
613 6_
5392
4548"
3976
3604
2760
800 '1500 ;
480 "1200~ T
I!
i1
400 -i 900
240
110
900
eon
220
: 650 ;
- 525— — *"T 1
"i48
-131
_116_
;160.
*250
;179
1200
'386
525
_231_
732
600
475
433.
400
250 I ' ■ j ,
■ •‘ » !
•. 11 .. '697
— -— :----- r? 97
' " 437
3000
¿000 "
1600
t
1000
'70 0
"*960
— 891
■750
8800
"5500“ T r ‘■I
-4400— -— |
_2640 ; ;
!1320
.88O0 Î 9900 ,
983
-696...I
1410
HT»no
-1200
...933
6050j 8250 , , i .
--4950p 7150 -j-; - -
...4850 j. 5225 ;
3000 j 3850 !
— -------- 1 -<---r-
1I
■I (
1400 "l590 ~1770 2080
-1531— 1701— 2062 • 2422
_9..1Z__1.3.5.0__l625__ 12QSL
,1767 '2000 L 2367 I2781
r2n00"~225Cr, 2500 \ 2938
*1558 17921*2000 _l_2350'
114 _182ü[_2067-i-2428
; ; • ; |J | , ;
rG-eneral — — •—>— * 
Colonel ____ _ ____ t_
Commandant •.
Capitaine ' , j
Lieutenant... — - — --
1Sous-Lieutenant ___
Adjudant 1 !
Minister
Director of Ministry
Supervisor of-Min.dpt. — ~
Secretary _ .... _..... _i.._
Clerk
............. a .
President,Cour de Cassation
Members • •
Conseillers, Cour d*;Anpel '
Juges de Ire instance
Juges de paix
*3d Skilled labour, averages
-Mechanics
--Building -industry - : T"
_-.Çh_emicül_in.dus±ry_J_______ _
-Textile
-Food industry 1
-Misc. technicians“ .... 7
-Merchant-morine engineers _
,1


72 Q
Footnotes - Table XVII
N B .1 Comparison of 1923-1926 figures with 1921 and 1922 shows substantial retrogression of real labour earn ings. The same applies to officers' salaries in 1914 and 1920-23. Both these findings should be seriously qualified, labour earnings sky-rocketed during 1921 and 22 because of the acute shortages caused by the war. The gallopping inr flation not only was an argument in favour of wage increa ses, but also obscured the relationship between wages and prices. One can safely say that the increases given in 1921 and 22 were anticipatory rather than compensatory. As such they should be considered as having caused a change that was serious, but less dramatic than suggested by the indices' sharp rise and fall. The real basis for comparison is 1914, which indicates relative stability of labour earn ings in the long term. (Whether this stability, especially as seen against the immense profits of business, was just or hot is another matter. It undeniably suggests that the pattern of distribution of increased national income had become much more unfavourable for labour by the end of the period.) As for the officers’ salaries, the increase in 1914 and the consistent fall until 1923 are somewhat misleading. The initial increase was not only some kind of compensation for the victories in the 1912-13 Balkan Wars, but also an anticipatory incentive born of Venizelos' irreden tist dream. As for the sharp fall in 1921-23, this is not as significant, because the figures do not account for spe cial salaries paid to the participants of the Asia Minor campaign.
WB.2 This Table is based on Table XVI; conversions and in dexing having been calculated on the basis of Table I.
As I was unable to find labour earnings for 1914, and to make comparison possible, I had to compromise and derive ap proximate 1914 earnings from the existing 1914-16 averages. Based on a price-index increase from 100 in 1914 to 117 in 1915, and 159 in 1916, I assumed that labour was able to ob tain an average increase of 2Q>% during 1916. It is highly improbable that within 1916 labour had the time to appre ciate the full impact of the 1916 price increases and raise its demands accordingly. (This is not necessarily so for the years that followed, with labour having meanwhile experienced the first two years of inflation and employers operating un der conditions of inflationary demand within a war economy, when their first priority must have been production at all costs to meet these more or less inelastic conditions.) To find the 1914 basis, I reduced the 1914-16 averages by half of the assumed increases, presuming the other half already included in the 3-year average — the latter being a figure
Í
iven in the sources and therefore including part of the nflationary effects of this period.


I J L B - L _ ! =_=x y n = :
14-16 I9TI 1914
AVERAGE_INDEXEQ_EARNINGS^ (Armed F o r c e s ,'Executive' $. Civil Service, Justice,^ Industry (1911
1920 1921 1922 1923- 1924 1925 1926 • : I
.-26)
750__ 100Q_
580
377 307 : 244 551
590
*440 '" 440 "
-310--— 300
* 1 B 0 __ _210_
'160 . 190
riicr_h “i40"'
j--- — i-iOO
! ; 100
: 251" 204 i ' 172 ' 421
7 201' 170 j- 141 356
. -- Ì51.-- -138 1 . 116 ...'. 291
126' 110 1 103 259
, . 113, 99 ,
if
I 92 ,
227
r”: 8 2 . 1 7 2 r i70" - 162
467
376
330
Colonel «
I
Commandant"
447
342
2 ie?'
237 !-279'— ’2.Capitaine 'I 210
184
132
General price-indexed drs
-1- - ■ 1 I_ n _
II
243 ! Liutenant
221
169
II
!I
- -J.
Sous-Lioitenant !
Adjudant;'] j ; j-"-"
1-37*7- .30,7 - I 24,4 .155*1 44.7 ■ 46.7 ..INDEX, ;Generali .
69.2
100
" 100“
-ion
44.2 36.7 ' 30.7 76.2 6 U 9
.......... •'-t I ; . r : •■ : 1 55.7 49.6. 44.4 lli;o 90.1 106.1 ' "
IT Col-Command,ever
Cnp-Lieut.-S.Lieut.' aver
'58.6 '*5174 " : 50.0 115.7 " 94.3 120.7'" 'Adjudant
• I • • • Iì , I I ** •• -48.9 — 41.9— — 3 6 . 3 — ¡90 J3^- J3.4 --84.4 ^ ____ AL.ybrades_except.general and_Adjudant
000 
I
.480 _
400
-y ~ ~ 2 4 0
-¿— -110
' 100
427
341 _
256'
171
• 63 
67 :
- i — t-rTU-r
M'
j_445_
356
7*214
ii
—. ..
'1
1
j ),
II
900
650
525,
400
2 50.
loo.
.472.
314
107
— i— .-Minister.— .. 
~ -I*I
. j. ,price-indexed, .drs
I Director' of Ministry ■i i
Supervisor of Min.dpt.
:91.2 r i ■' r •
Secretary j
■Clerk ¡ [ M M
*I r r
— ir
713
252 ;
157
490
401
700. i: 583
i INDEX, ALL nrades 'except1 President, ,(1914=»100) '
T : 7 ;*j ~““' |
President, Cour do Cassation price-ind. drs _i
393 
110
45.6
243_
183.7
506
370
272
II I.!
Members !■ ■, . ! , . i , i . . j . I. Conseillers, Cûur d 'Appel • 0
-Juges de' Ire Instance --; f- •
Juges de' paix
i ._
_ tl_
94.0 INDEX, ALL nrades except President, (1914=100) ; I
1 4 8 ' (118) 1 7 5 1 5 1 !1
131 : ! 1:
i :(105) , . ' 200, 140 i
“llü ! ! ' . "(93) 110 110 r
160 1 , '(128) 1 147' 222 !
2 5 0 : ■ : : ' (200) ; •; i 1 1
i 220 '
179 ! ; . (143) 175 189 1
'2 0 0 - ! j
i l ! 1 T - ’- ( l 6 0 ) ' - - ’- '----- - 1 4 7 "
■-»■— T—I ; , ...îoo_____ .. . 1 5 4 , 5 . 1 2 5 * 3
119 129 : 125 127 1 M e c h a n i c s ,1* price-ind. drs
,130 ; 144 ; 146
79— 1— 109-'— 115
148 Building industry ii -117- Chemical ■:i i 170 Textile
industry
180
*144
149
Food industry j | '
Mise, technicians :
; 169; ; 182 | ■177
{ 132'" Ï45'r ’Ï41
' i ■ ■' ' •; ! •-119- • 147 *-¡146 149 i-Merchant: marine engineers;
..^94.8 io.7.5.10J.4 109.3 INDEX» j.AVERAGE, ..ALL •CATEGORIES _----J
mmVm. !r
T
ii — L.


74
3. Economie and Social Structures, their Nature and
Relationships
Alongside the embryonic capitalism which was centred on
Greece's primitive industrial sector, and the quasi-feudalism
that prevailed in certain regions, there were strong traits of
another mode of production which was clearly more vigorous and
*34
dominant throughout Greece as a social formation. Most of
these traits reflected the pre-capitalist functioning of the
peripheral economy and its connection with the foreign centres
of capitalist domination.lThe predominantly agricultural pro
duction was not all absorbed by subsistence needs, taxes and .
tithes; a substantial part of it was directed towards the mar
ket." There was also some production of raw materials, mainly
minerals for export. The capital market was relatively de
veloped, but its best clients were the State and the peasantry.
Both its sectors, big banking and private money lending, were
based on usury. The productive equipment and the organisation
al structures of the economy, the 'means and relations of pro
duction', were not geared to the secondary, industrial sector
but rather to the tertiary, commercial arid financial sector.^
They were centred on trade and banking networks, and fed produc
tion and surplus into two channels : to foreign centres of dom
ination, mainly via the diaspora traders, and to the growing
Greek towns, mostly via the local merchants.
This dominant mode, essentially oriented towards the ter-
tiary sector, cannot by definition be called capitalist; and to
consider it as the peripheral adjunct of the capitalism already do
inant in the West would merely change the angle of observation
without solving the problem. It would simply transpose the ana 
lysis from the level of the local society, defined by certain eco
nomic and cultural integration and mainly by its formal sovereigi
ty in international politics, to that of a global capitalist sys
tem, defined by the structure of international political and eco
nomic relations. Such transposition is an undeniably useful ana


75
lytical practice, allowing a better understanding of the interac
tion between the local and the international systems, but it does
not illuminate what happens at grass-roots level within the local
economy and society, however peripheral these may be.
The dominant mode was then one of simple commodity produc
tion and may be called mercantile or.comprador pre-capitalism.
The term has two advantages. Firstly, it signifies that the dom
inant class element was not the producer but the merchant; second
ly, it stresses the system's inherent potential to evolve towards
capitalism. In fact, the future role of mercantile profits great
ly depends on the merchants' conception of this role. When the
most imaginative and enterprising among them are aroused by the
desire for further profits, their money is instantly baptised •
liquid capital and their hoard becomes accumulation. The conse
quent investment in the secondary sector is another step in the
1C transition towards capitalism.
The chosen terra does not suggest a strict theoretical categ
orisation. It simply defines limits and draws guidelines for dis
cussion. One of its most important roles, for example, is to
constantly emphasise that the dominant mode in 1864-1910 Greece
was not capitalist. Conversely, the term does not suggest that
conditions within the Greek mode precisely matched an 'ideal type',
a model, simply because it does not refer to conditions generally
observable or obeying empirically established laws. All notions
defy their terms, of course, but the notion of mode of production
is one of the most defiant. It is difficult not to reify it and
to simply take it for what it is: an analytical tool. It would
thus be naive to try and fit Creek pre-capitalism into any pre
conceived model -- to compare it with that of England, for example,
merely because there were certain similarities in mercantilist
traits.- Greek pre-capitalism cannot be classified using the yard
stick of western European history and the concomitant dichotomy
between conformity and non-conformity with the related models.
But the models of the metropolis-periphery type are not sufficient


76
either. Less naive than citing the English example but equally
misleading would be to compare Greek pre-capitalism with that of
Mexico because the economies of both countries functioned in a
similarly peripheral manner.
On the other hand, unconditioned empiricism can be somewhat
sterile, especially in attempts to synthethize: there is indeed
some need for a model, provided that it is not used rigidly and
that it has precise and historically shaped contours. The Balkan
countries are a group clearly distinct from western societies by
'their very different historical development. It was not only
their common Byzantine past, their Christian cultures and their"
centuries-long submission to the peculiarities of the Islamic so
cial and economic system; it was also that they did not emerge
as sovereign States and as geographically distinct social systems
until the 19th century. Their appearance thus coincided with, and
was partly the effect of, the advent of a new state of affairs in
Europe and the world. A new international equilibrium was making
itself felt after the Napoleonic upheaval; a ttew world economy
was emerging, with the triumph of capitalism, out of the depths
of the industrial revolution; .and a new pattern of internal so
cial equilibrium was being established throughout Europe in the
wake of the 1848-1851 revolutions. The birth of the new Balkan - 
countries was thus very different from that of their western coun
terparts. Extensive empirical research on the Balkans may, there
fore, provide the theoretical model for a less schematic classific. *-»7
ation of Greece. ■ ■ , ‘ . .
A final point of caution: it should be stressed, without '
further comment at this moment, that the conditions of mercantile
pre-capitalism were still.dominant in Greece during the years pre
ceding the 1909 coup, despite the undeniable but very insufficient
development achieved in the period 1864-1909. The emergence of a
few factories could not make the system 'more' capitalist, especial
ly as capitalism is not really measurable in degrees; nor was it
sufficient to displace mercantile pre-capitalism and establish
capitalism in the dominant position.


77
4. Greece's Failure to Industrialise
The discussion and the figures presented so far in this
chapter indicate a peculiar inability of Greece to profit from
the titanic economic progress of her western European neighbours
in the golden age of capitalism, the third quarter of the 19th
century. ‘What is more, this inability persisted throughout the
last quarter also. Curiously enough, Greek historiography does
not treat these conditions as peculiar. Some historians simply
ignore this failure, others attribute it almost exclusively to
foreign economic domination. Although this discussion is con
cerned less with the causes of this failure than with one of its
effects — the weakness of the local middle class — a very brief
commentary on the causes will be helpful to the basic argument.
The point of view that overlooks Greece’s failure as of pre
sumably little importance, is refuted by the above figures them- ;
selves. It needs only to be added that it is wrong to consider
Greece’s very slow development as some kind of midget's growth,
in some convenient application of*Euclidian analogy. Strict •
analogies are seldom useful in the evaluation of conditions as
comprehensive as capitalist growth. It is not that Greece’s eco
nomic development became less capitalist or less advanced than
that of the West, as rather that she did not develop at all into
a capitalist society and that the dominant system of economic and
social structures did not transcend the boundaries of pre-capit
alism.
The standpoint that attributes this failure to foreign eco
nomic domination deserves more attention. To some extent, with
certain qualifications 'and seen in conjunction with other factors,
at is not unfounded. Yet its alleged causal preponderance or even
■uniqueness is an error. Other factors must also be taken into ac
count, and of these the most crucial seem to be the effects of the
1873-1896 international economic depression, and the role of rail
way construction in Greece. 39


78
The country’s development in the 19th century could not, of
course, parallel that of her advanced European neighbours. Her
site and population in the 1850s and 1860s, her backwardness, her
almost exclusively agricultural economy made it inevitable she
should lag behind.' Political factors too were extremely unfavour
able.: Before 1864 there was the acute strife that ended with the
revolt against King Otho and his fall. During the entire 1850 to
1873 period of international boom, the Greek parties and parlia
mentary regime were suffering from teething pains. The State
was sadly unorganised, banditry flourished, and illiteracy was
the rule and even plagued the ranks of the administration. Yet"
these conditions inevitably lost some of their force with time,
and the country could in the end have profited from at least the
side effects of the boom. . By the time Greece was ready for this,
however, the rest of the world was well over the 1850-1873 boom
and had plunged into the great 19th-century depression. Further
more, the model of development then chosen for Greece, an imita
tion of the western one with primitive emphasis'on railways, was
inadequate for this country. That emphasis, in interplay with the
depression, thereafter became the major cause of Greece's failure
to develop in this period.
The myth of the Greek railroads is an ironic cautionary tale.
The first phase of construction (1880-1890) began almost as a
guilt reaction to the country's delay in joining the cult, and >
has always been advanced as the almost unquestionable sign of
Creece’s transition to some kind of capitalism. Yet in many re
spects the railways’ utility in the transition process was doubt
ful, if not completely negative. Their total mileage (under 750
in 1890, about 850 in 1909) indicates that the investment injec
tion was insufficient to create conditions for take-off into cap
italism. But even a larger investment would have been almost as
useless. Railway construction could not be a stimulus for indus
trial suppliers of construction and operation material if they
were non-existent, nor was it an effective incentive for estab
lishing such .industries in a small country which had no iron or
coal. This contrasts sharply with other countries where railroad


79
construction functioned as a vital factor in the capitalist trans
formation, more so because of its side effects on industrialisa
*40 tion than because of utility in transport.
»
The coincidence of the international economic depression,
then, prevented Greece from enjoying even such meagre benefits
from railroad construction as her backwardness would have allowed.
In fact, these benefits only contributed to moderating and prob
ably delaying the country's experience of the depression. They
served as a policy of reflation through fiscal expenditure in pub
lic works, Premier Trikoupis' unintentional New Deal. They played
the role of reflating an economy crippled by depression and not,
as in the West a few years earlier, the beneficial, mildly infla
tionary role of massive investment in a period of euphoria.
Even in the transport sector itself the contribution of the
railroad to Greece's development was not decisive, partly because
there were two widths .of. track within the same network, mainly be
cause the railway was built somewhat frivolously to serve mostly
coastal areas. Competition from shipping might have been less se
vere a threat had the period been one of economic boom; it be
came a major handicap in the conditions of acute crisis which had
created a cut-price war in the maritime transport market.
This is only one of the areas where the railroads had a neg
ative effect. For if competition with shipping was harmful to
them, it was even more so to shipping. The railways were compet
itors of the Greek merchant marine not only in their everyday op
eration, but also by the very fact of their being built. Their
construction consumed immense investment funds which might other
wise have been employed in the shipping sector. It was there
that Greece had some kind of comparative advantage. For the reju
venation of Greek shipping would not be based on tradition only.
Its other mainstays would be its powerful potential clients and
fund-purveyors, the diaspora entrepreneurs with the international
Merchant and finance activities.42


«30
Total Greek"tonnage had remained generally stable for
about half a century until well into the 1900s, with a drop from
360,000 to 300,000 tons between 1866 and 1876. This was in the
middle of a thirty-year period of immense progress in the rest of
the world. From 1850-1880, Britain increased her steamship ton
nage by 1,600JS, the rest of the world by about 440$. The star
ting point for the growth represented by these percentages was
'j'very nearly the steamers* first appearance, which accounts for
the high figures. Nevertheless, compared with Greece's lamentable
record they do acquire some significance. In 1875, by the end of
the boom period, this formerly great maritime country had a mere
23 steamships totalling 13,000 tons. Thus, Greece failing to in
vest in shipping in the 1850s and investing in railroads in the
1880s instead, is as if Belgium had failed to invest in railroads
and industry in the 1850s and '60s and tried desperately to devel
op its merchant fleet in the 1880s.
This tale of wrong choices remains exactly the same if we
look at the more specific aspects of the subject. For example,
• the effects which' the obsolescence of the sail had on the inter
national competitiveness of the Greek merchant fleet could have
been delayed had part of the obsolete equipment and the crews been
re-employed in the internal transport market which was progressing
fairly well during that period. This would have been feasible
only in the absence of competition from a coastal railway network.
That in the circumstances it was not possible not only fed unem-.
ployment, but also had a serious side effect with far-reaching ,
consequences: this unnecessary obsolescence suddenly and sharply
devalued a great part of what little capital the local middle class
had accumulated and invested in shipping, and drastically reduced
its profit potential. It is mainly for this reason that the most
promising sector of the Greek economy and the most vigorous sec
tion of the local bourgeoisie were condemned to a long period of
hibernation.
In the above circumstances it'is not surprising that nearly
a century later, in 1975, the total railtrack mileage had reached
only 1,600 although the country had meanwhile doubled in size, ’


quadrupled its population, and had about fifty to seventy times
the income of 1890; that the railroad companies were always in
the red and often went bankrupt, not just because of the inter
nationally-felt reasons for railroad failure, but mainly because
of the above specifically Greek conditions; and that the Greek
governments of the 20th century did not pursue the development of
the railroad, precisely because it had proved neither a' socially
profitable transport system nor a stimulus for local industry. As
for the heroic age of Greek railway construction in the 1830s,
that alleged mark of the country's transition to capitalism, it
simply contributed to ever heavier foreign economic dominance
through increase in the public debt and, finally, to the 1893 .
State bankruptcy.^
5. The Alleged Conflict between Middle Class and Landowners
With the emergence of some npw manufacture in the 1864-1890
period, the statistical image of Greece underwent considerable
change, but these statistics should be properly weighted. L’ndcubt
edly the 1866-89 increase in the number of factories from 29 to
145, corresponding to approximately 500%, was impressive. Simil
arly, given a base of only three or four factories in the 1830s,
the increase by the 1880s was over 4,000$. It is a fundamental if
common error in development statistics to overlook the possible
irrelevance of the base, the starting point. The significance of
the data here is near zero; all that can be said unequivocally is
that, taking into consideration Greece had meanwhile greatly in
creased in area and nearly doubled its population, Greek industry
was at almost as primitive a stage in the 1890s and 1900s as it
had been in the 1870s.*46
This mediocre progress had nonetheless been the basis of mis
interpretations which run counter the present argument. Based on
an -evolutionist classification, they see Greek industrialisation
and the Greek.bourgeoisie as fundamentally similar to those of any
other society, and claim that the said mediocre development marked
the beginning of a period of conflict between industrialists on
the one side and landowners or merchants on the other.
If, to begin with, the difference between the English and the
French landlords was great, the difference between them and the


Creek landlords was immense. It is not only a difference of histor
ic periods, or the lack of a strictly feudal past in the Greek
case, or of a typically feudal organisation of production, or the
fact that two-thirds of the landowners were heterocthones. These
overall conditions generated specific effects which made the rela
tionship between the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie much
less antagonistic than in the typical western case. It is these
s effects which are of intèrest to this discussion because they de
jfine the limits of political strife between these two classes.
Political power was not monopolised or even held by the landed
aristocracy, as will be explained in detail below. The institutions
chosen for the new Creek State had transcended this type of rule,
somewhat prematurely, and put in its place the complex system of
indirect dominance characteristic of democratic bourgeois politics.
Yet even this indirect dominance was not enjoyed by the landowners
alone, but by the bourgeoisie as well. If there had been an assault
of the bourgeoisie against the landowners, therefore, its primary
objective would not .have been a political power'that was already
theirs', though indirectly and partially,' particularly as the insti
tutions were already bourgeois. Instead, its first objective would
have been to deprive the landowners of their economic power and,
therefore, of their position as one of the economically dominant
social groups — assuming, of course, that there were conflicting
interests between these two classes.
The government's external trade policy was the one issue that
could have provoked a struggle of the industrialists against other
sections of the bourgeoisie or against the landowners. A protec
tionist policy, for instance, would have favoured industrialists
and harmed merchants. This hypothetical case can easily be exclu
. ded. Importers' interests and their group were then so marginal,
and the country so short of foreign currency, that this could
hardly become a major political issue; in fact, there are no signs
that it ever was one.
The other potential area of conflict might have been pro
tectionist policy-on basic agricultural products, seen as favour
•* A.H
ing the landowners against the industrialists. The period did
in fact see a succession of conflicting governmental policies on


such issues: the 18S0s' policy of protectionism for agriculrur:’
production of Trikoupis contrasted with the free-trade policy 1..1- .
lowed someyears earlier by the Koumoundouros governments.
Neither of these, however, was necessarily the result of a
struggle between landowners and manufacturers. If it had exis
ted, such strife would certainly have found expression in opposing
parliamentary lobbies, which does not seem to have been the case.
Besides,'and much more importantly, the thirty-odd industrialists
°f the 1860s, or the hundred or so of the 1880s, did not need to
form a lobby to protect their interests. In a political world
dominated by particularistic, petty individual strife, each one
of them could much more practically use his connections to obtain
some made-to-order tariff protection in his own favour, rather
than try by means of lobbying to impose an overall government pol
icy of free trade in agricultural produce. In any case, his ad
vantages from the latter would be only indirect and very doubtful.
Free trade in agricultural produce would supposedly result in
lower food prices and thus in a lower cost of living for the labour
force, in lower wages, and in reduced costs for the industrialists
m question. These indirect and uncertain advantages to the indus
trialist. were insignificant compared-to the immediate hard-cash
Profits obtainable through a specific protectionist tariff in fa
vour of his own products — a privilege which, as already mentioned,
was not too difficult to acquire in the primitive political con- .
ditions then prevailing in Creece. .
Even if it were accepted that Trikoupis over-protected local
agriculture to the detriment of the industrialists' interests, this
in itself would not prove the policy was imposed by an aggressive
landowners' lobby. This would have been in flagrant contradiction
to Trikoupis' consistent effort to promote industrialisation by
attracting diaspora capital, a subject on which he preached repeat
. . 49 **• edly to his fellow MPs. There is much evidence that he believed
in liberal economics as much as in industrialisation, and if he
failed it was simply because this is a difficult marriage, especi
ally in backward societies. There is no convincing evidence that
he wished.to support the landowners against the industrialists
That such an explanation fits the pattern common in Marxist ar.aly


84
sis is undeniable, but that it fits Trikoupis' policies is doubt
ful. A simpler explanation is that he wanted to raise money, save
foreign currency, and especially to promote the country’s self
sufficiency in wheat — the very reasons he himself gave. Autarky
in particular was then not only an internationally fashionable
slogan, but also a natural government concern within an undevel
oped economy'and an imperative need for a country constantly pre
paring for a long-term irredentist war.
The main factor determining the government's trade policies
was, however, the state of the world market for wheat. Whatever
the landowners or industrialists might have said, Premier Koumoun
douros would have been mad to impose duties on wheat during the
1867-69 period of international shortages and famines, when pro
duction of wheat was still very low in Creece. Conversely, before
and during the application of Trikoupis’ protective policies,
three basic factors brought radical changes * Creece acquired
Thessaly, one of the largest wheat-producing regions in the Balkans
the world was entering on the great agricultural depression of • 
1870-80; finally, the country was beginning to experience an acute
shortage of foreign currency and simply- could not afford to spend
it on cereals.
In conclusion, Trikoupis’ policy may have favoured the land
owners , but was not and could not be generally harmful to the Greek
industry of that period. Its effects could be considered detrimen
tal only.on the basis of two assumptions. The first, as already
mentioned, is that a protectionist policy for agricultural produc
tion generates .higher cereal prices and therefore higher subsis
tence coSts for the labour force and thus causes increased wage
costs harmful to the industrial interests. .The second assumption
is that industrialists aim at exports rather than the internal mar
ket, in which case a policy of high agricultural prices would mean
higher costs and prices of their industrial products too, and thus
reduced competitiveness in the international market.
The first assumption is simplistic, the second is false. To
presuppose that wages follow the price of bread and the workers'
subsistence costs is mechanistically playing at Marxist economics.
Moreover, when this assumption is without further qualification


85
applied to Marxist sociological analysis, it defeats basic
rules of the very theory it is supposed to serve: it does not allow
for certain facts which become evident only in a comprehensive
analysis of a society as whole. There is the economic fact, for
instance, that whatever cost reduction is achieved by an abolition
of tariffs may well be pumped not into the workers' budget through
lower food prices, but rather into the merchants' pockets, depend
ing on the degree of monopoly prevailing in the specific market; in
this case, where is the industrialists' profit? Conversely, if lo
cal industry is oriented towards the production of basic goods with
highly inelastic demand, this may result in the industrialists ac
tually supporting measures which increase the cost of these goods
without reducing total consumption, since higher.costs mean also
higher profits. In such a case, the local industrialists might end
up supporting a policy of higher subsistence costs and higher wages
because it augments their volume of profits; and the only industria
lists who would be harmed by this would be those selling non-basic
goods, local and foreign.
As for the second assumption, it will suffice to say that, at
least until the beginning of the 20th century, the primitive Greek
industry was almost exclusively oriented towards the internal mar
ket. It could not have been otherwise in a world ravaged by depres
sion until the turn of the century.
##* '
The above discussion' has shown the absence of conflict over
specific issues such as might have arisen within given socio-econo
mic structures. The question remains, however, whether these struc
tures, and especially the system of landownership, could themselves
have been an issue of struggle.
In essence, the bourgeoisie did not need to deprive the land
owners of their economic power, seeing that this power was not
antagonistic but frequently complementary to the bourgeois economic
interests. "The middle class had not yet developed a substantial


66
industrial sector and a long-term oriented entrepreneurial men
tality. There was no urgent need, therefore, for a large inter
nal market which could have been formed only by a relatively pros
perous peasantry or, in other words, through measures contrary to
the landowners' interests and, ultimately, through land reform.
Whilst the middle class was not interested in imposing land
reform on the landowners, they in their turn did not fanatically
oppose it either, at least as seen from a long-term perspective.
Most of them had bought land from the Greek State or from the Tur
kish landlords at very low prices. Not only the heterocthones but
also the indigenous owners were very often absentee landlords,-i■l.
with an economic mentality not much different from the prevailing
comprador ideology. Not unexpectedly, then, the argument around
land reform was soon transferred from the area of property prin
ciples to that of indemnity prices.
For many landowners it was not the form of economic power
that mattered, but its essence. None of them conceived the bour
geoisie as a potential threat to their economic power, whatever
its form. As long as they might keep their holdings, the interests
of the comprador middle classes did not conflict with their own,
as has already been explained. If, on the other hand, they were
to lose their land, the resultant indemnity would have to come out
of funds derived not from a non-existant income tax, but from indi
rect taces, and would thus be a burden not for the bourgeoisie but
for the lower classes. .What reason then for the bourgeoisie to
oppose the landowners' indemnity interests? Supposing those same
indirect taxes were not levied or not used to pay the indemnities,
then they would either remain in the hands of the lower classes,
or return to them in the form of some kind of social policy. Such
outcomes might have interested an industrial middle class in need
of developed local markets, but not the pre-1909 merchants and
mining speculators. They, quite significantly, would much rather


see these funds transferred into the hands of the landowners
where they would serve, at least partly, to finance their own
comprador activities.
87
This economic argument is confirmed by the actual political
practices of the time. In the whole of. the 1864-1909 period
there are no signs that economic policy, tariffs and land reform
were consistently seen as means to enlarge the market for local
industry. The sporadic bursts of interest for or against some
tariff protection or other, to be found in the press or parlia
mentary discussions of the period, are not sufficient to prove
the existence of a sustained conflict that would eventually cause
a struggle among the upper classes. Likewise the tergiversations
on these problems by the parties, with the exception of Trikou
pis1 personal policies, show a lack of consistent strong conflicts
between landowners and bourgeoisie, or the parliamentary lobbies
that might have represented the interests of these classes.


88
P A R T II
IDEOLOGY, POLITICS AND MILITARY INTERVENTION
Chapter C
POLITICS AND POWER
1. The Relative Autonomy of Politics against Class Structure
and Social Conflict — Historical Background
The examination in this chapter of the political practices
throughout the 1864-1909 period will show a section of Greek pol
itics across,, not along class lines. By way of a working hypo
thethis — for the subject is immense- — it may be said that one
of the primary causes of this autonomy of politics from the class
structure was the absence in the past of consistency and depth
of class conflict in Greek society. Such outbursts of social up
heaval as occurred under Turkish rule were sporadic. Not that
economic conditions favouring conflict were absent, far from it.
But the length and the peculiarities of Ottoman rule created cer
tain social and ideological conditions unknown in western socie
ties which mitigated the development of class conflict. It will
help the subsequent argument to mention them at least in summary
fashion.
The most important of.these conditions was the effect of
Ottoman rule on the economic activities and the social action of
the Greek mercantile classes. Their outward, indeed cosmopolitan
orientation in.business was a successful attempt to avoid the in
security and economic stagnation caused by Islamic absolutism,
and had the somewhat unexpected result of making a typical con
flict with the landowning class almost meaningless. This was not
only because the economic activities of the middle class were
mostly mercantile and outward-looking, but also because they were
inexorably condemned to. remain so. If insecurity and sluggish


89
growth prospects were compromising conditions for bourgeois in
terest in local trade, they were nearly prohibitive for any large
scale involvement in local manufacture. It is not by chance that
much of the growth in manufacture and shipping during the 18th
century was based on a peculiar brand of Greek corporatism and not
on the typical individualistic initiative of capitalist entrepre
neurs. Finally, the Christians had acquired a status similar to
that of the big Muslim landholders under the political shadow of
these same masters, the Turkish overlords. Kot surprisingly, the
commonality of economic interests between these two sections of
the landowning class, Muslim and Christian, created a bond the
merchant class was unable to break. The entrepreneurial bourgeoi
sie of the empire contained but very few Muslims, if any, whereas
the Turkish landowning class was even in the days of its decadence
a vital part of the Islamic administrative and military system.
The conditions for the typical conflict between landowners and
bourgeoisie were thus almost absent in the Greek case, as the in
terests of these two classes were in most cases complementary
rather than opposed.
The other condition displacing social conflict was ideologi
cal and affected the social action not only of the middle classes,
but also and mainly of the peasantry. It was the confusion caused
by the overwhelming power of the alien conqueror whose rule, by
extending over four long centuries, had made his social order ap
pear as an almost irrevocable fate. In the absence of conflict
between landowners and bourgeois — a conflict which in other so
cieties served as a catalyst for the ideology of all classes and,
until the 18th century, lack also of the other‘catalyst, nation
alism — this confusion could flourish freely among the peasant
ry, a class which seldom develops consistent and revolutionary ac
tion on its own initiative. Thus the Christian population of the
Creek provinces did not clearly distinguish between religious and
social oppression, foreign rule and landowning rights of the mas
ters. The landlord's exploitation of the peasant, or the Sultan's
arbitrary measures hindering the merchant's activity, could often


90
be interpreted as the deeds of infidel and alien masters or, at
most, of local traitors. First religion and later nationalism
had blurred the borderlines between social conflict and religious
or national strife. It seems that even when these conflicts
reached their climax in the 1821 revolution, the•borderlines still
remained confused though the nationalist element was preponder
ant. This preponderance was, after all, dictated also by prac*51
tical considerations of unity against the greatest common enemy.
Two well-known interpretations of the Greek revolution are
based, roughly, the one on the notion of bour|eois revolution,
the other on that of the peasants' uprising.^ These Marxist
views are not much less rigid than are those of the non-Marxist
historians who insist on the purely nationalist nature of the rev
olution. .The strength of the nationalistic element in the revolu
tionaries' ideology, as expressed in declarations and official or
unofficial statements, is undeniable. However, the circumstance
that the landowners and the other members of the local leadership
under the Turks, in short the rroestoi. did not-lead it or even
give it their support, at any rate initially, shows that a cleav
age along class lines did exist even on the nationalist issue. It
is a very plausible hypothethis, however, that ideologically any
way this was a nationalist revolution and that certain class con
flicts existed as undercurrents, thus simultaneously allowing and
undermining the provisional alliance of the classes. This very
broad alliance would embrace the peasantry, the local middle class
including the shipowners, and finally the progressive and idealist
elements of the diaspora middle class. The civil wars that erup
ted during the revolution, and especially the first one (1824),
indicate both the existence and the fragility of this alliance.
Another important level of alliance was a regional one. Again,
its existence and fragility are strongly implied by the second
civil war, this one fought on the grounds of geographical differ
ences. To label it a class struggle because of the shipowners'
dominance in one of the opposing regions, the islands, would be ,
an oversimplification. Creece was not a unified and well-defined
social entity; the social and economic structures in the islands


91
were radically different from those of the Pelopor.nese; there
was no direct conflict of class interest between the shipowners
and the Peloponnesian population; and the civil strife was an
essentially regionalist struggle based on cleavages and allian
ces between individuals and cliques striving for power.
The war of independence gave birth to a bourgeois conaitu
tion. If the above working hypothethis•is correct, this was not
imposed by the victory of either the upper classes over the small
people, or of the bourgeois over the landowners. The foreign
powers, of course, would not have accepted -- and later on im
posed -- a bourgeois regime on Greece unless this provided a ba
sis for compromise between the social actors whose conflicting
interests and ideologies were latently or openly hostile, simul
taneously with and alongside the nationalist struggle, though
often overpowered and hidden by the latter. This, however, does
not alter the argument that there was no tradition of persistent
and deep class conflict. As for the future, the new State was to
be administered not by a socially defined aristocracy, but by more
or less the same rival political groups that had led the revolu
tion, a political oligarchy that included landlords, rich pro
pertied peasants and local chieftains, native bourgeois, quite a
few heterocthones, and certain diaspora elements. Each of
these groups reflected the same loose alliance of personal and re
' gional cliques, held together by much the same need for compromise
• as required in the face of the Turkish threat and in the pursuit
of individual personal power.
Not only was the emergence of politics in liberated Greece
' relatively independent of the social structure, but the seeds of
autonomy were also sown on fertile soil, the institutional system
itself. Indeed, such separation of politics from the social and
economic structures is typical of bourgeois regimes; the Greek
case may be seen as a somewhat sharp exaggeration of such typical
conditions. Is it not bourgeois democracy that denies the very
'.existence of classes and, through the mechanism of economic liber


92
alism, of the free vote and multi-party rule, institutionalises
individualism, conceals or even temporarily cures social conflict
and imposes the autonomy of politics? Thus the rival alliances
of cliques that led the Greek revolution, non-representative as
they were of Greece's class structure, could now perpetuate their
existence without having to resort to gaining the support of any
one class in particular, merely by recruiting voters across class
borders and alternating in power according to the rules of demo
cracy.
**♦
The bourgeois regime was not allowed to function immediately.
Because of foreign intervention and rivalries between the compe
ting political groups, but mainly because it was not really the
offspring of a victorious bourgeoisie, the democratic Constitution
was soon subverted by authoritarian rule -- Capodistria's between
1830 and 1833, Otho's between 1833 and 1843. This interval served
to consolidate the parties' relative autonomy from class structure
and social conflict: it forged their unity against the common
enemy, the monarch; it allowed political struggle on questions of
civic rights, and eventually of regime, to overshadow, displace;
or even postpone conflict between the classes;, and it forced these
socially incoherent parties to strive for the alliance of Greece's
true masters, the Great Powers, rather than seek the people's sup
port — which further accentuated their alienation from the grass
roots of class strife, in one word, their autonomisation.
~ The names of the parties that were already operating during
Otho's'reign (1833-1863) were symptomatic of a total.lack of;iden
tification with the social or ideological divisions inside Greece:
the English party, the French, the Russian.' This was understand
able as long as they were fighting the monarch for political power
and the people did not vote. Sovereign actor and supreme centre
of decision-making, the Crown had been created by a consensus :
among the foreign protectors. The breaking of this consensus might.


93
also break the Crown's power. The parties, therefore, had to
conduct their fight against Otho by taking sides according to the
latent or overt, real or imagined conflicts among the three Pro
tectors.
Gradually, the parties acquired a significant share of pow
er with the change of regime, first to a constitutional monarchy
under Otho in 1843, then to a parliamentary democracy under King
George I in 1864. Thereafter, sovereignty was no longer concealed
behind the Crown; it was dispersed in the hands of the people.
Power no longer held sway in the ambassadorial corridors and the
Palace; a good part of it was to be enjoyed in the parliamentary
and governmental offices which were the subject of bargaining at
election time. But on what ground was this bargaining to be trans
acted? The Protectors' names were no longer representative of a
political position and could be discarded. Yet tte parties did
not feel any need for socio-politically meaningful names^Almost
half a century later they were still designated by their leaders’
surnames.
***
Before Otho's fall, party ideology revolved around anti-roy
alism, which of course was not a social but rather a political
question, a dispute about the regime and the institutional alloca
tion of power. For some time after 1864 the parties did not need
even these mechanistic, highly formalised principles; they oper
ated in a maze of ideological tautology and pettiness which made
them indistinguishable from one another. Irredentism was not a
factor of ideological differentiation during this period:, all par
ties adhered to it in principle, the only area of occasional dis
agreement being the strategy and tactics to be followed. More
over, irredentism was not really related to Greece’s internal.so
cial problems. Its pathetic predominance merely proves how disen
gaged the parties were from the realities of economic misery and
social inequality.


94
Post-1864 anti-royalism was another indication of the rel
ative autonomy of politics from the country's class structure 
although in this period it was not even a consistent ideological
and political trend. The few outbursts of anti-monarchism were
due either to the lonely voices of individuals who were considered
eccentrics rather than a real threat to the Crown, or the usual
petty blackmailing of the King by the political leaders whose on
ly objective was really to gain royal favours. The only exception
was Trikoupis’ attack in 1874 against the King's practices in the
appointment of prime ministers. This major incident, however,
can be compared neither with the struggle against Otho, nor with
the cleavage of the 1915-1935 dichasmos. both of which divided '
the people deeply and lastingly. Was it not, after all, Premier
Trikoupis who, a few years later, lavishly provided for the King's
daughter before her marriage by getting parliament to vote a
sizeable dowry? And was it not the same simple folk who had voted
for Trikoupis in 1875 who cheered the sweet princess later on al
though, in the absence of any kind of income tax, they had been
willy-nilly made to pay for that dowry?*®®
Absence of principles, pettiness in argument, lack of ideol
ogical distinction between parties — all these would inevitably
be reflected in the electoral practices of the period. Between
1551 and 1881 there were 13 elections, 11 of them fraudulent.®®
No electoral programmes for government, however primitive, were
presented during these elections, but patronage attained the acme *57
of perfection. It is not surprising that the political par
ties, relatively autonomous from the social structure by birth, 1
were not equipped.to function on the basis of class conflict and
could thus operate only on the basis of patronage and of ideolo
gies which concealed such conflict or relegated it to a secondary 53 . . . . . . .
position. ■
Autonomy, once created (mainly by the absence of real con- •
flict between bourgeois and landowners),thereafter became a self
perpetuating condition. Yet patronage and ideological confusion


95
would not have been sufficient to continue reproducing it after
1864, had certain primary conditions not combined in its favour.
Autonomy could thus be maintained because of the familiar struc
tural and dynamic characteristics of Greek society: the landov
ners were not a traditional elite with strong roots in a feudal
istic past; the relationship between landowners and bourgeois
did not deteriorate into a serious conflict; the economic might
of the diaspora and the political will of Greece's foreign protec
tors were still crucial factors in the local balance of power;
the institutions were bourgeois even before the advent of capital
ism; and, concomitantly, the bourgeoisie was not sufficiently vig
orous to strive for absolute economic and political dominance.
These conditions prevented the development of deep class
conflict capable of breaking the autonomy by polarising politics,
either through strife between the peasantry and the upper classes,
or through conflict between landowners and bourgeois. It was these
factors which were in part responsible for the extremely slow evol
ution of the peasantry's economic and social problematic, and also
allowed a political oligarchy to keep this class in a state of per
manent confusion -- the two main causes behind the lack of a peas
ant movement and an agrarian party. Again, it was these factors
which meant that land reform — and hence support from the unpro
pertied peasants -- was pretty well useless for a bourgeoisie in
terested in trade but not manufacture; and these which made an
alliance with the small independent farmers meaningless for the
comprador bourgeois, and useful only to the Crown.
Similarly, it was in consequence of the above factors that the
economically dominant classes, bourgeois and landowners, were ei
ther unable or unwilling to break the politicians' autonomy and
establish direct class rule. They were unable, because their econ
omic power was too moderate and too circumscribed to let them un
dermine the oligarchy and dominate politics in the way they domin
ated the economy. Although there was no serious competition bet
ween then as separate classes, the purely individual interests of
®any of their members were in conflict, and this weakened them


96
both. Furthermore, the landowners’ relative economic power was
constantly declining — they were responsible for about 15$ of
the^nation^l income in 1825, and only 4$ in 1910 , and although
the bourgeoisie could augment its own economic power considerably,
it^ris st^Ll'relatively weak even as late as the 1900s. Finally,
the economic stronghold of the diaspora and the political privil
eges of the Protection and of the Crown curtailed the potential
of both the bourgeoisie and the landowners even further. Neither
were these classes willing to dominate politics directly, simply
because the bourgeois institutions, including a Constitution *
that sanctified private property and excluded its expropriation,
assured them that the politicians would always function within
their proper limits. In such circumstances it is not surprising
that the political oligarchy was able to remain autonomous of
these classes, and that it did not faithfully reflect their econ
omic dominance on the political level.
2. Autonomy and Patronage
Civen that the parties did not represent or serve class in
terests, the other potential points of articulation with the elec
torate were in the interests of individuals, of.regions, or pro
fessional groups. The latter were not a promising target in a ' :
country where four-fifths of the population lived and voted in ;
rural areas, more than two-thirds of them peasants, and where 
economic backwardness did not favour collective professional or- :
ganisation. Campaigning on the basis of regional interests was
not really much better; in a period of still strong sectionalist
feelings this was actually a dangerous policy for a party to f o l - ■
low. In any case, the parties themselves were too primitive and
badly organised for such manoeuvres, which were thus left to the
discretion of individual politicians. ’ The average politician w a s !
not all that set on systematically promoting the regional inter- •
ests of his constituency, because any positive results might well
be accredited not to him personally but to the party as a wh o l e 1 ’
or, worse still, to the opposition MPs of the same region. So •


97
the only alternative for attracting votes easily and safely was
by appealing to the electors' individual interests, and patronage^
was the simplest method to communicate and satisfy such interests.
It was this soil of political necessity, in an overwhelmingly
agrarian economy and society, which nourished the roots of both
patronage and the modern Greek State. Patronage was the only
means to serve individual demands, the State was the means to sat
isfy them.V62
Throughout the 19th century, and especially in the economic
depression of its last quarter, employment was one of the stronge*
and most constant needs of the population. In fact, the problem
was not so much unemployment — it could not possibly have been in
s primitive agricultural economy -- as the hopelessly difficult
conditions and the sheer misery caused by rural under-empleyraent.
Naturally, this was a social problem mainly among the small
independent farmers and not among the unpropertied peasants: for
farm workers it was marginal; as for those established on the
landlords' estates, the colleeoi.63 they had their own sinister
security of employment and could always be transferred to other
farms, especially in the conditions of non-intensive cultivation
prevailing on most large estates.
Conversely, the propertied peasants had to face the two prob
lems typical for their class. The first was the gradual penetra
tion of market capitalism. In Greece, the perplexities of the
system of agricultural prices and market risks were amplified by
the rising importance of wine and currant production, and especial
ly the major part of the harvest destined for export — a situa
tion which by the 1890s and 1900s had culminated in the explosive
currant crisis already mentioned. The second typical problem -was
the.fragmentation of the already small landholdings from genera
tion to generation. The propertied peasants' second and subsequent
sons had few ways out of such a situation: emigration abroad was


9S
practiced only on a limited scale until the 1900s, and borrowing
at usury rates to buy new land was no particularly desirable sol
ution. This left seeking employment in other sectors, and usually
in the urban areas. In short, whether they were driven by the
scarcity of land or by the evils of market penetration, the major
ity of those seeking employment consisted of the demographic 're
dundancies’ from within the propertied peasantry.
As explained above, that same long period of the entire sec
ond half of the 19th century saw no susbstantial development of a
capitalist economy in the urban centres. Whereas in other socie
ties the movement of the rural population towards the cities was
,a factor and also partly a symptom of industrialisation, this was
not so in 19th-century Creece, for the reasons given in the prece
ding chapter. But whilst the embryonic Creek industry could not
absorb the flow of migrant peasants, the youthful Greek State •
could. Not only was it in its age of formation and rapid growth,
it was also vulnerable to the interference of politicians.
. Indeed, the politicians profited immensely from these con
ditions. One of the most important individual demands was employ
ment, and the largest potential employer was the State. Inter
action of the two in a typical supply-demand complex was unavoid
able. This market, however, had certain characteristic peculiar
ities. Whilst there was abundant supply of labour at any wage
above subsistence level, demand was fixed at the relatively low
rate of State requirements, and the wages offered were fixed at
the relatively high level imposed by the need for a facade of •
State prestige and morality. This was an unusual case of an em
ployer not able to exploit his monopsonisitc position — the ad
vantage of being the only buyer in this sector of the labour mar
ket — and depress wages to the absolute minimum. The usual out
come of such conditions is a black market, and in Greece this was
provided by the patronage system: the monopsonistic profits thé
State itself could not realise were channelled through patronage
and expressed in votes for the politicians. 64


99
The class that profited most from this situation was the prop
ertied peasantry, mainly because of two reasons. The first was
that the less impoverished among them were in a position to edu
cate their children to qualify for the civil service. In this they
were motivated mainly by the above problems of underemployment, but
also by a cultural factors their restless aspiration towards so
cial mobility, the reasons for which were partly the example of
thriving emigrants, and chiefly the tradition of insecurity inher
ited from centuries of foreign rule. These aspirations were not
unfeasible for the better-off among them who could afford to send
their sons to the secondary schools of the bigger towns or even
the University of Athens -- though often at the cost of serious
privation for the remainder of the family. ^
The other reason that helped the propertied peasants to pro
lit from patronage more than any other class was related to the
scarcity of spoils and the hierarchical structure of the patronage
networks. Scarcity meant that spoils of relatively higher value,
such as employment in the civil service, had to be allocated to
clients situated at the higher levels of the hierarchy. The better
off among the propertied peasants could aspire to such favours pre
cisely because they were placed higher in the social, and thus also
In the clientelistic hierarchy of the rural communities where the
politicians were operating. Their economic and social position
enabled them to influence larger circles of relatives, friends and
protégés, to command larger numbers of votes, and to offer more in
exchange for employment of their educated children.
The effects of this interaction between the small independent
peasantry, the politicians, and the civil servants left deep and
permanent scars on Creek social history. For it was an interaction
between a conservative political elite, a conservative social actor
like the propertied peasantry, and the members of an institution
conservative by definition— the State. The right-wing tendencies
of the small independent peasants were thus amplified and streng
thened. The rightist vvting behaviour of a district like Laconia,
for example, always correlated closely with the traditionally very


100
high proportions of Laconians within the administration, includ
ing the police and the army. The conservatism of each of these
three elements of this peculiar patronage system was thus pre
served and enhanced by their interaction.
It is not surprising that by the end of the 19th century,
after some decades of such practices, the administration was
flooded with the politicians’ protégés, and most civil servants
were, at any rate loosely, members of political networks built on
patronage.
This process led not unexpectedly to an inflationary and con
fusing expansion of legislation, especially on petty issues, and
the development of institutionalised repression. Both of these
were to some extent normal side-effects of Greece's growth, but
they were also due to less natural causes, such as the incompet
ence of governments and parliaments, the self-amplifying functions
of bureaucratic pathology, and even the deliberate obfuscation
practiced by groups and individuals so as to attain their ends
more comfortably. One of the most characteristic examples is the
manic detail in which a plethora of Greek laws set down the com
position and competence of various committees, which clearly re- ;
fleets the effort of patronage forces standing behind the legisla
tor to create new employment opportunities. As for the repression
mechanisms, they were created to deal not only with smuggling and
banditry, but also with unrest among the currant growers and the
unpropertied peasants, and because of the need for reliable per- .
sonnel to direct electoral fraud and violence neatly and author
itatively.
One of the effects of these conditions is of particular inter
est for this discussion: the additional need they created among
the people for further protection by the patrons. The politicians
thus became more and more indispensable to disentangling legally
confused situations; to satisfying personal requests the ambig
uous legitimacy of which was a lawyer’s delight; to convincing the
administration that measures of repression, legitimate or not, ;


101
should be waived. The literature of the period is full of in
trigues centred upon customs officials, coast guards, gendarmes,
warrants of arrest for failure to pay huge interest rates, and
of course the unavoidable theme of bribery.
By the turn of the century, clientelism and pervert bureau
AQ
cracy had fused in a self-perpetuating system. The monstrous
**1*7A
Creek State had physically matured. It remains to be seen
whether it had also achieved some kind of ideological maturity,
pre-condition of coherent behaviour.
3, Patronage. State Functioning, and Political Power
Clearly, the birth and childhood of the Greek State during
the 19th century differ radically from the similar stages in the
development of the major western States. Nothing in the Creek case
resembles the administrative contribution of the British aristoc
racy, refined and modernised in the greenhouses of the colonial
empire; or the French tradition of a meritocracy born in the vis
ionary rule of Louis XI and developed in the long centuries of
centralisation; or the bureaucratic machinery urgently but ex
pertly created by a man like Bismarck and nurtured in the golden
age of imperialist and capitalist Germany. In these western ca
ses, the class origins, the tradition, or simply the skills' as
sured by intelligent recruitment had by the end of the 19th cen
tury contributed to a degree of coherence in the State machinery
unknown in the Greek case. Moreover, the coherent western demo 
cracles were a natural complement to historically mature institu
tional systems which in turn had by this time arrived at a point
of relative equilibrium with the underlying advanced systems of
economic and social structures. Conversely, the Greek bureau
cracy was an incoherent set of individuals who simply acted out
some of the functions of the State and all of the functions of the
patronage systems to which they belonged. This situation was, in
fact, the natural outcome of a dominant mercantile pre-capitalism


102
that was backward, peripheral, and in many respects contradictory
to the institutional system, itself imposed by outside factors
and not matured through the conflicts and contradictions of local
social forces.
The social, economic and external factors which constituted
the origins of the Greek State also foreshadowed and to some ex
tent predetermined the distribution of State power among its con
tenders, especially before the turn of the century. An equally
determinant factor was the manner in which the State functioned:
by amplifying or partly transforming the predetermined tendencies;
by gradually shaping an all-pervasive State ideology; and by set
ting the pace for its evolution in the 20th century towards great
er coherence and autonomy.
The functioning of the State in this period was strongly
marked by two contradictory factors: first, the State, as the
tool for gratifying clientelist needs and affecting electoral re
sults, could command an immense amount of power; secondly, near
ly all civil servants were heavily dependent on the politicians.
By their very nature, individual clientelist favours could *72
very seldom be allocated through the channels of the legislative.
This would frequently infringe the constitutional principle of
equality before the law, and almost certainly be impracticable,
since it would be sure to result in the crumbling of that same
legislature. This, of course, was by no means unheard of in
Greece, but it was certainly not the rule, as is indicated by the
often scandalous outcome and content of any.such made-to-measure
legislation. Very broadly speaking, the same applied to the exec
utive, although to a lesser extent. According to the elementary
rules of organisation, the executive was concerned with the direc
tion and not the detailed implementation of policies, and even
less with the allocation of patronage favours, since both of these
were the responsibility of the administration. As has been ex-,
plained already, however, politics was only occasionally based on .


103
important issues, which were the job of the legislative and the
executive, and much more frequently on the distribution of indiv
idual favours, which was the domaine of the administration. It
thus becomes evident that the political process, in the specific
ally Greek style it had acquired, was essentially in the hands of
the State. This amount of power, already large in comparison
with that of the civil services in non-clientelistic societies,
was further increased by the standard practice of electoral fraud
and violence, which was also carried out chiefly through the State
mechanisms.
The other condition that marked the functioning of the State
was the dependence of the civil servants on the politicians. The
method of recruitment through patronage was not the only cause of
this dependence, though the usage persisted throughout the 19th
and well into the 20th century. There were also the typical means
of dominance through corruption; promotion or transfer to the
best posting; the privilege of remaining in Athens or one of the
bigger towns; promotion to the status of a permanent civil servant
as opposed to holding a temporary post; frequent leaves of ab
sence; the quality and even the quantity of work; official 'in
difference' in cases of parallel employment; at the higher levels
Participation in well-paid committees, in missions or special
training-schemes abroad — and so on with a seemingly endless re
pertory of favours that might be granted a civil servant by the
minister or, through him, by any other political patron.
’ This situation was facilitated by the absence of any substan
tial legal protection for civil servants. The principle of per
manent employment was introduced for the first time with the 1911
revision of the Constitution, alongside regulations imposing that
Promotions or transfers should be deliberated by special commit
tees. Even this was only an effect of new brooms sweeping clean:
87.5^ of the members of the Reform Parliament were new to politics,
«j
elected under the post 1909 post-revolutionary impetus. Short
ly afterwards, the special committees were absorbed by the clien
telistic networks of both old and new politicians, and the appro


104
priate legal method ws discovered to by-pass the law. this was the
perfectly constitutional regulation which allowed a preliminary
trial period before a civil servant's final employment, and the
right of the executive to appoint instead a so-called extraordin
ary employee not protected by the principle of permanence. There
after the total strength of this legion of 'extraordinaries' 
whose members were supposedly appointed to fulfil only unusual •
and temporary State requirements — was constantly increased and
never reduced, even if turnover within its ranks was quite high
and faithfully reflected the fluctuations of the parties' politic
al power and their alternation in office.
These two conditions — the State's immense potential power
and the civil servants' deep dependence on the politicians 
may easily lead to two contradictory but equally misleading con
clusions. The fact that there existed such potential for centfal
ised rule — due to the predominance of clientelisra and fraudul
ent electoral practices — might suggest the convenient theory
that the 19th-century State was a political factor relatively aut
onomous from both political and social conflict and holding a dom
inant, if not the hegemonic position in the power structure. On
the other hand, the typical civil servant, in so many ways subser
vient to the politicians, and ruthlessly used by them in serving
their ends, may give rise to the opposite but equally facile con
clusion that the State itself was the politicians’ instrument at
all levels of political activity -- and consequently that the
hegemony had been achieved by the already familar political ol
igarchy. ' '
Such conclusions disregard the fact that the relationships
described were essentially inter-personal and did not reflect the
ideology and behaviour of the civil servants as a group, but rather
that of individuals or small cliques. It is not by chance that so
far this paragraph has spoken mainly of civil servants or polit
icians and rarely of the State or parties. Because of the frag
mentation and antagonism inherent in all clientelist systems, the


105
State and the parties, whether viewed separately or together,
were not coherent and stable wholes, but unsteady associations
of competing individuals.7^* The State power was thus almost use
less to State and parties alike. Neither could properly exploit
this power, for neither was subjected to the other as an entity,
despite the hierarchic patronage relationships. True, these rela
tionships were erected across the borderline between State and
parties, but this implies a relationship between individual pat
rons and clients rather than a hierarchy between parties and the
State. The patronage hierarchy, in other words, did not imply an
interdependence of entities, but rather an interdependence of in
dividual members.
A good .example of this mutual weakness is the case of elec
toral fraud. It is well established that fraud affected almost
every election held in Greece before 1963, and more extensively
so in the 19th than in the 20th century.77 The party in power im
mediately before and during the poll had of course more chances of
winning the election because it could more easily organise fraud
and repression. That this was possible for all parties, however,
suggests two things. Firstly, that there was no specific State
ideology which favoured one of the political parties over the
others, and it was not the State as an entity that did the oppres
sing and defrauding, but the individual cliques within it (other
wise one State-favoured party would have won all the elections).
Secondly and even more obviously, that no party had a stranglehold
over the State as a whole, or there would always have been one
single winner. The terrifying capacity of the bureaucratic and
repressive mechanisms for fraud and violence was thus useless to
the ideologically and organisationally incoherent State. To some
extent even the parties could not fully utilise this capacity,
since none of them dominated the State as a whole, and none could
use it as a total weapon to put its opponents out of the running
Permanently, as would be the case in a so-called multi-party to
talitarian polity dominated by one of the parties. The State
mechanism was of real use to a party only at the lowest level and
ih the short term, as long as the party clients within the civil


lOö
service could function freely because their patrons were in power.
If a bad crop, a turn of the business cycle, or a political cri
sis overthrew the government a few weeks later and caused new elec
tions, the State machinery could be equally useful to some other
party. A different set of civil servants would go to work whilst
their colleagues, who up to then had been active in favouritism
and fraud, would now watch in apathy or nervous impotence.
4. The Distribution of Power
4.1 The Crown
A somewhat unexpected effect of this situation was that the
power of the Crown was greatly inflated by its rights to appoint
*70
the prime minister and dissolve parliament. Interpreting the •
Constitution somewhat freely, it was the Crown that decided which
party would bribe the electorate before the elections and for how
long, and which would be given the privilege to conduct fraud and
repression during the elections. It cannot be"established here
to what extent the King's practices in this matter were unconstit
utional, nor would this be a rewarding area of investigation al
though it has always been a central issue in Greek politics and
historiography. The above-mentioned conditions of unashamed clien
telism, which were in effect an expression of division and instab- ’
ility, by augmenting the King's ability to manoeuvre and thus en
hance his power, were initially causes rather than effects of his
illegal practices. That these practices afterwards became causes
of continued division is undeniable, but this simply means that
the factors of a rre-existing clientelist conflict would use new ..
constitutional arguments in the Kobbesian war of all against all.
legalism being at least as sterile as psychologism, basing an
historic analysis on legalistic argumentation would not be any
more reliable than explaining the division and instability in terms
of national character or of frustration/aggression. Undue emphasis .
on legalistic argument was, after all, precisely the defect of
19th-century Greek politics. It was this which sowed the formalism .
that subsequently crippled not only the political practices, but


I 107
also the historiography that tried to explain formalistic prac
tices with equally formalistic arguments, What really matters
is the King's objectives towards which he utilised his powers 
legally or not — and the forces which stood behind these objec
tives." 79
The political initiatives of the Crown certainly aimed at
preserving and enhancing its own power, mainly by creating deep
rifts between the parties and by maintaining a blackmail hold
over them. But they served other interests as well. Whilst the
politicians were busy organising and bribing their clients or at
most uttering their legalistic complaints, forces alien to Greek
society and politics were continually and ruthlessly participa
ting in the.power game through the King's own patronage networks.
4.2 'Protection bv the Foreign Powers'
If Ottoman decadence had augmented western profits, it had
also created the problem of how to preserve these pleasant con
ditions after the giant's collapse. Greece was the first province
to become independent, she became free just before the second
half of the 19th century when the triumphs of capitalism and tech
nology reduced the size of the world and distances between nations,
hig and small, poor and rich alike. She was, therefore, one of
the first countries in this smaller world to experience certain
conditions of co-existence with the Great Powers which more than
a century later became known under the somewhat facile term neo
colonialism.
The fact that the foreign intervention is 19th-century Greece
has also quite seriously been termed 'protection' shows the extent
of an ideological confusion which partly allowed the intervention,
Partly-brought it about, and partly resulted from it. The sub
ject is too wide to allow even a short separate discussion here.
This paragraph is meant to serve as an introduction to the frequent
references to the 'protection' in the analysis of various questions
nearer the scope of this worl.


106
A few decades after Greece had won Independence, foreign in80
vestments accounted for two-thirds of all her invested capital;
she had repaid three to five times the proceeds of her public.
O1 debts of 1824, 1825, and 1833; the Great Powers, according to
the treaty signed on his ascension to the throne in 1864, were
paying the Greek King an annual indemnity which was in reality a
*o2
percentage of Greek public-debt repayment to the Powers; and
Greece's small but once thriving wool, silk and cotton industries
had already disappeared under mainly British competition, but her
government pursued, except for short protectionist intervals, what
*Q \ was basically a free-trade policy.
Foreign policy, public finance and the purchase of armaments
were the main areas where the Protection exploited its privileged
relations with the Crown. This was possible through the latently
recognised preponderance of the King's opinion in matters of for
eign policy; through the Princes' role in leading positions in
the army; and through Greece's notorious and very natural inabil
ity to repay public debts contracted at often scandalous terms,
which resulted in the 1893 bankruptcy and in the sequestration of
Greece's resources from taxation, which the Powers elegantly im
posed by submitting the country's finances to a wholly foreign ad
ministration.
4.3 The Diaspora
The foreign powers were only one of the outside factors which
occupied the power positions left vacant by the Balkanisation of
Creek politics: the other was the diaspora. Parallel to the dia
spora magnates’ widely advertised philanthropic activities, many
of which were concerned with institutions of learning that sup
plied the philanthropists' businesses with reliable and cheap la
bour, there prospered the numerous discreet deals that enabled the
diaspora to exercise control over the most lucrative areas of the
Greek economy. These activities, already described in the preced
ing chapters, vere dominated by the diaspora's connections with


109
the Crown ~ and the politicians, of course — and not through its
position as a local grande-bourgeoisie, an error which has been re
futed a b o v e . T h e dominance was the effect not of an internal
socio-political power structure, but rather of a purely political
game with basically foreign, though Greek-speaking, capitalists as
players.
This does not mean that the Palace was where conspiracy and
fi
intrigue were continually practiced with a view to exploiting the
country; in reality, things were much less schematic. Big deals
were arranged more casually and in style at dinners, receptions
and balls. It is a common tendency to explain the backwardness of
Greece and similar countries by facile conspiratorial constructs.
It may be convenient to use the stereotyped scapegoats of the Brit
ish Ambassador and the gunboat for the 19th century, the Intelli
gence Service and the Comintern for the inter-war period, the mul
ti-national companies and the CIA for even more recently. Never
theless, it is a method of analysis far less rewarding than a prop
er investigation of every internal factor which permitted these
interventions.
• To consider the Crown and the diaspora, for example, as the
mere instruments of foreign domination is simplistic. That they
were basic elements in a complex politico-economic system of in
fluences, interests and transactions is undeniable. The Palace
was one of the meeting places for politicians, foreign ambassadors
and financiers, diaspora magnates and important local landowners
°r grand-bourgeois. The Court was their channel of communication
among each other and with the King. But the role of the King as
a mediator and sometimes arbitrator and his inflated political
Power elevated him to a position higher than that of a pawn on the
foreigner's* chessboard. He was thus able to serve his own inter
ests, those of the local upper classes, and occasionally even the
nationalist interests of Greece if he so wished. The diaspora was
0ne of the means through which the Vest acquired good interest
nates, profitable investments, and much of Crcece’s external trade,
including the minerals and other raw materials so precious for


110
western industries. But foreign economic domination would have
existed even without the diaspora’s mediation, would probably
have been even more ruthless, and such conditions might have
postponed for an even longer period Creece's development, since
it was the absence of an economically powerful local bourgeoisie
that permitted both foreign dominance and the diaspora's exploi-'
tative practices.
In short, Greece's role in the European division of labour
was clearly defined not only by foreign interests and by the dia
spora’s comprador activities, but also by her own economic and
social structures. Similarly, her subordinate position in Euro
pean politics was determined not only by the arrangements and
disputes within the Power's holy alliance, but also by the Crown's
secret diplomacy and the politicians' need for the irredentist
panacea.
4.4 The Dominant Classes
Examination of how the dominant local classes were situated
within the power structure has been deliberately postponed until
the end of this chapter, mainly to show how little they needed
direct power, but also how little remained for them to share. Al
though their profits from landownership, local business, or rea
sonable foreign trade deals were small compared to those of the
diaspora or the immense sums of Creece's public debt, they were
quite content. The taxes imposed to meet the debt obligations did
not affect them; the petit-bourgeoisie aspired to their status
as an enviable one; and the dominant classes had no pressing big
issues to be solved in parliament or government, no great threats
to fear from below or from fratricidal strife within. This ab
sence of great issues as well as of threats allowed them to dele
gate power to lower levels. The politicians could be encouraged
to play their petty games which helped to keep the populace under •
control and opened the road for good business deals through a'
docile administration. The dominant classes' power was exercised


Ill
in the same familiar clientelist manner. Having no serious inter
ests to protect by exercising direct power through a strong hold
over the legislature and the executive, and leaving the big busi
ness deals to the diaspora and the Protection, the landowners and
the bourgeoisie were content with dominating everyday economic
life by means of unchallenged property and tax systems, and the
leisurely transaction of friendly business deals with the politi
cians and their clients in the civil service.
In the political sphere, the upper classes had little direct
power. But why should they ask for more? It was as though they
had delegated it to the politicians before ever acquiring it, as
though they had accepted with pleasure an autonomisation of pol
itics that profited them so much financially and deprived them of
so little politically. Behind the politicians' childish'rituals
and delicious little sins stood the guarantors of the upper clas
ses' tranquillity and economic dominance, of the status quo and
of the bourgeois institutions, the Crown and the Protection,
armed with decrees to appoint prime ministers and dissolve parlia
ments, to grant loans, and to satisfy, drop by drop, Greece's ir
redentist thirst.
Note:
Instead of going straight on to Chapter D, the reader might find
it useful to refer to the Appendix first, which gives a commen
tary on ideology.


112
Chapter D
THE MILITARY COUP OF 1909
1. Introduction: Summary of Events
This very brief schematic summary of events is intended as
a framework for the subsequent discussion and to relieve it of
frequent interruptions for clarification of events and conditions.
The analysis and explanations attempted in the discussion below
are based on a long-term perspective and an inscription of events
into this diachronic and tendential context. A proper understan
ding of these events requires familiarity with the historic back
ground, for which this summary is to serve as a timely reminder.
Similar such introductions will also precede the chapters
to follow. Since the events described are basic and widely known,
footnotes will largely be avoided.
***
There are many opinions on the origins of the Military League,
the organisation that staged the 15 August 1909 coup at Goudi,
then just outside Athens. A summary of them will be useful as
some kind of a participants' profile.
The existence of the Military League became officially known
on 25 June 1909 when the colonel who was at the head of the Athens
garrison caught out a number of officers discussing their plans in
the house of a member of the group, Hadjimihalis. This led to the
widespread but erroneous view that the League had actually been
formed that day. In fact, the date and the Initiative are matters
of controversy, every one of the military authors claiming the
honour for himself and his group. Ccneral Mazarakis speaks of a
group of lieutenants in which he as a young officer participated,
meeting in the house of Cavalry Lieutenant Zymvrakakis. General


113
Pángalos insists that Mazaalds' group, consisting of 20-25 members, met
for the first time only in May 1909, whereas his own group of ten
lower-ranking officers (there was only one lieutenant) had met as
early as October 1908. He does accept, however, that there was yet
a third group, consisting of non-commissioned officers, which he
considers as one of th*e major factors of the coup’s success. The
truth seems to be that all three groups had existed simultaneously
for some time before the June meeting at the Hadjimihalis residence,
where they merged and adopted a common name. Pángalos' claim, how
ever, that his own group had started as early as October 1908 coin
cides with a confidential report recently located in the Austrian
Archives.
The feeling of discontent in the army was so general that it
is superfluous to know precisely which group had initiated the later
League. What matters is that about four-fifths of the army officers
and nine-tenths of the navy officers participated.
The government was well aware of the League’s existence but
greatly underestimated its potential power, and for several weeks
followed a peculiar policy of dialogue with the clearly illegal or
ganisation. Twelve of the officers caught at the meeting which was
surprised by the Athens garrison commander were removed from service
and two lieutenants were arrested later on, but these half-measures
only helped to precipitate the coup.
, 0 n the actual day of the coup there was only one minor incident
in reaction to the rebels by a group of royalist officers. The King
bad to accept the League's demands, and the royal Princes were re
moved from their positions in the army. Although the new government
was formed by old politicians, the executive and the parliament came
gradually under the League’s dominance.
The officers' ideology was confused and their objectives short
sighted, however. In the first stage of their organisation, they
offered the leadership of the League to the King's aide-de-camp 
a truly monumental naiveté.®^ The protocol they had stipulated


114
before their revolt provided for violent action in case the Crown
did not accept the pronunciamento with their demands, but this
clause was withdrawn after pressure from more moderate, higher
ranking officers. In the end, one of their demands was a humble
request for amnesty. Although the support they enjoyed among the
population was overwhelming, the officers had perceived their
role very narrowly and seemed unaware of the extent of the people's
feelings. It is not surprising, therefore, that they could not
really govern the country and that the proposal of one of them to
call Venizelos from Crete, then still autonomous, was accepted
wholeheartedly and, it seems, with a sense of relief.
Although Venizelos declined the leadership of the League, he
advised the military on their problems, suggested and strongly
supported the moderate view of revising the Constitution rather than
drawing up a new one, charmed the King and his entourage, and
returned to Crete. His friends proposed him in the elections of
8 August 1910, and although again he did notofficially accept
the proposal and did not campaign, he received the largest vote
among all candidates.. The old parties formed a coalition, which
was opposed by a surprisingly large number of independent fcandid
ates. Some of the so-called independents claimed to be Venize
lists or anti-monarchists; others declared that after the elec
tions they would support that parliament should not merely revise
the Constitution but should declare itself a Constituent Assembly;
quite a few of them were sponsored by newly-created associations
of merchants and other professional unions. Despite the old par
ties' cohesion and the incoherence of the independents, the lat
ter achieved substantial majorities in most towns and in the rural
areas of the new provinces, obtaining 120 seats, about 40$ of the
Assembly. The established parties, through their lead in the ru
ral areas of the old provinces, kept the majority of the seats,
but the coming radicalisation of the electorate was already obvious.
The popular verdict led the King to take action which was
clearly unconstitutional. He called in Veni2 elos to form a gov
ernment, thus breaking the Dedilomeni principle of appointing only


115
t.
the man who had the declared confidence of parliament. Some his
torians claim that the King also armed Venizelos with a major pol
itical weapon, the power to use the decree for the dissolution of
parliament, although the Assembly was a sovereign body that could
be dissolved only by its own decision.
Venizelos managed without much delay to proclaim the new el
ections in which he obtained an overwhelming majority. The old par
ties abstained, yet the actual abstentions attributed to them
amounted to no more than eight percent. In the new parliament,
87.5# of the HPs were newcomers to politics. The mostly proper
tied' peasantry of the old provinces kept to tradition and voted
Tor the old parties, whereas the newly acquired rural province of^
Thessaly voted massively for Venizelist and Agrarian candidates.
The ten years of Venizelist rule that followed were marked
by a sharp growth of the economy; an increase of the demographic
and economic importance of the bourgeoisie; a profound reorgani
sation of an already centralised, powerful State machinery; four
wars that doubled Greece's size and population; and the deep div
ision of the country over the personal conflict between (pro-Eng
lish) Venizelos and the (pro-German) King on the question of
Greece’s position in World War I.
2. A Survey of Viewpoints
Creek historians disagree as to whether the 1909 coup and the
Political change immediately following it expressed a revolt of
the bourgeoisie, and there is a lack of extensive analyses on the
subject. Kordatos considers the officers as "the avant-garde of
the bourgeoisie" but adds that this same class, "because of the
Peculiarities of the economy ... had not y»t matured sufficiently
to be able to displace the old parties by itself and to initiate
a new social policy".91 Elsewhere, he sees the coup as a victory
°f the middle class over the landowners, anC the officers as ’fexecU'
ting the decisions taken in the Commercial Associations". Yet he


116
admits in the very next paragraph that from 1883-1907 there was
a ''certain stagnation ... in the functioning of Greek capitalism.”
Vournas thinks that the coup was "the expression of a bourgeoisie
wishing to establish a truly bourgeois society and reorganise the
economy on its basis", and that the effort failed because of the
"bourgeoisie's narrow-minded conservative fear of the lower clas
ses". Moskof examines the coup from a predominantly ideological
viewpoint, and describes it as "the effect of a situation in which
the feeling of having arrived at a dead end with the 1897 humilia
tion had become strong and widespread". He considers the new
ideological elements to be "the renovated and now vigorous compra94
dor ideology" of the middle class, as well as apparently the
cultural fermentation within an intelligentsia of mainly bourgeois
origins.
Filaretos says that the revolution was actively supported by
95
all classes "except the bandits of the oligarchy"., Pangalos re
ports that before the coup there was unrest and indignation among
all classes. General Sarafis writes*. "The revolution came about
because it had popular support. It expressed the wishes of the 97 98
people..." Melas speaks similarly of general popular unrest.
Zakythinos' work covers too wide an area for detailed analy
sis of the 1909 events. He considers the coup and the advent of
Venizelos as a cause of renewal (anakainissis) in the economic,
gg political and social life of Greece. Korizis denies the term
revolution commonly used to denote the coup, and claims that the
truly revolutionary change was that effected through the electoral
dialogue between Venizelos and the people in 1910, thus implicit
ly rejecting the view of a bourgeois revolt.^® Dafnis also re
jects this view categorically, basing himself on the relative weak
ness of the middle c l a s s . K a r o l i d e s denies it on the grounds
of the somewhat peculiar argument that Greece was a society with- .
out class division. S.‘ Markesinis claims the bourgeoisie was
already in decline, and that the coup and the popular support for
the military and for Venizelos were an expression of the rise of
92


117
the lower c l a s s e s . K o r i z i s , Dafnis, and Karolides, like the
Marxist writers previously mentioned, do not base their opinions
on an extensive analysis of the social structure, but rather on
their own personal methodologies. In the case of Korizis and Daf
nis, however, there is also serious concern to avoid statements
not backed by historical evidence. As for S.Markesinis, his ex
planation about the pre-eminence of the lower classes in the revolt
v may be more compatible with the facts, but this seems to have been
intuitive rather than the result of a detailed analysis of these
facts.
Ventiris, who speaks categorically of bourgeois revolution,
is one of the most perceptive of the non-Marxist historians. His
work is based on class analysis, but it suffers from a near-ab
sence of economic arguments to support his sociological claims,
and from a confusion of terms. Throughout, th'is writer lumps to
gether the bourgeoisie and the petit-bourgeoisie. He often speaks
of them as "the popular classes" or as "the urbanised population",
although sometimes he also confuses the bourgeoisie with the oli
garchy. These ambiguities explain many of his misinterpretations.
Such comment should not, however, predispose against the value of
Ventiris' contribution.- His book is one of the few oases of in
formative reading in a desert of dry-as-dust narratives, hero-or
iented analyses, and mechanistic evolutionist "explanations".^^
Kaltchas attributes the coup to personal ambitions and the
army's overwhelming anxiety about Greece’s foreign policy and in
ternal stagnation. He also states that "the suggestive theory
that the malaise was symptomatic of a somewhat belated drive of
the Greek middle class for political power is perhaps too simple
an explanation of a complex phenomenon. It is nevertheless true
that -the new ferment was prevalent in the urban centres, that it
affected the mercantile and professional classes and the more ad
vanced intelligentsia, and that it finally crystallised into a
revolt of .'new men', that is, a younger generation of mostly middle
class politicians..."105 Svolos offers a short but very lucid
'analysis. He points out the vagueness .of the officers' intentions,


118
which assumed more concrete reformist goals only with help from
the radical elements of the middle class. He considers Venizelos'
intervention an effort to calm down unrest among the lower clas
ses which were then experiencing their "awakening". He states
that the bourgeoisie "followed" Venizelos, and that it was in this
manner, ex post facto, that the revolution was canalised into the
road towards a bourgeois transformation.
legg consideres that "... there was uneasiness among the ...
professional and commercial classes in the growing cities...",but
does not explain whether this uneasiness was caused by frustrated
class interests, or nationalist sentiments, or even merely by the
fear of a war with Turkey and a new debacle potentially harmful
to business. He says that the coup was "mainly directed against
the established political elite", but was also "a protest against
alleged royal failures in military matters"; however, he insists
on the intra-military as well as the external.causes of the coup.*®^
Toynbee, writing about the 1909 events in Creece in an early pamph
let (1914), presents the coup as the effect of exclusively exter
nal and military factors.
'• i- ♦ '
The articles of the press during this period are probably more
informative. An article written by Cavrielides, written before the
coup, reads: ‘
"There are now within the country other classes, other social sectors... wishing to displace the . . oligarchy ... and to form another (type of) State, with different laws, ... different economic rela tionships. ... A peaceful revolution must displace , the dominant corrupt oligarchy which does not re present peasant interests, commercial interests, industrial interests, property interests..."109
The day after the election that followed the coup, a leader-writer
in Patris declared: "A revolution has indeed taken place, but not
by the army: it was a people's revolution."^-® Similarly Kyrix.
the Venizelist newspaper, wrote on 13 Sept. 1910 of "... the
people’s awakening which caused the revolution last August..."


119
Even more enlightening are the opinions of four leading c on
temporary politicians and prime ministers as reported by Ventiris:
Vcnizelos, Papanastassiou (leftist republican, socialist/social
democrat); Kafandaris (liberal of the centre), and Michalakopoulos
(right-wing liberal).
"Venizelos purports that the oligarchy had indeed fallen and that new social and political elements had entered the government (obtained power). He does not clarify, however, whether pov'er had been acquired by a whole class, that of the bourgeoisie.
"Papanastassiou believes that the activity in 1909 of the so-called guilds, the popular demonstrations and the rise of Venizelos implied an overthrow of the plutocratic oligarchy and its replacement by the popular classes (sic).
•> "Michalakopoulos thinks that the bourgeoisie has par ticipated in governing the country since 1-64. He pays particular attention to the activity of the . peasants. (From conversations with Ventiris, the au thor, summer 1928).
"Kafandaris is of the opinion that there was a gener alised feeling of dissatisfaction with the politicians' incompetence, the inefficiency of parliament, and the national misfortunes. One form this took was the 1909 • coup. He does not consider the social implications of the revolt. (From a conversation with Ventiris, the author, 29 December 1930)." (emphasis added)
Venizelos' private secretary, S. Stefanou, reports with more
Precision and perhaps Also more detachment, Venizelos’ replies to
Ventiris.
"This is one of the few chapters that you wrote without previously discussing it with me.
"You were more concerned with the philosophy of his tory than with history itself.
"I see the events from a more empirical viewpoint. Instead of believing that a certain period saw an economic and social cleavage between the classes in Greece, I am under the impression that new elements, more determined and vigorous, grasped the opportunity offered by the military coup to take power away from the hereditary (personalised) parties. I myself be long to these new elements. This is how Gambetta ex plained the Third Republic in France ...
"Whatever the interpretation of the 1909 revolution, the fact remains that a new era of.our modern history began with it." (Emphasis added)*1^ ***


120
The remainder of this chapter will deal with the above con
troversy in an attempt to pinpoint a common methodological error
and to prove certain points. The error lies in the assumption that,
since the 1909 coup was followed by the call to Yenizelos, the ad
vent of the Liberal Party, the 1910-30 economic growth and the con
comitant consolidation of middle-class economic and political pow*113
er, the coup itself was a bourgeois revolt. This cause-and
effect assumption is denied, and five concomitant points are raised.
The first is that the coup did not aim at establishing or streng
thening the bourgeoisie's dominance, nor was it inspired or led
by this or any other class.' The second is that there was no revol
utionary action by the bourgeoisie, either independently or in sup
port of the officers' revolt. Conversely, and this is the third
point, the revolutionary tendencies in the decade before 1909
among part of the peasantry and the lower urban classes, and re
sulting in the latter’s insurgent support during and after the coip,
expressed much greater radicalism than the officers' action. The
fourth point is that the emergence of Venizelos and his liberals,
like the fact of the coup itself, was no symptom of some non-exis
tent bourgeois revolution; it was, however, a major factor in the
bourgeois transformation of the 1910s and 1920s.
The fifth and concluding point is that this transformation
became possible despite the absence of a bourgeois revolt and de
spite the potentially anti-bourgeois aspirations of the lower clas
ses. For it was the army that seized power and then offered it
to Venizelos, not the lower classes; and neither did the liberal
party recruit from them to any large extent, nor was its electoral
success based exclusively on their support. Thus in the end the
abstract radicalism of the lower classes was canalised into bour
geois channels by Venizelos. And his exceptional success was the
interplay of numerous factors. The most preponderant internal
factors were the open or latent post-1909 conflicts between the
army, the Crown, the old parties, and the upper and lower classes
on the one hand, and the ideological confusion on the other, with
the concomitant political deadlock. The individual importance of
these factors was differentiatied and amplified by the absence of


any class with truly overwhelming economic and political power in
a traditionally leading position or put into power by the revolu
tion itself. Among the basic external forces were foreign domin
ation interacting with Greece’s irredentist vision and with the
approaching international crisis. For two of the focal points of
World War I were the Middle East economically, and the Balkans
strategically: the two feet of clay on which tottered the very
target of Greek irredentism -- the enfeebled Ottoman empire.
The emphasis on the role of the bourgeoisie is more than
necessary. Between achieving independence in 1627 and the second
half of the 20th century, Greek history is marred by the weakness
of two classes, the peasantry and the bourgeoisie. This weakness
can be a great help in explaining the relative autonomy of Greek
politics from the underlying class structure; the pathological
importance of ideology as a political factor; the endless alter
nating of pluralist with authoritarian phases; the importance of
the State as a political factor after 1909 and especially after
1^22- and finally, the gradually increasing degree in the autono
my of the State-army complex from Greece's class structure, but
also its linkages with it by means of the technical rather than
social network of patronage, with its vertical rather than horizon
tal divisions, and its concomitantly immense potential for oppres sion.
121
3. Internal Army Causes of the Coup
3,1 Humiliation in relations with Turkey
The 1897 national defeat by Turkey and the scorn and contempt
the army-had to face subsequently caused an intense feeling of
* 114 humiliation among the officers. This was aggravated by the
government's policy of 'impeccable behaviour'-in relations with
Turkey, by the procrastination of the Cretan issue, by the dead
lock in the guerrilla struggle for Macedonia and by the slow rate of


122
Greece's rearmament efforts — in short, by a strong feeling of
impotence and frustration due to the country's military weakness
and administrative paralysis. This feeling became even more overt
and universal with the 1908 Young Turk revolt in Turkey. The mod
ernising emergence of the Young Turks, although it raised hopes
for greater liberalism in the Christian provinces of the empire, •
was an additional threat and humiliation for Greece. It was a
threat in that it could halt the Ottoman decadence and the concom
itant frequent interventions by the Powers, usually favourable for
Greece; it was a humiliation because it pointed the comparison
with the stagnation and pettiness within Greece.
The effect of the changes in Turkey on the Greek officers
was immediate. Between October 1908 and January 1909, the group
of ten sub-lieutenants had been unable to recruit more than fifteen
additional members. Then, in a matter of a few weeks, eighty more
officers joined them. This reaction has been-attributed to Gen
eral Shefket Pasha's sarcastic comment that he might walk over to
Athens to drink his coffee on the Acropolis. The incident, and
the humiliation felt because of the changes in Turkey, were1not,
of course, the sole causes of reaction among the Greek officers.
Every secret organisation, after all, begins with the recruitment
of a few members by the initial small group,' a mechanism which pro
ceeds very slowly at first until it gathers speed with the cumu
lative effect of geometric progression. Yet the incident and the
events in Turkey must decidedly have reduced the officers’ loyalty,
as they totally demolished the prestige and authority of the gov
ernment.^® • » »'•
Two more important causes of the coup were of a strictly mil
itary nature. One was the officers' discontent with military staff
positions being occupied by the Crown Princes, with the General
Command held by the heir to the throne, and the resulting conditions
of nepotism and inefficiency within the army. This situation was
made worse by the authoritarian mentality of the royal family and
the often vulgar behaviour of the Princes.*^-®; Another cause was
the non-commissioned officers’ discontent, generated by a 1908 law


preventing nco's from being promoted to the high ranks, in imita
tion of the German army organisation -- the first expression of
then Prince Constantine’s passion for all things German, a passion 117
which would deeply divide the country a few years later.
123
3.2 The officers’ class origins
Attributing undue importance to the officers’ class origins
is an analytical attitude common in the literature on military in
terventions in p o l i t i c s . C e r t a i n authors qualify it by refer
ence to the effect of the so-called esprit de corps and military
ideology. • This mixture is contradictory. The army is part of the
State; the values and norms transmitted by military education are
normally an integral part of the dominant ideology as endorsed by
the State; and officers are usually very young when first recrui
ted for their schools. But even when the majority of officers are
not graduates of military academies — in Creece of the 1900s only
about one-third of the officers were — their recruitment can be
based on a highly selective and personalised system, aimed at care
fully examining the officer-candidate’s family background and his
own personal convictions.
An officer corps may thus be recruited from all of the clas
ses without exception and be a perfect reflection of a country’s
class structure, yet every one of the officers may be totally un
related to the ideology of his family’s class and strongly at
tached to the dominant ideology endorsed and professed by the State
and ’tiie army.119 Considerations of self-preservation by the
State — a major objective, whether implicit or explicit — more
or less ensure that there will be no significant differences bet
ween, the dominant ideology and that of the officers. Hence the
mentality that will prevail in the officer corps depends on the
importance attached to this objective and the degree to which dif
ferences from the official ideology are tolerated. When the State
• and the dominant political and social agents are not threatened
or do not perceive any threat to this ideology and their own domin


124
ance, a certain laxity in both recruitment patterns and educa
tional orthodoxy may creep,in. This seems actually to have been
the case in pre-1909 Greece, and the sharp contrast with the 1945
to 1974 period may indeed be illuminating for anyone familiar with
the history of the Greek army. It is then in these 'non-threat'
cases that the officers' class origins may acquire increased i m - '
portance. Yet, whichever of the above ramparts of the military
establishment may be preponderant at one or other historical mo
ment, the fact remains that none of them may be considered as the
powder keg of military interventions in politics. The factors
that cause or allow such interventions should be sought deeper in
the social structures and conflicts as expressed in terms of pol
itical power — the very same factors, after all, which also de
termine the dominant ideology, the recruitment policies, the mil
itary education programmes,' and even the greater preference by
certain classes for the military profession.
The 1909 officers were mostly of upper and middle-class
origin, which seems also to have been the case with some of the
nco's4'* , though the majority of the latter came from middle-class
and petit-bourgeois families. This is merely mentioned as an in
cidental fact; in accordance with the above discussion'it must
not be seen as the cause of their uprising, nor does this make it
a revolution of the bourgeoisie. Even if it could be proved that
such a revolution occurred simultaneously with the coup, this
would not mean that the coup itself was an integral part of it.
To establish whether the uprising was in any way related to the 
middle class, it is necessary to examine the officers' programme
and their policies after they had seised power.
3.3 The officers* demands and policies:
military preoccupations and populist pretensions ,
The programme of the Military League contained nothing re
sembling the demands of a bourgeoisie in revolt, hidden behind the
bayonets. In the five points of this programme, the officers:


I.
- deplored the constant humiliation of Greece in her rela
tions with Turkey, caused by her insufficient military
strength;
- declared their allegiance to the Crown and the regime;
- nevertheless demanded that the Heir to the Throne and his
brothers be removed from their military posts;
- "respectfully requested" that in the future the King al
ways appoint one of the officers to the Ministries of the
Army and the Navy;
- demanded better administration of the country and reduction
of unnecessary expenses; this would allow a reduction of
the tax burden in favour of the "the Greek people who are
on the verge of starvation" and at the same time an in
crease in military expenditure.
t’
One of the five points was thus a declaration of allegiance
to the Crown and the regime, another was related to foreign policy,
and two dealt with military questions. Only the fifth contained
any demand of a social nature, reduction of taxes, and not in fa
vour of the middle class but of "the people". Even this seems to
have been added only to pay lip service to the cause and to some
how justify the other part of this same demand: an.increase of the
military budget.
t►.
Similarly, in the League's subsequent policy there was almost
no. stepping beyond the intentions announced in the programme, in
a direction favourable to the bourgeoisie. Conversely, a movement
to the left could be discerned, with some strong populist and es
sentially anti-bourgeois tendencies, apparent in the often incen
diary commentaries in Chronos. the League's semi-official news
paper. Most explicit was, for example, the attack on banks and
companies which were said to exercise "an immoral and disgraceful
influence upon Creek s o c i e t y " . F u r t h e r m o r e , . of the measures
taken many -were favourable to the lower classes, whereas quite a
few were harmful to both landowners and bourgeoisie, as will be
shown in the following paragraphs.
125


126
Finally, the call to bring in Venizelos was in no way a re
volutionary action, let alone that of a bourgeois revolution: it
was an act of despair. Confronted with constitutional deadlocks,
administrative and governmental failure, and especially with their
own total lack of" imagination, the officers sought a deus ex
machina. Whether Venizelos pursued a revolutionary pro-bourgeois
policy or not is another question, not related causally to the
1909 military coup, and one which will be examined at the end of
this chapter.^^
4. The Alleged Strife between Middle Class and Landowners
* in the Context of the 1909 Period
If, notwithstanding the above argument, it were temporarily
accepted that the coup was related to some kind of middle-class
revolt, one might justifiably ask: Did the bourgeoisie really
need to revolt in 1909? The question may seem strange, so wide
ly accepted is the belief that it was in that year that this class
confirmed its irresistible ascendency. Yet a second question is
inevitable: Against whom was the revolution directed? The only
possible targets could have been the Crown or the landed aristo-
cracy, but neither was the case in 1909. There can be no doubt
as far as the Crown is concerned; there is no trace of any such
conflict, neither had there been any economic or political ten
sion to instigate it. As for the landowners, their case has al
ready been sufficiently discussed to require only confirmation 
from examining the specific conditions and events of the 1909
period.
The first strong argument refuting the contention of a bour
geois revolt against the landowners is that it had no historical
past. It would be unrealistic to believe that a conflict ser
rious enough to lead to a revolution could have developed in the
few years immediately before the coup. Even if this were so,
the strife would undoubtedly have found expression in the demands
of the rebel officers, which was not in fact the case.


127
True, it seems that certain anti-landovner tendencies did
exist among the non-commissioned officers. Karaiskakis, their
leader and MP for Karditsa-Thessaly, was a fervent supporter of
land reform. A certain primitive agrarianism and vague populism
were rather common among the nco's, but these were not conscious
collective choices related to a class struggle against the land
owners, they were merely individual positions. In the manifesto
circulated by the nco’s and signed by Karaiskakis a week before
the coup there were a number of nationalist exorcisms, but no
mention of the peasant problem, and the same was the case for
the programme of the League itself.
In the cascade of laws that followed the coup -- all passed
by a gasping parliament relentlessly kept voting by the officers’
whips — there was not even the beginning of a solution to the
most crucial social and economic problem since independence. At
the height of what was supposedly a revolution against-the land
owners, the peasant uprising in Kileler was suppressed with blood
shed. Land reform was not imposed in 1909 but in 1924, and even
then handsome indemnities were offered to the Creek landowners -
one-hundred-and-thirty years after the Jacobin Constitution had
deprived the French landowners of any rights to indemnity.
If there had been any real conflict between bourgeoisie and
landowners other than the question of land reform, it would cer
tainly have climaxed into serious political battle long before it
exploded as a major revolution; and after the revolution it would
have been more or less resolved by a series of measures against
the landowners. Once more: this was not the case. There was some
talk of imposing a tax on income from land, for example, but the
scheme did net materialise when Finance Minister Eftaxias presen
ted the widely publicised first post-coup budget of 1910. There
was only one measure relating to the landowners, and this can be
considered as neither opposing their interests nor as a result of
serious strife» a tax on the number of animals used for farm la
bour was abolished for the small peasants and the collegoi, but
not for the landowners. It was evidently a measure directed


.123
not against the landowner but in favour of the small peasant.
It would have been scandalous, after all, to extend a tax exemp
tion to the rich at a time of intense efforts to redress the
country's finances. However, though the measure did not express
ly benefit the landowners, it did not harm them either.
The stand taken by the new political forces which had emerged
from the 1910 elections on the issue of land reform provides the
most explicit evidence against the contention of an anti-feudal
bourgeois revolt. Article 17 of the revised 1864/1911 Constitu
tion was formulated for the purpose of expropriating private pro
perty. During discussion in the Assembly, the proposal seemed
to be heading for a rejection not only by the old parties, but also
by the greater part of the liberals, the very party of the alleged12A *
ly anti-feudal bourgeoisie. Only Venizelos' personal interven
tion saved the Article from the "revolutionary anti-landowner"
zeal of his bourgeois followers. "
Even if economic strife had really existed and had indeed gen
erated a revolt of. the bourgeoisie, mobilisation of this class
would have been hindered by its stagnant political ideology. Al
though some progressive intellectuals of bourgeois origin suppor
ted the coup, the bulk of the bourgeois population was initially
against it. .So much so, in effect, that the British Consul in
Piraeus could attribute the 1909 recession, the worst for years,
mainly to the prevailing feeling among the trading community of
"... insecurity, owing to the unsettled political situation...", 128
and could one year later speak of "complete loss of confidence".
As for the intellectual avant-garde, it would be unrealistic to
attribute undue importance to the ten or so years of cultural de
velopment before 1909, and to suppose that they had been sufficient
to create a revolutionary consciousness and to ferment the alleged
revolt of the bourgeoisie in 1909. Moreover, with the exception
of vex-y few individuals, the intelligentsia was only relatively
progressive -- and not in the area of social and political ideolo
gy. It is not surprising that a letter sent shortly after the
coup by the great poet Palaraas to Penelope Delta, another bour


129
geois intellectual, said: "The situation in Greece today ... is (in
deed) bad and difficult... yet this cannot, it should not, stop
us from leading our lives (as decently as we can)..." How
could it be otherwise in a circle dominated by a Niettschean cult
and a fixation on classical Hellenism? Both these tendencies 
almost exclusively, though often latently — expressed a frustra
ted nationalism, if not actually chauvinism, but certainly not any
’typical* revolutionary bourgeois thirst for more political power , *130
and more economic opportunities.
5. Unrest among the Urban Lower Classes
If taxation was not a cause of conflict between landowners
and bourgeoisie, it was certainly the field on which the two domin
ant classes and the State confronted the lower-class urban popula
tion. Although the major cause of unrest among the lower classes
was the excess of indirect taxation, for the upper classes the lack
of direct taxes and especially of income tax was a cause for rejoi
cing rather than revolt. Whereas there were indirect taxes from
30% to 1,400% on items of popular, consumption and the tax burden on
peasants' and petit-bourgeois' incomes ranged from 10 to 40^, there
was a tax of only 5% on corporations.131 Greece enjoyed the high
est per capita taxation in the Balkans, 39 drachmas (£1.60) compared
to 26 in Roumania, 25 in Serbia, and 23 in Bulgaria. So if
there were plenty of signs of a rebellious effervescence among the
people, it was not among the middle class.
In 1908 Finance Minister Counaris proposed a budget which in
cluded a few new taxes. Shortly afterwards a wave of protest made
him resign and his proposals were withdrawn. One of them was jt
tax on alcohol, used as fuel at that time and extracted from cur
rants because of a chronic crisis of currant overproduction. Accor
ding to British diplomatic reports, "... the principal rock on
which Gounaris' was shipwrecked was the considerable tax ... on
alcohol" .which "... created many enemies ... among the powerful
societies associated with (alcohol) production..." (By "societies"


130
the British Consul most probably meant "companies".)133 Quite ob
viously, the tax would mostly have affected the low-income consu
mers, and not the alcohol industries which could simply increase
their prices in the pattern typical for taxes on goods with inelas
tic demand. The tax was also inoffensive to the currant growers,
of the Peloponnese whose level of production would hardly have
been affected. Yet neither the alcohol industrialists nor the
peasants bothered about refined economic analyses, and simply
joined the consumers in condemning the tax. The lobby which really
forced its withdrawal, as the above reports seem to suggest, was
the most powerful among them: the industrialists'.
Another measure Counaris had proposed was a light tax on
corporation dividends. The very few bourgeois to whom this applied
would hardly have stirred up much of a noise about it, yet this
measure too was withdrawn, silently and swiftly, ii) the shadow of
the alcohol tax.
Both these cases are illuminating. ■ In 1908 the bourgeoisie '
was able to avoid these very light tax burdens under the ancien
regime is allegedly desired to overthrow. One year later, after
its supposed revolution, it failed to avoid much more important
taxes on dividends; was obliged to endorse the principle and prac
tice of income tax; and was forced to accept even that immense
threat to the sacrosanctum of private property: an inheritance
tax/'134 . •
By the end of the first decade of the century, the urban
lower classes' unrest culminated in open contention. The above
mentioned 1908 measures brought a note of protest from the crafts
men's and workers' associations which was expressed in unusually
violent terms. The parties, explicitly called in this text a
"political oligarchy", were attacked vehemently.133 The guilds
submitted a second note of protest to the King in February 1909. ...
On 31 March, two-thousand members of the merchants' and shopkeepers'
associations paraded in front of the Palace to protest against the
strong-handed policy of the Piraeus Customs Authority.133


131
It is a common error to identify the bourgeoisie with the
associations and guilds that were mobilised before the coup. As
the guilds were also extensively mobilised after the coup and
made particularly radical demands, their correct classification
is indeed important for the explanation of the 1909 events. The
term 'guild* may have an historic past reminiscent of the early
bourgeoisie, but in Greece it was used for organisations of typ
ically petit-bourgeois professional groups, like bakers and crafts
men, or even for unions of workers in this period of embryonic
syndicalism.*13^ It is significant that when, after the coup, the
officers carelessly proposed to parliament a law providing for
penalties which would have made strikes virtually impossible, it ^
was guild lobbying that caused the withdrawal of these proposals.
As for the associations of merchants, the criterion should not
be merely their members' occupation, but rather their economic
function and social status, their income and their 'net worth',
in other words all those elements that classify the bulk of them
as small tradesmen and shopkeepers rather than entrepreneurs, as
Petit-bourgeois rather than bourgeois. That there were truly 
bourgeois elements within these associations is undeniable. It
was not their minorities, however, but rather the petit-bourgeois
majorities which elected their leadership. It does not come as a
surprise, therefore, that the only professional group which refused
bo participate in the critical mass demonstration on 14 September
1909 in support of the League was the entirely bourgeois Lawyers'
Association.*1383
Meanwhile, taxes and the continuing peasant problem had gen
erated a chronic upheaval in rural Greece. A just tax system had
been the foremost and basic demand of the somewhat petty rebellion
led by ex-Major Fikioris in Sparta as early as 1900. An anarcho
socialist movement had a certain success among the rural popula
tion of the Peloponnese in the 1900s. Many violent demonstrations,
staged by armed currant-growers during the first decade of the
century, were suppressed by the police and the army. The unrest
in rural Greece thus became fertile soil for the insurrectionist


132
aspirations of the ubai Iowa1classes These aspirations are dis
cernible not only in the already described activism of the petit
bourgeois associations, but also in the position of the students
and the press.
One week before the coup, the students of.Athens University
addressed a declaration to the King, asking for his intervention
against the inefficiency and corruption of the political parties.
Greek students at that time were known for conservatism rather
than radicalism.^*® Their pompous text, however, written in in
tricate purist Creek and asking the King to use his ‘punch"
against the politicians, speaks of emigration, tuberculosis, star
vation, and taxes, but not of middle-class sufferings or demands
or liberal ideas.
•■ ’ r . . Pre-1909 newspaper commentaries are also illuminating. Chronos
and Acropolis were the most vociferous, both'with clearly populist
and often anti-bourgeois leaders. Chronos became the League's
semi-official'mouthpiece and published many articles written by
141
Loidorikis, the Secretary-General of the League. In Acropolis.
the w'ell-known journalist Gavriclidis regularly wrote his incen
diary articles calling for a "peaceful revolution".. His propo
sals included the imposition of income tax and the reduction of
customs duties. :Both newspapers ran a referendum on their propo
sals in June/July 1909 and had a good response.
It was in these circumstances that the group of the non-com
misioned officers chose to form political base-organisations in
support of the League in the popular neighbourhoods of Athens.
The effort was undertaken belatedly and organised badly. If this
had been otherwise, the outcome of the 1909 events might easily
have been more radical in orientation.
Such, then, were the economic causes and the actualisation
of the popular outcry before 1909. The hard core of the potential
insurgents consisted understandably of the insecure petit-bourgeoisie


133
and the heavily exploited workers. At its periphery dwelled the
utterly miserable migrants who had come to Athens from the pro
vinces and were trying to leave for America. The gates of New
York remained shut as long as the great depression lasted. Fewer
than an average of 1,000 immigrants a year could leave Greece be
for the turn of the century, then 10,000 until 1905, and more
than 30,000 a year from then until 1910.143 In the few weeks,
months or years between their arrival in Athens and their emigra
tion, these desperate masses poured their venom into the already
poisonous social atmosphere of the capital and were an easy ally
Tor the petit-bourgeoisie and the working class. This is how
these people’s economic discontent and militancy provided a social
basis for the officers’ hesitant populism after 1909.
##*
The composition and demands of the 14 September 1909 demon
stration in support of the League will serve to confirm the argu-^
ment. The assembled crowd was calculated- to number about 1,000
out of a total Athenian population of less then 300,000. Even if
a ll the few thousand bourgeois of Athens had been present, which •
is d-oubtful, they were certainly a small minority in this crowd.
The very size of the demonstration, therefore, implies that the
middle class was not alone in the insurrection, and perhaps that
it was not even part of it.
Even if the bourgeoisie were to have been an insurgent class
before that demonstration, it is doubtful whether it would have
continued after it. The declaration voted by the participants
and banded over to the King — expressed in populist and leftist
berms — contained quite a few anti-bourgeois threats: “ 
"... the People ... considering that their lawful interests and rights are being sacrificed under the cover of a liberal regime, that their (parlia mentary) representatives have been transformed into an oligarchy ... (ruling) in coalition with an un taxed plutocracy whilst the People is groaning un• der the burden of unjust taxes etc.


134
Some of the demands that followed this preamble were:
"The imposition of income tax, but not under any circumstances•of new taxes on consumption; legis lation against usury imposing a maximum interest rate; the civil servants to become the people's servants; amelioration of the condition of the worker who labours in the worst of servitudes for the benefit of vested capital."
The major mass expression of the period indicates, there
fore, that the popular forces were urging the military to turn
the coup into a revolution which would naturally aim not at streng
thening, but rather at weakening the upper classes and especially
the bourgeoisie. It was to be directed against the "plutocracy"
and its bourgeois members, usury and its bourgeois practitioners,
the tax system and its bourgeois protégés.
The declaration which was voted at the 14 September meeting
appears to have been written by the group of the so-called Socio
logists, the black sheep and at the same time the enfants gâtés
of the progressive bourgeois intelligentsia.^^ Could these or
igins of the declaration imply that it was an elite-imposed, in
» tellectualiscd text, unrelated to any popular wishes? This seems
to be disproved by fact. The populist demand on the problem of r
taxation had been a central issue in all lower-class demonstrations
for many years before the coup. The text was actually voted by
the assembled people. It was discussed with and approved by the
leadership of the associations. It was also endorsed by the
League, and the officers would not have adopted it had it not ex
pressed genuine popular demands which would assure them the con- >
scious and consistent popular support they urgently needed. Be
cause this demonstration, one of the first significant events af
ter the coup, was crucial: it would show the real force behind
the opposing forces, and this would be vital in the bargaining
that had already begun between the officers, the parties, and the
King. That the officers chose to solicit the support of the lower'
classes rather than that of the bourgeoisie — how else could they
have adopted these anti-bourgeois d e m ands?— shows that there


135
were revolutionary tendencies among the former, but no hope of
active support among the latter. It also suggests that in the
tripartite strife between army, Crown and the old parties, the
officers themselves favoured the popular demands rather than the
interests of the bourgeoisie, which was thus either rejected or
not trusted as a potential ally.
The text of the declaration was not submitted to the King
and the government in its original form as approved by the people
assembled. It was amended by the Association leaders in order
to sound more respectful. An Pangalos puts it, "The revolutiona
ry roar of.the people was transformed by the pusillanimous dwarfs
of its committee into the mournful supplicatory mewing of a star
ving k i t t e n " . T h i s of course was a typically petit-bourgeois
way of approaching a bourgeois government and challenging bour
geois legitimacy. For the officers' uprising was not a social
revolution, and when it occurred it was not supported by the self
confident animal that is the bourgeoisie in the economically mature
conditions of a 'typical' bourgeois revolution. The real suppor
ters of the officers' uprising were the ideologically immature
and confused, the, economically and politically weak petit-bour
gois, in alliance with the few workers and the Lumpenproletariat
of Athens.*147
.* # # ••
Two major political factors of this period seem to have
diagnosed the situation in a way similar to the above analysis:
the so-called Protectors, as represented by the Ambassadors of
England and France, and Vcnizelos.
• Nothing reveals more clearly where the heart of the revolu
tion lay than this quotation from the English Ambassador's report
one month before the coup: "There is a strong and dangerous dis
content amongst the lower orders and considerable alarm is felt
*>y the upper classes". After the coup, too, the ambassadors were


136
deeply concerned about what they called "dangerous resentment"
among the people. Their persistence on this matter clearly shows
that they did not see the 1909 revolt as a plain coup or as a n 
uprising against the landowners. They saw it as a jstill amorphous
but potentially threatening revolution of the army and certain
sections of the population, which could well evolve towards rad
ical populist solutions and possibly a change of regime. It is
doubtful whether the ambassadors of the two major bourgeois States
would have exhibited such fears if they had perceived the situa
tion as an ongoing bourgeois transformation. ' The objection that?
a revolutionary middle class might overthrow the King, while the
Powers were interested in keeping him in his place, does not
stand serious scrutiny. The Powers knew, in fact, that a purely
bourgeois'revolt in Greece would certainly not overthrow the
Crown, for the Greek middle class had no reason to be, and indeed
*148
was not, hostile towards the King. — *
Venizelos seems to have arrived at the same conclusion..There
are many indications that he, like the two ambassadors, feared
more than anything else the popular outcry and the probability of
the situation getting out of control. One of these indications is
particularly significant: Venizelcs’ analysis of the situation’
at his first meeting with the representatives of the League. The
entire meeting was essentially oriented towards finding ways to
preserve law and order and to protect, if not strengthen, the
Crown. Neither the Crown nor the bourgeois legality, of course,
were threatened by the bourgeoisie or by the docile leadership of
the League. The threat came from below, from the lower classes *14-9
and the radical younger officers.
The confrontation was not, in fact, avoided. It came, but
was handled in masterly fashion by Venizelos. During his historic
speech in the central square of Athens, Venizelos faced a huge
anti-royalist crowd which kept interrupting him, rejecting the re
form he was advocating and demanding a Constituent Assembly. He
insisted, raised his voice above that of the crowd, and firmly
reiterated his own choice. The people were silenced. In this


137
famous incident Greek historians saw the confirmation of the ex
ceptional impact a charismatic leader may have upon history, and
rightly so. Certain questions have remained unasked, however.
If there had been no charismatic leader on that balcony but in
stead the placid leader of the coup, would the crowd have been si
lenced? In this case, would Greek society in subsequent years
have undergone the same process of bourgeois transformation? And
what would have happened if the demonstration had been addressed
by some Greek Cracchus Baboeuf? The crowd met only fifty yards
from the parliament, five hundred from the Royal Palace.
«
6. A Tentative Synthesis
6.1 The military
Following the above discussion, how is the 1909 coup to be
properly classified? Far from being the ' instrument of an irresis
tible bourgeoisie, the military revolted against the political elite
wishing to replace it by a more competent and less corrupt leader
ship within the same bourgeois institutional framework. In this
they proceeded as a political agent relatively autonomous from the
country’s class structure, under the pressure of mainly external
*•
and military conditions. One must not be misled by this autonomy,
however: it could only be relative, as indeed it was. Both its
emergence and its functioning were determined by the prevailing
political and social conditions. ,
Its emergence was brought about by the weakness of the dom
inant classes, the power of the Crown and relative independence
of the political oligarchy from social conflict, the weight of ‘
foreign interference -- indeed, by all the major characteristics
of Greek society and politics. In other words, autonomy was p o s s
ible because of the conditions of instability or at best a pre
carious balance among social and political forces, and the non
existence of dominant classes with overwhelming power.’’151 It is
unlikely that the army could have become autonomous had the bour
geoisie been a well-established, dominant class; or had the pol
itical- oligarchy been sufficiently powerful, properly integrated
into the social and economic system, responsive not only' to its
petty demands but also to its vital needs and adaptable to its •
changes in the crucial period of international economic uncertain
ty and political upheaval prior -to .World War I . ^ 52


13S
The manner in which this autonomy operated, its functioning
and its limits, were also determined by the above factors. The
army was an integral part of a bourgeois State, itself fairly au
tonomous from the complexities of Creece's social structure, yet
closely related to the political oligarchy through the bonds of a
sophisticated system of patronage and spoils. How far could the
military go in their struggle against this oligarchy? As far fes
accepting a mere change of government. How far could they chal
lenge the bourgeois legality? As far as to beg an amnesty the
very day of their coup. The officers’ ideology was determined'
not merely by their class origins, but also by their education or
at least their mutual cultural interaction within a more or less
elitist army. How could they even have thought of radical econ
omic and social changes? Why would they not remain content with
the Megali Idea and the status quo, embellished by the humanistic
«153
verbalism of "the People on the verge of starvation"?
6.2 The role of the middle class in the 1909 revolt .
It is pointless to go to extreme lengths, led by a narrow .
evolutionism, to find a*bourgeois revolution in Greek history.
Put quite bluntly, there never has been one because there never
*154 : . . . .
was any need for one. The 1843 uprising that caused King .
Otho’s constitutional concessions, for example, may seem near the
model of a bourgeois revolution, but.it took place at a time when
almost no bourgeoisie existed.
Where the case of 1909 is concerned, the misinterpretation
is more justified. The coup was in fact followed by such progress
in capitalist growth and concomitant middle-class power, by such
strengthening of the bourgeois institutions, by so vigorous an
assertion of a great bourgeois party, that the temptation to cau
sally link these evolutions with the coup is almost irresistible.
However justified this may seem, it remains a misinterpreration.
Thus Venizelos was not the effect of the awakening of the middle .
class, as is often claimed, but rather one of its causes. The
Crown and its British and local consultants, anxious to prevent a
potential radicalisation of the officers’ movement and frightened
by the initially amorphous yet threatening popular support for the
League,:tried to neutralise these forces by playing the game sug
gested by Venizelos. He in turn was convinced, and not without
justification, that this game was the only one that could, given


the international conditions, serve the interests of Greece. Led
by this conviction and his own fervent ambition, he opted for a
transformation of Greece into a truly bourgeois.society. This
meant a class-conscious, long-term oriented, economically powerful
middle class that would also be politically dominant without the
now useless landed class in tow and with the autonomy of the pol
itical elite seriously curtailed. On the institutional level,
this meant a consistently bourgeois, liberal regime, a King play
ing the role of watchdog rather than shepherd, and well-organised
bourgeois parties, preferably no more than two, administering the
country.*155
It was not precisely these options, of course, whj.ch were
explicitly presented to the electorate in 1910 and 1912; neither
was there any concrete programme of bourgeois transformation which
was enthusiastically approved by the majority, including a good
Part of the middle class.*156 The enthusiasm appears to have been
for Venizelos rather than his visions, for the concrete prospect
°f pulling the country out of stagnation and humiliation rather
than the abstract choice of a bourgeois transformation. That Veni
zelos’ visions were truly bourgeois and as such truly revolutiona
ry» or that the bourgeoisie ultimately adhered to them, does not
mean that the 1909-12 period witnessed a revolution of the bour
geoisie.' It simply means that the ambiguous revolt of the army
ftnd the ideologically confused revolutionary support it generated
among the lower classes were canalised into bourgeois channels.
This was the achievement of a charismatic leader who was able to
convince the Crown and the foreign protectors that this solution
was indeed best in terms of their own interests, and who thus ob
tained their support. 15^
This same charismatic leader did not, of course, and could
not make his choices independently of the forces that determined
Greece's internal social structure. It was obvious to him that the
option of a bourgeois transformation, supported by the foreign
Protectors and by the diaspora capitalists, promised a more stable
Political development and faster economic growth than a solution
risking their wrath. Moreover, his solutions had to reconcile the
Powers' concern to keep Greece under control, with Greece's need
to acquire the population and the riches of her provinces still.


under Turkish rule. His success depended, therefore, on the com
patibility of his options with all the above conditions, external£
and internal. But compatibility need not imply causal connection.
6.3 The middle class after 1909
The economic and demographic growth of the bourgeoisie had
become inevitable by the second decade of the century. The neces
sary conditions were present already; the liberals were to pro
vide an institutional and legal framework coupled with the appro
priate economic policy.
The post-1910 economic boom and the concomitant benefits for
the middle class — both as a rule attributed at least partly to
good government -- marked the turning point: it was then that
this class began orienting itself massively towards Venizelos. It
is doubtful whether this could have happened before he had had a
chance to prove himself, or before the effects of the economic
recovery were felt. In 1911, for example, following Venizelos'
pro working-class measures, the middle class reacted angrily, and
the rumour spread quickly that Venizelos was nwooing and. rabble*159
rousing the workers".
There were of course exceptions of immediate and enthusias
tic support by certain bourgeois and quasi-bourgeois elements;
exceptions in the shipowning section of the bourgeoisie, of a few
lucid individuals, and of certain diaspora groups that began or
ienting themselves towards permanent establishment in Creece. But
these exceptions merely proved the rule. The reasons behind the
immediate and unconditional support by certain individuals was
often .personal, an effect of their education and progressive pol
itical thinking. As for the support of the local shipowners and
certain diaspora groups, this was caused by the changing assess
ment of their collective interests. There was rising anxiety
among these diaspora elements about their future in the various
countries where they had established themselves, which was due ■


t. 141
either to local xenophobic movements as in Roumania, Egypt and
Turkey^®, or to increasing social problems, as in Russia. It
was therefore natural that these people should feel the need for
a new place of residence, possibly a new passport, and certainly
a national centre that would properly protect their interests out
side Greece, in other words a Greek State something more than a
puppet on the international political stage. It is not by chance
that only around the turn of the century did the diaspora begin
to contributeV heavily with funds to Greece's armament needs 
for example, the donation of a whole cruiser by Averof. The same
argument applies to the shipowners. The need in the shipping in
dustry for a patron State was very understandable at a time of
rising antagonism on the high seas, partly intensified by Germany's
new imperial ambitions.
In consequence, part of the diaspora and the shipowning sec
tion of the local bourgeoisie supported Venizelos.immediately when
he appeared on the scene and projected his youthful personality
and his promising leadership potential. Simultaneously, the econ
omic conditions inside Creece herself were also changing. Under
their impact, strongly felt during the very first years of Veni
zelist rule, other and larger sections of the middle class were
also gradually attracted to the liberals. This process was neither
one-dimensional in form, nor linear in movement. Furthermore, it
had deep and varied effects. All these elements, therefore, re
quire a careful and somewhat longer analysis.
The Balkan wars had greatly increased the size of the local
market: by 1913, the population was two times that of 1909, four
times that of 1880. The unemployed among this population, those
who would consume without producing, could now emigrate cn masse
to America. Those who stayed worked for relatively low wages „and
then consumed nearly all of their income, pumping profits into
the emerging industrial sector, and the proceeds from indirect
taxes into the State budget. The war expenses not only stimulated
Production, but also yielded handsome direct returns:'the plains
the North, the riches of Crete, the trade of Thessaloniki. A
dooming, international economy created or re-opened markets for


142
Greece's products and opportunities for the Greek merchants and
shipowners. These favourable conditions came to full fruition
with the fever of the Great War. Now the profits came into Greece
not only through her merchant ports, but also via the Balkan front.
Initially confined to Serbia and Callipoli, it expanded to neutral
Greece by 1916, and all over the Balkans when Greece and Roumania
entered the war in 1917.
During the same period, the new and vigorous liberal party,
endowed the country with the basic legal and organisational struc
tures of a modern State and followed a sound economic policy, .¡in
cluding a protectionaism that greatly encouraged the country's
primitive industry. A reflection of this effort and of the above
favourable economic conditions was the new robust image of the
middle class, an image clearly indicated by the figures already
mentioned (chapter B).
Historians of the period tend to overlook the importance of
the favourable economic conditions, and to overestimate the Or
ganisational and generally political causes of this transition
to a triumphant capitalism and to the political dominance of the
bourgeoisie, in one word, of the bourgeois transformation. It
is very doubtful whether good government alone would have been
sufficient to bring it about had the local and international econ
omic conditions been unfavourable. tNot that underlining of the
economic factor in this analysis implies a rigid and universally
applicable economism; the case of Japan for example is a good
warning against such simplifications. In Greece the added weight
of the economic factor was due to certain clearly local peculiar
ities, such as the nature of her economy or the mentality of her,
entrepreneurs.
Defeating good political leadership, in fact, the evils of t
a peripheral position would have blocked the transformation un- .
less counter-balanced by an exceptionally favourable conjuncture.
Lack of the range of resources needed for an autonomous take-off;
exploitation of many of the existing resources by foreigners;


143
export of numerous products in their crudest and cheapest form;
the small size of the market; short-term entrepreneurial mental
ity; hoarding practices; lack of capital — all these familiar
conditions meant that Greece's transformation depended on the
health of the great masters, on the capricious graphs of the in
ternational business cycle, and on the existence of at least a
few favourable factors in the internal market. In other words,
they meant an exceptional dependence on the economic factor, its
dominance over the political-organisational one.
That it is very difficult, if not impossible, for a peri
pheral country to base its economic take-off on its own primitive
markets for goods and capital is a commonplace. That it is dif
ficult even given an ideal institutional and legal mechanism op
erated by the most brilliant political elite is what has needed
clarification. The implications of this conclusion are illumin
ating. In the forcing-frame of what was essentially a war economy
and within bourgeois institutions that had been maturing for more
than half a century, the transformation would have occurred any
way. it would have occurred without the encouragement of the
1909 revolt, and quite plausibly even without the organisational
contribution of the liberal governments. The transformation would
have been different perhaps, less spectacular, it would probably
have caused more and severe disarticulations and upheavals on the
economic and social level — but it would have occurred. A sound
economic policy coupled with protectionism, as well as a reorgan
isation of the State and of the legal system would then have been
imposed upon the political leadership ex rost facto, as an effect
these troubles, as a necessity. And imposed by the economic
conditions of war, electoral needs or even by revolution, such
Progress would have seemed an effect rather than a cause of the
transformation. But in both instances, the true and the hypo
thetical, the political factor was cause as well as effect. This,
a^ter all, is strongly suggested by the chronological coincidence
the three processes, political, social,, and economic. Seen
in this light* these processes can be explained in less linear


144
terms. There is no more truth in a causal sequence of the type
'rise of a bourgeois party - creation of animation of bourgeois
institutions, laws, policies - rise of the middle class - econ
omic growth' than there is in its reverse. There is no need
for any sequence whatsoever, for the process evolved as a complex
system of interacting parts.
In a manner of speaking, this process functioned as an osmo
sis between the social and the political level. The liberals
mixed gradually with the bourgeoisie through friendship and pat
ronage, marriage and lobby. The State was not merely reorganised,
but also gradually invaded by bourgeois and petit-bourgeois friends,
protégés and relatives of both the new dominant groups, the libr
eral politicians and the middle class. This youthful socio-pol
itical complex Bourgeoisie-Party-Bureaucracy was thus the creature
and at the same time the creator of the new legal systems and re
gulations, the new economic and social policies, the new ideolo• n 162
gical messages.
Seen from another standpoint, this process of the liberals'
embourgeoisement was also a gradual initiation of the bourgeoisie
into the game of political power. Not that this class had had
no political power before. It had, but exerted it through particu
laristic, individual concerns and practices, and not through class
action, which is after all suggested also by its ideological
orientation towards comjyador competitiveness on the level of the
individual, and irredentism on the level of the social group. In
this new period, however, the emphasis began to shift towards
general class interests.because of the new development prospects,
and to a search for a more concrete ideology because of the new
threats from a growing working class and from imported revolution.
It is not by chance that the term 'bourgeois regime' came into
frequent use during this period, even before the October Revolu
tion in Russia; that preachings on the need to preserve this re
gime in Greece were then much more common than before 1909; and
that many of these discussions took place in parliament itself
and were often led by Venizelos, the most perceptive of the bour
geois leaders.


145
Chapter E
REVOLUTION AND THE FALL OF THE DYNASTY. 1922-1924
1. Introduction
1.1 Brief summary of events. 1912-22
The 1912 war of Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria and Montenegro
against Turkey ended with the allies' victory and the annexation
by Greece of Epirus, Macedonia and several Aegean islands. But
the vast territories that had been at stake inevitably became the
apple of discord among the allies later on. The 1913 war against
Bulgaria too was victorious for Greece. The gains this time were
the plains of Eastern Macedonia and Western Thrace. Once again
Greece had a common frontier with Turkey, but now her islands
formed a rampart against Asia Minor and her armies were facing
Constantinople.
Constantine, meanwhile enthroned as King, Rad been the leado~ of
these armies but not quite the only man responsible for their vic
tories: Venizelos had taken not merely all the political decisions
during the war, but also some of the vital military ones. However,
anxious to give the State a safe foundation of solid institutions,
Venizelos promoted the royal symbol among the people and, keen to
Prepare the nation—at—arms for the final assault towards the east,
exalted Constantine's image as military leader. <I
The harmonious idyll was not to last. The Kaiser's efforts
to capitalise on the support of his Greek son-in-law, and Veni
zelos' belief that Greece on the contrary had much to gain from
joining the Entente unconditionally, brought about the acute dis
agreement between the two men as to Greece's neutrality in the
Great War. On 25 February 1915 Venizelos resigned. From then on
the situation deteriorated rapidly and irreparably.. The dichasmos
spread throughout the country, to begin with in the form of a bit
ter journalistic war, then with the first 1915 election. Although
the government conducting this election was led by the royalist


146
Counaris, the liberals were the victors and Venizelos formed his
cabinet again. Constantine's intransigence brought about his
prime minister's renewed resignation on 24 September 1915. Another
dissolution of parliament was considered unconstitutional by the
liberals, who declared they would abstain from the elections pro
claimed for 6 December.
In November 1915 the Entente armies, their Callipoli campaign
having meanwhile failed, were transferred to Thessaloniki: the
new Macedonian front was to be deployed on the soil of neutral
Greece. This flagrant infringement of international law was, as
it were, legitimised by the Greek electors' approval of Venizelos'
foreign policy. In July 1916, Greek officers stationed in Thessa
loniki staged a coup, and on 13 September Venizelos and Admiral
Countouriotis left Athens to join the rebels. General Danglis,
the King's honorary aide-de-camp, completed the triumvirate that
was to lead the new Creek State of the North. • *
The allies' interference in the affairs of Greece had mean
while continued and was shortly to culminate in the November 1916
sea-blockade of Athens, the seizure of Greece's warships, and the
disembarkation of allied army units in Athens. The demonstrations
that followed, and the street-fighting of 18 November, as well as
the royalists' terrorist raids against the Athenian liberals on 19
November, led to the humiliation of the Greek flag in front of the
allied flags in Athens in January 1917, and finally to the 29 May
allied note to the Athenian government which was actually an ulti
matum. . Constantine had to comply: he left the country, Alexan
der ascended the throne, the country was formally reunified, and
Venizelos set up his new government in Athens.,
Greece thus entered the war, and Venizelos' wishes at last
came true, solidly supported by a Greek army of 300,000 men. By
1919, the treaties of Neuilly and of Sevres had allocated to
Creece the territories of south-western and eastern Thrace, the
islands of Imvros andTenedos and, under special international
regime, the Smyrna region of Asia Minor.


147
On the other side of the frontier with Turkey, the situation
was aiso changing rapidly. Whilst the Sultan's puppet government
in Istanbul had to comply with the allies' orders, the Ankara
government of Kemal Atatürk refused to acknowledge Greece's newly
acquired rights, terrorised the Greek population of the Black Sea
littoral, and prepared for war. Venizelos, basing himself on the
unofficial support of the British government, landed Creek troops
in Smyrna on 2 May 1919. Soon afterwards Greece, with the appar
ent indifference of the allies, and later on the latent and open
hostility of France and Italy, began her Asia Minor entanglement.
The first year of the war saw a victorious advance of the
Greek army, clouded only by the inevitable acts of brutality
against the Turkish population. Kemal Atatürk retreated to a
line of defence west of Ankara, with the depth of Asia Minor be
hind him. In Greece, elections were soon to be held. With the
memory of his triumph at Sèvres still fresh in their minds, Veni
zelos expected the people to crown him with laurels. But on 1 bov
ember 1920 the vote turned against him. The new royalist govern
ment called a referendum for 20 November in which the majority
voted for Constantine's return. Whatever the latent wishes of
the people, however, the evils of war could not be exorcised,
least of all by Constantine, the proclaimed enemy of Greece’s
sole potential saviours, the Powers of the entente. Deprived of
financial support, the Greek economy quickly deteriorated and the
government was soon obliged to devalue the drachma by fifty per
cent. Deprived of diplomatic support, the army was soon led into
desparate large-scale offensives which bled it to exhaustion and
destroyed its morale. When Kemal Atatürk counter-attacked on
13 August 1922, the brittle Greek front collapsed.
The allies' shameless and humiliating interference before.
1917; ' the martial-law parliamentarianism of the 1917-1920 per
iod; the arbitrary and often dictatorial methods of many Venize
list cadres; • the popular emotion engendered by King Alexander's
death and the concomitant prospect of exiled King Constantine's
return; but above all the people's exhaustion after eight years


of wars and civil strife — such were the main causes of Venizelos
fall. Immediately after the 1920 elections, the great leader left
politics and went into self-imposed exile. He was to return, but
the days of his greatness had passed; the political movement he
had constantly striven for was already condemned; and the progres
sive bourgeoisie he had hoped to place at the head of the country
was already losing vital ground to its conservative counterpart,
even within its own bastion, the Liberal Party — but this is a
subject for the forthcoming chapters to examine.
#**
Venizelos' revolt against the King will not be considered in
detail in this work since it does not form part of the present
subject matter, economic and social change and military interven
tion in politics. The causes of this revolt were almost exclu
sively related to Greece's position in the international political
game as it was shaped in the personal conflict between Premier and
King. The participation on the side of Venizelos by certain of
ficers and army units should not be misinterpreted. The crucial
element was the support, indeed the open military intervention,
of the a l l i e s . F r o m then on, the dichasmos as a question over
neutrality in the war, as a political conflict, and as an issue
on the nature of the regime operated across, not along class lines
Simultaneously, the continually imminent or actual war also con
tributed to the transcendence of economic and social conflict in
some kind of a domestic truce imposed by the deadly external dan
ger: in the decade from 1912 to 1922, Greece was in a state of
war for not less than seven years. There was the war against
Turkey in 1912, against Bulgaria in 1913, against the Central
Powers in 1917-19, and again against Turkey between 1918 and 1922.
This work will, of course, concern itself with the continua
tion of the dichasmos after the end of these wars; with those
of its ideological effects which are relevant; with the causes
of its intra-class divisive capacity; with the general motives
of the social forces that followed its protagonists; and with the


149
economic growth during the decade of wars. All these questions,
however, will beexarained in the context of the p'ost-1922 period
when they became primary factors in the evolution of Creek so
ciety — not because this was the period of their maturity, but
mainly because they then were not obstructed and overshadowed by
the agony of the war, the commands of the Great Powers, and the
climax of Creek irredentism.
1.2 Main events of the revolutionary period. 1922-24
As in the preceding paragraph, the purpose of this summary
is to facilitate the reader who may not be familiar with the his
tory of this period, and to relieve the main text •of the chapter
of frequent historic parentheses and footnotes. The events to
he mentioned are intimately relevant to the forthcoming analysis,
and constitute the major stages of the strife over the choice of
regime. The protagonists were the republicans, the bloc of roy
alists, and the neutral Venizelists. The events to be summarised
begin with the September 1922 military coup, but the discussion
will centre on the period between the October 1923 royalist coun
ter-coup and the April 1924 referendum which abolished the mo
narchy.
The collapse of the Asia Minor front led on 11 September
1922 to the armed forces coup which installed the so-called Revo
lutionary Government of Colonels Plastiras and Conatas. Plastiras,
a Venitelist, acquired the ambiguous but powerful post of Leader
°f the Revolution. The premiership went for a short time to a
civilian and then to Conatas, a moderate ex-royalist who had by
then become a neutralist on the regime issue. On 15 November,
six men — Field Marshal Hadjianestis, as well as the prime minis
ter of the deposed government and four other leading royalist
politicians — met their death by firing squad. The.decision was
taken by a court martial presided over by the Veniselist Ceneral
Othonaios, despite Venizelos1 strong opposition to the execution.


i
150
Venizelos' attitude had undergone dramatic changes. He was
now convinced that the dichasmos had best be forgotten and the
Crown saved. When, immediately after the 1922 coup, he inter
vened for the first time in the heated issue of the regime, his
pathetic telegramme from his self-exile in Paris shows his new
position very clearly and suggests both the short-term and the
long-term causes behind it:
' "... I am absolutely convinced that a violent change of regime will alienate Greece from (her) foreign friendships and that, in conditions of perpetual ... anomaly, internal enemies w'ould have the opportunity to destroy the great achieve ments of the past decade... (whereupon) the curse of the nation will fall on the conspirators’ -.gheads."
The execution was a grave but not a fatal blow to Venizelos
plans. The unnatural and precarious revolutionary-governmental
coalition of moderate royalists, neutralists, and Venizelists
was shaken but not broken. Conatas remained in the government.
Some royalist officers, not without justification, continued to
believe that what really mattered was to save the institution of
the monarchy, and this was sufficiently warranted by Venizelos’ .
conciliatory attitude.
• Such trustfulness was, however, shared by very few of the .
royalist officers. Those strongly doubting Venizelos’ sincerity
decided, therefore, that it was safer to gamble at two tables.
A royalist counter-coup, led by Cenerals Leonardopoulos and
Gargalides, took place on 22 October 1923. It was organised by
the junta of intransigent royalists known as the Organisation of
the Majors•**^, and supported, if not guided, by Metaxas. The
two generals were not committed to any of the opposed blocs.
To persuade them to accept the leadership, the majors had to con
ceal their monarchist objectives as well as Metaxas’ involvement
The same precautions were taken towards other officers whose sup
port was solicited by the junta on the basis of their hostility
to their rebel colleagues , or because of personal ambitions and
allegiances. When the generals finally did accept, they were


151
under the mistaken impression that they would control the junta
and that the objectives of the coup would be "the dissolution
of the Revolution(ary) Committee, the resignation of the govern
ment in favour of a (new) government of general consent ... which
will guarantee prompt elections under the electoral law of the
pre-1922 period, so that the will of the Greek people be ^ree^ g
expressed" It became known after the failure of the coup
that one or two of the King’s aides-de-camp had been involved.
Notwithstanding this, or Metaxas’ role, nor the majors' royalist
background, government reaction was to remove the responsible
officers from service, court-martial them, and then ensure that
the decisions of the court were never carried out.
However, the protests of the republicans and certain^key
members of the revolution — officers like Pangalos, Hadjikyriakos
and Kondylis — forced the government to call a conference of
"leading personalities" on 31 October and finally bring up the
issue for discussion. The questions asked were whether or not
the regime should be changed and, if yes, whether this should be
done before the election by "informal consensus of the Army, the
Navy, and the People"(sic), or after the election of a Constit
uent Assembly.170 The 'leading personalities' happening to be
pro-royalist — the monarchist participants openly so, the Veni
zelists ambiguously — the government declared that there was no
reason to change the policy followed up to then, which had not
been republican but, in essence, pro-monarchist.
This government policy was closely related to that of the
Venizelist party. Indeed, on 4 November 1923 the liberals an
nounced that they "do not accept that the regime issue be raised
during the coming elections". This^position was made even more
explicit by the declaration of 21 November, stating that the
party "does not raise the regime issue, nor does it stand for a
republican regime, and will co-operate with other political groips
only if they agree to those principles."171 Following this de
claration, a number of important cadres left the party, formed a
liberal-republican group and collaborated with the Democratic


152
Union, the party formed by Papanastassiou and other Venizelists
of the Left only a few months earlier.
Meanwhile, the leadership of the revolution had made an abor
tive effort to promote the formation of a new moderate party
around veteran politician A. Zaimis , the main short-term ob
jective of which was to lead the country to elections. Indeed,
entrusting this task to one of the established political agents
was difficult. The revolutionary leadership did not particularly
want this responsibility; the various mutually opposing forces
within it could not agree on the liberal party leading the elec
toral government because it had been too deeply involved in the •
dichasmos; the royalists were out of the question; and the re
publicans were small and viewed with suspicion by the conservative
elements within the revolution. Another, possibly more important
objective of the move towards a coalition party seems to have been to
assure conservatives and moderates .that they too had a chance of participa
ting in such government as might come to decide about the regime*
Considering these objectives, it is clear that the unexpectedly
docile and reconciliatory attitude Venizelos imposed on the liber
als made the new party obsolete before it could become active: the
conciliatory role would be played by the great liberal leader
himself.' . ■ >. . . . . .
The elections of 15 December 1923 took place without the
participation of the royalist parties, and abstentions amounted ■
to 30^.; Out of a total of 397 seats, the Venizelists won 250,
the republicans (Democratic Union and Republican Liberals) 120,
the Independent Monarchists 6, and the remaining 21 went to v a r - /
ious independent candidates among whom was one socialist elected
with mainly communist votes. (The total communist vote in the
country was 18,000}^'*
The day after the election, the republican officers of the
Military League (Stratiotikos Syndesmos), led by Ceneral Otho
naios.issued what despite its mild content may be termed a pro- ■
174
nunciamento, demanding the abolition of the monarchy. The :.


153
government having accepted a compromise, the King left the country
two days later. This compromise lay in the legal formula invented
to cover his departure and was a major constitutional novelty:
the King had gone "on leave".
On 4 January 1924, convinced by his lieutenants' calls and
largely by their rivalries in the regime issue, Venizelos returned
to Greece after his three-year self-exile. Not only did he ensure
that his party would not take up an anti-royalist stand in the
coming referendum, but he also, through the use of his parliamen
tary majority, endeavoured to postpone the decision on the date
of the referendum and to ensure that only a majority of over
would abolish the monarchy. His failure to find a prime minister
who would be docile enough to follow his instructions blindly and
the rivalries among Venitelist cadres led him to fill the post
himself.^ 5 But not for long. The reaction to his pro-royalist
efforts from within his own party, as well as the republicans',
violent disapproval of his clemency to the rebels of the 1923
coup, led to his resignation only a few weeks later. The same am
biguity on the regime issue, the republican officers’ threats, and
strong criticism from the press brought the resignation of his suc
cessor, Kafandaris. On 14 March 1924 the Regent asked the repub
lican leader Papanastassiou to form a minority government. Veni
zelos having left the country again, the final schism in his party
occurred on 21 March. Three groups emerged, the 'genuine liberals'
under Sophoulis, the 'conservatives’ under Michalakopoulos, and
Kafandaris' ’progressive liberals' (approximately 60, 30 and
100 MPs respectively).
The referendum of 17 April 1924 ratified the abolition of the
monarchy by 69.9%. Although the new leader of the Populist Party,
Tsaldaris, claimed with some justification that there had been
electoral fraud, it is certain that a substantial majority of the
electorate did vote republican.
On the basis of the regime issue, therefore, the political
forces in operation before the 1924 referendum can be divided into


154
three formal groups: a) on the republican side, the republican
officers, Papanastassiou's Democratic Union, and the republican
politicians of Venizelist origin, as well as the small communist
party; b) on the monarchist side, the dispersed and disorganised
remnants of the royalist parties, the royalist officers, and
Metaxas' conservative party; c) in between, neutral in appearance
but pro-monarchist in reality, the liberal party with strong in
fluence on Plastiras and, through him, on the revolutionary gov
ernment. This formal division, however — as will be argued in
the following pages — did not reflect the real distribution of>
forces.
;- 2, The Ambiguities of the 1922 Coup
The 1922 coup is often described as republican and radical.
This erroneous interpretation is based on the'subsequent abolition
of the monarchy and the execution of the Six, as well as the psy
chological impact of these events. Yet the 1922 rebels did not
take a radical anti-royalist position. , The government demanded
not the abolition of the monarchy, but simply King Constantine's
abdication in favour of his heir, Crown Prince George — thus .
compromising between the demands of the royalist and republican
stand. '
The punishment of those responsible for the debacle had al
ready been pre-announced by the coup leaders who actually arres
ted those six and intended to summarily court-martial and execute
them. This, however, was inspired not by a coherent republican
attitude, but rather by impulsive reactions to the stress of fail
ure and the need for scapegoats — a need felt strongly even by
the royalist officers. The emotiveness and resiliency of this;
intention became evident ¿s early as the second day after the
coup, when the ambassadors of the foreign powers intervened dras
tically in favour of the arrested. The Revolutionary Committee


155
issued a communiqué announcing that the arrested would ” ... re
main in custody until the future (parliamentary) Assembly decides
•* 178 on the procedure for their prompt trial” .
That the Six were finally tried and executed was due to heavy
pressure by the radical officers, the soldiers, and the people.
The military government had to comply if it wished to obtain the
support it needed. Without popular support it would not be able
to reorganise the army, successfully collect new taxes, and thus
face the Turkish threat and honorably negotiate peace. There was
also a danger that the revolution might be outflanked by the most
radical of the republicans, by officers and civilians — as will
he explained later on in this chapter. The anti-royalists had
managed, chiefly by sheer intimidation, to take over many adminis
trative and governmental posts. The most radical republicans
among them could easily manipulate the popular outcry for justice,
and possibly even overthrow.the government. After all, Plastiras
and Gonatas could rely for personal support only on their own two
battalions, which they had managed to salvage and hold together
during the disaster.
Just as in 1909, the officers’ coup triggered off m i l i t a n t ^
popular support which should be seen as a parallel revolution.
The mobilised part of the population was, naturally, unambigu
ously republican; but initially the hesitant attitude of the mil
itary revolutionaries was not at all obvious. That the position
of the rebel officers was the outcome of a compromise never be
came quite clear to the population. In appearance, the military
government seemed much more republican than it was in actuality.
There was a lot of radical speechifying, with the republican of- •
ficers able to be much more vociferous than their guilt-ridden
royalist colleagues. The anti-monarchist Plastiras, the legen
dary ’Black Cavalier’, the popular ’gypsy’ with his strong peasant
accent, was a much bolder figure than the neutralist Gonatas. He
thus tilted the image of the government towards a republicanism
which even he no longer supported in reality, faithful to Veni
telos and his new policy of benevolent neutrality on the regime


156
issue. The government's hesitation over the question of the Six
vas either unknown to the population, or simply forgotten after
the execution which could thus appear as a sign of intransigent,
republicanism.
The paths of these two uprisings, the popular and the milit
ary, did not diverge until much later, when the moment for solving
the regime issue could no longer be postponed and the ambiguity
of the military government's position became obvious at last. In
the end, the popular revolt was not expressed by the 1922 coup,
but by the 1923 republican pronunciamento.
3. Radical Republicanism among the Urban Lower Classes
Before the King departed 'on leave', the majority of the pol
itical factors had been neutral or in favour of the monarchy.
Their solid bloc comprised the military government, the Liberal
Party, the conservative parties, and the royalist officers. Only
the small Republican Union, the even smaller Communist Party, the
radical officers and the unorganised republican elements, within
the Liberal Party were opposed to the monarchy. In those circum
stances, why was the monarchy ever abolished?
The question cannot be answered unless the political events
are seen in the extraordinary economic and social context of the
period. One could hardly envisage more ideal or typical revolu
180
tionary conditions than those prevailing in 1923 Greece. The
country had just experienced one of the worst debacles of world
military history. It had received one of the largest waves of
refugees ever experienced by any one country, and by far the lar
gest in the world's modern history if judged in proportion to
the local population (one to five). These refugees had settled
under abominable conditions mostly in the urban centres, where
they outnumbered the loci inhabitants. In the provinces, a large
part of the peasantry vas still unproperticd. The ideology which


I
157
• had nurtured the nation for nearly five centuries had, after a
climax in which its wildest dreams were realised, suddenly col
lapsed in shame — a psychological condition of fundamental^sig
nificance for the motivation and behaviour of most Greeks..
The pathological uniqueness of Greek irredentism and the non-exis
fence of any substitutes could not but result in frustration and
anomie. The country was still one of the poorest in Europe, but
the decade before the debacle had witnessed an amating economic
growth, the first phase in the capitalist transformation of the
economy. The hopes and projects generated during that period
seemed now to be deeply compromised. Nobody could then foresee
the beneficial economic potential of the refugee population. This
sense of frustrated hope may not have been too important among
the rich and powerful with one leg abroad, who had accumulated a
highly protective layer of fat in the previous decade; but it
was destructive to those in the lower ranks of the middle class,
as well as to the petit-bourgeois. For they had hardly begun on
the hors d ’oeuvres when the debacle occurred, and it was they who
had aspired to profit the most from the increased social mobility
. ..v v182
generated by the now defunct economic growth.
Once established, the revolutionary character of .the period
demands a major change in methodological focus. The importance
of the social classes' action is instantly increased in a revolu
tion, as simultaneously the degree of the autonomy of politics
from class structure and conflict is drastically reduced. Factois
which previously allowed or encouraged this autonomy no longer
hold under the insurgent pressure of the boiling social temper.
And although the practices, norms and values of relatively autono
mous politics, having become a part of the structures prevailing
in the country, continue to have a strong restrictive influence^
on social action, they no longer play a decisive role. This is
now taken over by the revolutionary forces, by the social classes
themselves, led by their economic and political interests, their
Prejudices and emotions, towards the explosion and the final as
'sault on the position of power.


158
It was in such a setting that the drama of the abolition
was played out; the first act ended with the November 1923
pronunciamento, the second with the referendum of April 1924.
In the first, the behaviour of the liberals was marked by their
constant, though reasonably well suppressed, anxiety about the
outcome of the future elections, an anxiety continually stirred
by the rising radicalism of the urban lower classes, the refugees
and the younger officers. Not without reason, the liberals feared
they might be crushed between the royalists, whose popularity had
allegedly not much declined, and the republicans, who opportunely
cashed in on the popular desire for a new political leadership.
N. Politis, for example, the Venitelist Foreign Secretary in the
revolutionary government, wrote in a private letter to Veniselos
that the liberals had not profited from the outcry against the 
King, and that "public opinion" seemed to be looking around for
able new politicians who had not been involved in the politics
of the turbulent 1915-22 period.18,1
Another element feeding the liberals' uncertainty before the .
election was the fear that their left-wingers' republicanism might,
split them into two or more groups. Just a few weeks after the
1922 coup half of the liberal MPs had refused to endorse the of
ficial party policy towards the Crown: a letter to provisional
party leader Ceneral Danglis, by which the parliamentary group
was supposed to "request" a policy of support for the King, bears ■
only 52 signatures out of a total of 150 liberal MPs.18^
By the time the elections were due, the situation had deter
iorated a great deal further. Many liberals had meanwhile left
185
the party and joined the republicans. A few days before the
vote, Danglis implicitly admitted that the party could not keep
its unity unless the regime issue was dropped from the electoral
debate.186 '


159
If this situation of doubt and anxiety seems to be in con
tradiction to the party's victory in the election, this is only
apparent. The liberal party having officially adopted a neutral
stand on the issue of the regime did not necessarily mean that
all its election candidates had abandoned their republicanism in
the course of their campaign, especially, those who were contes
ting strongly republican constituencies. Neither did this of
ficial neutrality exorcise the widespread rumours that Venizelos,
having always been the greatest of the King's enemies, ws projecting
his neutralism merely as 'a facade to appease Greece's foreign
Protectors. 187 These rumours, but far more so the liberals'
unity, their electoral collaboration with the republicans, and
the open republicanism of many liberal candidates,• assisted in
the voters' confusion and kept alive the old simplified dichotomy:
liberals versus royalists. It was on this basis that the liberal
Party was able to win its landslide victory in spi'te of its of
ficial neutralism and its pre-electoral malaise.
The success of Othonaios' gentle pronunciamento the very
next.day confirms this point. It would be unrealistic to believe
it was in itself sufficient to overcome the revolutionary govern
ment's authority, the military hierarchy, and the formal majority
of the country's political forces, a majority which included both
the royalists and the victorious liberals. That the occurrence
°f the 17 November took the form of a pronunciamento and not a
coup deprived it of the advantage of surprise. If the Plastiras
government had wanted to reject it, therefore, it would have stood
a good chance of winning the game, provided — and this is the
crucial point — that it had the support of the people and the
uew parliament, and that it could purge the army after the Milita
ry League's retreat. Neither the government, however, nor Veni
zelos personally, nor yet the provisional leadership of his vic
torious party opposed the League with any real determination,
Precisely because the support of the people was out of the ques
tion, that of parliament very doubtful, and an array purge would
most probably have brought desperate reactions from t ^ « ^ ePubl1“
cans, the radical officers, and the urban population.


160
In the second phase of the process.that led to the abolition
of the monarchy, the disintegration of the liberals was more
rapid and more clearly visible. Keeping the party united after
the elections became impossible. Venizelos himself had to aban
don his previously irrevocable decision to keep out of active
politics, one of the most important reasons having been the need*190
for someone able to discipline the party's republican left wing.
Although he was thereafter obliged to accept the premiership, it
soon became obvious that even this could not keep the party to
gether unless its stand in the forthcoming referendum could be'
less ambiguous. V.lien Venizelos had to admit he could not base his
party's future on a lost cause, he abandoned his neutralism and
declared, in one of his first speeches to parliament after he had
returned to Greece, that he had "always been opposed to the monar
chy". He added that he would not campaign against the monarchy
in the forthcoming referendum, but this was only to save appear
ances: he knew only too well that his campaign would not be neces
sary. The referendum dies had been cast long before, in the bar
racks and in the streets of Athens. Venizelos had no choice other
than to leave the country again and allow his party's split. Imme
diately thereafter, when Papanastassiou formed his minority gov
ernment and it thus became clear that the monarchy had lost its
last hope, nearly all MPs of liberal origins vested him with their
confidence: a volte face which only a few weeks earlier would have
been considered as impudent mutiny against Venizelos' neutralism.
Thus the apparently invincible moderate bloc consisting of
the military government' and the leadership of the major political
parties collapsed under the threat of a second revolution. The
minimum symbolic ritual that could exorcise it was to make a
scapegoat of the monarchy and idolise the republican panacea.
Had the parties and the military government refused to do so, the
situation would inevitably have evolved towards more and more de
monstrations, gradual disenchantment of the refugees with Veni
zelos, and most probably a second intervention by the radical of
ficers. After that, three outcomes might have been possible.
One was a military dictatorship which would enjoy strong popular


161
support and follow a radical populist or even leftist policy.
The second was new elections forced by the officers, resulting
in overwhelming electoral gains for the small republican party,
the liberal left wing, and probably the communists. The third
possibility was the outbreak of a purely popular second revolu
tion, staged by the same militants who had participated in the
first — the radical officers leading the progressive section of
the bourgeoisie, the petit-bourgeoisie, the refugees and workers.
The objectives of this alliance being bigotedly political rather
than social, such a revolution would not have put up some kind
of people's government, but merely exchanged the regime on the
spot, enjoyed a few days of petty "terreur". and finally installed
; *191
in power the most radical of the republicans.
4» A Comparison with 1909:
Intensification of a Division within the Middle Cl ass
■The period under examination will be made clearer still if
it is compared with the revolutionary period around 1909. The
first similarity to be emphasised is, of course, the revolution
ary nature of both periods. The degree of the autonomy of pol- •
itics from the class structure and conflict was in both cases
reduced by the very nature of the revolution.
'The most obvious outcome of comparison between the two per
iods is that the political world was being condemned as a whole
in 1909, whereas in 1922 the outcry was against the royalists
and the conservatives. The great majority of the 1909 anti-roy
alist elements were against the King’s practices, but not against
the monarchy, as was the case in 1922-24. Keither revolt had
t^vich causal relation with the landowning class, the majority of
whom had accepted the principle of land reform much earlier and
vere mainly concerned with the method and value of their indem
nity — in other words, with the liquidation of their own class
and integration with the bourgeoisie at the highest possible level.


162
The only effect of both these revolutions on the landowners was
thus indirect. By creating the conditions for the middle class
acquiring increased political and economic power, the revolu
tionary mutation undermined the landowners' bargaining position,
with the result that they received much less in 1924 than they
would most probably have obtained twenty years earlier.
As in 1909, the 'locomotive' behind the 1922-24 revolution
was the well-mannered 20th-century Greek sansculotterie. This
time, the revolutionary sections of the petit-bourgeoisie, the
working class and the Lumpenproletariat had been joined by the
refugees. And as in 1909, it was not they who emerged the victors,
for their radicalism was rudimentary and their political knowledge
extended only to the point of seeing the republic as a panacea:
the victors were their less vociferous but more privileged allies *192
the progressive section of the bourgeoisie. It could not
possibly have been otherwise, given the economic and social trans
formation in the decade of wars. The country had already entered
its initial phase of genuine capitalistic growth; the demogra- .
phic and economic power of the bourgeoisie had become undeniably
significant; capitalism now was dominant within the Greek social
formation. In 1922 Greece, as in 1794 France, sansculottism was
indeed a "helpless phenomenon"; but in Greece, the economic
and social reasons for this helplessness were much more impor-‘
tant than the political. For the determinant factors that bloctod
the Creek sansculottes' road to power were not only their petit
bourgeois mentality or the bourgeois orientation of the majority
of the political factors. In the Greek case there were impor-**
tant handicaps in the socio-economic structure itself: the bour
geois ideology of the political leadership and of the dominant
classes was by then firmly supported by real economic power; the
largely conservative propertied peasantry was no longer facing'
a potentially radical unpropertied counterpart;- and, although
the petit-bourgeoisie had joined the revolt because of short-term
difficulties and governmental inefficiency, on reflection many of ,
them reckoned that the already dominant capitalism seemed to pro
mise them vast long-term opportunities for economic and social ad
vancement. How could sansculottism be anything but temporary,
indeed "helpless"?


163
The most important difference between these two periods was,
however, the different kinds of division within the middle class
and the liberal party. In 1909, the emergence of the liberal
party had been a vital step in the bourgeoisie asserting its pol
itical power. Not that it was virtually created by the bourgeoi
sie itself, or that it was sponsored and faithfully followed by
the majority of its members — the preceding chapters have con
tained enough warnings against such oversimplifications. As al
ready discussed, the liberal party was conceived and made to
measure by Venizelos to promote bourgeois economic and political
dominance through modernisation, reforms and concessions to the
lower classes -- not because the bourgeoisie demanded it or was
ripe for It, but because thi* was the ehorteet poeeible road, if
not the only one, to Greece's relative emancipation and aggran
disement; and also because it was the easiest, if not the only,
evolution which the international and local economic and social
conditions allowed in 1909. It would have been surprising if the
• .egocentric infant which was then the Greek bourgeoisie had under
stood Venizelos and followed him en masse. If it had already at
tained such maturity, it would have found its Venizelos long
before 1909.
<»
It was only natural that in these circumstances, the bour
geoisie should have been divided down the middle from the very
beginning. Thus in 1910 the conservatives stayed with the old
parties and continued seeing the Crown as the rampart of their
petty economic dominance. The moderates and progressives, fear
ing that this dominance would prove fragile without a modicum of
reforms and a more direct political role, embraced Venizelos, in
vaded the liberal party, lobbied in parliament, and built their
°wn liberal bastion within the State.
A further split was due in 1922. The moderate bourgeois
elements were now to join their conservative counterparts who had
remained faithful to the Crown: those modérais who had been
simple supporters or members of the liberal pa-ty did so by
i'


164
shifting their allegiance to the royalists; and the moderate
cadres and MPs within the party, by joining the 'neutralist'
alliance With them. Therefore, although the 1920s' split with
in the middle class clearly dated back to 1910, there was a dif
ference in the sections that broke away from the pro-monarchist
conservatives: moderates and progressives in 1910, i.e. the
more numerous and less coherent; but only the progressives in
1922-24, i.e. the less numerous, more coherent, and bitterly
matured in the dichasmos politics. Concomitantly, the division
that had always existed within the middle class had by 1922
crept into the ranks of its political herald, the liberal party.
So it is not surprising that, whereas in 1910 the party was
accepted as modelled by Venizelos, the controversial problem in
1922 was its remodelling along more open, more populist lines.
In contrast to their embryonic unity in 1910, both the liberal
party and the non-reactionary part of the middle class — moder
ates and progressives alike — were now divided on this strategic
question. By the moderates approaching their conservative coun
terparts in the royalist parties,and the progressives joining the
lower classes in a republican alliance, the dichasmos between
royalists and Venizelists was now advancing well into the ranks
of the Venizelist party. Its right wing, led by Venizelos, fear
ing the fresh ideological Soviet threat, and flirting with the
gold-plated image of the youthful Italian fascism, still felt a
great need for allies. These allies could not be the frivolous,
ideologically suspect progressive sections of the population.
These allies should include a powerful Crown, re-letigimised by
an historic reconciliation with the Venizelists: in other words,
a Venizelist Crown; the moneyed and enterprising grand-bourgeoi
sie and especially tbe financiers, badly needed by the country
in such times of economic crisis; and finally Venizelos' great
personal allies, thj British government and the financiers of
the City of London. • '
The liberal leader's face-about in 1924 was thus an eleventh
hour decision tr embrace his progressive children too, so as to


165
keep his party united and in power, and to sacrifice the King
while hoping nevertheless to retain the support of the Greek fi
nanciers and the British Embassy. Indeed, from that moment on
his party and, following its split, the various Venizelist par
tisans, became officially anti-royalist and consistently fought
for the new regime throughout the inter-war period. Venizelos'
error was that his decision to abandon the Crown came too late;
it was an error which would prove fatal -- not for the Crown,
v v *194
out for his party and the Republic.
'5. The Long-term Effects of Venizelos' Conservatism
Revolution with a charismatic leader is not an uncommon blend
in history. For post-1922 Greece it was an unhappy blend: the one
neutralising the other. Despite his wish to end thé diçhasmqs.,
Venizelos helped to perpetuate it with his vision of a liberal,
bourgeois parliamentary democracy, some kind of Mediterranean
United Kingdom. The radical military and the people accepted the
liberal, the bourgeois, the parliamentary, the democratic, the
united - but not the kingdom. They had won their Pyrrhic victory
and erected a bourgeois republic that could not possibly be united.
I t ^ a s the royalist bloc that was blamed, rightly or wrongly,
for the 1922 debacle. Basing itself on this blame, the revolution
could easily deprive the royalists of the institutional foundation
of their power, the throne -- and in a firm and solemn manner,
contrasting with the guilt-ridden hesitation that had proved so
destructive for the legitimacy of the fragile young republic. The
unti-monarchist propaganda could consistently capitalise on the
royalists' failure, and succeed in depriving them of a good part
of their support from among the people and the less fanatic royalist
officers.195 A purge of one or two-hundred intransigent royalist
officers, effected before the 1923 counter-coup, would have been
sufficient t& prevent it. It would also have prevented a much
greater and more far-reaching evil: the dismissal of not fewer


166
than 2,836 officers between 1922 and 1926, of whom 1,284 were 196
to be retired en masse after the 1923 counter-coup.
Such could have been the course of events had Venizelos adop
ted a radical republican position. Instead, he opted for a la
tently pro-monarchist policy. It was this policy that perpetua
ted the conflict by preventing the republican forces inside and
outside the liberal party from dominating the game. . It divided
and weakened the Venizelist party. It frustrated its supporters
in the army. It confused and neutralised the people as a revolu
tionary force. It served as a lifeboat to the sinking royalists,
granted them absolution, and helped them to rehabilitate and re-*
legitimise themselves. It forced them to take sides with the mass
of dismissed officers and demand their rehabilitation, a polari
sing issue that kept the regime question open, the army in a con
stant state of mutinous anxiety, and the republic in a cul-de-sac
of discredit and disintegration. The royalists were thus able
to reappear in politics as a majority party in 1932 and to restore
the monarchy in 1935. This in turn enabled the King and Metaxas .
to impose a crown dictatorship in 1936 with a strong fascist fla198
vour.
, The emphasis on Venizelos' role must not be misunderstood,
like all great men, he had to function within certain limits.
His particular delimitations .did not stem from the personal pre
ferences of the protagonists and the heroes, nor from the Greek .
national character. Neither did they stem from a random coin
cidence of structural and functional conditions operating despite
the social actors -- some kind of fate dressed up in scholarly
garb. The really important limits were drawn by the social con
ditions prevailing at this specific historic moment, as well as
by the social agents’ behaviour within these conditions, by their
practices and apathy, their errors and ideas, their alliances and
conflicts. .
Venizelos' role was decisive, but his charisma did not oper
ate in a vacuum, it was-contained both by the foreign and the


167
internal social factors. It was the foreign factor that forced
the attitude of support and fair-play towards the Crown. Follow
ing Constantine's pro-German policy, the dynasty was of course no
longer the trusted child of the allies; but the Crown, any Crown,
was their guarantee of access to the higher echelons of local
power. All the same, the foreign factor was a crucial element in
Venizelos’ choices and policies only in the first year after 1922.
The Protectors lost their strongest means of pressure after the
formation of a new Greek army at the Evros River frontier and the
signing of the peace treaty with the Turks. And even had they
been able to, they were no longer interested in supporting a vigor
ous and potentially dangerous new Turkey, now that a balance of
forces had been restored in the eastern part of the Mediterranean
and the question of Middle-Eastern oil had been arranged.
Thereafter Venizelos could abandon the Crown without the risk of
arousing the Protectors’ wrath to a degree harmful to Greece’s
interests, or perhaps their suspicion of his own personal integrity.
He could not, however, abandon a certain bourgeois conservatism
without risking the foreign financiers’ refusal to support Greece’s
reconstruction, aid which he considered absolutely essential.
The influence of the social agents was much more intense and
permanent than that of the foreign powers, but here also Venizelos
had some flexibility of choice. Nevertheless, his relative free
dom to move left or right was always bound by certain limits. Not
that his action on the right of the spectrum was without results.
His presence, and especially his influence on the army and the
refugees brought the balance of social and political, forces to an
equilibrium, a compromise on the relatively neutral grounds of the
republican regime instead of a conflict on the controversial grounds
of real political power and social justice. His limits were clear,
however: he could neither spare the King his ’leave of absence’
»or the Six their lives; he could not postpone the referendum,
prevent Othonaios' gentle but effective pronunciamento, or avoid
the republic; he could not even prevent his own party from split
ting three ways - into Right, Left, and Centre.


169
On the other hand, Venizelos could have gone far more to
wards the Left, where the bulk of the social forces would not
have blocked but rather paved his road for him. This might have
been the case, for example, had he returned to Greece not to ef
fect a reconciliation with the Crown, but rather to lead a pro
cess of cleaning the Augean stables of royalism and to follow a
radical populist policy with strong socialist overtones. In
such a hypothetical case the charismatic leader would have fun
tioned not against, but with the social actors. Instead of try
ing to contain and neutralise them, he would have been able tow
follow their somewhat nebulous wishes by clarifying and implemen
ting them.


Charter F
THE FIRST REPUBLIC. 1924-1935:
169
THREATS OF RESTORATION AX'D FASCISM
1. Introduction: Summary of Events
This very short and schematic introduction and summary of
events serves the purpose familiar by now to the reader, to
provide a framework for the subsequent discussion by recalling
the strictly indispensable events and conditions.
Papanastassiou governed with his minority group for four
months, until 25 July 1924; his successor Sofoulis for two, until
7 October; and Michalakopoulos for nine months, until his’ over
throw by Pangalos on 26 June 1925. All three governments had been
undermined not only by the division among the various parties of
liberal origins, but mainly by the conditions of constant con
spiracy and the officers' interventions in the political process.
Initially, there were the royalists' conspiracies, such as the
plot by Papagos, Kallinski, the Vassos brothers and other officers
in January 1924, or the February attempts to infiltrate the army
made by the Constitutional Youth organisation. On the other side,
there was the impatience of the more fanatic republicans, resul
ting in the quasi-pronunciamento of Colonels Langouras and Vout
sinas on 6 March 1924, which asked for the immediate abolition •
of the monarchy; or the terrorist actitivities of General Kon
dylis' praetorian organisation Kinigoi (the Hunters) before and
after the referendum; and finally the plot directed against Kon
dylis in June 1924.200
Once the regime issue had been superseded, a previously la
tent cause of military unrest came into the open: the mussolinian
ambitions of Pangalos and his friends. On 25 June 1924, the ma- 
jority of the country's naval officers resigned in a body -- an
act of mutiny under the military penal code -- in protest against
the promotions ordered by the Navy Minister which infringed con


170
siderations of seniority. In reality, the 158 officers resigned
because they were against Pángalos' plans and wished to prevent
his virtual dominance over the Navy which he would be assured of
through his friend the minister, Admiral Hadjikyriakos, his client
Kolialexis, who was being promoted to captain, and their various
followers, many of whom were also being advanced in rank. Papa
nastassiou did not give in to the officers, but felt his minister
had better be removed. His courage failed him, however, when it
came to Pángalos himself: he did not remove him from the Ministry
of the Army despite clear indications of his dictatorial tenden’’O l
cies“ and despite the protocol circulated in the army by Col.
Voutsinas, allegedly supporting the government in case of a no
confidence vote, in reality preparing for Pángalos' dictatorship
under this plausible pretext. However, following the 17 July
assault by a few soldiers of Pangalist Colonel Karakoufas against
the offices of two opposition newspapers, Pángalos was openly
accused by his great enemy General Kondylis in parliament of hav
ing dictatorial ambitions. It was this that forced Papanastassiou
to resign.
His successor, Sofoulis, reaped the fruit of these quarrels.
First came the August 15 abortive coup by naval officers Vandoros
and Drossinos, which was anti-republican in motive but above all
anti-Pangalist. On 21 August 1924 the 158 officers who had re
signed in June assaulted and occupied the Navy Ministry and de
manded reinstatement. Sofoulis ejected them by force but acceded
to their demand. Seriously threatened, the Pangalist clique in '
the navy then staged its operatic pronunciamento of 23 August.
Captain Kolialexis sailed the flagship Averof into the Bay of
Athens and trained her guns on the capital. Sofoulis, in a shrewd
but equally operatic move, sent an aeroplane to drop on the Averof
thousands of reprints of a government order announcing that all
sailors in the navy had been discharged from service. Two weeks
later PangalistGenerals Tseroulis and Panayotopoulos were arrested
for having plotted the overthrow of the government by coup. They
were treated as magnanimously as Captain Kolialexis, who had been


sentenced to only two months’ imprisonment: their defence coun
sel, Papnastassiou himself, succeeded in getting the^charge of
high treason changed to one of breach of discipline. So it
is not surprising that on 19 November 1924 it was the turn of
Major General Loufas and Lt. Colonel Dertilis, the leaders of
Pángalos' praetorian Republican Battalions, to be arrested for
conspiracy.
Pángalos himself was never arrested, and could thus stage
his successful coup on 25 June 1925. By presenting himself as
the protector of the republic, and by using the threat of an even
tual royalist revenge against republican politicians and officers
alike, he succeeded in demoralising parliament. Papanastassiou
advised the government "to avoid the shedding of republican bloo<T,
and not to order Kondylis to move against Pángalos. Parliament
thus gave its vote of confidence to the new self-proclaimed prime
minister. Three months later it found itself being dissolved by
the same man. As for the President of the Republic, veteran
Venizelist Admiral Countouriotis, he did not resign until much
later, opening the road for Pángalos to proclaim presidential el
ections for 15 Karqh 1926, announce himself as a candidate, and
win. Despite the political parties having abstained from the
campaign and the conditions of fraud and violence, it is undeni
able that part of the pro-Pangalos voce was genuine.
•Pángalos had to face immense difficulties with notoriously
inadequate means. A frontier incident with Bulgaria ended with
Greece being humiliated and then convicted by the League of Nations
to pay a handsome indemnity. A treaty with Yugoslavia breached
Greece's sovereignty over the territory of Thessaloniki so scan
dalously that it could easily be revoked later after Tangalos' ^
overthrow; The public finances, rapidly deteriorating under the
pressure of expenditure for the refugees, were further depleted 
by frivolous management. To restore them, the dictator ordered
the banknotes literally cut in half — a devaluation which would
have been in order much earlier but should have been milder in
application and buttressed by rigorous antirinflationary action.
172


172
Meanwhile, ridiculous measures alternated with severe oppression:
regulations on the length of women’s skirts .existed side by
side with the breach of civil servants' security of tenure, and
the 'unmarrieds' tax' with hangings for corruption.
On 21 August 1926, Kondylis overthrew Pangalos with the vital
help of the ex-Pangalist Republican Battalions. Two weeks later
he attacked the battalions and arrested their ambitious leaders.
The republic was temporarily resuscitated, and so was the royalist
bloc with the help of the anti-monarchists' conciliatory attitude.
The latter were thus hoping to protect the regime from eventual
assaults of ambitious officers like Pangalos, by shielding it be
hind the legitimation of consensus. Two years of coalition or
minority governments followed before Venizelos' return to politics
in 1929.
* #. #
The preceding chapter examined the coups, the upheaval among
the people, the role of the liberals, and the question of the re
gime, all centred on the 1922-24 period. Causes and effects were
analysed within the given period, when the royalists, the conser
vative Right and the social groups following them were crushed by
the assault of the radical republican officers and politicians,
the progressive bourgeois elements, the urban lower classes, and
the mass of the refugees. So clear-cut an image, however, is as
misleading here as for any other revolutionary period. Although *
the political forces of the Right were in full retreat, although
their reserves in the structure of power and their supporters
among the population were silenced in near-panic, they were not
destroyed, nor was there any decisive change in the economic or
social structures on which their existence -- and at certain mo
ments, such as the 1920 elections, their triumphs — had been
based. True, the advent of the refugees was a dramatic change,
but their future position in the social spectrum was not yet de- :


173'
cided: as long as it was not directed against the bourgeois re
gime, it would also not be actually harmful, in the long run, to
the Crown, the Right, and the upper classes.
This chapter will examine the outcome of the 1922-24 events
in the longer historical perspective of the inter-war period. The
examination will centre on the interval between the proclamation
of the republic and Venizelos' return to politics in 192S, with
some reference to the Venizelist coups of 1933 and 1935. For it
was before 1928 that the conservatives reassembled their forces,
undermined the republicans’ radicalism, and prepared the ground
for the return to power of the King and the Right. Although all
the parties of Venizelist origin rallied to the republic after.
1924 and tenaciously fought for it, the defences of the regime
were undermined by the conflict between the conservative and pro
gressive sections of the bourgeoisie as represented by the royal
ist and anti-royalist parties respectively. The subsequent return
of Venizelos anS the 1928-32 period of uninterrupted liberal gov
ernment was the republicans' last line of defence, their ultimate
reluctant and vain effort to unite, forced to by the conservatives'
siege.203 Consequently, the liberals' malaise after the elections
of 1933 and their panic in 1935, as well as the abortive coups
caused by these circumstances, were in reality the final spasms
of a moderate bourgeois party under the determined assault .of its
conservative rival. The Right was soon to commence its rule vhich^
almost without interruption, would last for more than forty years.
2. Military Intervention in the Inter-kar Period;
A Two-fold Classification
The inter-war period, with its fourteen coups and pronuncia
mentos and numerous conspiracies or acts of military intervention
in politics, seems at first sight a puzzling example of an army
totally independent of the social structures and even the political
conflict, and completely dominating these primary, conditions ra
ther than being determined by them. Thus the student of this period
may well be tempted into consistently seeing military intervention
as a cause and seldom an effect, and to look for the reasons be


174
hind it in the army itself, thus falling into tautological traps
and claiming that personal ambitions or the patronage system led
to the interventions. The crucial question is rather what had
brought about the rise of the patronage system and personal am
bitions in the first place.*
The number and frequency of military interventions should
not be an obstacle to their classification. A vital distinction
might be made on the basis of the officers' objectives concerning
the group they wished to instal in power each time they staged a
plot. Two large groups of major interventions appear under such
scrutiny, arranged in three chronological periods: from Septem
ber 1922 to March 1924, with four major acts of intervention re
lated to the issue of the regime; from 25 June 1924 to 9 Septem
ber 1926, eight acts related to dictator Pangalos' rise and fall;
and finally the two coups of 1933 and 1935, related again to the
regime issue. It is noteworthy that all minor acts of interven
tion which took place within these periods had more or less the
same orientation.
*k
Of the minor interventions, the only one that seems unrela
ted to the two mainstreams of activity (the regime and the Panga
list dictatorship) is the Goudas conspiracy of Venizelist and
anti-Venizelist officers aimed against General Kondylis, then
Minister of Defence. It seems, however, that the plot was joined
not only by those opposed to Kondylis’ terrorist methods during
and after the referendum campaign, but also by supporters of Pan
galos, wishing to weaken an important political enemy. Even the
coups staged against Pangalos were, in fact, directly linked with
the regime issue. They were precipitated, if not solely caused,
by the dictator’s gradual reorientation towards the royalist
camp, from which he solicited support and recruited cadres. -In
the end, Pangalos* thoughtless move towards readmitting royalist
officers to the army precipitated his downfall. '
Thus the two-fold classification according to objectives of
the military interventions — regime/Pangalist -- considerably


175
Leaders
MAJOR ACTS OK
Plastiras-Conatas
Lconardopoulos-Carga lides
^ Othonaios
Voutsinas-Langouras
Navy officers' mass resign.
Kolialexis (Navy)
Tseroulis-Panayotopoulos
Loufas-Dcrtilis^*^
B Pángalos
Karakoufas-Bakirtzis
Kondylis-Zervas-Dertilis
Zervas-Dertilis vs Kondylis
Pías tiras
C Plastiras
Athens Carrison o f f i c e r s
Papagos
Coudas
O Vandoros-Drossinos
Othonaios
C Pángalos
INTERVENTION (M = monarchists, R = republicans)
Pate and type of act Main area of objectives
16 Sept.»22 - Coup
M 23 Oct. •23 - Abortive coup
R 17 Dec. »23 - Pronunciamento
R 6 Marcii '24 - Abortive pron.
25 June '24 - Mutiny
24 Aug. '24 - Abortive pron.
10 Sept.•24 - Abortive coup
19 Nov. '24 - Abortive coup
25 June '25 - Coup
9 April '26 - Abortive coup
21 Aug. '26 -• Coup
9 Sept. »26 - Abortive coup
R 5 Mardi »33 - Abortive coup
R 1 Mardi »35 - Abortive coup
MINOR ACTS OF INTERVENTION
M 10 Dec. »23 - Conspiracy
M Jan. »24 - Conspiracy
24 June »24 - Conspiracy M IS Aug. '24 - Conspiracy
R 1 June •27 - Conspiracy
30 Oct. '30 - Conspiracy
•Regime
I Anti-Pungalos/professior.al
Pro-Pangalos/professional
Pro-Pangalos
^Pro-Pangalos
Pangalos dictatorship
Anti-Pangalos
Anti-Pangalos,end of diet.
Post-Pangalos settlement
Regime
J Regime
Anti-Kondylis Anti-Pangalos
Regime
Pro-Pangalos


176
■» •
simplifies the task of explaining the officers' action. The re
lation of the coups of the 1922-24 period to the regime and, through
it, to the underlying conflict between social groups has already
been examined in detail. As for the coups of 1933 and 1935, also
related to the regime issue, it can safely be said that their re
lation to social structures and conflict was quite similar to that
of the coups of the remaining inter-war period. Hence there.re
main two dark areas for a more detailed investigation: the social
framework and the political ramifications of the regime question
between 1924 and 1928, and especially before the 1926 coalition'
government; and how, out of these circumstances, arose the strife
around the irresistible ascent of Theodore Pangalos.
3. End of the 1922-24 Revolution and the New Autonomy of
Politics i
With the 1924 referendum the revolutionary republican alli
ance affirmed its victory, achieved its objective, and came to an
end. That the objective was short-sighted and the victory Pyrrhic
could not put off the end of the popular revolt, nor resuscitate
its momentum. Although the republic had not proved the panacea
most people had expected it to be, disenchantment with it would
not by itself be sufficient to bring the rebels back to the streets.
The end of the revolution allowed the political agents, the
parties and the army, to disentangle themselves from the social
actors' embrace. Interaction of revolutionary and counter-revolu
tionary, progressive and conservative classes no longer determined
the political process. The subtle play of bourgeois democratic
politics could again establish its relative autonomy from class
structure and social conflict; and the process of autonomisation
was amplified and accelerated by the specific social and political
circumstances of this period.


M77
One such circumstance was the refugees’ attachment to Veni
zelos. Over the whole inter-war period, a quarter of the coun
try’s population, consisting of .people from all social strata,
was to vote massively for a bourgeois party. Another circumstance
was the division within the bourgeoisie — the familiar cleavage
between the few progressives and the many.moderates and conser
vatives — as it had matured in the process of the dichasmos. Had
the bourgeoisie stood united behind one of the big parties, a cer
tain polarisation along class lines might have been facilitated.
If, for example, this class had been firmly associated with the
conservatives, then the Venizelists would have been obliged and at
the same time allowed to become a more radical party, addressed
more clearly to the lower and especially the peasant classes -
and politics would perhaps have centred on the agrarian problem.
If, on the other hand, the bourgeoisie had rallied around the \eni
zelists, the capitalist transformation of Greece might have been
easier and faster — and so would have been the polarisation of
politics along the bourgeois/lower-class dichotomy. Thus the bour
geoisie's division was for it a blessing in disguise: it allowed
this class to dominate both the big parties, establish a disorient
ing formalism in ideology, and -lead politics away from the crucial
social issues, to monopolise it with its own internecine strife
for quadrennia of power.
There were two more, though less important, circumstances
favouring the renewed relative autonomy of politics from social
conflict. One was the implementation of land reform during this
period, with both the royalists and the Venizelists in favour of
the age-old peasant aspiration. ■The second yas the gradual reap
pearance of shameless clientelism and patronage after the first
flush of Venizelist purification which had lasted only as long as
the liberals were the unchallenged rulers of Greek politics, i.e.
until about 1915. The dichasmos had inevitably created the need ..
f°r quickly attracting massive support and keeping it under control
with bribery, oppression and electoral fraud. In conjunction with
an increase of State power, these conditions, as in the 19th cen
tury, made patronage and spoils more important than class affilia tion and interests.


178
Autonomy, however, does not mean that random events can take
place on the political level in total isolation from the underly
ing social currents. Autonomy, as a summary term, is used here to
suggest an independence which certain events and participating
factors may have from the social structures and conflicts — which,
means, if seen from an opposite vantage point, a loose and indi
rect relationship emphasised to contrast with close dependence or
determinateness. It follows that, once autonomy is established,
the methodological problem is not one of moving the discussion
away from the social level, but rather a matter of changing focus:
instead of emphasising the social factors and suggesting direct
links, situations of increased autonomy show links that are indi
rect, and social conditions are seen as delimitations rather than
as direct causes. The fact, for example, that it was not a dicta
torship of the proletariat that occurred but a dictatorship of
Pangalos suggests that the former was perhaps outside the delimita
tion set up by the social structures, whereas the latter was toler
ated and possibly even encouraged by them — always remembering,
of course, that' Pangalos imposed himself not abruptly but gradually,
and not so much by force as by threat and persuasion. It will be
useful, therefore, to examine those limits before returning to a
more specific analysis of the political process.
4. Social Conflict as the Framework of Political Strife
Before 1922, the conflict of interests between the upper and
lower classes had seldom been so deep and clear-cut as now. The
need for recovery after a decade cf wars and the urgency of the
refugee problem imposed an unbearable burden on the State finances.
The lower classes, having long since reached a point of explosive ,
discontent because of crippling indirect taxation, expected the
rich to feed the budget — especially after the immense profits ac
cumulated during the wars. > The bourgeoisie, until then almost un
taxed, knew very well that only new indirect taxes could avert the
danger to its incomes and capital.


179
The repatriation of almost 200,000 soldiers; an excessive
ly large refugee labour force; the new State and private expen
diture in reconstruction and housing; the reorientation of capital
towards peace-time production — all these created new markets for
goods, money and labour, or restructured the old ones. The peasants,
naturally, aspired to fairer prices and security in the sale of
their crops; the workers, threatened by inflation and the armies
of jobless refugees, nonetheless expected better wages and security
of employment. The bourgeoisie, however, was merely in an agony
to maintain the same rate of profit as it had enjoyed during the
wartime boom.
Inflation was ravaging the country. The lower classes, not
unreasonably, wanted the government to take measures against it and
thereafter keep it under control, yet they also demanded credit
facilities and social-welfare spending. Businessmen, on the other
hand, having got used to making quick and effortless profits,
wished for more and uncontrolled government spending in procure
ments from industry and uninhibited supplies of money to keep pro
viding them with profits and inflationary windfalls. By having
direct access to the centres of political decision, these same
entrepreneurs could readily obtain the implementation .of such in
flationary policies, whilst at the same time hypocritically^advo
cating financial rigour and -- what else? -- wage controls.
•The 1917 revolution in Russia was still present in the minds
of the Creek people; after all, Creece had participated with an
armed contingent in the allies' 1918 Ukraine campaign against the
Bolsheviks. Even more vivid and closer to the bone during the 1920s
were the impressions gradually being made on the Greek political
world by next-door Italian fascism, as also by the great post-war
wave of' revolutions and upheavals: the revolution in Germany, the
peasant revolt in Bulgaria, even the 1926 general strike in Eng
land. Some workers, peasants, and even petit-bourgeois dreamt of
October Revolutions at home; but a great many others comtemplated
the populism of the Italian miracle because of its appeasing rel
ative moderation, its apparent anti-capitalism, and its corporatist


180
productivity. Some bourgeois, on the other hand, also admired the
fascist efficiency, but for a different reason: for its ability
to bring law and order. And all the bourgeoisie trembled at the
hateful image of communism.
It is particularly interesting that there was no chance of
compromise between the conflicting interests described above. Not
that the lower classes were particularly intransigent in their de
mands and organised to do battle for them, or that their ideology
was clear-cut and free from ambiguities — far from it. The uncom
promising elements were rather the bourgeois — too greedy and
narrow-minded to accept sacrifices such as reforms, welfare-state
measures, or social democratic policies. The relatively autono
mous political elite that had been governing Greece for so long
had deprived them of the mental agility and the maturity they might
have gained from a more direct practice of politics. The lack of
a long tradition of economic activities meant 'that most of them
were first-generation pioneers, nouveaux riches par excellence.
who could not have developed, in a few years or even a few decades,
a general bourgeois culture comparable to that of their western
counterparts, let alone a political culture. How could they ex
hibit the subtle art of giving way, of shedding privileges, of per
suading through incentives and governing through consensus?
It was in fact the bourgeois inflexibility, solidly based on
bourgeois political power, that dictated government policies in
inter-war Greece. The major parties were dominated by intra-party
elites of bourgeois origin and ideologies and strongly influenced
by bourgeois lobbies. It is not surprising that no government ;
could or would take measures that might satisfy large sections o f 
the population: such measures would have had to be radically orien
ted and would thus have been harmful to the interests of the dora- •
inant class. • ' ‘ . . .
This bourgeois inflexibility, as expressed in the conserva-,
tism of all the republican governments, met with no challenge from
below, however. There were two reasons behind-the near-absence of


181
consistent popular mobilisation, the one economic, the other pol
itical and, more exactly, ideological. Despite the threatening
conditions caused by the war-destruction and the debacle, and to
a large extent because of their reflationary effects (as will be
explained shortly), the economic condition of the lower classes did
not in the end get any worse, and in some cases it even got better.
Thus the petit-bourgeois population found profitable opportunities
for small manufacture, service or trade activity at the periphery
of a quickly progressing industry and of a house-building market
which had to meet an urgent demand for about 300,000 refugee homes
— even if, in most urban areas, they were merely wretched huts of
tin and hardboard. As for the workers, they were so few and rel
atively unskilled before the decade of wars, that even the addition
of the refugee labour force was not sufficient to create a destruc
tive surplus in the booming labour market. The result was that,
aided by haphazard but often violent strike action usually inspired
toy the communist party, skilled-labour wages and salaries quite
faithfully followed the phrenetic upward movement of the price
index; they even exceeded it for some categories of workers, note
ably those employed in the building industry. So most of them saw
their real income consistently augment between 1914 and 1927 (see
Table XVII, chapter B). The very high increases of 1921 or 1922
were absorbed so quickly by inflation that the relati\e fall of
real income between 1921/22 and 1927 was not really perceptible to
the workers. True, the situation was not so good in the unskilled
labour market. But since the supply there was largely covered by
women, as for example in the textile and chemical industries, this
did not contribute to the mobilisation of the working class as a
whole, it was not cultural reasons alone which were responsible 
for this, although they undeniably did play a part in a country
with retrograde norms and values as to the role of women. The main
reasons were, firstly, that the primary income-earner in the house
toold was usually a male skilled worker whose real income had not
Kradualty declined as hai that of the woman, and secondly, that the
woman’s income was an innovation in the traditional Creek house
toold and, however small it might have been, did increase the total
family edrnings.


182
Nevertheless, the lower classes' incomes not finally having
been reduced did not mean that there was no feeling of insecurity,
nor that the people did not notice the rapidly widening gap bet
ween their own condition and the privileges of the trading and
manufacturing bourgeoisie. The potential for consistent social
upheaval, however, was further appeased by the ideological factor,
especially important in this post-revolutionary period. Indeed,
all the republican governments were seen as the offspring of the
.1922-24 revolution, and as such they had the people's full support;
their inefficiency was, therefore, attributed to reasons which,
though sometimes valid, were nonetheless minor compared to the
bourgeois-inspired conservatism of the governments in question.
Some critics held that there was a problem of leadership, some
that military intervention was too frequent, a few that it was not
drastic enough; others still that the republican regime was not
so good after all, and many that the politicians as a body were
incompetent and corrupt, if not downright imbecile.
What it was difficult to perceive and to apportion blame
for was the characteristic disadvantage any bourgeois regime, es
pecially a malfunctioning one, has for the lower classes: that
their interests are not those which are given priority, quite simp
ly because power is not really in their hands. How indeed could
the members of the Creek lower classes believe in 1924 that power
was not theirs? They had just made their revolution hnd had alle
gedly emerged the victors: the republic had been proclaimed to
work its wonders, and Papanastassiou's leftists were now an impor
tant party, and had even, been the government. Subsequently, bet
ween 1924 and 1925, all military interventions were staged explicit
ly to 'protect' the republic or the republic's protectors. Even
Pangalos’ ascension in 1925 could be made to appear as potentially
beneficial to the lower classes. Was he not, after all, a fanatic
republican and as such a friend of the people? Was he not one of
Greece's best military leaders, and therefore a potentially pro
mising political leader as well?


1.
Not pressed by the lower classes, but strongly influenced
by bourgeois lobbies and party elites, the post-1924 governments
were thus to be inexorably conservative, unimaginative, inefficient
and uninspiring. It would be wrong to give them credit, as iscustom
ary, for provisionally housing the refugees and for avoiding a col
lapse of the economy. The housing that was intended to be tempora
ry was left to remain for decades, and the economy was not saved
by any concrete and consistent governmental policy, but by the in
ventiveness, endurance and hard work of the people, especially the
refugees.
153
Indeed, one of the 1922 debacle’s most important effects
on the economy was a sharp increase in the country's labour force.
The educational standard of the newcomers was higher than that of
the local working class. Some of the entrepreneurs from Asia Minor
bad managed to transfer their savings to Greece. They had found
among their fellow refugees the same kind of labour force as had
worked for them at home: skilled and ready to work for reasonable
pay, Some of the traditional Asia Minor manufactures were revited
on Greek soil -- carpet and textile weaving especially. The ex
isting local industries also profited immensely. It should be re
membered that this was a period of post-war reconstruction, a pro
oesss the beneficial effect of which was further encouraged by the
boom of the world economy before the onset of the 1929 crash.
But the above cannot be properly understood without its neces
sary counterpart, the existence of a thirsty internal market. Here,
too, the role of the refugees was vital. The incredible burden of
the 1922 catastrophe was not only an indirect, but also an imrae
diate blessing for the immature Greek capitalism. Many of the re
fugees had arrived, as was only natural, with some gold, jewelry
°r other kind of family treasure, and apart from small family sa
vings quite a few large fortunes were transferred at this time.
These big fortunes were put to use in a wave of small and medium
sized investments; the small household savings were gradually spent
bo ensure survival; and the multiplied effect of such increases in
investment and consumption were dramatic.


184
Seen against such favourable conditions among the productive
population, the governmental omissions and errors were numerous,
and nearly all of them strongly marked by conservatism and lack of
imagination. If land reform w’as finally implemented, it was against
handsome indemnities. No appropriate heavy taxation was imposed on
the huge fortunes made by the grand-bourgeois in the years of the
war. The 1925 fifty-percent devaluation was aimed more at taxing
the lower-income consumers than at restoring economic sanity. More
over, it was imposed much too late, thus losing much of its bene
ficial potential. For the governments of the period were not onjy
affected by the lobby of importers, the bourgeois section which had
profited most from the war-trade, but also crippled by the fear of
the popular outcry against the inflationary effects of devaluation,
and so kept postponing it until it had become inevitable: signif
icantly, it was the dictatorial government that finally took the
measure, and even then the thinking behind it was not some coherent
monetarist or primitive pre-Keynesian policy, but the plain need
to feed the budget.
The refugees’ capital was never mobilised, it had to find its
own way. Yet it should have been clear to any government that di
rect taxes, the indirect proceeds from devaluation, and the refu
gees’ savings could serve to finance and subsidise State-protected
or corporatist, or even mixed-ownership industries. Relevant exam-
pies were abundant in neighbouring countries: such as State-protec210
tion in Bulgaria or corporatism in Italy. It is significant
that refugee peasants were never urged to adopt a more corporatist •
organisation of agriculture, although this was a natural area for
easy experimentation, considering that the government literally
gave away State lands and could impose any conditions it wanted on <
the settlers.’ > • . ■ <
'Last but not least, no measures were taken in favour of the
small independent peasants. Such measures, especially those badly
needed to restore agricultural prices to a truly acceptable level,
were imperative for any government wishing to follow, a popular po- ’
licy. What is more, they were unavoidable pre-conditions for any
kind of economic growth not based on ruthless exploitation.


1S5
Papanastassiou's Republican Union, with its vaguely social
ist inclinations, was indeed the only political group not totally
undermined by bourgeois conservatism and therefore capable of rad
ical measures . But, as historian Veremis puts it, "Papanastassiou
••• was more interested in socialism than in civil rights. The
moderate liberals were interested in the latter only in so far as
these rights did not disrupt public order, while the military had
little feeling for either."2'1'1 No wonder then that Papanastassiou,
ty paving the road for the Pangalists, had no time to try out his
socialist vision.
Inevitably, the governments of the period quickly established
a reputation for incompetence; the republic, having raised so many
irrational hopes, disintegrated in discredit and frustration; the
People were pushed into political apathy or the in such circumstan
ces typical search for charismatic saviours; and the officers’
tendency to intervene in politics, nurtured in the preceding period
of strife about the regime issue and shrewdly exploited by patron
age experts like Pangalos, could expand and seek for its legitima
tion in the Greek republicans' incompetence and the Italian fas
cists’ efficiency. -•
•5. The Near-Fascist Episode
.The Pangalist phenomenon was neither a subsidiary of the re
gime issue, nor a mere effect of pathological personal ambitions.
Certainly the royalist threat was used by Pangalos against politi
cians afraid of losing their oligopoly of power, and against of
ficers keen on retaining their seniority status or good postings,
°r so as to avoid the dismissed monarchist officers’ revengeful
return.- Pangalos' eccentricity, vanity and uncontrollable ambitkn
also played.their part in his consistent hunt for power, and his
schemes were indeed facilitated by his excellent personal network
of clientage. However, the primary factors that allowed his activity
and temporary rule were of a different nature: they were related
to the marginal and latent fascist tendencies in Creek society and
ln the army.


IS 6
The strife between royalists and republicans overshadowed
but could not totally expunge the factors that favoured these ten
dencies. Many Greek bourgeois, petit-bourgeois, and small peasants
were under the spell of newly acquired property and affluence, the
fascination of Italian efficiency, and the fear of socialist chaos.
Their concomitant anti-parliamentary and authoritarian prejudices
were enhanced by the climate of economic insecurity after the 1922
debacle, the threat of the refugee populace, and especially the
revolutionary action of their progressive counterparts in the urban
middle and lower classes. Their anxiety reached its peak with the
frequent military interventions and the occasional vacuum in govern
ment. Lastly, the diffusion of totalitarian ideologies was aided
and abetted by the ability of fascism to recruit not only from all
classes, but also from all political blocs. The republic was not
necessarily associated with parliamentarianism by many of its mod
erate supporters, who had been urged to join it more for reasons of
personal allegiance than from democratic principles.
Hence Pangalos' recruitment of supporters cut across the so
cial classes and took in the fringe of the two great political
blocs. It is certain that his call for a vigorous Greek State, out
wardly belligerent and inwardly authoritarian, and for a new, more
ethical society, attracted a certain following. Notwithstanding
any attempts to minimise the relevance of the 1925 elections in
which he was elected President, it is undeniable that a good part
212
of his votes was not simply due to fraud and violence.
, ••r
Yet the Creek version of fascism obviously lacked some essen
tial prerequisites, as for example a relatively advanced industrial
economy and hence any threat to the middle classes from a consis
tently revolutionary working class. The peculiarities of Creek
society and history, despite the absence of those basic prerequisites,
initially allowed the development of quasi-fascist tendencies: the
1922 debacle, the refugees, the recent rise and therefore inherent
insecurity of the bourgeoisie, the dichasmos. It is precisely these
same peculiarities that also, in the long run, caused the failure


of this Greek caricature of fascism. Thus the refugees at first
indirectly furthered the fascist ascendency by the threat of their
mass and some, initially, were even directly helpful to Pangalos
by supporting the would-be dictator's alleged republicanism and
populism. In the end, however, these same refugees helped to bring
about Pangalos’ downfall by their too strong devotion to Venizelos:
for their having concentrated in the cities meant that any totalita
rian political leader could not possibly do without their support.
Similarly, the bourgeoisie, having achieved status of importance
but recently which it felt to be increasingly jeopardised, was help
ful to the dictator at first by generating an initial wave of sup
port; hut in the long run it too changed into an unfavourable
factor because, as a class, it had not yet acquired cohesion and
coherence and thus could not support a totalitarian effort as a
unified whole. Furthermore, the dichasmos certainly helped Pangalos
bo rise to power by enabling him to play off his enemies one against
the other; yet again, by extending divisive strife to the political
level, it had created gulfs so deep that even Venizelos had been
unable to bridge them. Finally, the 1922 debacle had brought such
social and economic upheaval that although initially Pangalos could
capitalise on the resultant discontent, he could never hope to cope
without the enthusiastic support of.all available human resources 
& support the dichasmos had made it impossible to muster.
167
Little wonder then that Pangalos was faced with his own lam
entable inefficiency in government: the only available sources
for governmental and administrational manpower were the parties,
yet they barely tolerated him, and even this only at the beginning
of his brief rule, leaving him to his own devices shortly there
after. Hence the ridiculous blunders of his government, especially
in its unnecessary severity in questions of internal law and order
and its notorious naiveté in foreign policy. In the face of these
pressures it is quite understandable that the dictator should have
approached his .greatest past enemies, the royalists. Driven by
necessity, he recruited cadres and strengthened his personal clien
bage within the army by readmitting certain royalist officers. This


1SS
was to be his last blunder. Threatened by the prospect of royalists
in the government and the barracks, the republican politicians and
their army clients joined forces in the first serious alliance aimed
at the dictator's overthrow. They were even able to obtain the sup
port of Pangalos' own praetorians, the Republican Battalions, by
brandishing in the face of their leaders the frightful spectre of
revenge-thirsty royalists once more invading the army ranks.- Thus
Pangalos was capsized by the same winds that had so swiftly scudded
him to power.
6. Party Tactics and the Resurrection of the Royalists
That the interests of the bourgeoisie would be more or less .
protected whatever party was in the government could not have kept
the conservative section of this class and the more^fanatically
bourgeois parties from seeking full political power. Their clear
cut objectives were the restoration of the monarchy and a govern
ment of the Right. Their tactics, however, had of necessity to be
different in the first fifteen months of the republic, i.e. before
the Pangalos coup of June 1925, than what they could afford to be
after the dictator's overthrow and the 1926 elections. There were
two reasons for this. Firstly, during a substantial and crucial
part of the first period, the ramparts of government were not held
by a major party but by Papanastassiou's suspect Republican Union;
the fact that it was a minority government only somewhat allevia
ted but did not totally eradicate the conservatives' fears. Second
ly, the republican officers were far more threatening and active in
the first period, whereas after 1926 they had been largely discred
ited by their previous activity, and their failure to 'save the
country' caused a number of them to do some hard thinking, and re-,
suited in self-doubt and a certain moderation. .
The tactics of the Right, then, were inconsistent, and in
some cases stridently uncompromising in this first period,, whereas
they became much more homogeneous and moderate after, 1926. .


For Metaxas' small party, the best tactics seemed to be re
cognition of the republic, a low-profile image, and a slow but con
sistent effort to undermine the regime from the inside through stunt
opposition, and possibly even some collaboration with the republi
cans, who certainly needed allies against the Pangalist officers'
harassment. The choice to be made by Tsaldaris' People's Party was
otherwise: there could be no recognition of the republic. This
division of the conservatives, indeed the bitter assault on Metaxas,
accused of capitulation, suggest the degree of disarray in the con
servative ranks during this period.
Tsaldaris’ uncompromising position was not unwise. He could
aot know the extent of the Pangalist network in the ‘army as well as
a retired officer like Metaxas did. Hence he was inclined to
underestimate the potential for undermining the republic that exis
ted within the army despite the officers’ republicanism. He was,
therefore, quite justified in.choosing the only road which, at least
for the time being, would hold together the royalist-inspired alle
giance of the small peasants and the conservative sections of the
petit-bourgeois and the upper classes. •
Tsaldaris' only hope of reaping power in future elections was
through sowing ideological confusion. The method vas not new
Greek politics had always been plagued by a formalism which deter
mined the ideology and conditioned the behaviour of the leaders,
elites, anonymous voters and insurgents alike. But it t>as between
the great wars that formalism, centred upon the issue of the regime,
achieved absolute dominance. If in the 1910s, during the first
Phase of the dichasmos. the formalist dichotomy between the pro
English Venizelos and the pro-Cerman King was possibly justified by
the nation's breathtaking irredentist effort, the subsequent period
seems .to offer nothing for its justification — but whether justi
fied or not, it was nonetheless explicable.^4 The parliamentary
forum was useless to the conservatives since their main target, the
re-establishment'of crowned power, lay beyond the Constitution and
could not, therefore, be the subject of parliamentary debates. The
189


190
only alternative was to divert their potential followers’ interest
by keeping the regime issue open, by insisting on the abstract
merits of the monarchy, and by cultivating the sentimental, often
metaphysical faith of the small independent peasants in the Crown,
as well as the nearly paranoic conservatism of the upper classes
and the threats coming from the now red steppes of Russia.
In a second phase, when elections would hopefully have proved
the conservatives’ renewed strength and perhaps even allowed them
participation in a coalition, the subject of the dismissed royalist
officers could be brought up. And at the final stage, with the
army no longer dominated by the republicans, even the wildest dreans
could expect to find realisation.
Subsequent events proved these tactics to have been correct.
Whereas Metaxas never managed to carry through his desire for a
miscegenetic alliance with the republicans, Tsaldaris' intransigence
bore the sweet fruit of dividing and discrediting them. It served
as an additional pretext to the Pangalists and as an effective scare
to the Venizelist and republican parties, which were thus driven re
luctantly to tolerate, if not to legitimise, Pangalos’ activities,
paving the road for his ’March to Rome'. It was too late before
they realised that Pangalos’ republicanism had been only a pretext
to achieve absolute power, and that in his search for new allies the
dictator felt he could well afford to condescendingly enthrone his
own Victor-Emmanuel. Then they overthrew him and themselves sought
the royalists’ alliance, in a desperate effort to legitimise the ..
republic and exorcise any eventual Pangalos imitators.
Indeed, having overthrown the dictator and tamed the Repub
lican Eattalions’ ambitious leaders, Ceneral Kondylis proclaimed
elections for 7 November 1926 from which his small party abstained.
The vote was marginally more favourable to the republican bloc.
The liberals, reunited in a purely electoral coalition, received
31.63)o of the vote, and the Republican Union 6.43$», whereas Tsal
daris' People's Party obtained 20.27% and Metaxas’ Eleftherofrones


191
15.75%. As there was no possibility of a single-party cabinet, all
major parties formed a coalition government on 4 December 1926.
The new democratic government had inherited a contradictory
economic situation: alongside good employment figures and the re
construction boom, there were also grave difficulties, especially
concerning public finances and inflation. In an attempt to solve
the fiscal problem, a new loan was obtained with the consent of the
league of Nations. Despite this success and the rapid economic re
covery, and precisely becaifse of the inflationary and profiteering
nature of this recovery, unrest among the working classes continued
to grow. Strikes occurred frequently and were inevitably suppressed
ly violence, often at the expense of a few dead and numerous injured.
On the political level, the question of the regime was slow
ly being resuscitated. The issue of seniority in the army, in
fringed by the Thessaloniki government in favour of its supporters,
was also revived. The decision to reconsider the case of the 2,3s6
royalist officers dismissed between 1922 and 1926 raised a storm of
Protest among the more fanatic republicans. The compromise solu
tions chosen by the government pleased very few people and the ques
tion of equilibrium between royalists and republicans in the armed
forces began to be openly discussed.
This growing malaise at all levels led to the usual would-be
Panacea: on 25 May 1923, eighteen months after the coalition gov
ernment had been sworn in, Venizelos returned to Crecce. After a
few weeks of little trial and much error, especially where his own
veteran lieutenants were concerned, he unscrupulously dissolved
Parliament and proceeded^to his last electoral triumph on 19 August.
Venizelos’ final rule was one of the longest in Greek parlia
mentary history _ and in an odd way one of the most successful.
Between 1923 and 1932 much work was accomplished to enable Greece
to capitalise on. the hard work, the frugality and the inventiveness
of her people, the same virtues that had created the near-miracle
°f. the 1922-28 period. As the success of this administration was


192
not immediately apparent, however, it was not appreciated by his
contemporaries and ended with the electorate disapproving of its
architect, Venizelos. The catalyst was the great economic collapse
of 1929 and its aftermath. Long before the crisis, the government
had initiated a vast scheme of public works, including an unprece
dented school-building programme, partly covered by a series of
loans. Some of these investments, such as irrigation and drainage
schemes, had the additional beneficial effect of being immediately
productive. Even investments which traditionally take longer to
bear fruit were in the Greek case more productive in the short term
for a number of already familiar reasons. The settlement of the
refugees and land reform had created conditions for an unusually
rapid increase in the degree of agricultural commercialisation. Its
counterpart, rapid urbanisation, had been achieved almost overnight
by the very disaster of the refugee wave. The economic effect of
this urbanisation, an expansion of the urban markets, did not have
to wait for a gradual increase of the urban dwellers’ incomes: it
was fed, as already explained, by the refugees' necessarily spend
ing their savings, their earnings, and whatever government aid and
loans they were allocated. The public works programme had also be
gun even before the onset of the 1929 crisis, and had a similarly
reflationary influence on the economy before the effects of the
world crisis could reach Greece. In fact, if one takes into consid
eration the bad wheat and tobacco harvests in 1930-32, and poor
crops cf other agricultural products even earlier during this admin
istration, the beneficial effects of these measures become even
more apparent. Venizelos, without attempting to, had implemented - .■
a policy of New Deal objectives, just as Trikoupis had done fifty
years earlier; and by implementing it before the crisis, he ensured
the added benefit of prevention being better, easier, and much
cheaper than cure. Thus the onset of the crisis in Greece her
self was related to her finances, the stranglehold of over-borrow
ing and the concomitant State bankruptcy, and not really to the 
structural deficiencies and low productivity of the economy. For
such is the permanent economic condition of underdeveloped countries,
though their great foreign patrons willingly overlook it and even


193
help in its temporary alleviation as long as they can continue with
their lucrative business — only to waive their 'support* when their
own economi'es undergo fundamental crises, just as in the case of
Greece after 1929. 2 8
That it was not until 1931 that the effects of the crisis
were really felt in Greece underscores the liberals’ success, but
also explains their failure in the 1932 elections. From then
on the stage was set for a return to power of the Right. The Peqilc's
Party formed a short-lived minority government, based on the liber
als’ vote of tolerance. Rumours about dictatorial plans by Koniylis
and Hadjikyriakos, who had meanwhile approached the conservative
bloc, precipitated the government's fall. In the 1933 elections
the People's Party obtained 136 seats against 109 for the liberals.
The very next day, General Plastiras staged a coup. Venizelos’
Personal intervention persuaded Plastiras to give way to a mixed
military-civilian government, which was immediately afterwards su
perseded by the victorious People's Party. The new cabinet inclu
ded Kondylis (Army) and Hadjikyriakos (Navy). Plastiras fled the
country, many of his clients in the army were retired, and Metaxas
proposed to parliament that Venizelos himself should be tried for
his connections with Plastiras and, allegedly, with the 1933 coup.
On 5 June 1933 a well-known bandit made an assassination attempt on
Vcnizelos. Shortly thereafter two Athenian police chiefs were ar
rested following the general outcry against the attempt, and their
implication more or less proved. But the infiltration of the State
hy conservative elements was not restricted to the police. The per
ennial issue of the royalist officers' reinstatement and especially
that of the army list were revived yet again. Charging true or al
leged implications in the 1933 coup, the government dismissed about
45 higher-ranking officers.218 The coup de grace to relations bet
ween the Right and the Liberals was the issue of the electoral law.
The government proposed an alteration in the geographical definition
of the constituencies, which would have meant serious losses of lib
eral seats in the refugee bastions of Athens, Piraeus and Thessalsulo.


194
1 March 1935 saw the eruption of a coup by republican and
219
liberal officers, virtually led by Venizelos. The coup failed
Venizelos and its leaders were courtmartialled and condemned to
death. Generals Papoulas and Koimissis, who had not fled the
country, were executed. The time had come for two new dramatis
personae: King George II and dictator Ceneral Metaxas.


195'
Appendiv I
i-» Comments on the Peasant Ideology and the Lack of an
Agrarian Movement
This appendix will serve to clarify certain basic character
istics and effects of the ideology prevailing among the peasantry
and the middle class around the turn of the century. It is not,
°f course, a detailed investigation of the immense subject of ideo
iogy, but rather an exposition of the writer’s main assumptions
and working hypotheses on this subject.
***
Although the Creek peasantry never played an active part in
Political power, it faithfully assisted the participating classes
!n maintaining their collective dominance. The peasants adhered
bo the systems of values propagated by and serving the interests of
the dominant classes. They developed neither their own ideology,
nor a cohesive and broadly based social movement, nor the political
counterpart to such a movement, an agrarian party. This is in con
trast with conditions in other countries, where the existence of a
Peasant movement strongly affected politics — as in neighbouring
Bulgaria.*221
. Certain economic and social aspects of 19th-century Creece,
however, suggest that the peasantry should have been a decisive
social and political actor. The problems with the highest poten
tial for social conflict — land reform and rural underdevelopment 
v ere peasant problems. The economy was predominantly agricultural.
The vast majority of the population were peasants. This demogra
phic majority, following the institutionalisation of universal suff
rage in 1S64, could easily have become an overwhelming electoral
force. In these favourable circumstances it seems curious that
such a transformation did not occur, that some degree of peasant
dominance over politics was not realised. It seems even more cur
ious that it was not realised for another whole century during which
the problems of rural poverty and land reform remained unsolved.


196
And it seems utterly surprising that, throughout this period, these
grave social problems were no more than relatively minor political
issues. The juxtaposition of three important events is an illum
inating example. The major and final political event of this per
iod was the 1909 coup. Although the officers were sympathetic to
the peasant problem, they considered it so marginal that they did
not even give it a mention in their programme. One of the major
and the last social demonstratiore of the period was that of the
Thessalian peasants in 1910. It was suppressed in violence and
bloodshed; and although the officers, who had meanwhile staged their
coup, had no involvement with the governmental decisions on this
matter, the fact remains that the government was then virtually
under the control of the army. A few months later, the peasants
elected 46 agrarian 'independent' MPs in a total of 48 parliamen
tary seats allocated to Thessaly. The 'independent' candidates
mostly supported the military. ' : t
Such flagrant contradictions must generate suspicion. Are
we facing a paradox? How could the officers afford to ignore the
peasant problem? Was the 1910 uprising in Kileler the climax in
the struggle of a conscious, integrated and organised social actor?
Or was it an impulsive, spontaneous outburst by a geographically
isolated part of an ideologically disoriented and politically pro
stituted peasantry?
Two basic reasons behind the apparent paradox may serve to
explain i t T h e political reason has been sufficiently discussed'
in the previous chapters to require only a summary. The other '
argument is that the peasants' inability to develop their own pol
itical movement was caused by the contradiction between backward
economic and social structures and advanced democratic institutions.
Indeed, had the economy by this time progressed to capital
ism, this would have had two clear effects: firstly, that the
bourgeois institutional system would not only have been adequate
but actually forced by its own nature to solve certain important
peasant problems; secondly, that the vote of the peasantry could


197
have been used towards these ends, thus yielding it the substantial
amount of indirect power which a pluralistic bourgeois democracy
can offer. If Greece had been a capitalist society at this point,
it simply could not have functioned without a very early solution
of the major peasant problem, land reform. On the other hand, the
very mechanisms of the market would necessarily have exposed the
residuals of the pre-capitalist era, the factors restricting elemen
tary market, functions and thus preventing the development of the
large internal market vital to economic growth — factors such as
heavy and exclusively indirect tacation, or exploitative agricul
tural prices. But the evils working against capitalism happen also
to work against the aspirations of the peasantry. By their expos- 
ln£ them, the market forces can thus transform the peasant prob
lems into real political issues on which the peasants' vote would
he decisive and, almost incidentally, augment their political powr.
The institutional mechanisms for solving the collective prob
lems of the peasantry may have existed, therefore, but the indis- 
Pensible economic motivation for solving them, i.e. the demands of
capitalism, were lacking. As for the peasants' individual problems,
clicntelism seemed to provide quite, a good short-term solution. It
has already been extensively discussed how these political proces
Ses operated, how clientelism was in fact the natural complement
to the institutional system's inadequacy to serve the peasants' •
class interests. The way the political oligarchy utilised these
disarticulations and at the same time fell victim to them, was also
examined, as was the relationship between peasants, politicians and
cavil servants. Why this was a relationship between individuals
not between entities — peasantry, parties, the State — and
vhy the latter was impossible in a socio-economic context such as
chat of 19th-century Greece, are questions also already investig
aCed. is ^ therefore," the second element that prevented peasant
ss oction which should now be examined: the element of ideolo
gical disorientation — and more specifically that caused not by
the av . *222
°ove political problems but by factors not yet analysed.
##* •


19S
Two of these factors which delayed the evolution of a cohe
rent peasant ideology were the simultaneous existence of two peas
ant classes and the regional diversities in their economic and
*223
social positions. The lack of cohesion of the rural popula
tion within each region, the fragmentation and geographic disper
sion of the unpropertied peasants in many regions, each of them
different and isolated from the others, were serious handicaps in
the development of a peasant movement: they posed particular dif
ficulties by augmenting its organisational and functional problems
and by preventing the peasants from realising that theirs was a
universal condition which could be ameliorated by their own ideo
*2 '’ A
logical emancipation.
' These difficulties are not immediately apparent if Greek
society is seen as a whole, and rather too much emphasis is placed
on demographic data or social statistics and too little on the re
gional distribution of such figures and the realities of 19th-cen
tury Greece. A look at post-1581 Greece may compound this holistic
error, because by then annexation of Thessaly and Arta had already
greatly increased the relative importance of the unpropertied peas antry and of big-property economy. In fact, while examining the
overall image of Greece in the ISSOs, one may decide to disregard
the ideological confusion that had prevailed until then and be
tempted into vainly searching for a revolutionary attitude among •
the peasantry. Yet conditions for the development of a peasant .
movement had not really undergone any very dramatic change.
In Thessaly itself, a strictly local peasant mobilisation
did not develop immediately upon union with Greece, mainly for two
reasons. One was the constant threat of war, a threat particularly
felt in this region which bordered on Turkey until 1912, and was
indeed invaded by a victorious Turkish army in 1897. The other was
that the treaty of annexation had guaranteed the,Turkish landlords'
property rights: the peasants could not readily develop militant
action against overlords protected by international treaties. This
factor lost a good part of its significance, of course, after many


199
Turkish properties had been purchased by diaspora Creeks, but
o25
this transfer of properties came about only slowly.
With regard to Greek society as a whole, the change of fron
tiers and of statistical proportions did not mean that class ideo
logy would be apocalyptically revealed to the peasantry, nor that
the peasant movement had to emerge as soon as the international
treaties were signed, nor that it would acquire consistency through
out the old and new provinces. The acquisition of Thessaly brought
some change in the elements of the peasant problem, but not in their
ramifications and the manner of their functioning. This could only
come about when the peasants themselves would have perceived these
new elements, understood them, and begun to act on them. And such
consciousness very much depends on the relationship of the peasant
to his land.
Ideological elements are no more able to explain the political
conditions within the peasantry than are climatic, psycholgocial or
geographic ones — unless it be in connection with the crucial fac
tor on which the whole argument centres: the relationship between
peasants and landowners in the specific conflict-area of land re- '
form. For centuries the peasants of Calicia, for example, faced
about the same climatic and concomitant psychological problems as
their Hungarian counterparts. Yet, whereas the Galician serfs
staged a very bloody .jacquerie in 1846, the Hungarian peasants sup
ported the dominant classes in the 1848 revolution for national in
dependence. The crucial difference was, of course, that the Gali
cian rebels were serfs in 1846, whereas the Hungarian Diet, vir
tually ruled by the landlords, had abolished serfdom earlier in
1848. The Hungarian landlords could thus neutralise Petbfi’s re
volutionary peasants, and even mobilise massive peasant support
in the- revolt against the Hapsburgs.
These two cases are in fact the two extremes of the spectrum
ranging from apathy-conservatism to mobilisation-radicalism. In
Greece, the peasants' position in the spectrum of political ideology
was .intermediate. This was chiefly due to the fact that the.problem


200
of land reform too was in an ’intermediate’, ambiguous state: it
existed, but its potential solution was considered possible. The
wretched peasant lived with a vision of the promised land. Problem
and solution, reality and vision, kept oscillating between accepted
principles and their delayed realisation, the declarations of good ,
intentions and the alleged lack of funds, the promising liberalism
of a bourgeois Constitution and the persistence, in certain regions,
of quasi-feudal conditions.
* *- * 
The ambiguities of landownership and land reform in Creece
were rooted in the war of independence and in the aspirations of
the peasants who fought in it, and thereafter were cultivated and
amplified throughout the 19th century. There is a controversy in
Greek historiography about the degree to which this war of inde
pendence was also a peasant revolution. It is not necessary to go
into the argument in detail. That the unpropertied peasants who
fought in the war aspired to independent landholdings is undeniable.
Their actions against thu Turkish overlords were based on the sim
plistic, but not totally unfounded, calculation that after.the
overthrow of the Turks there would be enough land to make everyone '>°6
rich"“ and the very existence of propertied peasants made these
hopes appear realistic and just.
In the first few decades after independence, a contradictory
situation gradually emerged which had a'strongly disorienting effect
on the peasants. Their hopes, encouraged by the liberation, and
not in the least discouraged by the State or the politicians, re- .
maiued nevertheless constantly unfulfilled on the grounds of some
very convincing justifications.' Certain important political chan
ges that promised further liberalisation and governmental competence,
as well as occasional small doses of specific measures, served as
stop-gaps and revived hopes. Although they were not deliberately
planned to fulfil this purpose,■these measures acted as excellent ..
transquillisers. One such was the distribution of land to the


201
veterans of the revolution after 1833; the implementation of the
Dotation Law after 1835; perhaps also the hopes revived by the
revolts against Otho in 1843 and 1863; and finally the large
scale distribution of the national lands in 1871.
The Dotation Law was a characteristic case* where the poten
tial for ideological confusion was actually quite intentional. Otho
hoped the measure would help create a propertied peasantry strongly
attached to the Crown and serving as its main support. He dreamt
of a single-class society, consisting of faithful small peasants,
administered by an obedient technocratic bureaucracy, and led by
a benevolent monarch. " That his vision was somewhat naive did
not deprive it of its disorienting potential. The Dotation Law was
the legal underwriting of the confusion that would, from then on,
dominate the peasant problem. The peasants, considering the State ,
lands as sufficient to cover their needs, tended to ignore any
prospects which an expropriation of private property might offer.
Moreover, the Law was the first to suggest that the principle of
justice in landownership had been adopted by the State and was ac
cepted by all sectors of the population. Even the landowners could
appear as the champions of the peasants, without any danger to their
own interests, by simply supporting the peasant demand for free dis
*228
tribution of the national lands.
Last but not least, the government could rightly claim that
its finances did not allow land distribution free of a rent, or of
an expropriation indemnity paid by the peasants. This situation •
not only moderated the small peasants’ cry for more land, it also
had an important direct effect on the collecoi: they were led to
believe that the condition of the small independent farmer paying
his inevitable rent to the State was not so much better than their
own relationship with the landowners.
The problem was thus transferred from the area of social con
flict, where it would sooner or later have been certain to evolve,
to the level of endless strident negotiations between the State
and the peasantry over what seemed to be legal and financial matters.


202
The question as to whether the national lands would be distributed ..
free of charge or not, and the legal details of such distribution
became the major problems, overshadowing the real issue of large
private properties. The forty years' lapse untilthe distribu
tion of the national landholdings served : to remove the peasants' *229
interests even further from the real problem.
As mentioned above, the principle of free distribution was
never denied, and until the national lands were finally shared out .
in 1S71 the delay was attributed to the State's need for not losing
an important source of revenue. .Similarly, in the post-1871 period
the moral principle of land reform was not really rejected, but
its actualisation was presented as well-nigh impossible because
of institutional and financial deadlocks. The 1364 ^Constitution
considered private property as one of the citizen's inviolable
rights -- indeed, Venizelos had to destroy this legal rampart in ....
the 1911 constitutional revision before land reform could even be
envisaged. Had it been possible to find a way to overcome the con
stitutional handicap, the State's financial inability to indemnify
the landowners remained as a conveniently insoluble problem.' Land
reform could thus be implicitly accepted as a highly desirable
principle, but also continually postponed as a, for the time being,
practical impossibility.V23° :
When the national'landholdings had finally been distributed,
these confusing conditions were almost duplicated around the issue
of large private holdings. Whatever government was in power at
tributed the delay in land reform to the country's poverty. What-;
ever party was in opposition could not possibly afford to reveal
the true causes of this poverty and therefore of the peasants',
misery -- the quasi-feudal conditions in certain regions, or the
excessive trade profits of the local comprador bourgeoisie, or the
economic dominance of foreign and diaspora capital -- since any
Farty indulging in such revelations would have had to break with
the Protection, the Crown, and the dominant classes. No opposition
could destroy the myth of crippling national poverty without at the
same time committing suicide. ■.


203
Inevitably, the responsibility vas eventually brought home
to the politicians. Wien this happened, however, it vas not be
cause the myth had been demolished and replaced by a lucid per
ception of the true facts. Instead, a new myth was superimposed
on the old one, which explained the persistence of poverty by cast
ing the blame on the politicians' administrative incompetence, cor
ruption and vicious in-fighting, without ever questioning the real
causes behind these vices. It was another facet of this new myth,
however, which did have really far-reaching effects: the King
could pose as an innocent spectator, even as an often impotent but
potentially sympathetic protector. This image, assisted initially
by Otho's personal interest in the peasantry, later on by the con
stitutional principle of the King's non-responsibility, had two
results: in the short term it enhanced the peasantry's pro-royalisn
vhich, with the lyric simplicity of rural values, had already been,
initiated by the irredentist ideology and the old tale of the legen
dary Byzantine king who would awaken to rise up and reconquer Con
stantinople. In the long term, this perception of the monarch as .
the hero and benevolent father-figure, crippled by the evils of
parliamentarianism, operated to ward off widespread peasant radic
alism. It is not accidental that this colourful image was cynic
ally exploited by the royalists until late into the 20th century,
and was part of the foundations of the traditional alliance between
the majority of the small independent peasants and the conservative
sections of the bourgeoisie and of the urban lower classes.
Such was the ideology of almost four-fifths of the Creek
people at.the turn of the century. Almost all of the remaining
one-fifth consisted of first-generation petit-bourgeois, still
strongly attached to their native villages and.their peasant-ideo
logy background. They were living side by side in the same tovns_
with about 30,000 workers who were even more bewildered by their
condition. In the suburbs, a few thousand bourgeois mimicked the
diaspora magnates and tried to forge a class unity as the basis on
which they would conduct their business, build their culture and,
eventually, govern the country.


204
2. Comments on the Evolution of the Bourgeois Ideology
The social and political insignificance of the 1864-1909
economic development was comparable to its statistical insignifi
cance. That a few people became industrialists did not mean that
the ideology of the bourgeoisie as a whole had changed overnight,
or that the environmental conditions determining its political
practices had fundamentally altered. Vhat is really significant
is not abstract classifications,'but the ideology and behaviour
of the class, both of which depended on external conditions which*
had remained unchanged by the mere emergence of a few factories.
The bourgeoisie was to change its ideology only after a period of
adjustment, diffusion and maturation. Similarly, conflict with
other classes and within the bourgeoisie could not develop unless
really conflicting interests were created. This was not to happen
during the 1S64-1909 period. *
It is not within the scope of this work to enter into details
of the history, the content, and especially the causes of the com
prador ideology. It will be sufficient to clarify that foreign
economical and political domination, the diaspora's economic rule,
and the weakness of the local bourgeoisie were so closely inter
related that none of them could have retained its character had one
of the others undergone noteable change. In this sense it would be
formalistic to attribute to any of those conditions causal prepon
derance. They had evolved inextricably interlinked. It was not,
therefore, the diaspora tradition alone that formed the comprador
ideology of the Creek bourgeoisie, it was all these conditions t o - ’
gether. A different ideology could only have developed if, for ex
ample, the local middle class had been economically more powerful,
or if foreign domination had been less extensive. :
It is rather the effects of this ideology which are of con
cern in this discussion. It is undeniable that the short-term,
low-risk, high-profit economic practices of the individual bour
geois defined the limits of their collective political action. Con
trary to their counterparts in the Vest, the Creek bourgeois had a


205
distorted concept of basic capitalistic needs, as for example the
need for protectionism, or a developed internal market. They con
ceived of customs duties as a means for increasing not competitive
ness, but prices and short-term profits. They understood develop
ment of consumption not in terms of growth of income for low-class
consumers, but in terms of trivialities like transfer payments,
specialised or local preferences in government expenditure, even
the transfer of army units to the neighbourhood of this or that
town. How could this bourgeoisie conceive and implement a con
sistent policy of small-peasant development on the example of Ger
many, or a Fordist policy of labour wages? Why would it attempt to
dominate politics as a means to carry through such coherent economic
policies when its members were only interested in individual priv
ileges obtainable by patronage and bribe? What value would long
term political dominance have for those individuals whose -temporal
horizon was only months away and whose greatest ambition was to
operate on capital depreciation rates of fifty or a hundred percent?
Vhat funds would feed capital formation if the primary concerns of
a grand-bourgeois were -- not only then but in 20th-century Greece
also — to save if not to invest part of his wealth abroad, to ac
quire a few houses, and to lay up a growing hoard of gold sovereigns?•
• The comprador ideology on the economic level was properly
matched by the pompous idealism of the Megali Idea irredentism on
the political. This juxtaposition, though useful, may lead to the
facile conclusion that the bourgeoisie not only subscribed to irre
dentism, but consciously amplified if not created it, supposedly in
a deliberate effort to divert the people's attention from the injus
tices of the comprador system. This is the same kind of error as
found in attempts to explain the later transition from the Megali
Idea to anti-communism as the plot of an omniscient, coherent,
ever-intriguing bourgeoisie. Both these ideologies were in fact the
unavoidable results of the prevailing international and local pol
itical conditions. Nationalism was as common a phenomenon through
out Europe in the 19th century as was anti-communism in the 1920s
and the 1930s. Both ideological waves had their main sources in


common for all countries in the international geopolitical con
*234
ditions of these two periods.
Although the Megali Idea was not a creation of the bourgeoi
sie, the question remains as to whether it was consciously utilised
to confuse the population and divert its attention from the injus-'
tices of the comprador system. This seems to have been the policy
of the governments rather than of classes. The attempt to divert a
people's attention from internal problems towards chauvinistic or
imperialistic interests is as typical a policy for governments in
difficulty as is the offering of scapegoats, be they Turks, Commu
nists, Jews, or Creek Cypriots. And although the government, the
State, and the decision centres of politics are often closely rela
ted to the prevailing class structure and, through its hierarchy,
to the dominant classes, they can also be relatively autonomous, as
for instance in the case of Creece. The imperialistic revanchism
in France under Napoleon III, admittedly bourgeois-inspired, cannot
be compared with the Italian irredentism, so very remote from an
indifferent or hostile borghesia. .The German nationalism after the
1SG6 Prussian victory at Sadowa was certainly inspired by a polit
ical elite, like the Megali Idea in Greece. In Germany, however,
the elite consciously played a game favourable to the dominant
classes, whereas in Greece the game was played by a political oli
garchy highly independent of the upper classes to serve its own in
terests. The fact that it also served the interests of the upper,
classes is incidental and does not demonstrate a conscious class-,
policy aimed at creating ideological confusion.
Around the turn of the century, Greece experienced an upsurge
of cultural activity and certain progressive movements appeared;
among the intelligentsia. These important cultural changes and the
intellectuals', mainly bourgeois origins may be erroneously inter
preted as symptoms or even causes of the alleged rise of the bour
geoisie. • However, the intellectual progress itself should not be
overestimated just because it is in such sharp contrast to the cul
tural parochialism of 19th-century Greece. This would be the same
kind of mistake as the typical statistical error of judging growth
206


207
rates by starting from an insignificant base. Finally, whatever
the value of this progress, it could not have had immediate re
percussions on the level of political ideology. Like most cul
tural changes of elite origins, this change too had to go through
a long period of maturation before it could affect the political
ideology of a class.
A good example of the intelligentsia's earnest concerns is
the struggle by the supporters of demotiki. the language spoken .
by the people, against the pure — and official — katharevousa.
Because a victory of the demotic, seen in historical perspective,
could, have potentially progressive effects, this conflict may be
wrongly considered as the major expression of the intellectuals'
— and'therefore'the bourgeoisie’s — progressiveness.- Yet not
all the intellectuals opposed the State in this matter, but only
the most radical among them who thus had to face their purist fel
low-intellectuals as well in what was an intra-elite conflict as
much as a struggle against the State. It is not by chance that •
the latter could successfully defend the ramparts of purism until
as late as 1975, in a stubborn alliance with a large group of
purist intellectuals, especially academics, who were of course as
much bourgeois as the demoticists, if not more.
Even among the section of the intelligentsia that supported
demoticism it is doubtful that the movement was expressive of
middle-class liberalism. The underlying ideology was a mixture of
nationalism, which may at times be included in bourgeois ideology
but is not necessarily an exclusively bourgeois trait, and a popu
lism rightfully affected not by the petit-bourgeoisie but by the
importance of the peasant element in modern Greek history and cul
ture. Moreover, the Nietzschean inclinations ofat least some*
demoticists should not be overlooked. . Nationalism or chauvinism,,
populism, pure or perverted Nietzscheism may be potentially con
tradictory elements, but they nonetheless belong in the same ideo
logical neighbourhood. What is more, they can explain far better


208
the roots and the targets of the demoticist movement than can the
middle-class origins of its members. One of its leaders, for ex
ample, Professor Psyharis, was a bourgeois and a monarchist. Was
his monarchism caused by his bourgeois conservatism, or was it per
haps, like his demoticism, an expression of his Weltanschauung? if 236
Didn’t he, too, desire 'punch and glory’?
Deraoticism was thus never accepted, let alone adopted and
supported, by a significant section of the bourgeoisie. Ventiris,
for example, a progressive bourgeois historian conveying his view
of.the so-called bourgeois demoticism of the 1900s, published his
1931 book on the subject in perfect purist katharevousa. The Mar
xist historian Kordatos used the same purist language until well'
into the 1920s, as did also the Communist Party. The official
communist daily Rizosnastis was only converted to demoticism in
1926.. Until then, demoticism was never really or consciously a
class-related issue, and when it became one the bourgeoisie found
itself in the opposite camp, supporting the State — as usual 
in its struggle to preserve the obscurantist virtues of the purist
language
The two most important political expressions of the intel- :
ligentsia at the turn of the century will confirm the argument.
The one, the so-called Japanese movement, shows the pettiness
within the political ideology of the bourgeoisie; the other, that
of the Sociologists, was more successful, precisely because it
functioned outside the limits of this class.
The first group acquired its name after the Japanese defeat
of the Russians in the 1905 Blitzkrieg. The Creek-Japanese, how
ver, managed only a Kricgssriel which ended when the conservative
Prime Minister Theotokis offered the Finance portfolio to one of
the samurai. Significantly, the man was obliged to resign some
time later, having failed to get a law passed which would have im
posed a light tax on some of his fellow-bourgeois. They were not


209
at all prepared to accept such a measure, natural in liberal cap
italism, being incapable of understanding the value of small con
cessions in keeping extensive privileges. Such was the alleged
middle-class liberalism of the 1900s, on which Finance Minister
Counaris was shipwrecked. 237a Even more significantly, Gounaris did
not persist in his progressive liberalism which so obviously did
not pay. He became a major political leader of the Right, and was
finally executed as one of the six royalists who served as scape
goats for the 1922 debacle in Asia Minor.
As for the Sociologists who were equally bourgeois in origin,
their political credo — a mixture of social-democratic radicalism,
Marxist arguments and consistent republicanism — kept the middle
class at a good distance. They inspired some radical individuals
within the army, as well as most of the big mass demonstrations in
1909, Their offspring, the Republican Union, played an important
role after 1922, but never stopped being a minor party. In the
intermediary period of Venizelist gloryj many of the Sociologists,
including their leading spokesman Papanastassiou, formed the left
wing of the liberal party. Their true social basis, however, be
came clearly visible only during the two periods of revolt, in
1909 and 1922. Then, in spite of their bourgeois origins, these
lucid individuals blended in harmony with the Athenian sansculotterie. 237 P


RITISH
an
CÛ
IMAGING SERVICES NORTH
Boston Spa, Wetherby West Yorkshire, LS23 7BQ
www.bl.uk
BLANK PAGE IN ORIGINAL


211
Appendix II
Methodology in the Study of Military Intervention
1. A review of methodologies
There is a wide range of writings on military intervention
in politics, some of them theoretical, quite a few of them case
studies, other presenting a number of cases comparatively and at
tempting the formulation of some commonly applicable theory.
The great majority of these works are more or less consis
tently based on a functionalist methodology. The following quo
tations are indicative of a somewhat extreme use of this approach
in an examination of the Argentinian case:
"The army's developments interwave with the polit ical mobilisation unchained by the oligarchy around 1910; when the first mobilisation failed (1912-30), it put an end to it and helped the conservatives in attaining a first demobilisation (l930-4i); when internal conflict between the army and the oligarchy reached its highest point, the army was the one of them in charge of a second mobilisation (1946-55). When that mobilisation went too far, it was still the army which attempted a second demobilisation (19o 5-66). ;
"In a country like Argentina, and in the second half of the twentieth century, mobilisation faces the elite with several crucial problems: how can a nation be developed without opening channels to the people's voice? How can the people be moved. motiva ted, to do what is needed if they are not stimulated and nothing is done to attack privilege? How is it possible to seek the people's consensus if that means running the risk of being disavowed by them?" 2iq ■ (emphasis added)
There are other questions, however, which are not asked here,
although they seem to be more promising. For instance: Vhy was
mobilisation necessary and possible? What social forces did the
oligarchy consist of and why? How did the army get into conflict
with the oligarchy and on what grounds other than 'mobilisation'7
*239
What caused all these social movements?
i


212
The whole method is reminiscent of the use of a cybernetic
’black box'. The economic and social forces fighting out their
continual strife are conveniently stored in the box, and the ef
fects of their struggle are examined and measured as the interes
ting output of an indifferent process hidden in the dark -- or a
process too difficult to examine without some guiding pattern of
varying intensity of Marxist flavour and, therefore, inadmissible.^®
The descriptive approach is also one much in vogue, especially
in comparative and typological classifications. Here is a charac
teristic quotation from a description of five 'types' of military
-elite:
"... military elites that maintain themselves as an' alien body superimposed on a conquered society, military elites that maintainthemselves as an alien . body distributed within a conquered society, mil itary elites which take their place in society as , , members of a native and politically oriented aris’ tocracy, military elites which qualify themselves in terms of some socially oriented scale of aptitu' des, and, finally, military elites whose composition , . corresponds to the overall structure of power with in a nation at arms." 241
There is doubtless considerable use for material collected in
typological and comparative lists, but the crucial point is, of
course, how it is used. If, as is often the case, it is utilised
for constructing models of military intervention or for explaining
such occurrences in a number of societies by analogy of similari
ties, then the material may be wasted in mere symptomatic theori
sing. Similarity of symptoms, even if supported by similarity of
alleged causes, does not have to denote similar social illnesses:
what about parallel causes not accounted for and symptoms not ob
served? Vhat of similar pathologies due to identical causes but
exhibiting different symptoms? Most important, is it the task of
the political scientist to describe the symptoms, or is it rather
to search for the primary causes in the heart of the economy and
the social conflict?*^^


213
Hence the 'five ideal types of civil-military relations” des
2± i
cribed by S. Huntington seem to be of little use for empirically
oriented research and of little relevance for further theorising.
His various combinations of anti/pro-military ideology, high/low
military political power, and high/low military professionalism are
too abstract to be useful in a case study, too concrete for a com
parative analysis, unnecessarily restrictive and, above all, unre
lated to the crucial problem of social structures and strifes. When,
however, the same author uses his remarkable insight on the social
class issue, then, despite his opposition to Marxism, his argument
fully attains the clarity and richness that is characteristic of
much of his writing.
A popular version of the functionalist method or of the des
criptive typological approach is one concerned specifically with
institutions, especially with their so-called dysfunctions and their
tie-up with the propensity to army intervention. Here are two char
acteristic quotations:
"Military intromission in the political power struc ture always indicates, of course, at least a relative inability of other social institutions to marshal their power effectively, and at most an advanced state of institutional decomposition."
And: "... the lack of internal balance of the modernisation process within the various institutional spheres... (strengthens) various counter-elites which have been long-term claimants for government." 244
' Similarly, in the case of Greece, undue emphasis may be given
to an ideological condition that contributed to the malfunctioning
of the institutions during the inter-war period. This was the of
ficers’ confusion over legitimacy and authority, both as concepts
and as concrete elements of political and social reality in specific
historical contexts. The importance of this confusion within Greek
society for creating a tendency towards sterile formalistic strife
has been underlined in previous paragraphs. Between the wars•this
Phenomenon was inevitably amplified within the army because of the
unstable institutional and political environment of that period.
Causes and effects were thus systeraically•’ linked and mutually
i


214
reinforced, so that the conceptual confusion was both a cause and
an effect of the actual environment. But it would be misleading
to attribute excessive causal importance to the dysfunction of the
institutions generated by this ideological peculiarity of Greek
society, and this applies to any other society equally.
Another quite common approach is the tendency to explanations
and methods derived from social psychology and anthropology. Explan
ations of military interventions along these lines range from very
simple — and often simplistic — allusions to psychological or
cultural factors, to quite impressive displays of specialised ter
minology. Here are some examples: ,
"Today the dominant factor is not the existence of .i■armed forces, but the prevalence of political sen timents ... Failure to solve the ... problems of ' a new State ... may involve the interference of the military because they ... are likely to be committed • to the revolution which is the main feature of the current phase of history in Afro-Asia."
Then, a mixture of psychologism and functionalism:
"... deepening ... conflicts in the period between 1961 and 1964 generated with significant numbers of officers a feeling of institutional insecurity, authoritarian attitudes, and desires for systemtransformation ..." , 245 (emphasis added)
In the case of,inter-war Creece, for example, the frequency
of military intervention is politics is often attributed to the
1922 debacle, the humiliating effect of the Turkish victory in Asia
MinorJ and the traumatic experience of an army in retreat crossing
the Aegean along with over a million civilian refugees. Undoubtedly,
the witch-hunt for responsibilities that followed; the revolution
‘ by the remnants of that army; the military government it imposed and
• t h e execution of six leaders of the previous regime; all these were
manifestations of a unique atmosphere of frustration, despair, and '
national crisis, virtually centred upon the army. It is therefore
justified to emphasise the psychological impact of the 1922 events
as an important factor behind the behaviour of the officers, provided


the explanation is not carried too far, especially in terms of time.
For it may have been a good (though not unique) cause of the officeo
reaction immediately after 1922, but cannot possibly be stored up
and conveniently used throughout the period in question if it is not
to become a highly insecure psychological-idealistic explanation.
This objection might also be applied to a more sophisticated
version of the same argument. This attributes the division amongst
the military to deep ideological disorientation following the des
truction of the irredentist Megali Idea, the ideology of ’a Greece
extended over two continents and five seas'. While it may be
true that the ideological factor played an almost pathologically
inflated role in modern Greek history, as has already been discussed
this cannot by itself explain the continuous turmoil in the army.
It was indeed one of its elements, but not by any means its sole
cause.'
The list of authors is long who attribute a major role to
technical factors such as esprit de corps, patronage, the high or
low degree of officers' professionalism, and the like. Some of
these discussions are very stimulating, for instance die one in
Rapoport's "A Comparative Theory..." on conditions of 'nations-at
arms'; and Janowitz’ "The Military...". This latter author, how
ever, is a pleasant exception in that he does not use his findings
to 'explain' military intervention; he is content to suggest the
channels through which such explanations should be directed (pp.
342-43). Similar is the attitude of the Creek historian Veremis
in his yet unpublished Ph.D. thesis on the Greek military in the 
inter-war period. As mentioned earlier, Veremis exhaustively des
cribes the officers’ behaviour, unravels by painstaking research
their extremely complex patronage networks, but explicitly clari
fies that these excellent descriptions are not presented as holistic
explanations of the causes behind intervention. Such is not always
the case with other works, which often do not look beyond the tech
nicalities of conflict in their assessment of why and how these
Vere allowed or even forced to spread inside the army. ' This area
bf methodology is specially appropriate for a longer critical exam


216
ination, as there is fertile ground for testing it in the case of
inter-war Greece, particularly along the lines of clientelisra. A:
somewhat more detailed critical discussion of this specific approach
will, therefore, attempt to explain the methodology followed in this
work, so as to point the difference between the two kinds of pro
cedure.
2, Testing the Functionalist Connection between Patronage and
Military Intervention
- 2.1 General comment
Because clientelism was so ubiquitous in the armed forces
during the inter-war period, it may be mistaken for a major cause
of intervention although, as will be argued here, it was not a 248
primary one, being determined by factors outside the army. Ad
mittedly, the divisive effect of patronage results in the officers'
increasing involvement in politics and hence their tendency to in
tervene. One of the basic reasons, in functionalist terms, is the
lack of any long-term efficiency in serving the interests of the
groups involved. The individualism inherent in patronage is, in
fact, well-nigh incompatible with the kind of efficiency that would
serve entire groups. At the hypothetical level of a 'perfect'
functioning of clientelism as a whole, the profits accruing to
each competing group or each individual are mutually offset. (A
comparison with conditions of perfect competition in economics,
although somewhat simplistic, is helpful.) This can partly explain
the frequent movement of individuals from their own to other com
petitive networks. The greater the competition, the smaller the
difference between the competitors' profits and the productive po
tential. To regain'their previous level of spoils needs an inten
sification of productivity and profits, and so on in continuo until
boiling point is reached. Then, the only way to raise the profit
is acquisition of total power through intervention in politics.
Such, very broadly, would be an explanation of military intervention
based on a functionalist perception of patronage relations. It may


217
be a reassuring, self-sufficient little construct, but it does
not answer certain basic questions.
The first question is to what extent everyday functions of
patronage are .independent of social forces. A return to the spe
cific example of inter-war Greece will help to provide the answer.
One of the striking characteristics of the way patronage functioned
in the army was the manifest fragility of its networks. The frus
tration caused by Venizelos’ pro-royalist position; the consequent
conflicts of allegiances; the fear of revenge by the royalists; all
these did contribute to many officers' gradual alienation from the
Venizelist party. This alienation was mostly temporary; only for
a few of them did it become permanent, among them Pangalos, Kondylis,
and Hadjikyriakos. Many officers who had shifted allegiances in
1923 from Venizelos to Othonaios, or in 1925 to Pangalos' dictator
ship, reappeared in later years as ardent Venizelists. This instab
ility could well be interpreted both ways, to support either of the
two opposing positions: that patronage was not a primary cause of
military intervention, or that it was the fragility of the patron
age allegiances which caused the said shifts in the officers' loy
alties; thus making conditions within and not without the army the
determinant factor. The ambivalence of the approach is clearly due
to its secondary causal significance. For what really matters is
not the instability as such, its symptoms and its effects, but its
causes: the evolution of social factors favourable or unfavourable
to military interventions, and the changes in the officers' ideolo
gy and in their hierarchical position within the army — both of
which had also their roots in the political and social conditions of
the period. .
The second question is what sort of profits patronage is ex
pected to yield in the army, whether they in their turn are indepen
dent of the social and political environment, and whether they-by
themselves are sufficient to cause intervention. The only profits
not directly related to that socio-political environment would
clearly be promotion and assignment of preferred postings. Here
again, the Greek example is helpful. Hierarchical changes and pro
i
n*


218
spects of promotion undoubtedly urged the officers towards plots !
and interventions, but this process did not operate in a vacuum.
If favourable political conditions had been lacking, and if the .
regime question had not been such fertile soil for rallying support,
it is inconceivable that the officers would have plotted en masse
249
and staged coups for the sake of mere promotion. ' '
The answers to the first two questions also provide the ans
wer to the third: What is the causal relationship, if any, between
patronage and intervention? Obviously, clientelism can serve only
as an amplifier of pre-existing cleavages, not as their instigator.
Once the prevailing social and economic conditions have generated
political division outside the army, the patronage system may bring
it into the ranks of the military where it will undergo amplifica
' tion. The same process may function in reverse,•too: patronage!
can transfer intra-military conflicts into politics, where the pol
itical forces may utilise them to their advantage through amplifica
tion of some already existing political conflict.
"It follows, that the utility of patronage as an analytical con
cept is not its alleged effects on the behaviour of the military,
but its function as a communications system between them and the
political forces. In the absence of such inter-communication, any
analysis of the army’s intervention in politics in a clientelist
society would have to be arbitrarily isolated from its social envi
ronment; this would make it unrealistic, however much it claimed
to be, for example, a rigorous Marxist analysis rejecting the func
tionalist vices of patronage as a methodological tool. Conversely,
(and this was the point of the previous paragraph), the analysis
will merely be mechanistic if patronage is considered as an indepen
dent phenomenon,*however intensely clientelistic the society exam'ined. The patronage system is useful in analysis only if seen as a
link. . It is with its methodological assistance that the officers'
behaviour can be linked to .the political forces, and through'them
to the environmental economic and social conditions whichodefine both
the structure and the dynamics of these political forces. ■


219
It should be emphasised that such a link is necessary only .
in a clientelist polity. In any other society, intervention can
occur without the assistance of patronage networks if social and
political conditions are favourable. . Under the pressure of these
conditions, the role of clientelism — communications and allocation
of spoils— will be played by some other system within the given so
ciety. Intervention may be thwarted and delayed in the absence of
patronage networks, but not necessarily avoided. Chile, a society
with a developed civic culture and restricted patronage practices,
is a good example. Conversely, post-war Italy, and Greece in the
23 years of civilian rule before the 1967 coup, are examples of
the opposite situation: despite conditions of shameless clientelist
nepotism, intervention did not occur because its social and polit- >t
ical prerequisites were lacking.
In the case of inter-war Greece, the social and political con
ditions and their institutional framework enabled non-military polit
ical forces to steer to their own advantage the political activities
carried out by the officers. It was only natural that these activi
ties should have been as conflicting as the aims of their instiga
tors; .it was also natural that political conflict and division were
mirrored in the armed forces. Evidently, then, the reason for the
division within the army was not patronage, but the great political
patrons themselves. It was neither the existence of networks within
the army nor their objectives that actually caused the cleavage, it
was the political forces outside it pursuing their own objectives.
2.2 The social roots of intervention — a recapitulation ,,
With the exception of the Pangalist case examined in the pre
vious chapter, it is clear that in the inter-war period the Greek
officers had no wish to establish their own lasting dictatorship.
When, for example, they seized power in 1923, they intended to hand
251
it over to the civilians, and actually did so. Throughout the
inter-war years there is no serious indication that either the army


220
as a whole or any substantial group of officers except Pangalos'
most intimate friends intended to establish a permanent military
dictatorship. The military did not see themselves as a potential •
political leadership. They served as the sword and shield of the
political leaders, but did not aspire to leadership themselves.
Their actions were not conducive to creating the conditions of a
252
garrison-State, but rather of praetorianism. One is tempted to
ask why.
Among the effective reasons for this somewhat surprising •
modesty was the divisive ideological fanaticism of the officers' 
which was a reflection of the dichasmos. the fundamental division
of Creek society and politics at the time. Confronting each other
on opposite sides were the two pyramids of patronage relationships,
Veniselist and royalist — the latter having gradually disintegra
ted in the post-1923 purges, slowly coalesced again after 1926. Even
if a group of dissident officers from either of these blocs had
decided to ferment its own independent revolt, it'would have met
with determined opposition from the fanatics of both blocs, officers
and politicians — ? which is precisely what happened in the overthrow
of Pangalos. >
The above-mentioned factors being sufficient to restrain the
officers from becoming too independent and totally superimposing
their own will on the politicians’ does not mean they were suf
ficient to restrain them from intervention altogether. Division
and fanaticism could not but feed interventionist aspirations,
though at the same time keeping them under the control of the pol- ■
itical blocs. These factors, however, were reflected in and deter
mined by a number of primary social and political conditions. One
of these was the division within the bourgeoisie, examined in the
preceding chapter, which found its expression in the royalist-re
publican dichotomy. The other was the fact that,.after the repub
licans had lost their unique opportunity of 1922, none of the con
flicting blocs, neither the conservative-royalist nor the moderate
republican, had the potential to overpower the other and thus in
stitutionalise itself on a permanent basis.


221
Indeed, only a particularly deep social cleavage such as this
division within the dominant class could have had the impact neces
sary to generate repeated recourse to arms; but no conflict, how
ever deep, is able to spark a series of intervention if one of the
opponents has a near-monopoly of power. In the case of inter-war
Greece, not only were both the conservative and the moderate sec
tions of the bourgeoisie weak in themselves, but the class'as a
whole was still too feeble economically and too infantile ideologi
cally to play, all by itself, the consistent role of indirect dom
• *253
inance it has been able to play in more advanced societies.
It is illuminating that the few dissident groups who did dare
to take independent action were, apart from the Pangalists, the more
intransigent members of the Venizelist bloc who, though they did not
attempt to propose a new ideology as Pangalos had done with his pe
culiar brand of somewhat fascist populism, disapproved of Venizelos’
moderation on the familiar issue of the regime to’the extent of pre
ferring the stick of the coup to the carrot of consensus. Such was
the nature, for example, of the 1923 pronunciamento, and of the 1933
coup. But if, as in the case of General Plastiras in 1933, their
instigators came to desire a dictatorship, it was a Venizelist dic
tatorship they dreamt of — c.ondqnned, characteristically, by the
disapproval of Venizelos himself ~ and not a military one.
. It is noteable also that the one really dissident group which
rose to dictatorial power, the Pangalists, did so on the basis of
more than mere alleged republican intransigence, indeed on an actual
social following which was essentially quasi-fascist. In other
words, the fact that the political and social conditions of inter
war Greece did not permit a military regime is strongly suggested by
the singularity of the military dictatorship of the period, and by
its prompt failure. Having been born on the fascist fringe of local
society and politics, nurtured by the for Greece but marginal musso
linian ideology, and deprived of sustenance ripened on its native
soil, it was condemned to die of starvation.
i


222 Footnotes
1,
For an excellent argument on this subject, see N. Mouzelis' ar
ticle in Vima. Athens 6 July 1976.
*2 ' . , ••
Throughout this work, common sense rather than dogma will be the
criterion for definition of the terms.bourgeoisie or middle class
.which will be clearly distinguished from the petit-bourgeoisie. .
The first two terms will be used interchangeably to denote the weal
thier sections of urban dwellers and the industrialists, but not the
petit-bourgeois artisans; the managers or higher executive cadres *
but not the lower-ranking employees; judges but not clerks of the
court; doctors, lawyers, and others in liberal professions, but not
-necessarily,their unemployed younger colleagues recently graduated
from the university. Nevertheless, the terms may well include the
- occasional artisan making a fortune from his expensive jewellery,
the clerk lending a large sum of inherited capital at 50% interest,
or the hoarding shopkeeper who rents out, as a sideline, the five
or six houses in which he has shrewdly invested. .
*3 ' ' ......
It is interesting that such qualifications and the more general class
analysis of distinct ethnic groups under foreign rule are methodolo
gical problems not yet investigated to an extent which might estab
lish precedents or guidelines. In fact, analytical historical or
sociological works of this kind are rare also, so the field of meth
odology is not only a virgin one, but the empirical applications
- are also lacking — applications which could serve as a testing
ground for theoretical and methodological work.
• * 4 : - . • :> : : i " " : • 
The degree of the Creek immigrants’ social integration into their
host countries is no contradiction. In most cases their integration
was more or less complete, so that one can consider the Vienna Creels,
for example, as members of the Austrian middle class. On the other
hand, those Creeks for whom social integration in the host country
was incomplete should not automatically be classified as middle class
in the newly-formed Greece. (On the issue of integration, see
T.Stoianovich, "The Conquering Balkan-Xerchant".)


223
For an excellent description of the Islamic legal system and its
linkage with the mode of production of the Islamic societies, see
P.Anderson, "Lineages of the Absolutist State".
*6 . " :
"Many of the richest natives (sic) of Thessaly derive their in
comes from Egypt and other foreign countries Consular
Report H°4492, F.O.Annual Series 1909, Thessaly. Indeed, most
landowners were diaspora Greeks, see Dakin, "The Unification...",
p. 251; Moskof in his "I ethniki ..." claims they numbered up
to two-thirds of the total. See also the illuminating descrip
tion of the relationship between the diaspora and Greece in Law's
. Report, 1893, F.O. Annual Series, p. 31. This is a special and
very detailed report from a perceptive diplomat, written as a
guideline for the action then to be taken by the Powers for the
protection of Greece's creditors, in view of the country's bank
ruptcy. Law very clearly speaks of the diaspora Greeks as alien
to the country's internal structure and sees them mainly as a
source of invisible earnings for the balance of payments. Here
is a characteristic extract distinguishing between foreign and
local investment by the heterocthones:
"From inquiries I have made, I have reason to put the amount of Greek gold stocks held in . Greece at about 60 to 80 mill, fr., but this is probably a small figure as compared with the value of foreign stocks and shares similarly held, and regularly contributing to swell the remittances to Greece."
■ *7 .
Deschampa, a contemporary visitor to Athens, wrote ("La Gr¿ce,.."<
pp. 52-53): "Si la vill? n'était habitée que par des Athéniens,
elle serait triste, silencieuse et morose ..." _
*8 •
Many of Moskof's comments on the diaspora can be interpreted as
supporting the view expressed here that the diaspora cannot be
treated as a local class (see "I ethniki pp. 92-95, 101-02,
108). His text is most explicit on p. 152: '
5


"Athens was for the heterocthones nothing but a place of residence; their economic activity still took place chiefly in the place abroad where they had migrated...; the choice of residence in the , . new Athens betrays nevertheless a will to grow ‘ roots in the free (Greek) State, a wish not unre lated to the nationalist or xenophobic movements in Rumania or Egypt in the years 1878-1907. In ad.dition to the search for security, however, the heterocthones ' presence in Athens occurs with a hegemonic perspective; deprived of participa tion 'in political power at the place of their — migration, they seek and actually obtain a major . position in Greek politics."
The emphasis is added to show the distinction,also made by Mos
kof, between the economic and political practices of the dias
pora. On the importance of their political participation, how
ever, I disagree. As explained in the text, though Phanariotes
and heterocthones were politically important,.they cannot be con
sidered members of this.same bourgeois and entrepreneurial dias
pora which, partly because of the heterocthones* political im
portance, is erroneously trated as part of the local bourgeoisie.
On this subject see also Psyroukis, "To paroikiako phenomeno".
Filias, "Koinonia kai exoussia p.,105, very clearly dis
tinguishes the heterocthones from the local middle class, and
goes on to say that economically speaking they were of "a cos
mopolitan, not a national orientation".
The purchases of.rural properties;refer to the property of
anxious Turkish landowners, and concerned landholdings protected
by the 1831 Treaty of Acquisition of Thessaly and Arta, which
were nevertheless sold at very favourable prices. Many diaspora
magnates who bought large landholdings belonged to such very
well-known families as the Syngros, Skylitsis, Zografos, Stefa
novic, Baltadjis, Zarifis, Zappas, Kartalis (Vergopoulos, "To
agrotiko...", p. 97). This was a repetition of what had happened
in 1833, when Turkish properties in Attica were also sold to rich
Greeks.(p. 94) and similar sales later on, until.the 1871 dis
tribution of the national lands to unpropertied peasants. '


225
The objection that banks were unable to lend at immoral and (fol
lowing Law rQAZ' of 1911) illegal rates is not valid. There is
evidence of bank loans transacted in Greece as'late as the 1950s
and 1960s with interest rates of 18$ (legal limit 10-12$). These
transactions were covered by the system of parallel accounting
and were therefore totally unofficial and free of tax. Zolotas
confirms that illegal rates on privately contracted loans were
common practice in the 1920s, and mentions rates of up to 15-30$
("I Hellas eis to p.73). Illegal interest rates seem to
have been admirably steady over the past century.
;
There can be no better witness to the prosecution of the diaspora
magnates along these lines than the leader writer of the news
paper Rambagas on 9 Dec. 1882: "They do not use their capital
in the development of industry or in enterprises which .will revi
talise the working classes. Speculating, special deals, and stock
market juggling are their best beloved interests." See also Dakin,
"The Unification...", p..252.*
*12
The quotation is from Law's Report, F.O. Annual Series 1169,
April 1893..
The privileged position of the diaspora's foreign capital •'
in Greece resembles the advantages of the dollar between 1945
and 1971 in the European and Japanese investment markets. In
fact, the manipulation of the drachma’s parity was even more
lucrative: it was a relatively easy and private affair, which .
of course was not the case with the dollar.
It would be wrong to think that speculators could be bro
kers or financiers unrelated to the diaspora entrepreneurs.
Firstly, the market was too small and there was no real fluc
tuation: the trend was continually towards devaluation, which
means that the risks in pure day-to-day monetary speculation,
not covered by merchandise or capital goods, were immense.
Secondly, there were no local Creeks with the huge fortunes
required for controlling a currency market, however small it
may have been. Lastly and most important, the magnates who
controlled investment in and exports from Greek mines as well
10


as a great part of the country's foreign trade, would at any
rate be obliged to enter the currency market on a term-basis,
this being an elementary risk-reducing measure. It would be
absurd to think that a businessman buying or selling on terms
large quantities of currency in a small market and seeing the
rates going up as a result of his own transactions, would ever
let someone else cash in on the profits, or never think of man
ipulating the market to his own advantage. Consequently, and.
considering also that the market was constantly directed to
wards devaluation, the only strategy the speculator/businessman
could possibly pursue would be one to ensure the largest pos
sible transfer of surplus out of the rapidly deteriorating
Greek economy. His speculative funds, in other words, should
stay in Greece for the shortest possible time if he wanted to
maximise his total profits from his twin operation, the one in
the currency market and the other in the investment or foreign
trade market. It was in the nature of this process that it
should be self-amplifying.’ 5
*13 ; . ;
If diaspora elements had avoided deposits of their profits in
Greek banks, it was different for the richest among them, who
could well afford to invest it not in the form of deposits but
of bank capital, which could be stipulated in gold francs even
after currency controls had been imposed. Two of the four banks
in operation in 1883 had been formed with diaspora capital, one
in 1873 (characteristically at the onset of the great 19th-cen
tury crisis), and one in 1882 (Moskof, "I ethniki..., p.162).
But all four of them, as.well as the Bank of Athens which was
established in 1893, enjoyed such privileges that their shares
were a very safe investment indeed. There is a marked imbalance
between the growth of capital and the growth of deposits in the
years from 1884 to 1905, which may partly be attributed to such
a tendency of diaspora capital as here described:
Year '. Capital * DeposIts ‘ ■ ■'‘' ' + reserves . (in mill, gold francs)
1694 ; 33.5 - Derived from Evelpidis, 94 - 26.9 "Oikonomiki kai koinoniki. 97 ''-- ' '21.2' ' 28.3 ' p. 97. • 1901 , 29.1 60.1 . , •. 05 63.2 ’ 154.1 » 10 125.6 337.2 14 99.0 396.8 19' 61.6 487.6 23 55.1 . 433.7


227
It is clear that the ratio of deposits to bank capital became
reasonable only after 1914, or even 1919. Conversely, capital
was relatively high in the 19th century. This cannot be ex
plained merely by Greece’s underdevelopment; the real question
is why these diaspora elements chose to establish banks in an un
derdeveloped country, why they not simply deposited their money
with the National Bank of Greece — a private bank enjoying the
privilege of issuing currency — and why they kept on doing so
despite the unfavourable prospect for a good deposit/capital ratio.
14
Prior to 1873, the total'investment in mining and industry was
insignificant (see the Statistical Tables in chapter B).
15
Hobsbawm, "The Age of Capital”, pp. 304-05.
16
For a brief and comprehensive analysis of the Phanariotes’ initial
role in the Ottoman empire, see Stoianovich, "The Conquering Balkan...
Merchant", pp. 269-73
17
Moskof, "I ethniki...", pp.115 and 122-26. His Table shows 21 MPs
of diaspora origin, six of them Phanariotes and heterocthones. On
the origin of most of the 15 MPs not specified by Moskof, and es
pecially their important role in the revolution and their subse
quent settling in Greece, see their biographies in Pyrsos* "Megali
Helliniki Encyclopaedia". See also "Essays in Memory of Basil
Laourdas", Society of Macedonian Studies, Thessaloniki 1965.
18 '‘ •
Explicit on this subject is, for example, Filias’ work "Koinonia...";
Tsoukalas’ descriptions in "The Greek Tragedy" give the reader the
same impression. Vergopoulos’ "To agrotiko..." supports the ar
gument' of market penetration in rural Creece, but again the impres
sion created is one of stagnation, if not regression of the system
as a whole. ..The same deduction holds for the work of Moskof, es
pecially if his two books are read in juxtaposition ("Thessaloniki...
and "I ethniki...").


223
*19
The argument which follows has been considerably influenced by
Dr. N. Mouzelis* extensive criticism and suggestions. Needless
to say that my text does not necessarily reflect his views.
In this discussion I had to infringe my rule for using
a minimum of.specialised terms in order to adhere strictly to
Marxist terminology as I see it. The non-Marxist reader will ap
preciate that this was necessary for two good reasons. Firstly,
the controversy is frequently couched in similar terms in the bib
liography on the subject; secondly the very term ’capitalism* and
the theoretical nature of the discussion demand such a deviation
from my rule. The problem being methodological, it requires exac
titude and rigour; but even the non-Marxist would agree that the
only rigorous and sufficiently comprehensive terminology available
in the field of the study of capitalism is that of Marxism.
To compensate, I have nonetheless tried to use non-special
ised substitutes whenever possible, to simplify the argument as.
much as I could, keep it to a minimum, and revert to concrete his
torical discussion¿and empirical examples as quickly as possible.
20
On the concept of 'social formation* and for an explanation-of its
role in a structuralist theoretical framework, see Poulantzas,
"Pouvoir politique...".vol.I, pp.69-72; Althusser and Balibar,
"Lire le Capital**, vol.II, pp.112-14 and 151; Althusser, "For
Marx’* (Penguin 1969) pp.100-02 and especially 212-14.
21 ' *
See Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko zitima...", pp.319-21, for a good
critical description of the system, and Vakalopoulos, "Historia.. .**
for a detailed enquiry into its historic roots.
*22
According to Thiersch "De l’Stat actuel de la Grice", Leipzig 1833),
five-sixth of the peasants were unpropertied. Though this may have
held true for the whole of the Greek peninsula, it was more pro
nounced in the case of the newly liberated Greed State which extent
ded only over the southern provinces. There, small property-hold
ings were much more common than in the North, whilst about 35^ of
the land (according to Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko zitima...", pp.
83-85), was State property.


229
23
These percentages, as well as the previously mentioned figure of
35% for land owned by the new Creek State, are reported by Ver
gopoulos, "To agrotiko zitima...", pp. 83-85. They are obviously
only approximate.
24
P.Dertilis, "I epanastassis tou 1821 kai ai ethnikai gaiai" (The
1821 revolution and the national landholdings), Athens 1971.
Also reprinted in full in Oikonomokis Tachvdromos N° 899, 1971.
25
On the important subject of the Dotation Law, see the excellent
work by Petropulos, "Politics and Statecraft...", pp. 236-38 and
254; see also Aspreas, "Politiki historia ...", pp.137-38 and 143
Kordatos, "Historia tou agrotikou.. pp. 277-83.
26
Law YAA of 1871. For details see Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko ziti
ma.-. ", p . 86.
*27
Kordatos, for example ("Historia ...", p. 179), admits that
"the particularities of the ... economy in the various regions
.... favoured the delay in the development of the peasants' pol
itical consciousness." Yet throughout his book he tries to over
come the difficulties he has created by considering the peasant
ry as a single class, by means of such constructs as "common
condition" and by repeating that the small independent peasants
"did not really own their land" because they were heavily in
debt at exorbitant interest rates. The argument of usury,
though simplistic, is employed widely among Marxist historians
who have examined the Bulgarian case (see the criticism by
Cershènkron in "Economic Backwardness...", pp. 220-21). For in
formation on usury in Greece during Otho's reign, see Petropulos
"Politics and Statecraft...", pp. 488 ff., and Evelpidis, "Oiko
nomiki kai koinoniki.. Athens 1950, p. 52, reporting interest
rates of 18-40%.


230
On the role of usury in the stage of primitive capitalist •
accumulation, see Marx, "The Eighteenth Brumaire.. pp.241-42;
see also Barrington Moore Jr, "The Social Origins...", p. 360,
for a discussion of the moneylender as a central figure in a
period of primitive capitalist accumulation in India; see also 
pp. 271 and 273 on Japan, concerning the objective of the Meiji
policy to use the peasant "as a source of capitalist accumula
tion", which had the "immediate effect" on the peasants of mak
ing them "more dependent ... on the village usurer". It is u n - ‘
deniable that whether usury has or does not have an effect on
capitalist development depends on the nature of the accumula
tion and its subsequent use. Mere hoarding will not cause cap
italist transformation, neither will mere merchant investment;
the differentiating element is industrial investment (see m y *3 8 •
footnote on industrialisation, beginning of section 4).
28 v
See Kordatos, "Historia ...", pp. 183-86 concerning Euboea;.; 
also p. 178 for a quotation from the Paris newspaper "Temps
Nouveaux (1900) which, among other information, reports that
"there are no tsiflikia in Achaia”, the region in the Pelop
ponnese next to and very similar to Eleia.
29 ' ' ■ • .. ■: ■ . - - '.
Moskof, "I ethniki..."", pp. 89-90. !'
30 ^ / ' ' ''' : ^ '■ 1 '' ' ' ■ ~
Derived from data given in Hoskof, "I ethniki...", p. 168, and
based on the Archives du Ministlre des Affaires Etrangires,
Nouvelle SSrie, Grice, vol.XII, pp. 157-62. *
31 ; ; '' _
The percentages were taken very approximately from a chart
given by Moskof, "I ethniki...", p.102. Zolotas, in his in
valuable book on industrialisation, "I Hellas eis to...", pp. .
106-08 and 92-97, attributes the low rate of capital formation
mainly to the scarcity of capital and low profits (p.107). Scar
city could well be caused by hoarding practices, however. As for


231
profits, it is not possible to establish whether they were low
or high, but lack of investment is not necessarily a symptom of
low profits.
32
This is explicitly Kartakis' view, who in fact considers a longer
period (1910-1940) as the first phase of Greek industrialisation
("Le développement industriel...", pp. 6-11).
*33
There is a basic theoretical and methodological distinction behind
such differences in interpretation. Seen from a system standpoint,
the structural causal linkage between coups, the rise of the middle
class and capitalist transformation seems justified. Conversely,
seen from an action approach, the linkage appears false. Such a
negation does not necessarily lead to the extreme of voluntarism.
To deny, for example, the role of the bourgeoisie in 1909 from an
action viewpoint does not need to mean that its structural impor
tance is neglected. (The useful distinction made in N.Poulantzas*
work between place de classe and position de classe is well applic
able here.) Similarly to stress the role of the petit bourgeoisie
does.not imply a voluntaristic conception of this social agent's
role. Vhat is attempted in this work as far as the writer's lim
itations allow, is a selective use of both standpoints, with em
phasis on action approach as required by elementary dialectical
rules. (On the crucial issue of methodology, I am heavily indebted
to Dr N.Mouzelis' for virtually teaching me through long discus
sions and patient criticism. For more details on the subject the
reader may wish to refer to Mouzelis' article, "Social and System
Integration: Some Reflections on a Fundamental Distinction", Brit.
Journ.' of Sociology, vol.XXV, N°4, Dec. 1974. Closely relevant
to this debate are also the works by Lockwood, "Social integra
tion..." and Dawe, "The Two Sociologies". /,
*34- '
Whenever possible, specialised language is avoided. Terms such
as capitalist/feudalist mode of production can often be replaced
by the simpler 'capitalism* or 'feudalism', provided the reader
can understand whether the simpler term is being used in its
,C
f


more common, wider sense, or in the strict and more precise .
sense that denotes a mode of production. In most cases this
will be clear from the context, but wherever it is not, the
more precise term will be given.
. Although it is possible to simplify a term such as 'capit
alist mode of production’, this is not always so for the more'
abstract 'mode of production’ when it has to stand by itself;
there are many instances when such a term is very useful, which
in this work is mostly the case in this paragraph only. Being
empirically rather than theoretically oriented, this work will
often refer to precise problems of capitalism or pre-capitalism
and seldom to abstract discussion about modes of production.
Hence the criteria will be clarity and facility: whenever pos
sible, even in a theoretically oriented paragraph, the term as
such will be avoided.and concrete historical examples preferred.
When abstract reference is made to a dynanic totality of social and
economic structures without the rigorous aspects of a particu
lar mode being necessarily implied,.then words like ’system’ '
or phrases like ’system of structures' will be employed. But
whatever term is used, I wish to make it clear that my argument'
is guided by the notion of 'mode of production', and that my
term implies more or less the same conditions as those denoted
by the Marxian term. On these conditions, see of course K.Marx,
’Grundrisse", pp. 97, 105-08, but also and chiefly the contra
dicting pp. 881-82; then pp. 254, 257, 319-20 and 856-58; and
above all the beautiful analysis of original accumulation and
the historical process leading to capitalist production through
the dissolution of the old modes at the end of "Notebook IV"
and the beginning of "Notebook V", pp. 471-514.
35 ;
I use the term tertiary sector in its classical, functionally
derived sense, and do not intend the contemporary connotations
attributing to the tertiary sector a development potential re
lated to the nature of services in the so-called post-industrial
societies. After all, the service sector undergoes a primitive
phase just like industry.


233
Marx, "Grundrisse", pp. 881, 856, 859, and again mainly pp.471-514 t . * . ', . , *
*37'
a) See Anderson, "Lineages...", p. 361, for a comment on the
Balkan peculiarities.' See also pp. 546-49 for a discussion of
the same methodological problem as encountered in the examina
tion of Asian feudalism: "Asian development cannot in any way
• be reduced to uniform residual category, left over after the
canons of European evolution have been established”(p. 549).
The significance of the historical element in the examination
of a mode of production is well summed up in Mandel's criticism
of Althusserian structuralism:
"Pourquoi Marx a-t-il commencé le ’Capital' par une analyse de la marchandise, non pas en tant que 'hégélien', mais en tant que marxiste? Parce que, contrairement à Althusser,... il n'£ pas voulu analyser le mode de production capita liste comme quelque chose de statique, comme une structure immobile séparée du passe et de l'avenir?
(E.Mandel, "Althusser corrige Marx", in "Contre Althusser",
p. 266.) See also Lefebvre "L'idédogie...", p. 169:
"Pour Marx, il n'y eut jamais dans l'histoire que des tendances,... De sorte qu'on va trop loin lorsqu'on exige qu'il montre le plein accomplisse ment d'un mode de production..." (p. 169)
b) In the discussion on the peasantry I have distinguished
between the different modes of production prevailing in various
regions. This is.not in contradiction to describing a mercan
tile mode of production as the dominant one in Creek society
as a whole. The one level of analysis is geographic or sec- '
torial, the other is not: it concerns the social formation as
a whole.
*38 .
Although considering industrialisation as a sufficient con
dition and an exclusive characteristic of capitalism is an over
simplification (see Giddens, "The Class Structure..."), this
would apply to advanced societies. Conversely, there is no
doubt that some degree of industrialisation is a pre-condition
for capitalism in the initial stage of its dominance. This
36


234
calls for clarification of the concept of original capital ac
cumulation as used here. Gershenkron links the concept with the
"initial industrial spurt" ("Economic Backwardness..., pp.90ff;
especially the argument on pp. 98-99). This is a view which is
appealing, not only because it clarifies a rather schematically •
interpreted Marxian classification, but mainly because of its
utility in the evaluation of economic reality. The term would
surely be meaningless if it referred to more or less plain hoar
ding. If, by contrast, the accumulated capital is not hoarded
but invested, then a reinvestment in the mercantile or more
widely tertiary sector constitutes no real change from pre-cap
italism but would simply be a quantitative change within the
same mode. - The change in mode begins not when this accumulated
wealth is unhoarded and invested, but when it is invested in
industry (p.116). I see no other safe path leading to conditions
of large-scale exchanges of free labour with_money. (Marx,
"Grundrisse", p. 471; see also Mandel, "Traité...", vol.I, p . •
150.) In Anderson's analysis of the reasons why China has failed
to industrialise, the role of investment patterns is seen as the
central issue ("Lineages...", pp. 544 and 540-49). Similarly,
in his discussion on the delay of capitalist development in
Mexico after the 1357 reform, A.Nunes underlines the same prob
lems :
"La reforme ... ne réussit pas i imposer le capital industriel comme structure dominante... Le capital-argent accumulé ... (est) investi improductivement (usure), ou alors dans le commerce ... ou dans le textile européen."
("Les revolutions de Mexique", p. 29.)
•39
"... the depression (in Greece), due to independent and general
causes..." This is from Lewis-Sergeant, "Creece in the 19th
century", p. 309, which was written in 1897. . The passage des
cribes the causes of the crisis in Greece of the 1880s.


235
Even the 32 engineers used in railroad construction were foreign
— French and Swiss. (Dakin, "The Unification...", p.146)
The sleepers used in the laying of the rails were also wholly
imported, despite Greece’s ability to provide the timber (Martin,
"Creece of the 20th Century", p.201). In fact, only a few years
later, certain lines were mainly used in the transport of timber
(58# of the total on the Agrinion line, see p.202). The necessary
fuel (briquettes) was also wholly imported to the amount of 18,000
tons annually during the 1910s (p.197).
The reader interested in Greek railways will find quite an
exhaustive description in this book by Martin, written just before
World War I and possibly a very diligent spying job (pp.188-225).
See also the Tables earlier in this chapter for more infor
mation on the development of the railways.
*41
It is also important to take into account the unusual reflationary
impact the boom in currant production had on the Greek economy.
This factor, together with government spending on railways and
other projects financed by extensive borrowing abroad, were nearly
the only causes of whatever economic development occurred in the
last quarter of the century. .The currant blessing came totally by
chances .pheloxera had destroyed the French vineyards in
1878 and caused a serious shortage of grapes in France for a long
period (during which, incidentally, French vines were first grown
in California). The boom lasted from 1878 to 1893, and currant
exports rose from 13.6 million drachmae in 1861, to an all-time
high of 37.8 million in 1875 (Dakin, "The Unification..", p.250).
The slow development of the country would have been even slower
without these random windfalls which had nothing to do with the
development of a secondary sector. They merely contributed towards
a greater commercialisation of agriculture in the Peloponnese, 
and not towards the country’s development as a whole towards capitalism.
42
On the important though unfortunately indecisive role played by dia
spora magnates in the resurrection of Greek shipping, see Andreades,
"La marine marchande.. pp.20-21, which has a description of the
contribution of Vagliano (London) and Zarifi (Constantinople). See
also Dakin's comments on shipping in his "The Unification...".
*40


236
43
Hcbsbavm, "The Age of Capital", p. 58.
44 5 . . . . ' .
Railways receipts per mile in 1896 were 13,720.- drachmae, in
1905 they were 16,090.- drachmae (Abbot, "Greece in Evolution",
p. 205). _
For a very detailed account of the not-so-brilliant invest
ment and operational finances of the Greek railroads for one of
its first years of operation (1892), see Law’s Report, F.0.An
nual Series N° 1169, April 1893, p. 87a; the following comment
on the most productive line, that from Athens to Piraeus, is
illuminating: "The Piraeus-Athens Company derive a large part 
of their revenue from the bathing and other public establish
ments which they own at Phaleron."
45
On the diplomatic activity backstage of the 1893 bankruptcy,
see Driault-LhSritier, "Histoire...", vol.IV; pp.296-98.*
*46 ^ ' ' '. '' . V .'
Girard, for example, is very enthusiastic about the growth of
Greek industry before 1883 ("La Grdce en 1883", pp. 45 and 135),
but his description of what he calls industry and growth shows
quite clearly that his enthusiasm was caused merely by compari
son with the zero point.
■George Papandreou, who was to become Prime Minister in
the 1960s, spoke in a 1914 interview with the magazine "Gramma
ta" of the "future" industrialisation of Greece, which he then
considered still at a pre-capitalist stage. It is interesting
that, in this very early and forgotten text, Papandreou proceeds
to a Marxist analysis, considering the bourgeois transformation
as a future and not a past stage of Greek history. Yet this was
at late as 1914.
Still later on, in 1930, Venizelos held the following views
about Creek industrialisation: "Although we (Greeks) believed
until 1912 that Greece would remain almost exclusively agri
cultural ... after, the war, (this) is impossible. Of course,
agriculture will always remain the main source of our wealth..."


.. . 237
(emphasis added). Speech to Parliament, 14 March 1930, in
S.Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...", vol.II, p. 484. Then, in a
speech to the Senate, two years later (26 April 1932), he ex
claimed: "We cannot forever remain a nation of compradors."
It is not surprising, therefore, that Zolotas explicitly
classifies the 1885-1911 period as one of stagnation in spite
of heavy tariff protection ("I Hellas eis to...", p.17); and
that Kordatos contradicts his own interpretation of pre-1909
as the period of the rise of the middle class, by admitting '.
that an analysis of the pre-1909 figures on industry "does not
indicate a rapid industrialisation", and that it was "the 1912
1913 wars that expanded the country and supported industrial
growth" and then that "industry has further grown since 1922"
("Historia...", vol. XIII, p.16).
47
In his excellent book on the peasant problem in Creece, Vergopou
los ("To agrotiko...") supports this view with very good argumen
tation. I believe, however, that his view is based on a false pre
mise, as I try to show in the text.
+48 . * . .
Vergopoulos rightly emphasises the role of the Koumoundouros gov
ernments and their policies in the development of the Greek eco
nomy, although it did not result in the capitalist transforma
tion of Greek society. It is true that until recently this
role had been underrated, but its rediscovery should not lead
one to the other extreme, i.e. to underestimate the role of Tri
koupis. That Kouraoundouros followed a protectionist policy,
and that the number of factories increased from 28 to 145 in
this period, are indications of relative, not absolute value._
Trikoupis’ concern with the economic infrastructure, railroads,
modernisation, public investments etc. had an undeniable ef
fect on Greece’s later development. Progress in industry during
Koumoundouros* period could not be sustained without the pro
gress in the infrastructure achieved in the subsequent period.
Gershenkron's view on the period of preparation of a certain
infrastructure (railroads etc.) contributes to a less linear


233
understanding of the relation between industrialisation and
its "prerequisites": "... it is ... possible to believe
that in a backward country a period of preparation that is
consummated before the industrial upsurge ... makes it im
possible for the latter to materialise." (Gershenkron,
"Economic Backwardness...", p.113)
49 See H.Trikoupis" 1889 Budget speech (p.33 of English text).
Further comments on Trikoupis* concern to attract diaspora
capital are in Toynbee, "Greek Policy ..", pp. 8-9; Kordatos, ^
"Historia...", vol.XII, p.437, pp.417-18, and vol.XIII, p.237;
and , Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko.. p.321.
• *50 ..... .........
"...many landowners have agreed to break up their holdings if
they can obtain fair prices...", Martin, "Greece of the 20th
Century", p.' 253. This is a book published in 1913.
See also Ventiris, "I Hellas...", vol.II, p. 27, for an
explanation of the mildness of the strife between middle clas
ses and what, without qualification, he calls the "ruling class"
Despite his opinion that a strife had developed between
landed aristocracy and bourgeoisie, Vergopoulos also admits that
the "landowners participated in the capitalist economic devel
opment" of Greece as financiers, businessmen, merchants etc.,
and did not strongly object to the land reform — they just bar
gained for more economic advantages in the expropriation process
("To agrotiko.. p. 146). ’ *
See also the interesting remark on Creece by Barrington
Moore Jr., "Social Origins...", footnote 4 on p.438, and his
text throughout pp. 436-41 concerning the "rough working coal-. .
ition between ... the landed upper classes and the emerging
commercial and manufacturing interests" and its effects on the
emergence of unstable authoritarian democracies. It should be ‘
remembered, however, that in Greece the landed upper classes?
did not insist on keeping their role as such, though, they did
insist, and very successfully so, on retaining their privileges.


239
With the versatility and entrepreneurial skill that only people
with long histories of prosecution can display, the Greek 'aris- .
tocracy' opted for more than a mere coalition with the class of
merchants and industrialists. After the land reform they chose
to play a dominant role within the bourgeoisie itself by becom
ing its financier section, though always in the particularly
Greek comprador manner which, in the financing sector, implies
a predominance of practices such as usury and speculation in
urban properties.
*51
Those who have devoted years of effort to disentangling the social
origins of the 1821 revolution will understand (and forgive), I
hope, my somewhat arbitrary statement and take it for what it is:
a working hypothesis. It would be impossible to examine this prob
lem, not even in summary, without diverging from either my main
course or the elementary rules of scholarship. It is equally im
possible to ignore it. No objectivity cult will ever exorcise our
assumptions. I have preferred admitting my assumption on the 1821
revolution rather than pretend that subsequent events can be trea
ted in'total historical isolation.
52 • See Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko.. pp.342-48 for a good brief
survey of these two outlooks.
54 '
Giannopoulos, a fanatically pro-aristocratic writer, considers
that the policicians were a distinct body totally unrelated to the
aristocracy. His description of their practices (Neon Pnevma.
pp.5-23) is characteristic of the autonomy he attributed to them.
*55
The dowry amounted to drs 400,000 (£17,400). Trikoupis also con
ceded an increase of nearly £6,000 of the King's civil list, the
gift of a tract of very fertile land in the Peloponnese, and the
inscription of an amount of £20,000 in the budget (Filaretos,
"Xenokratia.,7; and Kordatos, "Historia..." vol.IX, pp. 496 ff).
Of these £20,000 an amount of £5,600 or drs 199,700 was actually
spent to build a Crown Prince's-residence in Athens (Lewis-Sergeant,
"Greece in the 19th century", p.309). After the 1893 State bank


240
ruptcy, the King requested funds for the repair of the royal yacht.
The government allowed about £2,000. By the time the repairs had
cost over £34,000, the court was still asking for another £4,500,
and specialist shipbuilders“ calculated that it would finally cost
not less than £115,000. Yet the royal family never used the yacht
because the final funds were not approved and the vessel allegedly
"never came up to the standards of the Russian Emperor’s yacht"
(Lambrinos, "I monarchia.. p.70). General Danglis, a royal
aide-de-camp for quite some time, mentions quite casually how com
mon the "vice of avarice" was among the royal family (Archives,
vol.I, p.221).
56 ” ’
Korizis, "I politiki zoi...", p.110
5s .
Moskof, "I ethniki...", p.164; see also his comments on p.153.
On the autonomy of politics there is an interesting early view
.by Skliros, "Ta synchrona...”, p.54. As Moskof puts it, "Among
:these (bourgeois) sections of urban society, explicit conflicts will
seldom appear ... on the political level. ... This establishment
will continue to rest in peace, ... more and more isolated in its
uncontrolled omniscience'from the masses and their still latent
movement."
59 . . .
Derived approximately from a diagram given by Moskof, "I ethniki...",
p.129; as there is no mention of source, the percentages have only
indicative value.
*60 . , . .* .
To summarise in a schematic manner, a sui eeneris political oli
garchy was called to administer a bourgeois institutional system,
in order to meet problems and conflicts of an essentially non
capitalist society; The effect of such a disarticulation between
the political, institutional and socio-economic levels was that >
social conflict could not possibly find faithful reflection in pol
itics . ’
The use of the term disarticulation, and the level approach
do not imply emphasis on the structural aspects of methodology.


c. 241
A dialectical method is not possible in Cartesian terms. "L’erreur
théorique du structuralisme consiste ... en ce q u ’il privilégie
inconsidérément un concept, celui de la structure" (Lefebvre,
"L'ideologie...", p.10). Then, pp. 37-38: "Les totalités nou
velles entraînent i la fois la disparition des ançiennes struc
tures et la formation ... des structures nouvelles. D'od pro
viennent-elles? D'une activité infra-structurelle, a-structurelle
ou supra-structurelle?" And, p.40: "La dernière acception de la
structure, celle qui conçoit la déstructuration au sein même de
la structuration, domine et enveloppe les autres dans "le Capital'.
Elles les subordonne au mouvement dialectique et £ l'histoire.”
61
For contemporary opinions see General Danglis, "Archives", especial
ly in vol.I, pp. 93 ff, 98, 109; Deschamps, pp. 66-94; and Rontiris,
"I kata syntagma...", pp. 389-406, who offers an exhaustive account
of the "ways in which parliament may be corrupted". For later
commentaries see Dakin, "The Unification..", pp. 140 ff. and 267-68;
B.Markesinis, "The Theory...", p.148; and Stefanou (ed), "Veni
zelos...", especiallyvol.il, p.371.
*62 7.
The votes of unpropertied peasants could be easily and cheaply
bought, usually with payment cash down as soon as the candidate was
safely elected. A large variety of other small favours were also
brought into play: assuring better terms in the relationship with
the landowner, especially if he was a candidate himself; extension
of expiry dates for loans; less usurious interest rates; post
ponement of arrest for non-payment; clemency in cases of banditry
or other penal offences; help with the formalities of emigration;
cheaper fees at the doctors and lawyers in the town; godfather
relationships ; employment of the family's children as domestic ser
vants; and so on and so on. Many of these spoils were granted by
the politician himself, some were arranged by his clients lower
down in the hierarchy or his local agents.
63 For an interesting etymological point on the term collegoi
see Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko...", pp.312 and 314.
le


242
64 .
An additional profit in votes was yielded by the politician's
ability to increase the labour demand by creating additional
civil service posts, and to meet this demand by placing his own
clients in the vacancies. 
*65 ■ ’ ■■■:•• • •
a) In the last decades of the century Greece had a higher degree
of literacy than other backward countries (see Table, Chapter B).
This was partly due to the schools built with diaspora funds, des
tined to supply Greek businesses abroad with reliable and inexpen
sive labour. It was also due, however, to the propertied peasants
beginning to educate their children, and the employment prospects
created by the State.
b) On the relation between education and patronage for civil ser
vice posts, see an early and very critical opinion by Venizelos in
a speech to the Second Constituent Assembly of (autonomous) Crete
on 3 Nov. 1906 (S.Stefanou, ed., "Benizelos...", vol.II, pp.
333-84).
*67 ... . -tU \ . •.
Similarly, at a more general level, the divisive effect of patronage
added to the already significant split of the peasantry into two
classes - propertied and unpropertied - with two distinct ideologies,
thus contributing to the inability of the rural polulation to mobil
ise and generate an agrarian party movement. Simultaneously, the
material and ideological fetters that patronage had gradually woven
around the unpropertied peasants further helped to contain any con
sistent revolutionary tendencies.
*69 ...
See Karanikolas, "Nothes...", pp. 250-53 for a detailed description
of the system of voting. See also p. 262 for a reference to Prince
Nicholas* conversation with Voulgaris, the political leader who ex
celled in fraud and violence. In this discussion, Voulgaris went as
far as to propose the assissination of his great opponent, Koumoun
dourfts. That he dared to talk about assassination to the King shows
the degree of corruption in the electoral practices.
For information' on army activity during later elections, see
pp. 299-300, 4-2-04, 326-28; and especially 384-85 on the 1890


243
elections which were held under the premiership of Trikoupis, who
thus seems to have resigned himself to the had habits after a long
period of electoral honesty.
See pp. 271-72, 282-83 on the army and the gendarmerie collab
orating with the bandits for electoral purposes; p.277 contains
the following quotation from an 1868 newspaper reporting on the elec
tion: "... thirty graves were opened and about fifty citizens woun
ded..." The official announcement (30 March 1862) speaks of ten
and 26 respectively. See also pp. 291, 297, 351-52. See also Dafnis,
"Ta hellenika ...", pp. 70 ff. Repeated mention of fraud and vio
lence can be found in Kordatos' and Aspreas' works, and almost all
historians of the period agree that these practices distorted, elec
toral results excessively and often decisively. Karanikolas’ book
is a useful comprehensive account of much information on the subject.
Rontiris, in his "I kata syntagma...", p.391, speaks of the
"62 army units (that) may be used (for influencing election results)
in all 62 provinces of Greece" (referring to the third quarter of
the 19th century). See also Melas, "I epanastassis...", p. 167.
General Danglis, "Archives", vol.I, pp.93 ff., mentions that
when he was a lieutenant in 1878 he was transferred thirteen times
in about 30 months. Five times he was transferred back to a town
where he had been serving only a few months earlier. He makes no
comment or complaint, perhaps because transfers were then such a'
common phenomenon. But even more incredible are the reasons for two
of these moves; in one case a unit was transferred "...so that the
animals might consume the'fodder stored there", and in another a
whole camp for 1 0 ,0 0 0 soldiers was created out of nothing, to support
the economy of the Defence Minister's constituency (D.Grivas). Dismal
conditions, heat, lack of water and epidemics obliged the Minister
to dissolve the camp a few months later (p.98).
69
In functionalist terms, a "devi ation-amplifying mutual causal pro
cess" within the system (Magoroh Marujama, "The Second Cybernetics",
in American Scientist, vol.I, 1963).
*70 . - ■
In 1905-6, the police force numbered 6,538 men, one for every 90
male adults, yet it was assisted by the army units dispersed in many


244
of the provincial towns (British Admiralty, "Handbook of Greece",
published in the 1910s, p.124). Martin's remark on Athens of this
period is characteristic p.lll): "There are few better po
liced cities than Athens today..." (See Table of State-development
indicators, chapter B).
71 : '
'Systems of economic and social structures' in the sense of 'modes
of production'.
.*72 •
See the rather forgotten book by Polychroniadis, "Peri dimossion
_ ypallilon", pp.,242 ff. In this interesting, although somewhat one
sided and eccentric work, Polychroniadis considers that the system
- o f patronage has historically evolved in Greece on the basis of a
peculiar practical transaction: the MPs 'allowed' the executive to
virtually dominate their own field, i.e. legislation, and in return
the executive allowed them to interfere excessively with the admin
istration. The shortcomings of the transaction theory are evident,
but the relative refinement of the argument over the functions of
the executive and legislative, and its early publishing date (1918)
make this rather an interesting work. , .
73
V.Corbett, in his Report on the Greek finances for the year 1899,
F.O. Annual Series N°2370, p.24, speaks eloquently of the inter
relation between politics and civil Servants.
74
See chapter D, introduction to the 1909 period, summary of events.
*75 ‘ \
Premier Venizelos told the Reform Parliament on 18 May 1911: "That
we establish permanence for the civil servants is not for their per
sonal benefit but because we want the administration to function
"properly" (Session 92, 18/5/1911, B' Reform Parliament, in "Efimeris
ton Sizitisseon" (Annals), vol.A, p.2347). See also Sgouritsas,’
"Syntagmatikon dikaion", vol.I, pp. 448-55. R0ntiris, "I kata synr
tagma...", pp. 393-96, describes thoioughly the vulnerability of the
tenure of civil servants and judges during the 19th century. He


245
concludes his analysis of these vices with an allusion to two "pos
sible" outcomes or implications of such conditions: anarchy "in
the Mexican style" or, even more characteristically, "Asiatic des
potism" (sic),.(p.403).
On the practice of firing civil servants, see Karanikolas,
"Nothes...", pp. 270-71. One of its most unexpected effects was
the naming of a central Athenian square Piateia Klafthmonos, or
'Square of Weeping*. It was there that many ministries had their
offices, outside which would gather, protest, and weep the civil
servants who had lost their employment because of a change in govern
ment.
76
In Dakin’s words, "collections of groups" ("The Unification...", '
P. 141). •
77
See Korizis, "I politiki zoi...", especially p. 110; also Karani
kolas, "Nothes...", throughout.
*78
Lambrinos, "I monarchia...", p. 63: "...He (George I) always chose
the minority parties, so that no viable government could be formed."
Trikoupis himself, in his "Political Testament", names, the King "the
greatest of all patrons.(rousfetologos, Acropolis, 3 and 4 April,
1896). See also Karanikolas, "Nothes...", pp.372-73. For a complete
account of the monarch's competences and his excesses in practicing
the rights of .’appointment and dissolution, see Filaretos, "Xeno
kratia...". It is significant that George I ruthlessly abandoned
Trikoupis in 1895, after long years of an alliance lucrative for .
the throne, because the Prime Minister found it impossible to satisfy
the new royal demand for more money, this time in the form of grants
to the Princes Nicholas and George.
General Danglis ("Archives", pp. 100 and 229) wrote two articles
on patronage in the armed forces, the one in 1897 recommending the
creation of a headquarters independent of the minister, and the other
in 1891 to support the Crown Prince's appointment as comnander-in
chief of the army. It is sad that this appointment, which he had
recommended as a measure against patronage, ended up being the su
preme source of nepotism and elitism. It is even sadder and char


246
acteristic of the idealistic and formalised conception of politics
in Greece that Danglis never for a moment would have thought of j
such an outcome as only natural in the circumstances. |
For a lighter and picturesque description of patronage and |
its linkages with the throne, see Giannopoulos, "Neon Pnevma", |
p p . 24-25. ;
*79 I
On Trikoupis' article "Who is to blame?" and for a very good dis- jj
cussion on the "principle of proclaimed confidence", see B.Markesinis, j
"The theory pp. 146-56. This author purports that the prin- |
ciple was not followed in practice, and this is basically true. What §|
is important, however, is why it was not followed, and whom besides |
the Crown this asset benefited. Markesinis says, for example (p.150)
that the desertion of 69 MPs from the Deliyannis party was the re- 
suit of parliamentary manoeuvres by the King and Trikoupis so that
this transfer of votes would allow him to form a government - which
is quite true, although one should remember-that Trikoupis had only
days before declined another royal offer of the premiership, pre
cisely because he did not have a majority.' But Markesinis also
claims that this case is similar to the 1965 events that led to the
1967 coup. (Premier Papandreou was dismissed by King Constantine
on the issue of who would be the Minister of Defence during the ■
Aspida trial in which Papandreou's son was involved.) There are two
vital differences which Markesinis mentions in an earlier paragraph
but does not consider important enough to use for qualifying his
comparison of 1886 with 1965: that in 1886 the Deliyannis government
"was forced by events to resign" (to quote the author himself; p.149),
■whereas in 1965 the Premier resigned in protest against the King’s
intervention - rightly or wrongly. And most important, the "force
of events" in 1886 was Greece’s immense diplomatic failure and hum
iliation on a major international issue, "Bulgaria’s unilateral an
nexation ... of Eastern Roumelia" (p. 149). The 1886 crisis inclu
ded a series of brutal interventions by the British Ambassador, the
sea-blockade of Greece by the fleets of the Creat Powers, and three
days of undeclared limited war with Turkey. Deliyannis' handling
of this crisis was such a failure that the isolated but also totally


247
uncontrolled Creek army was in danger of a major debacle, and in
deed suffered a humiliating surrender of one of its units at Koutra
(an event diligently distorted in sources and historical works
but reported faithfully in the texts written by Cen. Danglis,
('Archives", vol.I, pp. 124-38). It was in this atmosphere of fail
ure and panic that Deliyannis* MPs abandoned their leader. B.Marke
sinis disregards this vital element, which makes any comparison
with 1965 merely legalistic; neither does his excellent discussion
on the 1965 crisis (pp. 220-23) help to substantiate this comparison
On Venizelos' opinions against the principle, see S.Stefanou
(ed), "Venizelos...", vol.I, pp. 239-42. He specified, however,
that he considered it as necessary during the 19th century but not
in the 20th when there was 'ho danger" of authoritarian initiatives
by the Head of the State. Before long, with King Constantine's
flagrant intervention in politics, Venizelos fell victim to this
non-existant danger.
Indicative of the politicians' formalistic and inconsistent
attitude towards the Crown in the 19th century is the intransigent
position taken by D. Rallis against the King, in an interview which
appeared in "Asty" of 10 May 1896. The tone of this interview was
not uncommon, but to hear such words from one of the prominent roy
alist leaders was certainly unusual. It bore the desired fruit,
however: Rallis increased his vote in the next election.
80
Moskof, "I ethniki...", p. 168
81 :
P.Dertilis, "To dimossion chreos...", pp. 168, 208, and "Simvoli
eis tin dimossionomikin.. p. 102. The ratio proceeds/repayment
is based on net input-output figures. It is difficult, however, to
establish it with exactitude, as it is not easy to classify objec
tively such outputs as 'purchases' by Creece in the creditors' Inter
nal market.


24S
*S2
Moskof, "I ethniki...", p. 117; and Katsoulis, "To katestiineno...
p. 185. Here is a short but revealing quotation from a diplomatic
document: "... we should perhaps not lose much by writing off in
his (Villiam's, later King George) favour the bad debt due to the
three Powers by Greece". (Palmerstone to Russel, 6 April 1863,
G.D. 22/22, as quoted by Prevelakis, "British Policy...", pp. 145
46; see also pp. 153-54 and 155. The debt was called bad only be
cause repayments had been slow; but whether they were overdue or
not did not concern the candidate King, as they would nonetheless
contribute to the already substantial civil list he had demanded.
In the end, Protocol N°3 of 1863 fixed a sum of £4,000 a year which
each of the three Powers could take off the sum Greece had in 1860
promised to repay against her overdue debts. In addition, the
Powers generously promised another £10,000 annually out of the re
venue from the government of the Ionian islands (Prevelakis, p.157).
This was, of course, being generous with someone else's money, as
the islands were to unite with Greece the day George ascended the
throne.
*83 • •
There are abundant data on the exploitative policies of the Powers
in Creece, but their closer consideration lies outside the scope
of this work. The four impressive cases mentioned suffice to show
the degree of economic-dominance (an effect, but also a cause of
political dominance), which is the point that needed clarifying here
(On economic dominance through trade, see Moskof, "I ethniki...",
and "Thessaloniki..."; through financing, see P.Dertilis, "La . ,
dette publique de la Gréce" and "La dette publique des États Bal
kaniques". A work on dominance through currency parities has yet
to be written and would be a very interesting piece of. research.
The relationship of the economically powerful European coun
tries with the new Balkan States after their liberation from Turkey
is in some ways comparable to that of the United States with Latin
America after decolonisation'. There is, however, a considerable
political difference which seems to have been responsible for the
lower degree and relative subtlety of economic domination in the
Balkans. Indeed, the antagonism between the great European powers


249
created for the Balkan countries occasional opportunities and open
ings of an oligopolistic-oligopsonistic nature; conversely, in
Latin America the United States enjoyed a very high degree of mono
poly-monopsony. The economic ramification of the Eastern question
and the Balkan problem may have been among the major causes of local
and world wars, but at the same time they allowed the Balkan States
a certain degree of emancipation. This,'as an implicit theme, un
;» derlies the entire argument in the interesting historical works by
Domna Dontas, "Greece and the Great Powers, 1663-1375", and Kofos,
"Greece and the Eastern Crisis, 1875-1878".
*84
a) For a description of the causes behind King George’s dependence
on the Great'Powers as brilliant as it is concise, see Kaltchas,
"Introduction...", pp. 111-16.
L) Institutionalised in the 1880s under Trikoupis' government, the
Princes’ occupation of leading positions in the army was challenged
after the debacle of the 1897 war against Turkey, when the Princes
had been busy not in the frontline but "chicken-hunting" in the
towns. Royal occupation of these posts was openly contested by the
rebel officers in 1909, and the Princes were finally removed from
the army — only to be fatally reinstated when Venizelos decided to
give the leadership of the armed fdrces to Crown Prince Constantine.
The King thus became the glorious Field Marshal of the 1912-13 war,
at the expense of Venizelos' political genius, the staff officers'
military talents, and, inevitably, the common soldiers' lives.
c) Nicholas, Prince of Greece, "My fifty Years", p. 212: "The
German Minister ... suggested (to the Greek War Minister) that ...
my change in attitude towards the German artillery gun began at the
time when I took tea with the Schneiders." Schneider and Canet were
the French armament magnates participating in the 1906 tender for
the procurement of guns by the Greek government. The tea was served
on board' Schneider's yacht, and the Prince's negative change of mind
as regards the German gun undeniably contributed in the end to Greece
deciding to purchase the French Schneider-Canet gun instead. .
The case of this armament procurement is extremely complicated
tut deserves special attention. It became the cause of a latent
8candal which was discussed in Athens for many years, with rumours


250
flying about about Prince Nicholas’ alleged favouritism towards the
French gun. Whatever the truth of these accusations, the mere fact
that they were levied shows there was a widespread feeling that the
Crown and the Court were not impartial where such big deals were con
cerned.
The dismantleable Schneider gun was the invention of General
to-be Danglis. Another Greek officer, Lykoudis, had proposed a sim
ilar invention in some article, and the resulting enmity between
the two rival inventors became a vital financial issue when the Greek
army decided to purchase a large quantity of the Danglis gun built
by Schneider-Canet. The accusations against Prince Nicholas were
based on his well-known friendship with the then COlonel Danglis
(see the Prince’s very personal and warm letters to Danglis in the
latter’s "Archives", vol.I, p. 248, dated 6 April and 18 May 1905.
See also pp. 255 ff. on the issue of the Schneider gun and Prince
Nicholas' letter to Danglis, sent before the procurement, promising
he would visit the Schneider factory in Paris, which he never did.)
Danglis mentions (p. 281) that he had also visited Crown Prince
Constantine, trying to convince him of the superiority of the French
gun over.the one built by Krupp of Germany.’
I do not see whg X. Lefkoparidis, who so painstakingly edited
Danglis' "Archives", persisted in trying to prove that Danglis did
not enjoy royal favour. He mentions, for example, that Nicholas was
not interested in Danglis' invention (vol. I, p. 267). I do not
know what made him so certain of this, unless it was perhaps Danglis'
own remark (p.288) that Nicholas was "on principle" not interested in
dismantleable guns. Yet the Prince also told Danglis that he set
aside his previous principles the moment he saw the performance of
the new weapon. . ‘ .
It is not certain that Nicholas would have helped Danglis and
Schneider unless he had become convinced that the new gun was the .
best (which it indeed was). On the other hand, it is undeniable .
that Danglis was a man of honesty and integrity. But patronage is •
not necessarily and always extended as a cover for dishonest actsj
It could well be that Nicholas intervened in the best interests of
Greece as much as for the sake of his friend.


251
What really matters to our discussion is, of course, that ar
mement, like other administrative decisions, was in the competence
of the Crown, and that patronage doubtless did affect relevant de
cisions. The implication for the distribution of power between
Crown, foreign suppliers, their representatives in Greece, and the
Powers' ambassadors are quite clear.
*85
Here is a description by a contemporary traveller, in slightly.
Victorian style:
"Les capitalistes (de la diaspora), d'abord affligés par un ostracisme a l'intérieur, ne se découragèrent pas. ils pensèrent que le seul moyen de calmer ces politiciens hargneux c'était de les faire fumer, man ger et danser. Ils ... etalérent, sur des tables, des viandes froides, des pités de gibier et des vins ... C ’est ainsi que plusieurs tasses de thé ont opéré la fusion des classes et que les figures du cotillon, en mêlant les partis, ont apaise les haines sociales." (Deschamps, "La Grèce...", p.53) (emphasis added)
86
a) On the early stages of the discontent within the army, see Gen.
Danglisi "Archives", vol. I, pp. 236, 245-47 (letter to Premier
Theotokis, dated 16 Jan. 1906 and containing an unusually strong
criticism of the armaments; purchases of the government in the effort
to reorganise the artillery), and pp. 256, 259ff.
b) Mazarakis, "Memoirs", p. 97; Pangalos, "Memoirs", vol.I, pp.
17 and 52-53; Aspreas, "Politiki.. pp. 105-09; HUS Politisches
Archiv Vienna, XVl/60, N°50C, as quoted by Papacosmas, "The Greek
Military...", p. 102; Mêlas, "I epanastassis...", p.218. Pangalos
is the only writer who explicitly claims that even the nco's came
mainly from the middle and upper classes.
87
The officers' mild and flexible intentions are widely reported in
the bibliography. See especially Mêlas, "I epanastassis...", pp.
213 and 227-28; and Pangalos, "Memoirs", throughout his chapter
on the 1909 coup, ^
88
On the infringement of the 1864 Constitution by the 1909 events,
see Kaltchas, "Introduction...", p. 139; also çf. B.Markesinis,


'’Theory...", pp. 158-61 for a thorough legal discussion and a per
suasive argument that Venizelos had not assured the dissolution of
parliament when he was appointed; Svolos, "Ta hellinika p.46
also considers that the 1864 Constitution was infringed.
89 /
Kitsikis, "Le Parlement...", p. 60.
90 ’
Korizis, "I politiki zoi...", p. 216
91 ,
Kordatos, "Historia ...", vol.VIII, p. 93.
92
Kordatos, ’Issagogi ... kefalaiokratias’, pp. 63-67 and 68.
93
Vournas, n2oudi..." p.73
94
Moskof, "I ethniki...", p. 273. Among foreign authors see also
Legg, "Politics in Modern Greece", p. 68.
95 , -,
Filaretos, "Seimeiossis pp. 560-63.
96
Pangalos>, "Memoirs",, vol. I, p. 44.'
97 ‘ ;
Sarafis, "Memoirs", p. 42
Mêlas, "I epanastassis...", p. 183. ;
99
Zakythinos,"Politiki...", p. 92.
ICC '
Korizis, "I politiki soi...", p. 215 •
ICI , ' . '
Bafnis, "Ta hellinik^ ...", pp. 104-16
102 " . / . _
Karolides, in Paparrigopoulos1 "Historia...", pp. 125-26, fn.3.


103
S.Markesinis, "Politiki.. vol.III, p. 72, and footnotes 5 and 6
on p . 98.
104
Ventiris, throughout "I Hellas tou .
105
Kaltchas, "Introduction...", p. 138. The book as whole is an ex
cellent though unfinished work; Kaltchas' premature death de
prived Creek historiography of a brilliant scholar.
106
Svolos, "Ta hellinika...", pp. 45-46.
107
Legg, "Politics...", quotations from pp. 68 and 194; also comments
on p. 312.
108 • ■'
Toynbee, "Creek Policy ...", pp. 11-12.,
109
Acropolis, 9 May 1909.
110
Patris, 9 August 1910.
111
Ventiris, "I Hellas tou 1910-1920", vol.I, pp, 74-75.
112 "
From an article, "To likofos ton aston", by G. Ventiris in Embros
of 18 March 1950, quoted by S.Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...", vol.I,
pp. 302. ’
*113
The methodological error is not caused simply by a false assumption,
but also by a different — and somewhat one-sided — viewpoint: that
of a system approach as opposed to an action approach.The reader may
wish to refer back to the basic commentary of fn.*33 to remind him
self of the fundamental distinction between these approaches.
114
Ventirisj "I Hellas tou 1910-1920", vol. I, p. 29.


254
115
On the enthusiasm caused in Greece by expectation from the liber
alisation potential of the Neo-Turk revolution, see Driault-LhSri
tier, "Histoire...", vol.V, pp. 5-9. On the rapid disillusionment
in Greece and its effects on the Greek officers' morale and bitter
ness, see Kaltchas, "Introduction...", p. 138, and Manousakis,"
"Hellas - Wohin...", pp. 36-41. Also Ventiris, "I Hellas...",
vol. I, p. 42; Melas, "I epanastassis...", p.204; and especially
Pangalos, "Memoirs", pp. 44-50, who also gives the recruitment pat
tern mentioned in my text. See also Driault-Lhiritier, "Histoire..
vol.V, pp. 32-33.
*116
Ventiris, referring to the discussions in the parliament of 1910,
reports that the Princes and their friends used to call the army
"that dirty old mob" (paliaskero). He also says that Crown Prince
Constantine once told a cavalry officer, "Shut up, Captain", and
addressed another with the elegant apostrophe, "Sit down, you
swine". ' (Ventiris, "I Hellas..., vol.I, .pp. 42 and 86; see also
Melas, "I epanastassis ...", p. 171; and Legg, "Politics in Modern
Greece", p. 188.)
On the nepotism rampant in the royal headquarters, there is
an eloquent passage from the memorandum submitted to the King by
D.Rallis, an essentially royalist politician, when he was invited
to form a government after the coup: "The condition of the army
and the recent anti-disciplinary (sic) coups have been furthered
by those who declare ... that they entirely have the good-will of
the General Command"(i.e. the Crown Prince). Quoted by Aposto
lopoulos, "0 Hellinikos...", p. 15.
117
a) Pangalos considers this law as a basic cause of the coup;
"Memoirs", vol.I, pp. 52-53.
b) For an analysis of intervention in Brazil based too exclusively
on problems of professionalism, see F.M. Nunn, "Military Profession
alism and Professional Militarism in Brazil, 1870-1970". Along 
similar lines but much narrower in its approach is the article by
U. Sundhaussen, "The Fashioning of Unity in the Indonesian Army".
For an explanation of Latin American military corporatism, see


255
E. Liewen,"Generals versus Presidents" (p. 107 gives a summary of
the author’s approach).
The subject of methodology is discussed in detail in Appendix
II of this work.
118
On the marginal effect of the officers' class origins on their be
haviour in Latin America, see the interesting discussion in H.J.
Viarda, "The Latin American Development Process...", pp. 480 and
477. For a very good critique of the social origins theory, see
R.Vandycke, ?Les appareils militaires...", especially pp. 66-118
and 187-88. See also L. North, "Civil-Military Relations...",
p. 59, for a similarly critical position. For moderately opposite
views, see J.J.Johnson, "The Latin American Military" in J.J.
Johnson (ed), "The Role of the Military...", especially p. 112.
Johnson, though attributing some importance to the officers' class,
emphasises even more other social and economic factors. See for
example pp. 113, 114, 116.
119
On the.relationship between the army and the State, see the inter
esting discussion by R. Vandycke, "Les appareils railitaires...",
especially pp. 118 ff, 136, 187-88. However, I would like to go
i•
further and claim that the army can also be relatively autonomous
of the State, that it is not necessarily an apparatus of the State,
as seems to be Vandycke's view.
120 • • • • • . •
Pangalos, "Memoirs", vol.I, p.52
121
As quoted in Papacosmas, "The Greek Military...", p. 147, with re
ference to the newspapers Chronos and Le Messager d'Athines. On
the League’s total lack of socio-political programme, Melas in M s
"I epanastassis...", p. 210, is categorical: "The officers had no
programme whatsoever."
122 ... ’ ' '• •
The position of Vournas, a conscientious Marxist writer, is charac
teristic of these ambiguities. He considers 1909 as a bourgeois
revolt, yet admits that "the League did not have a specific pro


256
gramme for bourgeois transformation ("Goudi ...", pp. 154-55) and
that even Venizelos after 1909 did not bring about this change'
(pp. 180-82). .
123 Concerning Karaiskakis and the nco's, see Vournas, "Goudi...",
pp. 105-06; and Melas, "I epanastassis...", p. 174. Karaiskakis1
manifesto is reprinted in full by Melas, pp. 245-47. See also,
for example, the article that appeared in Chronos, a newspaper
supporting the officers, claiming "the abolition of feudal serfdom"
(as quoted by Kordatos, "Historia...", vol.XIII, p.104). On the
officers’ well-known and often expressed hostility against the
oligarchy, see Pangalos, "Memoirs", and the Archives of the 1909
Revolution. But these were individual positions, not the League’s
official policies.
>124
The technicalities of the indemnity methods (State bonds etc.) and
the fact that they turned out to be harmful to the landowners' in
terests when applied, make no essential difference to the argument.
The harm became apparent only later on and was in no way premedita
ted or revolutionary. ; It was a direct result of Greece's economic
weakness arising from the 1922 debacle and her virtual bankruptcy
following the 1929-32 crisis. It also was, like the relatively
low indemnity rates, a result of the landowners’ reduced bargaining
power after the general shrinking of-their economic and political
power. Again, however, .this was not the direct effect of any revo
lution against them. r.
125
Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko.. p. 147.
126 ' \ - ;
S.Stefanou (ed), "Venizelcs...", vol.II, p. 318 •
127
Moskof, "I ethniki...", pp. 265-66
123
Consular Report N°44S4, F.O. Annual Series 1909, Piraeus; Report
4750 for 1910, Piraeus; 1909 Report on Thessaly N° 4492.


257
Moskof, "I ethniki...", p. 266 quotes this letter and attributes to
it the meaning of implicit disapproval of the coup, as I also do in
my text. For a commentary on the ideological evolution of a class,
see also Nunes, "Les revolutions du Mexique", p. 153.
*130
A few years earlier, in fact, Giannopoulos ("Neon Pnevma", p,33),
commenting on the revolutionary climate in 1906 Creece, said that
it had already existed "... for a long time". He then called for a
revolution himself, in his usual Nietzschean and chauvinistic lan
guage, but for a revolution by the aristocracy, specifying that it
should have a "military organisation" (p. 48).
The case of Penelope Delta may serve to sum up many of the
arguments in the text. Her books, addressed mainly to young rea
ders, were written in demotic and frequently praised the Crown. Her
father Emmanuel Benakis was one of the richest of the diaspora
Greeks established in Athens. He was elected Venizelist Mayor of
Athens, and in 1916 almost got lynched by a royalist crowd. (On
P.Delta, see also Moskof, "I ethniki...", p. 242. The same author .
denies that demoticism played any role in the bourgeois transfor
mation - p.241.)
131
Ventiris, "I Hellas...", vol. I, p. 25.
'*132
The newspaper Nea Imera of 13 March 1909, as quoted by Papacosmas,
"ThéLGreek Military...", p. 101. Trikoupis, speaking on the tariff
imposed in 1897: "One cannot find any principles underlying the
structure of the tariff... as we have taxed every article that could
(possibly) be taxed"; as quoted by Kartakis, "Le développement...",
p. 8. .
133
F.O. 371/677 N°36 and N°35, Elliot to Grey, Athens 6 March 1909 and
31 Dec. 1908 respectively, as quoted by Papacosmas, "The Creek Mili
tary...", pp. 100 and 56.
129


253
*134
Martin in his "Greece of the 20th Century", p. 133 (publ. 1913.),
says that the then newly imposed income tax of 3$ had failed.
This, however, makes little difference. After nearly a century of
total tax exemption, the bourgeoisie was obliged to accept some
tax burden. The failure of the measure was, after all, only tem
porary. Only a few years later, income and inheritance taxation
was properly integrated into Greece's social and economic system.
Even after the advent of Venizelos, the situation could not
have appeared much less threatening to the average bourgeois. It
is very doubtful whether the overwhelming majority of the bourgeoi
sie really did support Venizelos during his first years in politics
as so often claimed.> It was not only the fear that a conservative
class would naturally feel of a man with the firm reputation of
a revolutionary, acquired in the 1905 revolution against the Gover
nor of autonomous Crete; it was also a most natural reaction .
against a man whose electoral campaigns promised the people meas
ures clearly opposed to bourgeois interests — such as direct tax
ation, in a. country where one of the richest bankers paid an an
nual tax of 350 drachmas (£15). Venizelos would never, of course,
_ have promised such measures in his election speeches to workers and
peasants had he considered the middle class as his chief support.
S.Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...", pp. 470, 471, 473.
'.135.'. ’ . ;. : ; , .
Note submitted by the Associations to Parliament on 3 Dec. 1908.
The students' manifesto is reprinted in full in Mêlas, "I epana
stassis...", pp. 248-49.
136 ■. ~" ! .'
Ventiris, "I Hellas...", vol.I, p. 39; and M ê l a s , "I epanastassis..
p • 178. -1 ; ' ' l
*137 ’
It is significant that Vournas views the guilds from exactly the
opposite standpoint, i.e. from the left — not as middle-class
but rather as 'popular' associations. He then qualifies this by
allowing that very few of them were of "purely proletarian compo
sition, like the (associations of) typesetters, bakery and restau
rant staff, and construction workers". The rest of these 'popular'
guilds could only be petit-bourgeois, of course ("Goudi...", p.143)


The Times, London 17 Nov. 1909.
*138a
Although the Lawyers’ Association was the only one to refuse par
ticipation in the 14 Sept. 1909 demonstration in support of the of
ficers, Legg considers the 1910 Venizelos as the "representative of
the new political classes of lawyers and petty capitalists" ("Pol
itics in Modern Greece", p.68); repeats "...practicing lawyers were
the main beneficiaries of the revolution..." (pp. 305-06); but then
qualifies, "It is difficult to determine ... how many ... actually
practiced law and how many had merely taken a law degree before en
tering some other profession... In many respects the faculty of Law
... corresponds to the generalised liberal-arts curricula in the
United States and is the school a young person would normally en
ter" (p.2Sl).
,The high percentage of lawyers in the post-1909 parliaments
does not mean they were there as representatives of a bourgeoisie
rising to political power, and even less that this class had joined
the revolution in order to send its educated children to parliament.
The number of lawyers had grown substantially by the turn of the
century, mainly because unemployment in the households of propertied
peasants, many of-whom sent their son to the university to increase
his chances of becoming a civil servant. After graduation, these
young lawyers were chronically underemployed (there were 15 lawyers
per 10,000 of the population in Greece, compared to 2 in England,
Germany and France, and only one in Austria — see Mêlas, "I epana
stassis...", p. 159; also Dakin, "The Unification...", p.255). The
bourgeois education of these people is thus misleading; their ori
gins and their financial condition suggest they should rather be
classed with the petit-bourgeois whom , surprisingly, nobody has yet
acknowledged as the politically dominant class in post-1909 Greece.
However, to consider the post-1910 invasion of politics by
lawyers and more widely young educated politicians as a proof that
the coup was a bourgeois revolt, is a fallacy refuted noy only by
careful examination of the new politicians’ class origin, such as
attempted in this footnote, but mainly by a comprehensive analysis
of the social lineages of politics in 1910-12, such as attempted in
the main text (last paragraph of this chapter). Thus S.Markesinis,
138


260
("Historia.. p. 87) cites the reaction of the Lawyers' Associa
tion as aniidication that popular support of the League did not
have bourgeois but rather low-class origins. Indeed, this is as
far as such an indication may legitimately be used for a deduction
of trends. "... the court, the high society of Athens and the middle
class" opposed the League, as did the grande-bourgeoisie who fore
saw a bad future for the economy" (S.Markesinis, p.88). He also
adds that among the diaspora only the lower-class emigrants ap
proved of the coup (p. 8? ; see also Zorbas, "Memoirs", pp.40-41),
and that the real support for the League "came from the masses, ...
as would have become obvious if ... the World War ... had not gene
rated the dichasmos with the (concomitant) resurrection of the old
parties and the restraint of the impetuous progressive movement..."
S.Markesinis can hardly be suspected of leftist sympathies. He is
the man who, during his political career in pre-1967 Creece, "once
boasted that his parliamentary speeches were addressed to the ben
ches occupied by members of foreign embassies, not the House itself"
(Thomas, p. 761); he was also one of the very few politicians who
collaborated with the 1967 military regime.
139
See Vergopoulos, "To agrotiko..", p. 356, on the Pyrgos uprising
and the influence of free socialists on these events. On the mili
tant peasant action in the Peloponnese generally, see Vergopoulos,
p. 353; Kordatos, "Historia tou agrotikou.. pp. 177-79 and 252;
Vournas, 'Gouda...' . p. 566. On the revolt at Kileler, see
Kordatos, "Historia tou agrotikou...", p. 147-57, and "Historia tis
neoteras. . vol.XIII, pp. 182-94, and C. Karanicholas’ book
specifically on this subject, titled "Kileler".
140
See Giannopoulos,"Neon Pnevma", p. 28-30, for a description of the
conservatism and ideological pettiness of the students. .
141 ' _ . ' '
Melas, "I epanastassis ...’*, p. 197
142 ..
Acopolis, 27 June, 7-3 July 1909..;


261
143
Moskof, "I ethniki...", p. 194.
144
Vournas ("Goudi.. . p. 144) reports a crowd of 200,000 "according
to the press". The press in fact mentions various figures, exag
gerated as usual. Fileratos ("Seimeiosseis...", p. 562) says cer
tain people calculated the crowd at around 70,000, others at
100,000. Melas ("I epanastassis...", p. 312) suggests 100,000 and
his description of the roads covered seems to confirm this figure.
Aspreas ("Politiki histopia.. p. 116) says it was the largest
crowd ever seen in Athens.
145
Moskof, "I ethniki...", p. 265. It seems there were many similari
ties between this declaration and a pamphlet written by the same
group under the title "What's to be done?" This text does not
exist today, and Melas reports that it disappeared from the market
under obscure conditions. ("0 gios...", pp. 68-76).'
146
Pangalos, "Archives...", vol. I, p. 91.
*147
There are interesting parallels between the motives for the Athen
ians’ support of the 1909 coup and the urban insurgents’ for the
1848 European revolutions. If there is a historic prececent with
which to compare the 1909 case, it is this and not the vague model
of the ’typical bourgeois revolution’. To facilitate such compar
ison, here is a summary of Hobsbawm’s views in "The Age of Capital
pp. 20-26:
"The large body of the radical lower middle classes, discontented artisans, small shopkeepers etc. and even agriculturalists, whose spokesmen and leaders ~ .were intellectuals, especially young and marginal ones, formed a significant revolutionary force but rarely a political alternative, (p.20) "... the labouring poor ... lacked the organisation, the ma turity, the leadership, perhaps most of all the his torical conjuncture, to provide a political alter native. (p.21) (Therefore) the most that might be achieved was a bourgeois republic, (p.23) Thus the - revolutions of 1848 ... ’ought to have been* bour geois revolutions, but the bourgeoisie drew back from them, (p.24)"
i


262
It is useful to remember, however, that although the overall
similarities may be striking, the revolutionary tendencies among
the Greek lower classes in 1909 were far less conscious or power
ful than they had been among their western counterparts in 1848.
In fact, if a 'model' must be kept in mind as a stimulant, it should
not be., the French, but rather the milder and simpler German one.
*148
The quotation is from Papacosmas, "The Greek Military Revolt...",
p. 74, referring to F.O. 371/678, N°104, Elliot to Grey, Athens,
IS July 1909. •
The extent of the Powers' concern with the threat to the
status quo in Greece is indicated by their ambassadors' post-coup
interest in a matter which at first glance may seem trivial. The
incident is also reported by Papacosmas:
"The results of the large public meeting might have been entirely different had not King George reversed an earlier decision not to be in Athens... The troubled ruler did not publicise his resolve but M. Deville, the French minister in Athens, learned of it from a member of the King's suite. Realising England's minister, Sir Francis Elliot, had 'the privilege of access to His Majesty", Deville re layed his fears that a boycott by George would be a disastrous mistake. Elliot agreed and visited the King... The English diplomat underscored the effect on the King's personal position if the crowd did not see him; its disappointment could easily be turned . : into a dangerous resentment ... The King reluctantly yielded to the argument, reiterating the hopelessness • of the situation ... Elliot countered by saying that having begun a policy of concession, the King must continue for the time being until the Military League should dissolve itself." . (emphasis added) .
(Papacosmas, pp. 126-27, on the basis of F.O. 371/678, N°163A, Highly confidential, Elliot to Grey, Athens, 29 Sept. 1909; and F.O. 371/678, N°16S, Confidential, ■ Elliot to Crey, Athens 2 Oct. 1909.)
See also Mavrogordatos' account in "Modern Creece", p. 83:
"... the alarm felt by the King, the court, the diplomats..."
In the first few weeks after the coup, the League had con
sidered the possibility of finding a successor to George I (Driault
LhSritier, "Histoire diplomatique...", p. 33). But these consid
erations existed for only a short time. Moreover, a successor


could not have been chosen without the consent of the Great Powers.
Finally, the very fact that the League was thinking of a royal suc
cessor rather than in terms of a republic, speaks for itself. The
ambassadors' panic could not have been caused by these short-lived
and gentle ambitions of the officers, let alone by the hypothetical
threat from the bourgeoisie.
*149
Venizelos' personal opinion is invaluable to an understanding of
what really happened. He was not yet involved with the everyday
internal problems of Greece, and thus able to see more clearly than
the local protagonists or the contemporary journalists. Besides,
he was no ordinary man but an individual with rare intellectual
acumen, a born'political animal with an historically inclined mind,
whose view of the situation could only be realistic. (His trans
lating Thucydides was not accidental; they had certain historical
and political attitudes in common.) Finally, Venizelos' analysis
had to be correct: this was the crucial moment in his life when
success and failure hung in the balance. His admirable deployment
of tactics throughout the crisis, including his refutation of the
premiership, shows how far ahead he was of his contemporaries and
how sharp his understanding of the unique historical moment.
(S. Markesinis tried to replay Venizelos' role in 1973; he only
managed a lamentable pantomime which ended with the bloodshed of
the Athens Polytechnic. Not having attained the supreme political
position he had always dreamt of, and perhaps haunted by his advan
cing age and by Venizelos’' 'immortality', Markesinis wrote a few
years before Colonel Papadopoulos named him Prime Minister : "The
course of the (1909) revolution was virtually ... a search for a
means of escape (from the impasse). Venizelos perceived, provided,
and cashed in on this". A simplistic opinion and, in relation to
1973, a simplistic comparison, with the difference that the way
out so desperately sought by the colonels in 1973 — and which he
wished to help provide and cash in on -- existed only in Markesinis
mind, inflamed by megalomania and opportunism. (See S.Markesinis,
vol.III of "Polltiki Historia...", pp. 84-85.)
Asprcas gives a thorough account of the meeting of Venizelos
with the League. The reader can get some intimation of Venizelos'


264
position and preoccupations if certain passages are quoted here
verbatim (emphasis added):
"... Venizelos replied... 'Today you do not repre sent a revolution ... you represent only the people's impatience...' Then followed an explicit discussion on the Crown and whether it should be abolished or restrained, especially in its irresponsible adminis tration of foreign policy... Venizelos elevated him self to a protector of the Crown, and declared that in the interest of Greece and of Hellenism the Crown should remain intact, ... that the national interest (even) called for a reinforcement of the Crown.
"Those present who were opponents of the monarchy were surprised, whereas the supporters of the monar chy and of law and order were encouraged ...
"(Venizelos) advised the League ... to charge the next government with the responsibility of calling elections in the shortest time possible to form a constituent assembly... A discussion of special in terest followed on the various political orientations that could appear in a constituent assembly and the dangers involved. The more cool-headed of the parti cipants ... rejected this solution... as very dangerous because of the conditions within the army and the par ties and (because of) the people's impatience. The Cretan politician, however, found a solution that •'* r would neutralise those dangers, which he too considered as serious. He said ... the League should ... delimit beforehand the work-programme and the extent of the rights of the assembly, which should be (elected) under the explicit limitation of reforming the Con stitution and not drafting a new one.
"Next morning...' George I was informed confidentially and in detail of these discussions and decisions, the information ... coming from two persons acting inde:-pendentiy of one another... From this day on, George I ; . put aside a great part of his mistrust towards Veni-*
zelos... (Aspreas, "Politiki h i s t o r i a . p p . 133-36)
In his first meeting with Venizelos, George I was explicit:
"Be careful... don't surround yourself with men of the League."
Venizelos could afford a reply much more outspoken than his utter
ances at the meeting with the 'men of the League': "Naturally,
your Majesty, I shall not resort to them, nor to fanatical reac- .
tionaries. 1 shall recruit moderates... Metaxas, Dousmanis and
such." (Conversation transmitted by Prince Andreas to Metaxas and
quoted by the latter in his "Diary", vol.Bl, p.21.) Venizelos .


subsequently did recruit the moderates, one of whom encouraged an
abortive royalist counter-coup in 1923 and was appointed dictator by
by George II in 1936. As for Dousmanis, the only sign of modera
tion in his extreme conservatism and royalism was that in his me
moirs he could not resist the temptation to attribute to himself the
military success of the 1912-13 wars, at the expense of his great
patron, the King.
Not unexpectedly, then, Kaltchas concludes ("Introduction...",
p. 139): "From this initially anti-dynastic crisis, thanks largely
to Mr Venizelos' masterly handling, the monarchy emerged with re
newed strength"; and Dafnis ("Ta hellinika ...", p. 177) comments:
"Vhat was urgent ... was to discipline the masses and guide them
back to the familiar paths of the established regime." The bour
geois masses, one wonders?
150
See Hobsbawm, "The Age of Revolution", pp. 81-85 for a brilliant
juxtaposition of the roles of the bourgeoisie and the sansculottes
in the French revolution.
*151 ...
See chapter Band App.I on the relative weakness of the dominant clas
ses.
These social and political conditions themselves are linked,
in Appendix I, with two basic structural elements: the socio-eco
nomic system, the 'mode of production', and the economic-political
foreign dominance. These I see from a general theoretical view
point as the two historic conditions that tend to evolve more slowly
than the other structural elements, that belong, by their nature,
to the so-called la longue dur^e. It is mainly this feature, I
think, which endows them with a certain preponderance as causal fac
tors — and not only their economic elements, as might be suggested
by a dogmatic economism. This is how the autonomy of a social or
political actor, in this case of the military, is determined 'in the
last instance', by the economy, to use Althusser's term. Yet this is
an historically conceived linkage of social action with the economy,
not the bed of Procrustes. (See e.g. Althusser and Balibar, "Lire
le Capital", vol. II, pp. 205-17.) ,


266
*152
France in 1870 offers a typical example of a powerful army, humil
iated by defeat yet not capable of any autonomy, mainly because
of a powerful bourgeoisie and a militant proletariat. The Vehrmacht.
even during 1944-45, was unable to achieve any autonomy in a coun
try dominated by a highly autonomous and powerful political oligar
chy. : 
See also Hobsbawm, "The Age of Revolution", pp. 179-80;
and Huntington's very perceptive remarks ("Political Order ...",
pp. 220-21) on the middle-class weakness and its positive relation
ship with military intervention. They are based on Latin American
data utilised, somewhat arbitrarily, to support a more or less gen
eralised view. See also Nun, "A Latin-American Phenomenon...".
*153 '
The passionate article by the leading Creek writer . Karkavitsas,
published in the daily Chronos of 16 Ocober 1909, is the agonised
voice of a radical intellectual expressing his anxiety and impa
tience with the officers' policy of procrastination and compromise.
It is redolent with populist slogans, and obviously anti-oligarchy
and anti-bourgeois.1 Yet Karkavitsas had put irredentism ahead of
any other ideology when he had declared elsewhere: "The Greek
people are imbued with the most internationalist ideals, provided •
they are satisfied in their just (nationalist) claims" (reported
by Vitti, "I ideologiki leitourgia ...", p. 83). Karkavitsas is
one of those typical intellectuals whose peasant origins helped to
canalise:their nationalism into love for the 'healthy, simple folk'
and a concomitant radical and populist stand. - '
*154 ' '• ......... '
It would be useful to paraphrase Gershenkron's statement, "...one
is forced to ask oneself whether 'bourgeois revolutions' do really
resemble each other so much ..." ("Economic Backwardness..., p. 94),
by admitting that "one is forced to ask oneself whether'bourgeois
transformations' do really resemble each ether so much", and espe
cially whether they are necessarily propelled by revolution. The •
argument throughout this chapter.is not that such a transformation
did not occur in Greece. It is that the transformation was neither
the cause of the coup and the alleged middle-class uprising, nor an
effect of this revolt which was allegedly linked with it through
some kind of historical determinism.


267
On Venizelos' veil-structured and profoundly bourgeois-democratic
ideas concerning the parliamentary regime, see S. Stefanou (ed),
"Venizelos...", pp. 166, 171-72 (Parliamentary Minutes of 21 Dec.
1929, 4 March 1931, 19 Dec. 1931): "... a national government
— in the sense that it is not the instrument of any class — saves
whatever may be the general interest, trying to be ... a real arbit
rator..."
The Cretan politician had developed this consistent political
outlook from the very beginning of his career, as shown by his fight
against the monarchic practices of the Covernor of Crete, Prince .
Ceorge, as early as the 1900s. Together with Trikoupis, he was an
exception to the rule of Greek politicians being almost indifferent
to political principles and ignorant of the real social and politi
cal meaning of democratic regime. Yet neither his petit-bourgeois
family background nor his education as a lawyer were particularly
favourable to the development of such exceptional insight.- In fact,
he was at a relative disadvantage compared to such politicians as
were the offspring of the powerful landowning or bourgeois families
traditionally involved in politics.
(To the accusation, thrown at him during a social gathering
that he was not the son of a 'political family', Venizelos’ lively
sense of humour provided him with a ready reply, in the form of a
mantinada, a kind of Cretan hai-kai:
• No fence can stop the billy-goat, No fence can stop a man, A true man bears and leads the clan. And needs no clan to pave the road.)
The reader will have realised by now that for comments and de
tails of Venizelos' action and standpoints I draw heavily on Stefa
nou's edition of the liberal leader^ speeches and interviews. This
is not only because Stefanou was Venizelos' personal secretary“ or
because his work contains the most important material, easily acces
sible, but also because I preferred first-hand material to biogra
phers’ comments. Not that there is a paucity of conscientious bio
graphies, far from it; but how can any biography of a statesman of
international stature be complete without the existence of a social
or economic history of the country he led?
*155


268
*157
Kaltchas, "Introduction to...", p. 139:"(The revision of the Con
stitution) thus achieved the essentially conservative purpose.of
its chief sponsois, King George I and Venizelos, who used it to-de
fuse the potentially revolutionary movement of August 1909". Here
are some of Venizelos’ own opinions" "I was asked ... whether I
am a participant of the (will of the) revolution or its master
(ftamer*). My reply is: neither; I have been a controller of the
revolution... And ... I continued it... with the vote of the Greek
people." Also: "Since I came to Greece... I have never been a re
volutionary. I have been a counter-revolutionary." Speech to the
Senate on 23 Jan. 1933, as quoted in S. Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos
...", vol." I, p. 66; and speech to Parliament, reported in Patris
of 15 June 1911, as also quoted by S. Stefanou, p. 26..
*153 - ■ - ’
a) Stefanou says: "Perhaps (Venizelos) had not even read Marx
and Engels". This is not improbable, although some of Venizelos’
comments and analyses show he had at.least some second-hand know
ledge of Marxist t h e o r y : For example, in his parliamentary speech
of 27 Sept. 1920 he said: "... the merchandise he (the worker) ■
sells is not merchandise, it is the negation of his individuality,
it is his labour". In his speech of 16 Nov. 1919 he makes a dis
tinction between Marxism and State socialism which may be wrong,
but nonetheless suggests at least some knowledge on the subject.
His speech of 29 Jan. 1920 again shows awareness of the Leninist
contribution to the theory of revolution. What really matters,
however, is whether he would have followed a different policy had
he been more proficient in Marxism. It is indeed very difficult
to envisage him following any other policy more revolutionary and
less paternalistic.


269
b) The condition of relative weakness of the bourgeoisie is one
of the crucial factors to consider in examining the historical
evolution of any society just emerging from its pre-capitalist era,
whatever its subsequent evolution — capitalist or socialist, demo
cratic or absolutist. A remote example, though merely as a stimul
ating exercise and with all due reservations concerning its rele
vance, is the description of the Chinese merchant class prior to
the republican revolution in Anderson's "Lineages...". Anderson
concludes: "Predictably, the role of the Chinese merchant class in
the revolution was one of prudence and ambivalence". See also the
excellent essay by M.C.Bergeres, "The Role of the Bourgeoisie", in
M.Wright (ed), "China in Revolution: The First Phase, 1900-1913",
Newhaven 1968. *
*159
S.’Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos. . vol.II, p. 317. Venizeloslater
policies confirmed his liberal inclinations, but the fears, of the
bourgeoisie were also somewhat moderated by various factors that
had meanwhile come into play: the ideological evolution towards a
less narrow-minded conservatism,’and mainly the wide margins for
concessions created by the immense profits of the war-decade; Veni
selos' confirmation as a good administrator, and mainly his capacity
to match his liberalism with consistent support for capitalist de
velopment and strong-hand tactics towards labour whenever necessary.
Thus strike action was a penal offense in Creece until 1920
(Article 167 of the Penal Code). It was recognised as a right by
the Venizelist law 2111/1920 and the above Article was abolished.
Law 2111 recognised the right to strike, but also imposed that only
the union convention could decide on whether to stage a strike.
For more details on Venizelos' liberal, but definitely strong-handed
position on the question of strikes, see quotations from his spee
ches in S,Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...", vol.II, pp. 325-27, 329,
336- 37, 341-42. •
On the introduction, for the first time in.Greece, of a State
health and pension scheme by Venizelos (Law 5777/1933) and its .
replacement under Tsaldaris with the less generous Law 6298/1934,
see S. Stefanou (ed), vol.II, p. 310. See also vol.II, pp. 323,333,
337- 41, 343-51, and especially the editor's informative introduction
to the chapter on Venizelos' social policy in pp. 297-315.


270
Very indicative of Venizelos' liberalism is the following ex
tract from one his public speeches (of 25 Nov. 1919, in S. Stefanou,
"Venizelos...," vol. II, p. 326): "My purpose is that representa
tives of the workers participate in the management of the (State)
railways... and I actually offer them two posts on the Board..."
an admirable vision of the Gaullist system of ’participation', half
a century before May 1968; or, if one prefers less striking compar
isons, an equally admirable precursor of the inter-war corporatist
tendencies and the post-war German system of worker-participation in
management. ...
160 .. . . : . :
Kordatos, for example ("Oi epemvaseis ton Anglon...", p. 68), quoting
Filaretos' "To Egyptiakon zitima en ti vouli" (The issue of Egypt
in the Creek Parliament), Athens 1895, purports that the problems
of the diaspora Greeks in Egypt, caused by a policy of heavy tax
ation} had been initiated by the English government.
161 ’
So great were the profits from commerce in a war economy that the
government was obliged to block free import trade and allow the l
importers to continue their operations only under special controls
and for strictly limited*margins of commission. Still,.profits 
remained very high — most probably due to illegal procedures 
, so that the government.had to tax them after the end of World.War I.
(Venizelos' speeches' to the House, 29 March 1918 and 24 Nov. 1919,
in S. Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos ...", vol.II, pp. 488-89.). See also
Dakin, "The Unification., p.;248.
\ ■ 162 .• \ ■; ' : 1'
"... the main function of the new State apparatus (in most of the
new third-world States) was a mechanism for the production of a
'national bourgeoisie or ruling class, which had previously barely
existed" (Hobsbawm, "The Age of Revolution", p. 187). Hobsbawm uses
the term ’mechanism’ with only a few of its potential voluntarist
implications. Clearly, such a mechanism is not scrupulously planned
in every detail by an omniscient State wishing to create a bour
geoisie. ’


271
On the other hand, my use of the term 'osmosis* does not im
ply undue emphasis on the functional aspects of the society under
review.
"... les trois notions, forme, fonction, structure, doivent s'utiliser également, au mime titre, pour analyser le réel. ... elles permettent de saisir des stabilités provisoires et des équilibres momentanés ... A travers l'emploi logique de ces concepts pour l'analyse, s'atteint un mouvement plus profond et plus réel: le mouvement dialectique de la société et de l'histoire. Il en resuite bien que toute méthodologie qui isole et privilégié un de ces con cepts perd quelque chose d'essentiel."
(Lefebvre, "Ljideologie...", p. 189; emphasis as in the original).
163
On the excellent condition of the army in 1913, see Martin,
"Greece of the 20th Century" (1913), pp. 87-112.
164 ;•
For an excellent historic account of the Powers' influence on Greece
see G. Leon, "Greece and the Great Powers, 1914-1917".
165 • .
As quoted by Kordatos, "Historia tis neoteris...", vol. XIII, p.639.
The conservative historian Karolides in his volume of the Paparri
gopoulos History, pp. 366-68, gives an interesting report of his
personal activities in favour of the return of Venizelos, whom he
considered as the only man capable of saving the dynasty. Indeed,
Venizelos' stand is summed up in the following statement: "...
what the country needs above all is the definite termination of the
civil strife..." (interview with Elefthero Vima, 7 Dec. 1923, as
quoted in S. Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...", vol.I, p. 43).
166 • •• - '
Led by Colonel Panagos and Majors Polyzos, Skylakakis and Sarando
poulos. See Veremis, unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, p. 138.
167 , - • • ' • ‘ '
Leonardopoulos was a member of the Venizelist "Democratic Defense"
group (Mazarakis, "Memoirs", p. 335), but was not committed at the
i


272
time of this coup because of bitterness against his patrons for
favouritism shown to his junior Venizelist officers, especially
Pangalos. Gargalidis was not committed either, it seems, because
of his notorious opportunism. ..(Dafnis, "I Hellas...", voi. I,
p. 116, and Kordatos, "Historia tis neoteris...", voi. XIII, p. .
623.) See also Veremis, unpubl. Ph.D."thesis, pp. 135-46.
163
Declaration of the coup leaders, Kathimerini newspaper, 22 Oct.1923
169 ’
Dafnis,,"I Hellas...", voi. I, pp. 116 and 158.
170
Gonatas* opening speech as reported by Dafnis, "I Hellas...",
voi. I, pp. 164-65. It is interesting to see Metaxas’ comments on
the-conference in his "Diary", vol.C, p. 309.
171 ' • ' / _ : ,
Announcement of the Liberal Party, 4 Nov. 1923, and Declaration of
the Directing Committee of the Liberal Party, 21 Nov. 1923.
172
The party was named Ethnikos Synaspismos (National Coalition), la
ter changed to Komma Svmfilioseos (Party of Reconciliation).
173 .
KKE Epissima.., voi. I, p. 563. The socialist deputy was Yannis
Passalidis. - - .
174 , '
For a detailed description of the League's organisation and back
ground, see Veremis, unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, p. 158-62.
“•175 ' . .
There are of course explanations attributing the refusal of the
premiership by Venizelist cadres to psychological reasons. Dafnis
writes ("I Hellas metaxi...", voi.I, pp. 220-11) that "Mihalakopou
los and Kafandaris naturally r.efused the honor of the premiership
of a government in which Venizelos would participate as a minister"
but adds later more realistically that they also rejected the solu
tion that the premiership be given to Roussos because they feared


I
273
this would mean his being groomed as Venizelos’ heir (p. 214).
Kordatos ("Historia tis neoteris...", vol. XIII, p. 657) attrib
uted these refusals to the fact that any premier would have been
no more than a puppet of Venizelos. The bitter rivalry in 1923
between Venizelos and Kafandaris, after the latter had left the
party, seems to make the realistic stand adopted here the more
plausible. The basic factor, however, was not the rivalries
among personalities, but rather the intra-party rift on the ques
tion of the regime. (See the Danglis "Archived, vol. II,pp.474-77^
*176
Kaltchas, "Introduction to...", p. 150: "Hence the retirement of
Venizelos... was desired both by his enemies and by the more in
dependent of his former lieutenants, who were anxious to deper
sonalise the republican regime in order to make it acceptable to
the royalist section of the Greek people."
177 . ..
See General Sarafis' first-hand report in "Historikes...", p. 244.
178
Article 3 of the "Decision of the Revolution" dated 15 Sept. 1922.
179 . . - '
Apart from these two battalions, the only other units saved were
the two divisions that had managed to cross over to Eastern Thrace
and the small forces permanently stationed in Eastern Thrace
(Dafnis, "I Hellas...", vol.I, p. 22).
179a x •
On the popular discontent and upheaval in 1923, see also Danglis,
"Archives", vol.II, p. 453; and Kousoulas, "Revolution...", p.42.
•iso - . ..
Meta^as, "Diary", vol. C, p. 301: "The social pressure was indeed
explosive" (comment by the editor, P.M. Sifnaios. See also pp.lS6
212, especially 197, 208, 210.
1S1 '
On the preponderance of shame over guilt in the Creek culture 
in contrast to western patterns — see Vassiliou, "The Implicative
Meaning of the Greek Concept of.Philotimo"; Safilios-Rotchild,


274
"Class Position and Success S t e r e o t y p e s a n d especially Pollis,
"Political Implications of the Modern Greek Concept of Self". 
*182
In the above circumstances it is indeed surprising that the Commu
nist Party of Greece failed to exploit such revolutionary potential.
It was stranger still that this potential seems actually to have
been ignored altogether. The only party that had dared name the war
an imperialistic adventure, the only party that could hope to really
capitalise on the disaster, was modestly demanding such routine
measures as elections, land reform, or the restoration of constitu
tional rights by the military government. (On the Party's position
on the war, see the announcement of the Communist Party dated 22
Feb. 1922, "KKE: Epissima Keiraena", vol.I, 1918-1924, Athens 1974,
pp. 229-31. On the Party’s demands after the debacle, see announce
ment dated 27 Aug.1922, ibid., pp. 250-253, and compare with the
electoral programme (pp. 352-558) which presents more or less the
same demands in more daring language.)
: Although the Communist Party did consistently work for a
widespread trade union movement, it seems that its objectives were
mainly tactical. Not that there was a lack of sufficient potential.
The wave of strikes that began with the railway workers’ action and
ended with the 1924 general strike was generated not only by commu
nist syndicates, but mainly by unions with non-communist leadership.
It is significant that none of the eleven victims of the last wor
kers’ demonstration in Passalimani, Piraeus, in 1924 was a commu
nist. (S.Stefanou, ed, "Venizelos .. .’’, vol.II, p.302).' It seems,
however, that Party support of the non-communist union leaders, al
though strong in tactical matters, was almost non-existent in ques
tions of strategy. It is not surprising, therefore, that the general
strike was not properly exploited at the political level, and that
the non-communist union leaders compromised with the liberals and
called it off. (Kousoulas, "Revolution...", p.44, describing the
1923-24 upheaval and the events around the general strike, concludes:
"After the events... several non-communist labour leaders and liber
al politicians made joint efforts to find a compromise solution, and
the strikes were gradually called off.") •


275
The Communist Party's policy is thus clear: intransigence
and revolutionary action only within the insurgent activities led
by the Party itself or by the communist unions; reluctant tactical
support and great suspicion whenever other political and social
groups professed or practiced revolution; and a nearly total con
tempt for the insurgent potential of the bourgeois regime-issue.
Thus the Party's correct analysis of the bourgeois nature of
both the 1922 coup and the strife between republicans and royalists
led to the mistaken tactical decision not to collaborate with the
republican bourgeois and petit-bourgeois forces, however sincere
and obvious their revolutionary attitude. The Communist Party per
sistently refused to see the militant support for the republican
cause as a revolution that could go far beyond the formalistic
limits of the 1922 coup, the 1923 elections, and even the refer
endum on the regime. The people's radicalism was not a sufficient
stimulus as long as the essentially political orientation of the
popular upheaval, centred upon the regime as it was, did not resem
ble the classical model of a social revolution. It is clear that
this game of definitions and of tactical decisions does not mean
there was no revolutionary potential; it simply means that the
potential did not match the Party’s definitions.
See P. Nefeloudis, "Stis piges...", pp. 30-31; also "KKE
Epissima Keimena..." throughout tfie volume on the 1918-24 period.
Papanastassiou believed that communism had no chance whatsoever in
Greece ("Meletes...", pp. 23 and 37). The amorphous revolutionary
and leftist attitudes among the people (and the refugees before the
1930s) did not imply any willingness to follow the Communist Party.
Characteristically,.Venizelos feared the communist infiltration as
a threat to the working class only, and not to a wider section of
the population, neither to the preservation of the regime: "It is
not only a matter of justice... it is also one of foresight..._if
we do want to prevent... our working class... from deviating to
wards Bolshevism." (Speech of 26 Nov. 1918, in S.Stefanou, ed.
’’Venizelos...", vol.II, p. 326.)
183 . . . . . . .
Dafnis, "Sophocles Venizelos", p. 114.


276
184
Letter to General Danglis, acting as parliamentary leader of the
liberal party, 27 Oct. 1922. Danglis, "Archives", vol.II, p.444.
Equally explicit vas Danglis’ official personal position in his
interview with the newspaper Ethnos on 19 Nov. 1922 (p.445).
185
.Danglis ("Archives", vol.II, p. 462) in a letter to Venizelos men
tions the names of Vourloumis, Negrepontis and Simos as the leaders
of the liberal group that joined Papanastassiou’s republicans.
186
Danglis, "Archives", vol.II, p. 549, letter to Plastiras.
iS7 '‘
A somewhat later but typical rumour is the one which presented
General Othonaios as following Venizelos1 implicit or explicit
instructions when he drew up his pronunciamento. It is taken up
by Dafnis, "I Hellas...", vol.I, p. 187.
*188 • . . ; ••
Such was the overwhelming radicalism and republicanism of the urban
population that the liberals were obliged to offer the republican .
party a substantial number of urban candidacies for thé 1923 elec
tion} the latter in turn requested that the liberals do not pre
sent any candidates at all and let the republicans fight the elec
tion in the cities ,alone against the .royalists (Danglis, "Archives",
vol.II, p. 464).. ••
.199 ; : f ' : ' ' V
Veremis seems to be of the same opinion (unpubl. Ph.D. thesis,
p p . 150-51).
*190
One has only to read through the "Archives" of Danglis, the liber
als provisional leader, to understand the virtual agony of the party
between the election and the split, including the short period of
Venizelos1 premiership. Especially indicative are the conditions bf
constant personal intrigue, clearly woven around the effort to neu
tralise the centrifugal republican forces (vol.II, pp. 472-77).


277
Such were probably the ’scenarios' that Venizelos himself had in
mind when he talked about "internal enemies" in his first pro-roy
alist cable after the coup, quoted in the introduction to this
chapter. ,
The degree of participation in the•revolution by the refu
gees and the urban petit-bourgeoisie is indicated by the urban elec
tion results. For the (still) unpropertied peasantry it is con
firmed by the results in Thessaly and the North. For the middle
class it cannot be deduced from the electoral results, yet it is
suggested by the attitude of the progressive press of the period,
or the frequently republican, publicly proclaimed positions of
various middle-class elements forged and proven in the first phase
of the dichasmos when they were enthusiastic followers of Venizelos.
*192
Two methodological clarifications should again be underlined. The
first is that action by a social class, as treated in this work,
does not imply a voluntaristic approach; whatever personification
of a class appears in the text is merely used metaphorically for
reasons of greater simplicity and clarity. The second point has
already been made in previous instances, and concerns.the distinc
tion between the structural ’system’ approach and the action ap
proach. Again, a selective use of both approaches is here attemp
ted, with the emphasis on the dynamics of social action duly modi
fied by the limiting framework imposed by social structures. (See
footnote *33.)
193 •
Hobsbawm, "The Age of Revolution", p. 85. The analogy, of course,
ends here.
*194 , • ~
It is m y conviction that the slow death of the liberal party, and
with it of the moderate centre of the Greek political spectrum,
^egan in 1924. The period between 1928 and 1936 was only a drawn- 
°ut last spasm. The hegemony of the Right, which began in 1936 and
Is still continuing in 1975, should be partly attributed, I think,
*° the 1922-24 events and the division of the liberal party, from
*191


27S
which the centre has never been able to recover. And although
such a division seems to be the fate of the centre in all socie
ties, the question in the Greek case is not only why the split
occurred in 1922-24 — a question which this chapter has attempted
to answer — but also why it was the final split, why the con- 
ditions that created it continued to function afterwards — a ques
tion which lies outside the chronological scope of this work.
195 ; • ' . . .
General Mazarakis-Ainian, a conservative Venizelist, despite his-,,
strong enmity for Pangalos and many republicans, wrote in his
"Memoirs" (p. 305) about the days after the 1922 coup: "The people
(in Athens) watched the small demonstrations in favour of the King
with indifference.;. The revolution(-ary forces) arrived in Athens
and took control of the situation without meeting with any reac
tion." ' "
196 , ' '"*/ ' ' \
'Veremis,' unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, pp. 145 and 200.
197 . .. ;
Metaxas, "Diary", vol. Cl, p. 326: "... the extremists’ struggle
harmed the case of the dismissed officers' rehabilitation.! toyself
had obtained from Mr Papanastassiou the reinstatement of all those
dismissed. This is now cancelled..."
193 •
For a similar view of Venizelos' policy and its effects see Dafnis,
"I Hellas...", vol.I, p. 223. Dafnis' recognition of and praise 
for Venizelos' good intentions does not change the argument.
199 , t.. . • . . -
Driault-Lhlritier: "Histoire...", vol.V, p. 485, quoting Bierstedt,
E.H., "The Great Betrayal", New York, 1924: "Lausanne saw not only
a treaty, but a sale." The authors also quote the equally descrip
tive phrase, "oil won the day". . . . „
200 - /. : . - -'
Veremis, unpubl Ph.D. thesis, p. 385. ' 


f.
279
Veremis, unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, p. 3S6.
202
Veremis, unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, p. 388.
203
For a similar opinion, see Dafnis, "I Hellas...", vol.I, pp. 377
96, and vol.II, pp. 7-15.
204
With the exception of the 1963-64 period of Centre Union govern
ment and some of the various governments formed between 1945
and 1952 with the participation of parties of liberal origins.
Because of the polarising effects of the civil war, however, the
policy followed by the latter was pretty well dominated by their
latent or open allies in these governments: the groups of the con
servative Right.
*205
In contrast to many authors who are concerned with military inter
vention in other countries, Veremis’ examination of inter-war Greece
expertly uses analytical tools such as patronage, without his work
being overwhelmed by one-dimensional functionalism.
206
Hcpefblly, the reader will understand my haste in making clear that
I am no relation of Col. B. Dertilis, nor yet and especially of
Col. N. Dertilis, his son, who has been convicted to a life sentence
for his role in the 1973 Polytechnic uprising in Athens. (Two spel
lings are possible for this name in Greek.)
*207
Hobsbawm, "The Age of Revolution", p. 55:
. "It was all very well for the rich (in pre-1849 Europe), who could raise all the credit they needed, to clamp rigid deflation and monetary orthodoxy... it. was the little man who suffered, and who, in all countries and at all times in the nineteenth century demanded easy credit and financial unorthodoxy, labour and the disgruntled petit-bourgeois... there fore shared common discontents. These in turn united them in the mass movements of ’radicalism’, ’demo cracy’ or ’republicanism' of which the British Radic
201


2S0
als, the French Republicans, and the American’ Jacksonian Democrats were the most formidable between 1815 and 1848." ■'
208
Only three months after the debacle,.the new workshops erected by
the refugees were already taking orders from the USA market.
("Greek Handicraft",, a publication of the National Bank of Greece,
Athens 1969, p. 278.)
209
The economic contribution by the refugees' industrial’and agricul
u tural know-how is mentioned even in the diplomatic history of
Driault-LhSritier, "Histoire.. vol.V, pp. 488-89.
According to the 1961 census, one in five Greek industria' - ■
lists was born in Turkey.
210 ■ ’ ' ’' " ; ' '
On State aid in Bulgaria, see Gershenkron's"essay on Bulgarian in
dustrialisation in his "Economic Backwardness...” ; on corporatism,
see Venizelos' speech to the Senate of 4 March 1931, as quoted in'
S. Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...", vol.I, pp. 222-23. Venizelos
was a declared enemy of corporatism, which he rightly considered
a threat to parliamentarianism. It seems, however, that what he
feared most was the possibility of corporatism with leftist inclin
ations .
211 : ■ ' - ■ * ■ '
Veremis, unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, p. 171.
212 *
Among writers who consider that Pangalos had little popular fol
lowing, see Karolides in Paparrigopoulos, "Historia...", vol.VIII,
pp. 378-80; Papanastassiou, "Meletes...", pp. 30 and 41-42.
General Sarafis ("Historikes...", p. 253) reports a charac
teristic incident with Pangalos, who is quoted as saying after the
1922 coup and when he was the head of the Greek army facing the ,
Turks in Thracer "... when I enter Constantinople at the head of
the army, I'll g iv eo n e kick for Plastiras, one for Gonatas, and
there I'll be — Emperor of Byzantium."


281
It is interesting that in 1924 Metaxas proposed that the Swiss
army-organisation system be established in Greece. ("Diary",
voi.Cl, p. 352
214
For opinions on various aspects typical of this formalism, see
Papanastassiou, "Meletes...", pp. 18 and 22.
215
The economic policy of the 1928-32 administration was mainly in
spired by the two Finance Ministers of the period, G. Maris and
K. Varvaressos. It seems that the latter’s unusual integrity and
modesty kept him kept him from imposing himself on Greek public
life. Had his advice been followed, for example, in post-1947
economic policy-making, and especially on decisions as to the use
°f Marshall-Plan aid, the whole immense programme would have been
Far more productive and much less marred by corruption and nouveaux
Hiches absurdity.
216
Fn 1930-31, the relationship between national income and public
debt was 9.25% for Greece, 2.98% for Bulgaria, 2.32% for Rouma
ni-a, and 1.68% for Yugoslavia(Stavrianos, "The Balkans...", pp. ^5-66).
•On Venizelos' views about the effects of the international
ec°nomic crisis on Greece, see his speech reported in the newspaper
^lefthero • Vima, 8 Jan. 1932, and in S.Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...",
Vo^ ’H , pp. 477-78. On his rejection of Greece's legal obligation
Pay interest on the old public debt to the American bond-holders,
a°d his criticism of the Tsaldaris government for paying them, see
speech of 12 Jan. 1933 in S.Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos...",
V°1.II, pp. 265-66.
On the crisis as one of the reasons behind the regeneration of
*he Communist Party, see Kousoulas, "Revolution...", pp.-82-89,.
217
s®e Paparrigopoulos, "Historia.. voi.Vili, p. 389, for a descrip
tion of the first stages of the refugees’ alienation from the lib
aral party. Especially interesting is his report on the 1929 demon
213


252
stration in which the partipant refugees "revoked their pro
liberal vote" in the 1928 elections.
218
Eafnis, "I Hellas...", vol.II, pp. 229-30.
219
On the policies of the KKE during the 1933 and 1935 coups, see
Kousoulas, "Revolution...", pp. 84 and 85 and 94-96 respectively.
220
In the sense of classe-appui as defined by Poulantzas, "Pouvoir
politique...", vol.II, pp. 68-69.
*221 ■>
Venizelos opposition to the idea of an agrarian party in Greece
is revealing (Minutes of the parliamentary discussion of 21 Dec.
1929, as quoted in S.Stefanou, ed. "Venizelos...", vol.I, p. 1$6):
"I do not think our social and economic develop ment allows... class parties... I believe that... (we must) keep to ... national parties and not , ' leave the peasantry unprotected from the worst of demagogues that will urge it to ideas and aims of ■>; reversing the established order."
On the other hand, the distorted view of orthodoxy held by
the Communist Party of Greece in its early days created conditions
of near-indifference about the peasants’ political potential:
peasants were in some way considered as ’classless* (see the very *
good critical comments by Vergopoulos in his "To agrotiko...",
pp. 340-41, 343-49, 354-59).
*222
"... l ’instance idéologique (dans les sociétés pré-capitalistes)
est dominante, bien que l ’économique soit évidemment comme toujours
déterminante en dernière instance", S. Amin: "Le Capitalisme et
la rente foncière" in S. Amin and K. Vergopoulos, "La question
paysanne...", p . 1 0 .
For a more specific discussion on the formalistic role of ...
ideology in Greek politics, see N. Mouzelis* articles on this sub
ject in To Vima, Athens (regular contributions, March-June 1976 ).


For the interplay of ideology and social conditions with politics
it is interesting to examine the 2 0 th-century electoral results
in Thessaly, where quasi-feudal conditions prevailed until the
early 20th-century and where the peasant movement was the most pro
nounced. In the 1946-63 period and in a total of ten districts,
the pattern was :
Left-Centre-Right, competitive: three districts competitive, tendency Centre: four districts Right and Centre even: one district competitive, tendency Right only: two districts
(Legg, "Politics in Modern Greece", pp.325-27)
This contrasts with moderate and even conservative tendencies in
all other areas, and especially in the Peloponnese where small •
property has always been the rule.
*223 ’
Regionalism was also a handicap in the development of class cohe
sion among the peasantry. -The importance of this factor must not
be underestimated. There are still cultural differences in 20th
century Greece, and their effects — prejudice and a certain re
gional racialism — are expressed through antipathies and stereo
typing. These show themselves not in good-humoured jokes such as that
of the English against the Scots or the Parisian satire of the Mar
seillais; they take the form of sweeping statements, serious mutual
accusations and insults. So the Peloponnesians are ’sly peasants'
and the inhabitants of the province of Eleia 'tend towards criminal
behaviour’, Corfiotes are ’effeminate’, Cretans ’liars’ and ’trea
cherous’, Cephallonians ’mad’ or 'impostors’, etc.
Strong regionalist feeling was brought about not only by geo
graphic isolation, but also by a long tradition which had its roots
in the peculiarities of the Turkish administrative system, the cul
tural differentiation between the regions due to the variety of
foreign invaders, and the method of recruitment during the revolu
tion which relied almost exclusively on the local chieftains (Pet
ropulos, "Politics and Statecraft’, pp. 19-23; .Filias also emphas
ises the local and particularistic tendencies within Greek society
during and after the war of independence in "Koinonia kai exoussia..
R* i07).- The antagonism between the participants in the war of in
dependence, islanders, Peloponnesians and Rumeliotes, as well as
the 1824 civil war, found its expressions of these sectional cleava


ges, as they were brought to the surface and reinforced by the or
ganisational needs of the revolution (Petroprlos, "Politics and
Statecraft", pp. 21 and 87). The same local interpersonal depen
dence, transactions, allegiances and enmities persisted after the
liberation, with the difference that now they functioned not through
the hierarchy of the war-bands, but through the networks of patron
age.
*224
a) It is appropriate here to quote the famous Marxian passage
(in "The Eighteenth Brumaire...", p. 239):
"In so far as millions of families live under economic conditions separating their mode of life, their interest and their cultural formation from those of the other classes and bring them into conflict with those classes, they form a class. In so far as these small peasant proprietors are connected merely on a local basis, and the identity of their interests fails to produce a feeling of community, national links or a political organisa tion, they do not form a class."
For a discussion of peasant conservatism in connection with both
property systems and capitalist modernisation, see Barrington
Moore Jr, "The Social Ori gins p . 477.
b) A reference to today's differences between the Italian North
and the Metsogiorno would be misleading. Italy is not divided
into totally different systems of social and economic structures,
the main difference lies in the weight of the dominant ’mode of
production' within each regional system and, of course, in the^
degree of its development. Conversely, comparison with the Por
tugal of 1975 is much more revealing. Here, as in 19th-century
Greece, there is a regional differentiation in economic and so
cial structures which is boldly reflected in the ideology of the
peasantry, as shown by the results of the 25 April 1975 elections
(see regional analysis of election results and commentary in Le
Monde, 27-25 April 1975). Of course, comparison as such is simply
a methodological tool and its use here does not in the least dis
regard the differences between Portugal and Creece — such as that
the Greek landownership system had its own peculiarities, as did
the latifundia system in Portugal; also, that the Portuguese


285
2 0 th-century socio-economic system as a whole cannot be compared
with that of Greece in the 19th century. But whatever the differ
ences, there is indeed regional differentiation within both socie
ties, its degree is comparable, and so are its effects on ideology
(see Marcel Niedergang, "Dans le Portugal de lfinterieur", Le Monde
23 and 24 April 1975, for a perceptive juxtaposition of structural
and ideological differences).
*225
On the threat of war, here is a chronological summary pertaining
to the 1881-1909 period: ( .
1885: war between Turkey and Bulgaria with near-involvement of
Greece, ending with the acquisition by Bulgaria of Anatoliki Ro
mulia, a region of Thrace populated mainly by Greeks, which caused
an upsurge of bitterness and nationalism in Greece.
1880-90: civil strife in Crete, still under Turkish rule; revolu
tionary upheaval and extreme tension between Greece and Turkey.
1890: acquisition by Bulgaria of seven provinces in Northern Mace
donia by agreement with Turkey; Aspreas ("Politiki Historia...",
p. 213) considers this the direct result of the shrewd exploita
tion by Bulgaria of the existing tension between Turkey and Greece.
1890-93: invasion by Bulgarian guerrillas of predominantly Creek
populated provinces in Turkish'Macedonia.
1894 onwards: operations within Greece of the extreme nationalist
organisation Ethniki Etairia (National Society), largely composed
of members with a military background; the Society made persistent
demagogic propaganda for a militaiy conquest of the Greek provinces
still under foreign rule. ’
1 897: Creco-Turkish war and retreat of the Greek army in panic.
1904-08: Greek guerrillas in Macedonia operating against Turkish
forces and Bulgarian guerrillas. __
226
Petropulos, "Politics and Statecraft...", pp. 36-37. .
*227 ; ' "! ' '
Petropulos, "Politics and Statecraft...", p. 238. Otho appears to
have grasped the utility of a supportive peasantry in 1833 well be
fore the 1848 abolition of feudal rights in Prussia by Gierke, who
i


2So
seems to have had the same intuition. See Marx, "The bill for the
abolition of feudal burdens" in "The Revolutions of 1848", pp. 137
143, for a critique of Gierke's measures; and Barrington-Moore Jr,
"The Social Origins...", pp. 434-43, for an analysis of the German
model of "revolution from above" led by the State bureaucracy and
the landed aristocracy. Otho's scheme involved only the small
peasants and the State as represented by the Crown in a monarchy.'
not fettered by landowners. His vision, somewhat unexpectedly, re
sembles the fascist glorification of the small peasant as it is
theoretically treated in Hitler's "Mein Kampf". '
*228 • :v ' ' -‘ \ ^ ; •V 0
Kordatos," "Historia tou agrotikou.. p. 126) says that "the bour
geoisie...Was then struggling against the old families fcnctl seeking
allies among peasants and workers,in order to obtain political .
power... and to organise economic production,on different bases." ,
The passage refers to the 1909-12 period, but the process of ideo
logical conditioning which made the peasantry a classe appui. to
use Poulantzas' term, had really begun many decades earlier. .
*229 . . .
a) Changing the issue from one of social conflict to an opposition
between peasantry and State1 seems to have had far-reaching conse
quences on the political development of modern Greece.;.-It was one
of the incentives which encouraged the inflated role of the gendar
merie in rural Greece, the process of centralisation, and eventual
ly the disproportionate growth of the State which, in the 20th cen
tury, was to become such a major factor in Greek politics that it
obscured and falsified the role of social classes.
b) The legalistic view of the peasant problem is evident in Calli
gas’ 19th-century novel "Thanos Vlekas". .The author "insists on
the defects of the land-distribution to the veterans of the revolu
tion... By exploiting the gaps in the (distribution) law, Tasos
(the villain) commits a crime against the peasants." (Vitti,
"I ideologiki.. p. 27^) The crime was appropriation of national
land by means of fraudulent claims. ' ' 7 ■ '' '


287
. In his 1910 electoral speech to an audience of mostly unpro
pertied peasants, Venizelos said that the definitive solution of
the issue of land reform would be very difficult. Only after the
elections had provided him with a solid majority did Venizelos sup
port the peasants' right to land. Of course, the question was not
implementation of land reform, for which funds were lacking, but
adoption of the principle in the revised Constitution (S.Stefanou,
ed. "Venizelos...", vol.II, pp. 503ff). On Venizelos' position
between 1915.and 1920, when he actually proclaimed land reform,
see pp. 505-07.
.• On Venizelos' particular attention to the problem of land re
form during his electoral campaign in 1910, see Driault-Lhlritier
"Histoire...", vo. V, p. 51; and also S.Stefanou (ed), "Venizelos
, vol.II, pp. 311-13. It is not by chance that from then on
Venizelos consistently "placed the most competent and active" of
his cadres in the Ministry of Agriculture (p. 313).
*231
Speaking more theoretically, it is necessary to know from which of
three possible conceptual levels the bourgeoisie was operating:
consciousness of class-differentiation, consciousness of class con
«•
flict, or, depending on circumstances and the class-section exam
ined, either revolutionary or "incumbent" class consciousness. See
Giddens, "The Class Structure...", p. 112.
232
*233 .
Nunes, "Les revolutions du Mexique", p. 17, in examing the behavi
our of the encomanderos and the hacendados and its effects on the
delay of capitalist development in Mexico, comments as follows:
"... il n'investit pas son capital-argent sur place, de façon à aider i la création d'un marché intérieur • od pourrait avoir lieu une circulation de marchan dises et de capital. L'encomandero investit au con traire son capital-argent dans l'usure, dans la spé culation foncière ou immobilière, dans le gaspillage,
*230
i


2S8
le luxe, ou, alors, dans le meilleur des cas, en Europe, dans les zones manufacturiers de l'Empire espagnol. "Le Mexique n'est pas plus ’capitaliste’ i la veille de 1'Independence, i la fin du XVIIIe siècle, q u ’au . XVie siècle. ,La persistance de structures archaïques ... empêchent... l ’éclosion d ’une bourgeoisie."
*234 :- '
a) See Driault-Lhéritier, vol.V, pp. 467068 on the effects of the
Prang nach Os ten. "C’est le point faible de la grande combinaison
allemande que la Bulgarie et la Turquie, ses deux alliées, aient
été ennemies au moment critique (1912-1913)."
b) A commonly held view even more supportive of the argument in
the main text is that the Megali Idea was not only irredentist but
imperialistic as well. See Zakythinos, "Historia...”, pp. 86 and '
106. .The following incident might give the non-Greek reader a good
example of the imperialistic tendencies within the Greek ideology of
irredentism. In 1913 the Prime Minister had to intervene personal
ly in favour of a professor at the University of Athens, against
whom the Minister of Education as his senior had taken disciplinary
action. The-reason for the persecution was the professor's'opinion
that King Constantine should be referred to as King Constantine I
and not XII — in other words, that numbering according to the last
Byzantine imperial dynasty should be abandoned. (S.Stefanou, ed,'
"Venizelos...", vol.II, p. 390).
c) For a comprehensive view of 19th-century nationalism in Europe,
see Hobsbawm, "The Age of Capital", pp. 85-86 and 92-93.
*235
Venizelos himself seems to have held the view that the demotic issue
might have been a problem of class conflict although it was not in
the end taken up by the mutually opposed classes. In his speech to
the House on 2 April 1918, he considers the measure of imposing the
demotic in the primary schools as simply and plainly a "democratic"
one (S.Stefanou, ed. " V e n i z e l o s vol. II, pp. 368-69). Thus he
appropriately operated the transfer of the problem from the area of
cultural conflict to .that of political conflict, but always at a
safe distance from social strife. ; In this he was assisted, of course,


2S9
by the very nature of the bourgeois democratic regime. Thus, al
though he was in favour of the demotic in at least elementary edu
cation, he neither could nor wished to impose it as the official
language (see his speech to parliament of 28 Feb. 1911 in S.Stefanou,
ed. "Venizelou...n, pp. 364-68). That the demotic was imposed in
the primary schools by a bourgeois party is not significant; it
was the effect of Venizelos' personal convictions and the support
from the party's left wing and especially the republicans of the
Papanastassiou group whose clientele was essentially petit-bour
geois (see chapters D,‘E, and Appendix II). But this support should
not mislead either: the demotic was removed again from the primary
school curriculum by the 1925 Pangalos dictatorship, also vaguely
petit-bourgeois in its political orientation but with fascist 
and hence 'purist'— inclinations (see chapter F; see also Papanas
tassiou, "Meletes...", p. 27).
*236
I am indebted to Elias Antonopoulos for a lengthy discussion
on this subject. My writings do not necessarily reflect his views,
except for the quotation from Psyharis. Of the historians, Ventiris
is the most explicit in supporting demoticisra as a middle-class phe
nomenon ("I Hellas...", vol.I, pp. 30-31).
Palamas, Creece's national poet and considered as this period's
enlightened bourgeois intellectual par excellence, was member of an
extremist nationalist secret organisation (General Danglis, "Ar
chives", vol.I, p. 141). The membership list includes a few more
well-known names: Professors N.G.Politis and N. Apostolidis;
Ioannis Svoronos, director of the Numismatic Museum; the well-known
lawyer Ioannis Zepos, and Petros Protopapadakis, civil engineer and
Politician. General (then Major) Danglis was one of the Panhellenic
National Society's leaders, which explains his favourable comments
("Archives", vol.I, pp. 136-53). Other members from within the army
were Tsontos and Zymvrakakis, well known for his part in the 1909
coup. The objectives of this organisation, the dissolution of par
liament and imposition of an authoritarian regime'(pp. 493-41) are
characteristic of the ideological confusion among the Greek upper
classes of this period. Danglis was the son of a grand-bourgeois
family, a royal aide-de-camp and a monarchist until the 1915-17
dichasnirxs when he became a militant liberal. He ended up as the
liberal party's provisional leader during Venizelos' 1920-23 self
exile. 1


290
., A propos of chauvinism, I cannot resist this quotation from
Giannopoulos, ("Ekklissis...", p.40), written in his personal ver
sion of.purist: "... we Greeks (will) educate and discipline
Europe, that shameless hussy who is still eating rotten fish, meat,
poultry, and also a kind of cheese crawling with maggots.'.'." This
may be a caricature of the intelligentsia's chauvinism, but it is
characteristic that Giannopoulos W a s considered by his fellow
intellectuals as merely a bit of an eccentric.
* 2 3 7 If demotic was imposed in the primary schools by the
bourgeois Liberal Party, this was the effect of Venizelos' person
al convictions and the support from the party's left wing and es
peci a l l y the republicans of the Papanastassiou group whose clien
tele was essentially petit-bourgeois ; see chapters D, E, F. Sig
nificantly, it was removed again from the primary-school curriculum
by the Pangalos dictatorship, also vaguely petit-bourgeois in its
political orientation but with fascist -- and hence ’purist’
overtones ; see chapter F. , •" .v- 
3< - . . .
237a • N • V
F.O. 371/677 N°36 and N ° 174, Elliot to Crey, Athens, 6 March 1909
and 31 Dec. 1903 respectively, as quoted by Papacosmas, "The Greek
Military...", pp. 100 and 56. 1
2376 :
See Hobsbawm, "The Age of Capital", pp. 20-21 for a discussion on
the relationship between the intellectuals and the rebellious petit
bourgeoisie in the 1848-1851 revolutions. \
23S ’- . ■ r / ‘
Pangalos, "Archives", vol. I, p. 91
*239
These, more or less, are the questions asked by authors using a more
historically-oriented approach in works such as Ali Kazancigil's
"La participation et les élites... Turquie", Robin Luckham’s "The
Nigerian Military...", Valter Weikert's "The Turkish Revolution.


291
1960-61", and others to which there will be references in the
pages to follow.
240
See L. Hamon's similar argument in his Rapport Final to the Con
ference at the University at Dijon, in L. Hamon (ed), "Le role
extra-militaire de l’armée dans le Tiers-Monde", p. 413.
241
Feld, M.D., "A Typology of Military Organisation", p. 7.
*242
The abstraction of very conprehensive models is often a serious
handicap at the stage which naturally follows the setting up of
a typology, the stage of a descriptive-historical analysis on the
basis of such models. Characteristic of the variety of cases ex
amined and their lack of relationship is the historically-oriented
study by D.J. Goodspeed, "The Conspirators", dealing with the •
coups of Belgrade (1903), Dublin (1916), Petrograd (19Î7), Ber
lin (1920), Rome (1922), and Rastenburg (1944), although it is
not clear whether the author really used a typological model when
choosing these examples and not merely a number of'different coups.
243
See for example S'. Huntington’s discussion of class in the numer
ous instances where he uses this approach in his "Political Devel
opment and Political Change"; also in his "Political Order in
Changing Societies", especially pp. 222-23.
244
Quotations from (in order of appearance in main text): (1 ) Cermani,
G. and Silvert, K.: "Politics, Social Structure and Military Inter
vention in Latin America", p. 62; (2) Lissak, M . : "Modernisation
and Role-Expansion of the Military in Developing Countries” , p-.234.
245 '
Quotations from (in order of appearance in main text):
.(l) Gutteridge, V.: "Military Institutions and Power in the Nev/
States", p. 177; (2) Stepan, A.: "The Military in Politics", p.135.
292 .
In' the somewhat megolamaniac language of the period before the
debacle, this expression did not sound too pompous. It was widely


292
used in the Venizelist press of the period, having been coined by
Venizelos in his speech submitting the Treaty of Sevres to Parlia
ment . •
247
See for example A.R. Zolberg, "The Structure^of Political Conflict
in the New States of Tropical Africa".
24S.
That patronage is indeed a condition actually present in Greek
society is a point .well established in the various works by Prof.
Campbell (see bibliography). Its specific application to the pol
itical^ behaviour of the military during the inter-war period is
exhaustively analysed in Veremis' excellent historical Ph.D. thesis
(unpublished). '
249
For an analysis of intervention in Brazil based too exclu ively on
problems of professionalism, see F.M.Nunn, "Military Professional
ism...". Along similar lines but much narrower in its approach is
the article by U. Sundhaussen, "The Fashioning of Unity in the
Indonesian Army". For an explanation of Latin American military
politics based on military corporatism, see E. Liewen, "Generals
versus Presidents" (where p. 107 gives a summary of the author's
approach).
The subject of methodology is discussed in detail in this appendix.
*250 " .
A fine case for investigation is that of General Othonaios. (For
exhaustive and reliable information on Othonaios' activity during
the inter-war period, see Veremis, unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, pp. 150
and 152-53.) After the 1922 revolution this man, a devoted Veni
zelist, rushed to take sides for an immediate abolition of the
monarchy, only to change position as soon as Venizelos made known
his own moderate policies in the matter. Othonaios did, however,'
remain adamant on the punishment of the Six. Although it was gene
ral knowledge that Venizelos wished for moderation on this subject
as well, no explicit-instructions'were received from him until it
was too late, a few hours after the execution. To contain Otho
naios'. revolutionary zeal, Premier Plastiras had offered him t h e ’


293
presidency of the court martial. He not only accepted the appoint
ment, but also proceeded with the death sentence. He might have
acted differently had Venizelos' telegramme opposing the death
penalty arrived earlier.
Following the execution, Othonaios not unnaturally became
one of the royalists' most hated targets. Although he vras so heavi
ly compromised, he managed to remain faithful to Venizelos' pro
monarchist directives during the whole of the first twelve months
after the revolution, a year of stress and uncertainty. His posi
tion when invited to the 'Conference of Personalities' on 31 Octo
ber 1923 is most characteristic. At first he refused outright to
participate, and in a furious cable-reply to the invitation called •
the initiative " dijastrous" on the grounds that invitations had also
been sent to monarchists and people suspected of involvement in
the abortive 1923 royalist coup (Dafnis, "I Hellas...", vol.I,
p. 169). But in the course of the next few hours he reversed his 
intransigent position and even accepted the principle that the abol
ition of the monarchy was a matter to be resolved only after the
elections. The reason for his volte face was another telegramme
from Venizelos, in which Othonaios' idolised patron said: "I ...
adjure those who believe in the value of my opinion not to effect
the.violent change of regime (which is) under preparation." (Daf
nis, "I Hellas...", vol.I, pp. 168-69.)
Most probably, Othonaios could at this point have imposed
his will dynamically had he so wished, by using the Military League
of which he was one of the leaders. The organisation had been
formed as early as July 1923, and its alleged aim was to prevent
a monarchist counter-revolution. But its real objective was "to en
sure that the post-revolutionary regime would be favourable to those
of its members who had distinguished themselves in republican fixity
of pupose" (Dafnis, "I Hellas...", vol.I, p. 196; see also Korda
tos, "Historia tis neoteris...", vol.XIII, pp. 639 and 648 for sim
ilar comments on Othonaios attitude.) This certainly applied to •
Othonaios, a man deeply compromised by the execution of the Six.'


294
His allegiance to Venizelos, however, seems to have been stronger
than his sense of self-preservation. But he could not possibly
remain loyal for ever under the threat of the royalists’ eventual
revenge. About a year later he staged his 1923 pronunciamento. It
only seems strange that he did not do so earlier. (Dafnis, "I Hel
las...", voi.I, p. 187, writes that Othonaios proceeded to his pro
nunciamento because he was under the impression that this was Veni
zelos’ wish. According to Dafnis, Othonaios believed that Venize
*
los wanted a fait accompli which would not compromise him in the
eyes of.the Creat Powers. This seems a rather daring speculation
which Dafnis does not base on any specific■information. Even if.
Othonaios had had such an intricate view of the problem, it could
well have been a rationalisation of his more or less impulsive de
cision to proceed to his pronunciamento rather than any deep con
viction.) It is significant that even after the pronunciamento
Othonaios was never really able to firmly oppose Venizelos. In
January 1924, for instance, he threatened his patron that "he would
disclose information about his (Venizelos’) tactics during the trials
of 1922 unless he agreed to abolish the monarchy by a simple vote
in parliament. Yet once again he did not follow up his threat,
Venizelos did not give in, and the referendum was not called off. :
The course of events from then on proved that Othonaios’ fears
had been totally justified. Following the ephemeral reconciliation
of Venizelists and royalists and their coalition government of
4 December 1926, the Venizelists accepted the royalist demand to
remove Othonaios from the army. Naturally, he would not simply
plead guilty for the execution of the Six by tendering his resigna
tion as requested by the government. Whereupon he was retired
(Dafnis, "I Hellas...", voi. I, p. 354). Meanwhile, another measure
imposed on the coalition government by its royalist members was the
reinstatement of royalist officers purged by the 1922 revolutionary
government. Thus the stage was set. It comes as no surprise that
Othonaios, after having been so ruthlessly abandoned and under the
threat of royalist revenge, should have got ready to prepare another
coup. What is surprising is that.he did not proceed with it, which
is again characteristic:, once more he let himself be influenced by.
Venizelos’ telegramraes to Plastiras and Sophoulis, recommending that
the coup be avoided .


295
The conclusion from this short 'case study' is thus plain.
Patronage functioned primarily as a network for communication of
the political leaders' decisions, and for the feedback of the
officers' reactions to them. Othonaios' 1923 pronunciamento and
his post-1926 threatened coup were direct effects of the political
conditions outside the armed force : they were facilitated, but not
caused, by his extensive patronage relations within the army. This,
in fact, confirms the basic argument of the discussion, that the
officers' behaviour inside the army was determined by the political
conditions outside it, which in turn were shaped by the economic
and social factors of the period. (On the apotakti issue, see
Mazarakis, "Memoirs", p. 342-43. For an analysis of the elite-role
of the military in Greece, see also Legg, "Politics...", pp. 187-92.)
251 .
Dafnis, "I Hellas...", vol. I, p. 9, supports this view very well.
This appears also to have been Kordatos' and Karolides' implicit
position.
252 ...
See Dafnis, "I Hellas...", vol.II, pp. 169 ff. An opposite view
may be held if one considers pp. 2 0 1 -0 2 , but not for.long; the
events described on p. 2 1 1 suggest that there was an upsurge of dis
ciplinary action in this period.
*253 ' '•
"L'armée est d'autant plus indépendente socialement de la classe
dominante que cette dernière est plus faible..." — Hamon's percep
tive introduction in L. Hamon (ed), "Le réle extra-miliaire...";
see also the interesting article by Rouquié, "Revolutions mili
taires et indépendence nationale en Amérique Latine", especially
pp. 1256 ff.


296
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The bibliography below is not exhaustive. It lists the
works 1 have consulted either for information on certain spe
cific problems, or for general purposes. The Greek works cen
tre on the 1564-1935 period, and chiefly on 1881-1928- A few
works on the eighteenth century and the war of independence,
as well as Petropulos' exceptional book on the Othonian period,
were consulted for specialised background information and are
referred to also in the text.' ...
Although the bibliography was continually updated between
1973 and 1975, this was done within human limits. Following
23 July 1974, when Greece's most recent authoritarian night
mare ended, a flood of books poured into the market. There was
still no sign of it subsiding by 1975, when I decided to stop
reading and devote my time exclusively to writing. This deci
sion inevitably shut out some works either published very re
cently or due to be published soon: for example, the essay on
the demotic language by Rena Patrikiou; Moschonas' introductory
essay in Pallis'. "Broussos"; V.Kremmydas' "Introduction
to the History of Neo-Hellenic Society 1700-1821"; Elefantis'
"I epangelia tis adynatis epanastassis"; M.Nikolinakos' "Meletes
pano ston Helliniko capitalismo"; and Tsoukalas' socio-historical


297
work discussing the period at the turn of the century, of which
I was unable to secure a draft, though I fortunately elicited
the author' s views and general line at least, on an occasion
of his sharp criticism of my own work’.
The subject of military intervention in politics, both as
a theoretical issue in political science and as a topic for
case histories of countries other than Creece, presented me
with a similar problem. My reading had to be done within the
1973-75 period, and my bibliography was updated, for the last
time, in 1973; since then, some books and articles have been
added to my list, but only as I came across them in my research
and not as a result of systematic bibliographic investigation.
.I believe strongly that the role of the bibliography as a
guiding line for scholars and students wishing to examine sim
ilar subjects cannot be played^properly unless some critical
guidance is given by the author. Whenever possible, I tried
to provide this in my footnotes. As a newcomer in the field,
anxious to maintain a proper sense of proportion (and faced with
a field as flooded with triviality as that of military inter
vention) I have annotated with a cross (+) such titles as I
myself have found of some real help. This covers, without fur
ther differentiation, works of very high intrinsic standing,
and essays where only three of four paragraphs are applicable.
Similarly, not all the titles deprived of a +-sign are works I
dare consider of lower standard. It is merely that I myself
did not find them particularly helpful, which may well be due


to personal idiosyncrasies - even prejudice - in methodology.
Other researchers may find them of considerable value.
This distinction seemed unfair, however, to those works
to which I owe much more than information’or guidance: the
works that taught, strongly influenced, and even, in some cases,
moved me. -All-I could do was to acknowledge my gratitude with
an asterisk.- I did not mark with crosses or asterisks certain
very basic works such as general histories or the works of Marx
and Veber, or encyclopaedias. . But I have used crosses for ar
chives and memoirs. As for certain basic works used for very
general background information, I preferred not to list them at
all, except for works by Marx, lest my bibliography appear di
dactic and pompous. •
Finally, I have used alphabetical author listing, in prefer
ence to divisions into subject matter, which I indicated by a
G for books and articles on Greece, an M for works on military
intervention, and an L for works on theories around legitimacy
and authority, bureaucracy and organisation. Vorks of general
interest were left unmarked, whilst some titles show a combin
ation of letters, for example CM for works on military inter
vention in Greek politics.


299
Note: The following alphabetical list contains all entries books, articles, newspapers, journals; memoirs and archives. It does not include Army Lists, statistical sources, encyclopacdiae, special publications and Foreign Office papers, which are all listed separately at the end.
M ABDEL. Malek Anouar: "Egypte Société Militaire", Éditions du Seuil, Paris 1962
L+ ALBROW, Martin: "Bureaucracy", Macmillan 1970
L+ ALBROW, Martin: "Weber on Legitimate Norms and Authority A Comment on Martin C. Spencer's Account", Brit.Journ. of Sociology XXIII N° 4 1[Dec. 1972), pp. 483-87
G+ ALEXANDER, Alei.: "Creek Industrialists. An Economic and Social Analysis". Centre of Planning and Economic Re search, Athens 1964
M ALEXANDER. Robert J.: "The Army in Politics” , in H. E. Davis (ed): "Government and Politics in Latin America", New York 1958
M ALEXANDER, Robert J.: "The Peron Era", Colombia Univer- ■ sity Press, New York 1951
M ALEXANDER, Robert J.: "Today's Latin America", Doubleday, New York 1962
-ALMOND, G.A.: "Political Development: Essays in Heuristic Theory", Little-Brown, Boston 1970
ALMOND, G.A. & COLEMAN, James S. (eds): "The Politics of the Developing Areas", Princeton University Press 1963
ALMOND, C.A. & POWELL, Bingham C. Jr: "Comparative Pol. itics: A Development Approach", Brown &- Co., Boston 1966
f ALMOND, G.A. & VERBA, Sidney: "The Civic Culture: Polit ical Attitudes and Democracy in Five Nations", Princeton University Press 1963 ‘
* ALTHUSSER Louis & BALIBAR Etienne: "Lire le Capital", Maspero, Paris 1973 (2 vols)
+ ALTHUSSER, Louis: "For Marx", Penguin 1969 * '
+ AMANN, Peter: "Revolution: A Redefinition", in Political Science Quarterly, March 1962, pp. 36-53 “
* AMIN, Samir: "Le Développement Inégal", "Essai sur les -Formations Sociales du Capitalisme Périphérique”, Les Editions de Minuit, Paris 1973
* ■ AMIN, Samir & VERGOPOULOS, Kostas: "La question paysanne et le capitalisme", Editions Anthropos-idep., Paris 1974


G+- AXASTASSÖPOULOS, Georgios A.: "Historia tis Hellinikis Viomichanias, 1540-1940" (History of Creek Industry),. (3 vols), Helliniki Ekdotiki Etairia, Athens 1947
+ AXDERSOX,.Perry : "Les origines de la crise présente", Les Temps Modernes, Août-Septembre 1964
* AXDERSOX. Perry: "Lineages of the Absolutist State", XLB, London 1974
G+ AXDREADES, A.: "Dimossia Oikonomika tis Hellados 18211925", Athens 1925 •
G+ AXDREADES, A.: "Helliniki polemiki kai metapolemiki oikonomia", Athens 1927
G+ AXDREADES, A.: "La marine marchande Greque et la Guerre", in "Les effets économiques et sociaux de la guerre en Grèce”, Paris 1928.
G+ AXDREADES, A. et al: ^"Les effets économiques et sociaux de la guerre en Grèce", Paris 1928
G + A X D R E A D E S , A.: "Les finances publiques", inv"Les effets . économiques et sociaux de la guerre en Grèce", Paris 1925 ; . .
G+ AXDRIAXOPOULOS, A.J.: "Political Participation and Pol itical Change in Contemporary Greece", Ph.D.Thesis (Oxford University?), unpubl. as per July 1974
M+ AXTRIEJEWSKI (also AXDRESKl), Stanislaw: "Military Organ ization and Society", London 1954 •
G AP0ST0L0P0UL0S, X.P.: "0 hellinikos monarchismos" (Hel•lenic monarchism), Athens 1922 '
APIER, David E.: "System, Process and Politics of Economic Development", in Hoselits, Bert F. & Moore Wilbert E. (eds): "Industrialisation and Society", UNESCO, Mouton, The Hague 1963
+ APTER, David E. (ed): "Ideology and Discontent", Free Press of Glencoe, Xew York 1964
M - ARCIXIEGAS, Germain: "The State of Latin America", Alfred A. Knopf, Xew York 1952
L AREXDT, Hannah: "Authority in the Twentieth Century", Review o f Politics, 1956
GM ARGYR0P0ULC3, P.: "Apomnimonevmata" (Memoirs), Athens 1970
M ARXADE, Kurt Conrad: "The Technique of the Coup d'Etat in Latin America", in Christensen A.Xr. (ed) : "The Evol ution of Latin American Government", Henry Holt & Co, ' Xew York 1951 , . . ’
L ARORA, S.K.: "On Acquisition of Political Legitimacy", Economic and Political Weekly 5 (3-45) Jan.1970, pp. 129-36


301
G+ ASDRAHAS, S.I.: "Apo tl syngrotisi tou Armato.lismou", Reprint from "Epitheorissi Technis" 21/326 (1056), Athens 1965
G+ ASDRAHAS, S.I.: "Pragmatikotites apo ton Hellinike 15° Aiona (Agnosta kai anekdota kimena)" (Realities in 19th-century Greece), Reprint from "Epochcs", Athens 13 May 1964 
G+ ASDRAHAS, S.I.: "Oikonomia", in "Historia tou HeEinikou Ethnous, Xl/1", Athens 1975. ('Economy', in History of the Hellenic Nation)
G+ ASPREAS, G.K.: "Politiki Historia tis Neoteras Hellados 1921-1910" (Political history of modern Greece 15211910), Chrissima Vivlia Athens (undated, apparently reproduced photographically from 2nd edition. First ed. publ. 1930)
m ’ ASTIZ', C.A. Is CARCIA, J.A.: "The Peruvian Military Achievement: Orientation, Training and Political Ten dencies", Vest. Polit. Quart. 25(4), Dec. 1972, p p . 667-65
G+ AUGUSTIXOS, Jerry: "The Dynamics of Modern Greek Nation alism: The Great Idea and the Macedonian Problem", East European Quarterly, Vol.VI N° 4 (Jan.1973),pp. 111-15
M AYC0B, M . : "The Military in Pakistan's Political Develop ment - its growing Strength and Implication", South Asian Study 7(1), Jan. 1972, pp. 14-29
M AYRES, Robert L.: "Economic Stagnation and the Emergence of the Political Ideology of Chilean Underdevelopment", World Politics XXV, Oct. 1972
M BADEAU, John S.: "The Revolt Against Democracy", Journal • of International Affairs Vol.13 N° 2, 1959, pp. 149-57
M BADEAU, John S.: "A Role in Search of Hero - A Brief Study of Egyptian Revolution", Middle East Journal, Autumn 1955, pp. 373-64
M BADGLEY,John H . : "Burma's Political Crisis", Pacific Affairs, Vol.13, December 1955, pp. 336-52
M BADGLEY, John H.: "Burma's Military Government - A Polit ical Analysis", Asian Survey, Vol.2, August 1962, pp. 24-31
M BADGLEY, John H.: ."Burma - The Nevus of Socialism and Two Political Traditions", Asian Survey, Vol.3, Feb. 1963, pp. S9-95
M BAKER, R.K.: "The Ethiopian Army and Political Stability: Prospects and Potentials", Middle Eastern Studies 6(3), Oct. 1970,.pp. 331-39
+ BAXFIELD, Edward C.: "The Moral Basis of a Backward ..Society", The Free Press, Now York 1958
L+ BARNARD, Chester I: "The Functions of the.Executive", Cambridge Mass.; Harvard University Press 1956


302
* EARRINGTON' MOORE Jr: "Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy", Penguin University Books, 1973
M+ BE'ERI, E.: "A Note on Coups d'Etat in the Middle East", Journ. of Contemporary History 5(2), 1970, pp. 123-39
+ BELL, Daniel: "The End of Ideology - On the Exhaustion of. Political Ideas in the Fifties", The Free Press, New York 1962 «
+ BENDIX, R.: "Nation-building and Citizenship", Anchor Books, New York 1969
L+ BENDIX, R.: "Work and Authority in Industry", New York 1956
G+ BENAR0CIA5, Avraam: "I proti stadiodromia tou hellinikou proletariatou" (The beginnings of organisation of the a Greek proletariat), Olchos, Athens 1972
G BENEKOS, Giannis G.: "To kinima tou 1935" (The coup of 1935), Giannikos, Athens 1965
M BERGER, M . : "Military Elite and Social Change: Egypt since Napoleon", Centre for International Studies, Research Monograph N° 6, Princeton Univ. Press, N.J. I960
M BIENEN, H. (ed): "The Military and Modernization", Chicago, Aldine, Atherton 1971 •
M BLANKSTEN, George: "Ecuador: Constitution and Caudillos", - . Berkeley, Los Angeles 1951
M BLANKSTEN, George I.: "Peron's Argentina", Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago 1953
M BLANKSTEN, George I.: "Revolutions", in DAVIS, H.E. (ed): "Government and Politics in Latin America", Ronald Press Co., New York 1959, pp. 119-46
L+ BLAU, Peter M. : "Critical Remarks on Av'eber’s Theory of Authority", The American Political Science Review, Vol..LVII, June 1963, N° 2 ‘
M BOPEGAMAGE, A.: "The Military as a Modernizing Agent in India", Economic Development and Cultural Change 20(1), Oct. 1971, pp.. 71-79
M, BORJA, Q. de: "Some Career Attributes and Professional Views of the Philippine Military Elite", . Philippine Jcurn. of Public Administration 13(4), Oct. 1969, pp. 399-414
+ BOSE, Arun: "Marxian and Post-Marxian Political Economy", Penguin Books 1975
M B0ULEGUE, Jean: "Le socialisme militaire", Le Monde, 9 Aug. 1975 .
+ BROGAN, Sir Denis: "The Development of Modern France 1970-1939", .Hamish Hamilton Ltd, 1967
+ BROHM, J.M., COLLIOT-THELENE, C. et al: "Contre Althusser", . Union Générale d'Editions, Paris 1974 .


303
G BROWN, J.: "Political Performance within Polities: A Case Study in Greece", Review of Social Research N°3, Athens, July 1972
M BUTVELL, Richard: "Civilians and Soldiers in Burma", in SAKAI, R.K. (ed): "Studies in Asia", Univ. of Nebraska Press, Lincoln 1961
G+ CAMPBELL, J. & SHERRARD, P.: "Modern Greece", Ernest Benn, London 1968
G+ CAMPBELL, J.K.: "Honour, Family and Patronage - A Study of Institutions and Moral Values in a Greek Mountain Community", Clarendon Press, Oxford 1964
M+ CANTON. Dario: "Military Interventions in Argentina 1900-1966". Paper presented to the Conference on Armed Forces and Society, International Sociological Assoc., London, September 1967
M CARACTACUS. Fred J.: "Revolution in Iraq", Victor Gollanct, London 1959
+ CARDOSO, T.H.: "Sociologie du Développement en Amérique Latine", Anthropos, Paris 1969
G CAREY, J.P.C. & CAREY, A.G.: "The Web of Modern Creek Politics", Columbia Univ. Press, 196S
M CARLETON, Alford: "The Syria Coup d'Etat of 1949", Middle East Journal VI. 4, January 1950
G+ 'CATEPHORES, George: "Greece: The Institutionalisation of a Defence Society".' Kentron Pliroforion epi ton Evropaikon Koinotiton (Centre of Information on European Communities), 1974
M CHANC, D.W^: "The Military and Nation-building in Korea, Burma and Pakistan", Asian Survey 9(11), Nov. 1969, pp. 818-30
M -CHAPMAN, Brian: "Police State", Praeger Publishers, New York 1970, also Pall Mall Press, London 1970
G+ CHARITAKIS, C.: "Le mouvement industriel en Grèce pendant les années 1915-1925", in ANDREADES, A. et al: "Les effets économiques et sociaux de la guerre en Grèce", Paris 1928
C+ CHARITAKIS, G.: "I Helliniki viomichania" (The industry of Greece), Athens 1927
M 'CKORLEY, Katherina: "Armies and the Art of Revolution", Faber & Faber, London 1943
G CHOSE, R.A.: "Japan and Greece - Comparison, Contrast, and an Interesting Link", Bull, of the Japan Society of London IV(61), 1970, pp. 5-10
G CHRISTIDIS, C.: "I dekaetia tis Demokratias" (A decade of republican regime), Athens 1934
•M CLERC, Jean-Pierre: "La révolution péruvienne a l ’épreuve", Le Monde, 31 Aug. 1-2-3 Sept. 1975


G+
M+
G+
G
M
M
L+
M
G+
C+
G
+
+
G+
G-<
M
M
M
CLOGG, Richard b YIAXNOPOULOS, George (eds): "Greece under Military Rule", Seeker b Warburg, London 1972
COLLOGUE de DIJON: "Le Role Extra-Militaire de l ’Armée dans le Tiers-Monde", 3 March 1962, publ. under the direction of Leo Kamon, PUF, Paris 1966
COROXIS, S.: "La guerre et les voies de communications", in AXDREADES, A. et al: "Les effets économiques et sociaux de la guerre en Grèce", Paris 1938
COUTSOUMARIS,T.: "Relations entre l ’État et les Eglises en Grèce", Revue Hellénique du Droit International 23(1-4), Jan.-Dec. 1970, pp. 314-32
CROUCH, H.: "Military Politics under Indonesia’s New Order", Pacific Affairs 45(2), Summer 1972, p p . 206-19»
CROZIER, Brian: "The Rebels - A Study of Post-War insur rections", Chatto b’Windus, London 1960
CROZIER, M.: "Le phénomène bureaucratique", Paris 1963
PAALDER, H . : "The Role of the Military in the Emerging ._ Countries", Publication of the Institute of Social Studies, The Hague 1962
DAFXIS, Georgios: "I Hellas metaxy dytf polemon 1923-1940", (Greece between two wars, 1923-1940), 2 vols. Ikaros, Athens 1974 :
DAFXIS, G. : ”Ta Hellinika politika kommata, 1821-1961" (Tire Greek political parties 1521-1961), Galaxias, Athens 1961
DAFXIS, G.: "Sofokles E. Venicelos", Ikaros, Athens 1970
DAHL, Robert A.: "A Preface to Democratic Theory", Chicago, Univ. of Chicago Press, 1970 . . .
DAHL, Robert A.: "Polyarchy - Participation and Opposition" Yale Univ. Press 1971
DAHRENDORF, R.: "Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society", Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford 1959
DAKIN, Douglas: "The Unification of Greece 1770-1923," London b New York , Ernest Bonn, St Martin’s Press 1972
DANGLIS, P.G. (General): "Archives" (2 vols), Vagionakis, Athens 1965 ... '
DARLING, Frank C.: "Marshall Sarit and Absolutist Rule in Thailand", Pacific Affairs, Yol.33, Dec. 1960
DAVIES, James D.: "Toward a Theory of Revolution", in American Sociological Review, March 1962 . .
DAVIS, H.E.: "The Political Experience in Latin America”,' in DAVIS, H.E. (ed) : "Government and Politics in Latin America", The Ronald Press Co., New' York 1958
DAVIS, K.: "Political Ambivalence in Latin America", in CHRISTENSEN, A.N. (ed): "The Evolution of Latin American Government", Henry Holt b Co, New York 1951


+ DAWE, A.: "The Two Sociologies", British Journ. of Socio logy, Vol.XXl(2), 1970, pp, 207-1S
M DECRAENE, Phillipe: "Les Regimes en Afrique Noire", Le Monde, 12 March 1975, p.6
M DEMICHEL, Andre b Francine: "Les Dictatures Europeenes", Paris Presses Universitaires de France, 1973
G DERTILIS, Panagiotis B.: "I Epahastassis tou 1821 kai ai ethnikai gaiai" (The 1821 revolution and the national lands), Athens 1971. Also publ. in the special issue N°899/1971 of Oikonomikos Tachydromos, Athens
G+ DERTILIS, Panagiotis B.: "La dette publique des Etats Bal kaniques", Editions Flamma, Athens 1936
G DERTILIS, Panagiotis B.: "To dimosion chreos tis Hellados kai apopseis peri tou diakanonismou tou" (Greece's pub lic debt and proposals for its repayment), Sakkoulas, Athens 1960
,.G+ DESCHAMPS, Gaston: "La Crece d'aujourd'hui", Paris 1901
DEUTSCH, Karl W . : "The Growth of Nations : Some Recurrent Patterns of Political and Social Integration", in World Politics V N°2, Princeton I'niv. Press 1953
.+ DOBB, M . : "Studies in the Development of Capitalism", International Publishers, New’ York, 1958
G+ DONTAS, Domna: "Greece and the Great Powers, 1663-1S75”, Institute for Ealkan Studies, Thessaloniki 1966
M D00RN’, Jaques Van (ed): "Military Profession and-Military Regimes, Commitments and Conflicts", Mouton, The Hague 1969 • 
.M+ D00RN, Jaques Van: "Armed*Forces and Society", Mouton, The Hague, 1968
CM DOUSMAN'IS, V. (Ceneral): "Apomnimonevmata" (Memoirs), Athens 1946
G+ DRIAULT, E. b LHERITIER, M.: "Histoire diplomatique de la * ' Grece", Paris 1926 (5 vols)
L EASTON, David: "The Perception of Authority and Political . ■ Change", in FRIEDRICH, D.J. (ed): "Authority", Harvard L'niv. Press, Cambridge Mass. ;
L EASTON, David b DENNIS, Jack: "Children in the Political System - Origins of Political Legitimacy", McGraw Hill, New York 1968 M • F.CKHARDT, V. b NEWCOMBE, A.G.: "Militarism, Personality and Other Social Attitudes", Journ. of Conflict Resol ution 13(2), June 1969, pp. 210-219
+ ECKSTEIN,. Harry: "On the Etiology of Internal Wars", . History and Theory 4, 1965, Wesleyan I'niv. Press, pp,. 133-63 •
I*'" ECKSTEIN, Harry: "Division and Cohesion in Democracy: A Study of Norway", Princeton I'niv. Press 1966
ECKSTEIN, Harry: "Authority Relations and Governmental Performance. A Theoretical Framework", Comparative Political Studies 2(3), Oct. 1969, pp. 239-325


306
M EL-BARAWY, R.: "The Military Coup in Egypt",'The Renais sance Bookshop, Cairo 1952
G ENEPEKIDES, P.: "I doxa kai o dichasmos: apo ta mystika archeia tis Viennis 1908-1916" (The glory and the dichas mos: from the secret archives of Vienna 1908-1916), Athens, Biris, 1962 _
L ENGELS, F.: "On Authority", in MARX K. & ENGELS F.: "Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy"
ENGELS, F.: "The Prussian Military Question and the Ger•man Workers’ Party", in "The First International and After,"Penguin 1974
G+ "Epanastassis 1909 - To archeion tou Stratiotikou Syndesmou" (ihe 1909 revolution - the archives of the Military . League), publ. Kedros, Athens 1972, from Vice-Admiral ,, Thesseus T.Pangalos’ Archives
G+ EVELPIDIS,.C.: "Oikonomiki kai koinoniki historia tis Neoteras Hellados" (Economic and social history of Mod ern Greece), Athens 1939
G EVELPIDIS, C.: "0 Ilektrismos eis tin ipethron", Athens 1943 '
M FEPELBERG, R.L.: •"Political Systems and the Role of the Military", Social Quarterly 11(2), Spring 1970, > p p . 206-13 . . . ,
M FEIT, Edward: "The Armed Bureaucrats", Houghton Mifflin, Boston 1973
M FEIT, Edward: "Pen, Sword and People: Military Regimes and the Formation of Political Institutions", World Politics, Jan. 1973 ■- • ••
M FELD, M.D.: "A Typology of Military Organization", Public Policy (Yearbook of the Harvard Grad. School of Public. .Administration) 8, <1958, pp. 3-40
M+ FIDEL, K.: "Military Organization and Conspiracy in Turkey", Studies in Comparative International Develop ment 6(2), 1970-71, pp. 19-43
G+ FILARETOS, George N.: "Xenokratia kai vasilia en Helladi, 1S21-1S97" (Foreign power and the monarchy in Greece 1S21-1597), F.pikerotita, Athens 1973
G+ FILARETOS, George N.: ' "Eklogi politevmatos" (Choosing a : regime), Epikerotita, Athens 1974
G+ FILLAS, Vassilis: "Koinonia kai exoussia stin Hellada: notha astikopoiessi, 1800-1864" (Society and power in Greece: a false process of bourgeois transformation), Synchrona Keimena, Athens 1974 . .-•*
M+ FINER, Samuel E . : "The Men on Horseback", Pall Mall Press, London 1962
M FIXKLE, Jason L. & GABLE, Richard W . : "The Modernisers", ' in FINKLE & GABLE (eds): "Political Development and Social Change, John Willey & Sons, New York 1971


G+ FINLAY, George: "History of the Greek Revolution and the Reign of King Otto" (2 vols in one), London, Zeno 1971. (Reprint of the 1877 edition with new bibliography and foreword by Douglas Dakin)
M' FISHER, Sydney (ed): "The Military in the Middle East", Columbus 1963
M . FITZGIBBON, Russell H.: "Uruguay - Portrait of a Demo cracy", Rutgers Univ. Press, New Brunswick N.J. 1954
M. FITZGIBBON, Russell H.: - "Revolutions - Western Hemisphere" South Atlantic Quarterly, Vol.55, pp. 263-79, July 1956
M FLUHARTY, V.L.: "Dance of the Millions - Military Rule and Social Revolution in Colombia, 1930-1956", Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh 1957
+ FOURASTIE, Jean: "Le grand espoir du XXe siecle", Gallimard 1963
G 'FRIEDL, Ernestine: "Vassilika - a Village in Modern Greece Holt, Rinehart & Mistran, New York 1962
G FRIEDL, Ernestine: "The Role of Kingship in the Trans mission of National Culture to Rural Villages in Main- land Creece", American Anthropologist 61 N°l, Feb. 1969
L+ FRIEDRICH, C.J.: "Authority", in COULD J. and KOLB V.L.: "A Dictionary of the Social Sciences", Tavistock Public ations, London 1964, pp. 42-44
L+ 'FRIEDRICH, C.J.: "Tradition and Authority", Macmillan, London 1972
L+ FRIEDRICH, C.J. (ed): "Authority", Harvard Univ. Press, 1 Cambridge Mass. 1958
M GARCES, Juan: "Allende, les Militaires et la Voie Socia. liste", Le Monde Dec. 1973, pp. 18, 19
CM GENERAL STAFF OF THE ARMY, HISTORICAL DIVISION: "Historia tis organoseos tou Hellinikou Stratou 1821-1954", (A history of the organisation of the Greek Army 1821• 1954), Athens 1957
M .GEORGES, Pierre: "Les soldats de l ’an II", Le Monde, 26, 27, 28 Nov. 1975
GERMANI,.Cino : "Stages of Modernization", in International Journal Vol.24, Jan. 1969
M GERMANI, G. & SILVERT, Kalman: "Politics, Social Structure and Military Intervention in Latin America", Archives Européennes de Sociologie II, Spring 1961, pp. 62-81
+ GERSHENKRON, Alexander: "Economie Backwardness in Histor ical Perspective", Harvard l’niv. Press 1962
G+ GEVETSIS, M.A.: "I exelixis tis Hellinikis Viomichanias statidtiki dierevnisses" (The evolution of Greek indus• .try: a statistical investigation), Ph.D.Diss., Anotati Viomichaniki Scholi Thessalonikis, Athens 1975


308
G GIAXXOPOULOS, Pericles: "Ekklissis pros to panellinion . koinon", Athens 1907 
G GIAXXOPOULOS, P.: "Xeon Pnevma", Athens 1906
+ GIDDEXS, Anthony: "The Class Structure of the Advanced Societies", Hutchinson University Library, London 1973
GIDDEXS, A.: "Capitalism and Modern Social Theory - an Analysis of the Writings of Marx, Durkheim and Weber",' Cambridge University Press 1972 ». •
M GILMORE, Robert L.: "Caudillism and Militarism in Vene; zuela", Athens, Ohio 1964 •
G+- GIRARD, M.B.: "La Grèce en 1SS3", Paris 1884 :
M . GOMEZ, R.A.: ' "Government and Politics in Latin America", Random House, Xew York 1960
GM GOXATAS, S.: "Apemnimonevmata" (Memoirs), Athens 1958
M GOODSPEED, Donald James: "The Conspirators: A Study of . , the Coup d ’Etat", Macmillan, London 1962 .
L GREEXSTEIX, Fred I.: "Benevolent Leader - Children’s Images of Political Authority", American Political Science Review, Vol. 54, 1960 
M CRECORY, A.: "Factionalism and the Indonesian Army: The 1 Xew Order", Journal of Comparative Administration 2(3), •.'i Xov.1970, pp. 341-54
G GRICCRIADIS, Fivos X.: "Dichasmos - Mikra Asia 1909-1930" (Dichasmos - Asia Minor, vol. 1909-1930, History of Greece), Kedrinos, Athens 1971
CM GRICORIADIS, X: "Apomnimonevmata" (Memoirs), Athens 1958
M GRl'SKY, Oscar: "The Effects of Succession: A Comparative . ' . Study of Military and Business Organization", in JAXOWJIZ, Morris (ed): "The Xew Military - Changing Patterns of Organization", Russell Sage Foundation, ' 1 Xew York 1964
+ GUTELMAX,.. Michel: "Structures et réformes agraires",- » Maspero, Taris 1974
M GUTTERIDGE, William Frank: "Military Institutions and Power in tue Xew States", Xew York 1965
M GUTTERIDGE, V.F.: -"Armed Forces in Xew States", Oxford University Press, 1962
M ;GUTTERIDGE,VW.F.: "Opportunism and Military Interventions 'in Black Africa", East African Journal 9(9), Sept. , -1972, p p . 6-18 •
.. .HACEX, Everett E.: "How Economie Growth Begins. A Theory of Social Change", Journ. of Social Issues 19, Jan.1963 . p p . 20-34 ' . ........ . _
M-*- HAMOX, Léo (ed) : "Le role extra-militaire de l’armée dans le Tiers Monde", University of France, Paris 1966


I 309
M HARBOTTLE, Michael: "The Impartial Soldier", Oxford University Press for the Royal Institute of Interna tional Affairs, London 1970
M HARRIES-JENKINS, Gwyn: "The Victorian Military and the Political Order", Univ. of Hull, Journ. of Political and Military Sociology 1973, vol. 1
M HEBGA, J.A.: "Evolution des Armées Africaines", Cahiers Congolais de la Recherche et du Développement, Mars 1970, pp. 35-56
* HOBSBAVM, E.J.: "The Age of Capital 184S-1S75", Veiden- , feld v Nicolson, London 1975
* HOBSBAVM, E.J.: "The Age of Revolution", Cardinal, Sphere Books, London 1973
• *_ HOBSBAVM, E.J.: "Revolutionaries",. Veidenfeld &• Nicolson, London 1973
+ HOBSBAVM, E.J.:- "Industry and Empire", Penguin 1975
G+ HOMOLLE, T., THERY, E., P5ICKARI, J., PAILLARES, M. et al: "La Crèce", Paris 1903. (Also exists in English under the title "Greece in Evolution", edited by ABBOTT, G.F., London 1909)
M+ HOWARD, M. (ed): "Soldiers and Governments: Vine' Studies in Civil-Military Relations", London 1957
M+ HUNTINCTON, Samuel P.: "The Soldier and the State", — Belknap, Harvard 1957
+ HUNTINGTON, S.P.: "Political Order in Changing Societies", . Yale Univ. Press, Newhaven & London 3973
+ HUNTINGTON, S.P.: "Political Development and Political Decay", in World Politicst XVIII, April 1965, rp. 3^6-430
M HUNTINGTON, S.P.: "Changing Patterns of Military Politics", Free Press of Glencoe, New York 1962
M •HUNTINGTON, S.P.: "The New Military Politics - Introduc tion", in HUNTINGDON' S.P. (ed): "Military Politics", Free Press of Glencoe, New York 1962, pp. 13-16
M HUNTINGTON, S.P.: "Patterns of Violence in World Poli tics", in HUNTINGDON S.P. (ed) : "Military Politics",
Free Press of Glencoe, New York 1962, pp. 17-50
M HYMAN, E.H.: "Soldiers in Politics: New Insights on Latin American Armed Forces", Political Science Quarterly &7(3), . . ' Sept. 1972, pp. 401-1S
INKELES, Alex & LEVINSON, David J.: "National Character The Study of Modal Personality and Socio-Cultural Sys tem in LINDZEY, G. b ARONSON, E. (cds): "The Hand book of Social Psj’chology”, Reading, Mass., Addison- . Wesley 1969 (2nd ed., pp. 45S-507)
M JANOS, Andrew C.: "Seizure of Power: A Study of Force and Popular Consent", Princeton Centre of International Studies, Feb. 1964


.3 10
M+ JANOWITZ, Morris: "The Military in the Political Develop ment of New Nations: an Essay in Comparative Analysis", Univ. Of Chicago Press 1964
M JANOWITZ, M. : "The Professional Soldier and Political Power: a Theoretical Orientation and Selected Hypothe sis", Bureau of Government, Inst, of Public Administra tion, I'niv. of Michigan 1953
M JANOWITZ, M. : "The Professional Soldier: a Social and . Political Portrait", Free Press 1960
M JANOWITZ, M. (ed): "The New Military: Changing Patterns, of Organization", Russell Sage Foundation, New York 1964
M JAQUETTE, J.S.: . "Revolution by Fiat: The Context of Policy-making in Peru", Western Political Quarterly . 25(4), Dec. 1972, P P . 648-66
M JOHNSON, John J.: "The Military and Society in Latin America", Stanford 1964
M+ -JOHNSON, John J.:- "The Role of the Military in Underdevel oped Countries", Princeton 1962
L+ JOUYENEL, Bertrand de: "De la Souveraineté - a la recherche • d u bien politique", Editions Cenin, Paris 1955
G KAGIOULES, P.: "I Historia tou Hellinikou Ergatikou . Kinimatos" (History of the Greek Labour Movement), Athens 1970 • '
G + , KALLITSCUNAKIS, D.: "Legislation ouvrière et sociale Greque pendant et après la Guerre", in ANDREADES, A. et al: "Les effets économiques et sociaux de la guerre en Grèce", Paris 1923
G+ KATIFORIS, George: "I nomothessia ton varvaron" (The legis lature of the Barbarians), Themelio, Athens 1975
G KATSOULIS, Georgios: "To katestimeno stin neohelliniki historia" (The role of the establishment in modern Greek history), Nea Synora, Athens 1975 -•
G^ KALTCHAS, Nicolas: "Introduction to the Constitutional History of Modern Greece", AMS Press, New York 1965 (reprint of the rare first edition of 1940)
GM KAPSI.S, P. : "Ceorgios Kondylis", Athens 1934 " ~ •
G+ KARAGF.0RGA3, D.:. "Distribution of Tax Burden by Income Groups in Greece", Economic Journal LXXXIII (June 1973), p p . 436-4S ■ „
G + . KARANIKOLAS, Giorgos: "Nothes Ekloges stin Hellada" (Fraud ulent elections in Greece), 2nd ed. Ekdoseis Epikairotita, _ Athens 1973 ;..
G KARANIKOLAS, G.: "Kileler", Grammi, Athens .1975 \


311
M KARPAT, K.H.: "The Military and Politics in Turkey, 1960-64: a Socio-Cultural Analysis of a Revolution”, American'Institute of Research 15(6), Oct. 1970, pp. 1654-83
G+ KARTAKIS, Eleftherios A.: "Le Développement industriel de la Grèce", Centre de Recherches Européennes, Lausanne 1970
G KASTRINOS. N.: "0 Alexandros Papanastassiou kai i demokratia" (A. Papanastassiou and the republic), Byron, Athens 1974
M+ KAZANCIGIL, A.: "La participation et les élites dans un système politique en crise: le cas de la Turquie", Revue Française des Sciences Politiques 23(1), 1973 pp. 5-32
M KIM, J.A.: "A Korean Kundaehva: the Military as Moderniser", Journ. of Comparative Administration 2(3), Nov. 1970, p p . 355-371
G KITSIKIS, Dimitri: "Le Parlement et les transformations sociales de la Grèce jusqu’au coup d ’état militaire de 1967", Histoire Sociale, Canada (Nov. 1970), pp.' 56-86
M KLING, Merle: "Towards a Theory of Power and Political Instability in Latin America", Western Political Quarterly IX, March 1956
G+ KOFOS, Evangelos: "Creece and the Eastern Crisis, 18751878", Institute for Balkan Studies, 148, Thessaloniki 1975
G KOKKIXOS, D.: "Historia tis Xeoteras Hellados" (History of Modern Greece), Athens 1972
G+ KOMMOUNISTIKO KOMMA TIS HELLADAS: "Episima Keimena" (Communist Party of Greece, Official Texts), ' Vol.A, 1918-24, publ. by Synchroni Epochi, Athens 1974, Vol.B, 1925-28, publ. bySynchroni Epochi, Athens 1974, Vol.C, 1929-33, -publ. by Synchroni F.pochi, Athens 1975, Vol.D, 1934-40, publ. by KKE/Essot.(CPC/lnterior) 1974, Vol.E, 1940-45, publ. by KKE/Essot.(CPG/Interior) 1974
G KORDATOS, Yannis: "Historia tis Xeoteris Helladas" (History of Modern Greece), 20os Aionas, Athens 1957, vol.XII, vol.XIII ■ 
G+ KORDATOS, Y.: !"Eisagogi eis tin historian tis HellinikiS“ Kefalaiokratias’.’ (Introduction to the history of Greek capitalism), Epikairotita, Athens 1974 (first publ. in 1930)
G+ KORDATOS, Y.: "Historia tou agrotikou kinimatos stin ' Hellada" (History of the peasant movement in Creece), Boukoumanis, Athens 1973


312
G+ KORIIIS, Chariton: "I politiki zoS eis tin Hellada" (Political life in Greece), Athens 1974 German edition, "Die politischen Parteien Griechenlands, 1821-1910", Verlag Karl Pfeiffer, Nürnberg 1966
GM KOURYETARIS, G.A.: "Professional Self-images and Polit ical Perspectives of the Greek Military", American Sociol. Review 36(6), Dec. 1971, pp. 1043-57
GM KOURYETARIS. G.A.: "The Role of the Military in Greek Politics", International Review of History and Polit ical Science, Vol. S N J3, Aug. 1971, pp. 91-114
G+ KOUSOULAS, D.G.: "Revolution and Defeat", Oxford Univ... Press 1965 '' .'. .
+ KULA, Witold: "Théorie Économique du Système Féodal", * Mouton, Paris-La Haye 1970 . . .
G KYRIAXIDIS, E.: "Historia tou synchronou Hellenismou 1932-1992" (History of contemporary Hellenism 18321892), 2 vols. First publ. in Athens.in 1892, photo copy reproduction by B.Cregcriades Press, Athens 1972
M+ LABREYEUX, Philippe: "Divisions et Unité de la Junte Chilienne",.Le Monde, 20-21 Dec. 1973'
M+ LABREVEUX, P.: "Face au boom économique", Le Monde, • 2-3-4 Sept, 1975 .. .
G LAMBRIDIS, I.: , "Epirotika Mcletimata" (Studies on Epirus) Issue N°. 10: "Ta Souliotika" (About Souli), Athens 1890
G LAMBRIXOS, Georgios:" "I Monarchia stin Hellada" (The monarchy in Greece), Byron Press, Athens 1973'
>!+• ■ LAS5VELL. Harold B.: "The Garrison State", American Journ of Sociology XLVT, Jan. 1941, pp. 455-462
LASSVELL, H. & KAPLAN, Alraham: "Power and Society", .. , Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 1952
LASSWELL, H. & LERN'ER, D. (cds): "World Revolutionary Elites: Studies in Coercive Ideological Movements", Cambridge, Mass., M.I.I.Press 1966
M9-- LASSWELL, H.': "The Carrison State Hypothesis Today", in HUNTINGDON, S.P. (ed): "Military Politics", Free Press of Glencoe, New York 1962, pp. .51-70 -,
M+ LAVROFF, D.G.: "Regimes Militaires et Classes Sociales en Afrique noire: une Hypothèse", Revue Française de Science Politique 22(4), Aug. 1972, pp. 847-83
G LEE, Dorothy: "View of the Self in Greek Culture", in "Freedom and Culture", Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice Hall 1959 .;• . ,„: . , ■ • •
* LEFEBVRE, Henri: "L'ideologie structuraliste", Editions Anthrcpos 1971


313
G+ LEGG, Keith: "Politics in Modern Greece", Stanford L’niv. Press, Stanford Calif. 1969
G LEGG, Keith: "Regime Change and Public Policy in a Clientelist Polity: the Case of Greece and Italy". Paper presented at the 1972 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Assoc., Washington D.C., Sept 1972
G LEGG, Keith: "Political Change in "a Clientelist Polity: . the Failure of Democracy in Greece", I'niv. of Florida, Journal of Political and Military Sociology 1973, Vol.I, pp. 231-46
G+ LEON, George B.: "Creece and the Croat Powers, 1914-1917", 143, Institute of Balkan Studies, Thessaloniki 1974
M LERNER, D. & ROBINSON, R.D.: "Swords and Ploughshares: the T rkish Army as a Modernising Force", World Politics, XIII, Oct. 1960, pp. 19-44
M LEV, Daniel S.: "The Political Role of the Army in Indonesia", Pacific Affairs XXVI, Winter 1963-64, pp. 349-64
G+ LEWIS-SERGEANT: "Creece in the 19th Century", London 1S97
M LIEUWEN, Edwin: "arms and Politics in Latin America", New York 1961 •
M LIEUWEN, E.: "Cenerals versus Presidents", New York 1964
G+ LINARDa TOS, Spyros: "Pos ftassame stin 4 Avgoustcu" (How we came to the 4th of August), Dialogos, Athens 1974
L LINDZEY, Cardner (ed): "Handbook of Social Psychology", Addison-Wesley Publ. Co., Cambridge, Mass. 1956
+ LIPSET, Seymour Martin: "Political Man", Heinemann, London 1973
+ LIPSET, S.M. t- JOLARI, Aldo E. (eds): "Elites in Latin America", Oxford University Press 1967
•LIPSET, S.M.: "Some Social Requisites of Democracy", Amer ican Political Science Review LxII, March 1959
M LISSAKj Moshe: "Modernisation and Role-Expansion of the Military in Developing Countries: a Comparative Analy sis", Comparative Studies in Society and History IX, • April 1967, p p . 249-55
M LISSAK, Moshe: "The Military in Burma: Innovations and ; .Frustrations", Asian-African Studies (5), 1969,p p .133-63
+ L0CKW:00D. D .: "Social Integration and System Integration", in ZOLLSCHAU, C.K. & HIRSCH, W. (eds): "Explorations in Social Change", Routledge, London 1964
M LOFCHIE, M.F.: "The Uganda Coup - Class Action bv the Mil itary", Journ. of Modern African Studies 10(l), Mav 1972, pp. ly-35 •


M LONDON’ UNIVERSITY INSTITUTE OF COMMONWEALTH STUDIES: "The Politics of Demilitarisation", Coll. Seminar Papers, April/May 1966, publ. by Grosvenor Press,London
M Ll'CKHAM, A.R.: "A Comparative Typology of Civil-Military Relations", Government and Opposition 6(1), Winter 1971, p p . 5-35
M LUCKHAM, A.R.: "Institutional Transferand Breakdown in a New Nation: the Nigerian Military", Administration Science Quarterly 16(4), Dec. 1971, pp. 387-405
M+ LUCKHa M, A.R.: "The Nigerian Military and Sociological Analysis of Authority and Revolt 1960-67", Cambridge University Press 1971, XIII, p. 376
. +, Ma c k e n z i e , W.J.M.: "Politics and Social Science", Baiti-“ more, Penguin Books 1969 .
M MACKIE, J.A.C.: "Civil-Military Relations and the 1971 Elections in Indonesia", Australian Outlook 24(3), Dec. 1970, pp. 250-62
M MaKEDONSKY, E.: "Les Militaires au Pouvoir a Kinshasa", Revue Française des Sciences Politiques, 28 Feb. 1969, • p p . 41-62 • ■
GM Ma La INOS, M . : "I epanastassis tou 1909" (The 1909 révolu- ; ti.on, Athens 1965 -■■■"■ ,
+ Ma NDEL, E.: "Traité d'économie marxiste" (4 vols), Union Generale d'Editions, Paris
G a MANIa TIS, G.C.: "Propensity to Use Bank Credit: the Case of Industrial Corporate Entities in Greece", Rivista Internationale di Scienze Economiche e Commerciale 19(10) Oct. 1972, pp. 956-98 . .
+ MANNHEIM, Carl: "Ideoloay and Utopia: an Introduction to the Sociology of Knowledge", Routledge E- Kegan Paul, . London 1972
CM MANOUSa KIS, Cregor: "Hellas - Wohin? Das Verhältnis von Militär und Politik in Griechenland seit 1900", Verlag Wissenschaftliches Archiv, Godesberg 1967 •
G M aRKESi x IS, Spyros: "Politiki Historiatis Neoteras Hella dos" (Political History of Modern Creece), Papiros, Athens 1968 (4 vols)
G ;Ma RKESINIS, Basil S.: "The Greek Crownand its.Ministers", Political Affairs-26(1), Winter 1972-73, pp..56-65
■+ M aRKESIXIS, Basil S.: "The Theory and Practice of Dissol ution of Parliament", Cambridge (U.K.), 1973 ■
M MARR, P.A.:- "The Iraq Revolution" a Case Study of Army Rule", Orbis 14(3), Fall 1970, pp. 714-39
G-r Ma RTIX, Percy F . : "Greece of the Twentieth Century", London 1913


315
MARX, Karl: "The Class Struggles in France 1S48 to 1850", in "Surveys from Exile", Penguin 1973
MARX, Karl: "The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte", in "Suveys from Exile", Penguin 1973
MARX, Karl: "The First International and After", Penguin 1974
.MARX, Karl: "The Civil War in France", in "The First International and After", Panguin 1974
MARX, Karl: "Critique of the Gotha Programme", in "The First International and After", Penguin 1974
MARX, Karl: "The Revolutions of 184S", Penguin 1973
MARX, Karl: "Grundrisse", Penguin 1974
•MARX, K. b ENGELS, F . : "The Franco-Prussian War", in "The First International and After", Penguin 1974
MARX, K. & ENGELS, F . : "The German Ideology", Lawrence £r Wishart, London 1970
L-i MARTIN, Roderick: "The Concept of Power - a Critical Defence", British Journ. of Sociology N°3, Sept. 1971
MATOSSIAN, Mary: "Ideologies of Delayed Industrialisation: Some Tensions and Ambiguities", Economic Development and Cultural Change, 6 April 1958, pp, 217-28
G MAVR0G0RDAT0, John: "Modern Greece", London 1931
G MAXIMOS, Serapheim: "I avgi tou Hellenikou Kapitalismou", (The dawn of Greek capitalism), Stochastis, Athens 1973
G+ 'MAZARAKIS-AINIAN,1A.: "Apomnimonevmata" (Memoirs), Ikaros, Athens 194.8
M MAZRUI, A.A.: "The Lumpenproletariat and the Lumpen Militariat - African Soldiers as a New Political Class", Political Studies (Oxford) 21(1), March 1973, pp. 1-12
M McALISTAIR, L.N.: "Civil-Military Relations in Latin America", Journ. of Inter-American Studies, Vol.III N°3, July 1961, pp. 341-50
MCCLELLAND, David C.: "Achievement Motive in Economic Crowth", Industrialization and Society, Mouton, The Hague 1963
MCCLELLAND, D.C.: "The Achieving Society", Princeton, ' Van Nostrand 1961
M MEHDEN, R.F.: "The Military and Development in Thailand", Journ. of Comparative Administration 2(3), Nov. 1970, p p . 323-40 • 
G - M E L A S , S.: "0 gios tou Psiloriti anorthotis" (Venizelos: the son of Psiloritis as a leader), Biris, Athens 1958
C+ MELAS, S.: "I epanastassi tou .1909" (The 1909 revolution), Biris, Athens 1972


GM MERKûl’RIS, S.: "Ceorgios Kondylis", Athens 1954
L MERTON, Robert: "Social Theory and Social Structure", Free Press, New York 1949
Gt METAa a S, Ioannis: "Apomnimonevmata" (Memoirs), 8 vols. Govostis, Athens
G+ MEYNAl'O,' Jean: "Politikes Dynamies stin Hellada", Byron Athens 1974. (Publ. in French, "Les forces politiques en Grèce", Paris 1965)
L MICHELS, Roberto: "Authority", in Vol.2, pp. 319-321, Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, New York, Macmil lan 1930
Lt MIDDLETON, John &• Ta IT, David (eds): "Tribes without Rulers" Routledge & Kegan Paul, London 1958
M MIEVALD, R.D.: "Weberian Bureaucracy and the Military Model" Public Administration Review 30(2), Mar-Apr 1970, !p p . 129-33
L MILLER, I.P.: "Social-psychological Implications of Weber's Model of Bureaucracy: Relations Among Expertise, Control, Authority and Legitimacy", ' Social Forces 49(1), Sept. 1970, pp. 91-102' •
L : MILLER, Walter B.: "Two Concepts of Authority", American Anthropologist, Vol. 57, 1955 %
MOSCa , Gaetano: "The Ruling Class", McGraw-Hill, New York 1939 •
G^ -M0SK0F. Costis’: "I ethniki kai koinoniki sj'neidissi stin, •Hellada 1530-1909: ideologia tou metapratikou chorou" (National and social consciousness in Greece 1830-1909: ideology of a comprador (or mercantile) sector), Thessaloniki 1972
G+ MOSKOF, Costis: • "Thessaloniki 1700-1912: tomi tis meta•_pra^tikis polis" (Thessaloniki 1700-1912: cross-section of T comprador (or mercantile) city), Stochastis, Athens 1974 ' ■ •• •
L MOTT, Paul E.: "The Characteristics of Effective Organiza tions", Harper &■ Row, New York 1972
L+ MOt’ZELIS, Nicos : "Organisation and Bureaucracy", Routledge i ' Kegan Paul, London 1975 (2nd ed.)
G+ M0UCELI5 j N . : "Greek & Bulgarian Peasants: their SocioPolitical Organisation during the Inter-war Period", (unpubl. as of 1974)
MOl'IELIS,.N . : "Modernization, Development and the Peasant", Development and Change, Vol.IV(3), 1972-73, pp. 73-76
G+ ‘ M0U2ELI5, N.: "The Relevance of Class to the Study of Mod- * ern Greek Society", (unpubl..as of,Feb. 1975)


317
MOUZELIS, Nicos: "On Total Institutions", Sociology Vol.V, N°l, Jan. 1971, pp. 113-70
* MOUZELIS, Nicos: "Social and System Integration: Some Reflections on a Fundamental Distinction", The British Journal of Sociology, Vol.XXV, N°4, Dec. 1974
0. MOUZELIS, N. and APALIDES, Michael: "Greece", in SCOTFORD ARCHER, Margaret &■ GINER, Salvador (eds), "Contemporary Europe: Class, Status and Power” , Weidenfeld & Nicholson, London 1971
M XEEDLER, Martin C.: "Latin American Politics in Perspective", New York 1963
M ’ NEEDLER, Martin C.: "Anatomy of a Coup d'Etat: Ecuador 1963", Institute for the Comparative Study of Political Systems, Washington 1964
G+ NEFELOUDIS, Pavlos: ”Stis piges tis kakodaimonias - ta * vathytera aitia tis diaspassis tou K.K.E. 191S-1965" (The sources of misfortune - the deeper causes of the split within the Communist Party of Greece 1915-196S), Gutenberg, Athens 1974
G NIARCHOS, N.A. and CRANGER, C.V.: "The Gold Sovereign Mar ket in Greece - an Unusual Speculative Market", ■Journ. of Finance, Vol. XXVII, Dec. 1972, pp. 1127-35
G NICHOLAS, Prince of Greece: "My Fifty Years", London 1927
M NIEDERGANG, Marcel: "Un putsch sur mesure", Le Monde, ■ 13 March 1975, pp. 1 and 2
M NIEDERCANG, M . : "L'Armée Portugaise ou la fascination du pouvoir", Le Monde, 4-5-6-7~Feb. 1975
M NIEDERGANG, M . : "Dans 'le Portugal de 1'intérieur",*Le Monde, 23-24 April 1975
G NIKOLlNAKOS, Marios (ed) : "Oikonomiki anaptyxi kai metanas• tefsi stin Hellada" (Economie development and immigration in Greece), Proposals to the seminar organised by the Society of emigrant Greek academics of western Europe, Paris, April 1973, publ. by Kalvos Press, Athens 1974
M NORLINGER, E.A.: "Soldiers in Mufti: the Impact of Milit ary Rule upon Economic and Social Change in the nonIvestern States", American Political Science Review 64(4), Dec. 1970, pp. 1131-49
M NORTH, Liisa: "Civil-Military Revolutions in Argentine,*" Chile and Peru", Berkeley 1966
M+ NUN, José: "A Latin-American Phenomenon: the Middle-Class Military Coup", in "Trends in Social Science Research in Latin Maerican Studies: A Conference Report", Berkeley 1965 •
M+ NUN,.J.: The Hegemonic Crisis and the Military Coup", .Berkeley 196S
i


318
M NUNN, F.M.: '’Military Professionalism and Professional Militarism in Brazil, 1870-1970: Historical and Pol itical Implications", Journal of Latin American Studies 4(1), May 1972, pp. 29-54
-r NUNES, Americo: "Les révolutions du Mexique", Flammarion,. Paris 1975
G OTHONECS, A. (Ceneral): "Tris logoi dia tin demokratian" (Three speeches about the Republic), Panellinos Omostondia Dimokratikon SillogOn, Athens n.d.
OLSON, Mauser Jr.: "Rapid Growth as a Destabilizing Force", Journ. of Economic History 23, Dec. 1963, pp. 529-52
G+ PAXGALOS,^Theodoros (General): "Archion" (Archives), Kedros*, Athens 1974
GM+ PAXGALOS, T.: "Oi axiomatikoi stin ypiressia tis hellinikis astikis taxis" (The military in the service of the Greek middle class), Introductory Proposals to the Seminar organised by the Society of emigrant Greek academics of western Europe, Geneva, 5-7 April'1972
G+ PAXGALOS, Theodoros (General):' "Ta apomnimevmata mou 1897, 1947" (Memoirs 1697-1947), Kedros,-Athens 1959
M PAXTER-BRICK, S.K. (ed): "Nigerian Politics and Military 1 ■■ Rule: Prelude to Civil War", London 1970 .
CM+ PAPACOSMA, Solon V.: "The Greek Military Revolt of .1909", Ph.D.Diss ., Indiana University, 1971
G+ PAPACARYFALLOS, P.L.: "Oi georgikoi synetairosmoi en Helladi 1821-1940" (Agricultural associations in Greece 1621-1940), Papazissis, Athens 1973
G PAPAXASTASSIOU, A.C.: "Demokratia kai to eklogikon systima” (Democracy and the electoral system), Byron, Athens 1973
G PAPAXASTASSIOU, A.C.: "0 ethnikismos" (Nationalism), Byron, Athens 1973
G PAPANASTASSIOU, A.C.: "Politika Keimena" (Political Texts), . Byron, Athens 1972
G PAPANPREOU, Georgios : "Hellinikon mellon" (The future of Greece), "Crammata" (Journal), Athens 1914
G PAPARRIGOPOULOS, K.: "Historia tou Hellinikou ethnous" (History of the Hellenic nation), 8 vols. Eleftheroudakis, Athens ’
L PARSONS, Talcott: "Authority, Legitimation and Political Action", in FRIEDRICH, C.J. (ed): "Authority", Harvard : University Press, Cambridge, Mass. 1958
M PATCH, Richard: "Thé Peruvian Elections of 1962 and their Annulment", American Univerties Filed Reports, West Coast South American Studies IX, Sept. 1962


319
L+ PEABODY, Robert L.: "Authority", in International Encyc lopaedia of the Social Sciences, Vol.l, pp. A l l - 1 1 , Macmillan and the Free Press 1968
L PEABODY, R.L.: "Perceptions of Organizational Authority A Comparative Analysis", Administrative Science Quar terly, Vol.VI, 1962
L PEABODY, R.L.: "Organizational Authority - Super-subordinate Relationships in Three Public Service Organisations", Atherton, New York 1964 . .
GM+ PEPONIS, I.: "Nikolaos Plastiras 1890-1945", Athens 1946
M PERLMUTTER, Amos: "The Praetorian State and the Praetorian Army: Towards a Taxonomy of Civil-Military Relations in •Developing Politics", European Politics 1, April 1969, pp. 382-404
M+ PERLMUTTER, A.: "The Arab Military Elite", World Politics, Jan. 1970, pp. 269-300
M PERLMUTTER, A.: "The Military Politics in Israel 19691970"
M PETRAS, J. b ZEITLIN, M. (eds): : "Latin America: Reform or Revolution, Greenwich 1968
G PETROPOULOS, N.D.: "Anamniseis kei skepseis enos palaiou naftikou" (Memories and reflections of an old sailor), Vol.A, 1923-1940, Athens 1966
G* PETROPULOS, John Anthony: "Politics and Statecraft in the Kingdom of Greece 1833-1343”, Princeton University Press, . N.J. 1968
M PINKNEY, R.: "The Theory and Practice cf Military Govern*ment", Political Studies, Oxford 21(2), June 1973, pp. 167-88
G+ PIPINELLIS, P.: "I monarchia en Helladi" (The monarchy ,in Greece), Athens 1932
G+ POLLIS, Adamantia: "Political Implications of the Modern Greek Concept of Self", British Journ. of Sociology, March 1965
G POLYCHRONIADIS, Constantine: "Peri diraossion ypallilon" On civil servants), Athens 1918
G POTAMIANOU, A. V SAFILIOS-ROTHSCHILD, C.: "Trends of Discipline in the Greek Family", Human Relations XXIV', . ■' Oct. 1971, pp.. 387-95
* POULANTZAS, N.: "Pouvoir politique et classes sociales", Maspéro, Paris 1972
+ POULANTZAS, N.: "Les classes sociales dans le capitalisme aujourd'hui", Éditions du Seuil, Paris 1974
G+ POURNARAS, D.: "Charilaos Trikoupis", 2 vols. Eleftheros, . Athens n.d.
CM+ POULANTZAS, N.: "La crise des dictatures: Portugal, Grèce, Espagne",' Seuil,•Paris 1975


320
POWEL, John D.: "Peasant Society and Clientelist Politics", American Political Science Review 65, June 1970, pp. 411-25
0+ PREVELAKIS, E . : "British Policy Towards the Change of Dynasty in Creece, 1862-63", Athens 1953
M PRICE, Robert M . : "A Theoretical Approach to Military Rule in New States: Reference-Croup Theory and the Ghanian Case", World Politics XXIII, April 1971
PSOMIADES, Harry J.: "Political Elites and the Process of Modernization", Journ. of International Affairs, Vol. XXIV, X°l, 1970, pp. 113-15
C PSOMIADES, H.J.: "The Diplomacy of Theodoros Pangalos . 1925-1926", Balkan Studies, Vol.XIII, N°l, 1972, pp.3-26
G+ PSYCHARIS, I.: "To taxeidi mou" (My travels), with an introduction and an essay by A.AXGELOU, Hermes, Athens 1971
G . PSYRODKIS, Xicos :. "0 fasismos kai i 4 Avgoustou" (Fascism and the 4th of August), Epikairotita, Athens 1974
C+ PSYRCl'KIS, X.: "I mikrasiatiki katastrofi" (The Asia Minor debacle), Epikairotita, Athens 1975,.
G-4- PSYROIKIS, X.: "To neohelliniko paroikiako phenomeno" (The phenomenon of the modern Greek diaspora), Epikairotita, Athens 1975
M .PUTMAX, Robert D.: "Towards Explaining Military Inter vention in Latin American Politics", World Politics 20, . Oct. 1967, pp. 83-110 . •
*
M PYE, Lucian W. : "Aripies in the Process of Political Moder-. nization", Archives Européennes de Sociologie 2, 1961, pp. 82-92 M PIT, L.W.: "Politics, Personality and Nation-building: Burma' s Search for Identity", Yale Univ. Press 1962
M RAP0P0RT, David C.: "Praetorianism: Government without Consensus", Ph.D.Thesis, L'niv. of California, Berkeley 1960
M+ RAPOPORT, D.C.: "A comparative Theory of Military and Political Types", in Hl'XTIXDOXS, S.P. (ed): "Military Politics", Free Press of Glencoe, New York 1962, FF. 71-301
G ROXTIRIS, A.S.: "I kata syntagma organosis tou kratous" The organisation of the State according to the Constit ution), Athens 1876 .
M ROOS, L.Jr & ROOS, X.P.: "Managers of Modernisation: . Organisations and Elites in Turkey 1950-1969", Cambridge, Harvard l'niv. Tress 1971
M ROPP, S.C.: "The Military and Urbanization in Latin America Some Implications of Trends in Recruitment", Inter-Amer ican Economic Affairs 24(2), 1970, pp. 27-35
+ ROSTOW, W.W.: "The Take-off into Self-sustained Growth", Economic Journal 66, March 1956, pp. 25-48


M+- ROUQUIÊ, A.: "Révolutions militaires et independence nationale en Amérique Latine, 1969-1971", Révue Française de Science Poltique 21(5), Oct. 1971, pp. 1045-63, and 21(6), Dec. 1971, pp. 1234-59
RUSSET, Bruce M . : "World Handbook of Political and Social Indicators", New Haven 1964, 2R 58
M RUSTOW, A.: "The Turkish Army and the Founding of the Republic", World Politics XI, Oct. 1958, pp. 513-552
G SAFILIOS-ROTHSCHILD, C.: "Class Position and Success Stereo types in Creek and American Cultures", Social Forces, March 1967
C SAFILIOS-ROTHSCHILD, C.: "The Options of Creek Men and Women", Sociological Focus, Vol.V, N°2, Feb. 1972, pp. 71-83
M ‘ SAMSON, A.A.: "Army and Islam in Indonesia", Pacific Affairs 44(4), Winter 1971-72, pp. 545-65
G -SANDI5, Eva E.: "The Asia Minor Refugees of Xeo Ionia” , Epitheorisis Koinonikon Erevnon (Greek Review of Social Research) X°14, Oct.-Dec. 1972, pp. 163-71
G SARAFIS, Stephanos (Ceneral): "Historikes Anamnisseis" (Historical memoirs - from childhood to the Nazi occupa tion) , Synchrono Vivlio, Athens 1964
G SCHEIN, D.: "Social Stratification in a Greek Village", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, CCXX, Article 6, March 11, 1974, pp. 493-95
M SCHMITTER, Philippe C. (ed) : "Military Rule in Latin America", Sage Publications, Beverley Hills 1973
G+ SERAFETINID1S, Melina: "The Breakdown of Parliamentary and Political Institutions in Greece 1964-1967”, Ph.D.Thesis unpubl. as per July 1974, East Anglia University
G SCOl’RITSAS, Christos G. : "Syntagmatikon dikaion" (Constitu tional Law), A.Sakkoulas, Athens 1965, 2 vols.
M SHILS, Edward: ’.’The Military in the Political Development of the New States", in JOHNSON, J.J. (ed): "The Military in Underdeveloped Countries", Princeton Univ. Press 1962
M SHILS, E. & JAXOWITZ, Morris: "Cohesion and Disintegra tion in the Wehrmacht in World War II", Public Opinion Quarterly XII, Summer 194S, pp. 268-92
G-t- SIDERIS, A.D.: "I georgiki politiki tis Hellados kata tin lixassan ekatontaetian (1333-1933)" (The agricultural policy of Greece during the past 100 years, 1833-1933), Papadoyar.nis, Athens 1934
G+ SKLIR03, Georgios: "Ta synchrona provlimata tou Hellenismou" (Contemporary problems of Hellenism), Ekdosseis Diethnous Epikairotitos, Athens 1970
•L+ SPENCER, Martin E . : "Weber on Legitimate Norms and Author ity", British Journ. of Sociology XXI, N°2, June 1970, pp. 123-34


322
G+ STAMATOPül’LOS, T.A.: "O esoterikos agonas kata tin epanastassi tou 1S21" (The internai (social) strife during the 1S21 revolution), Athens 1964
+ STAYEXHAGEX, Rodolfo (ed): "Agrarian Problems and Peasant Movements in Latin America", Anchor Books, New York 1970
+ STAVEXHACEX, R.: "Les classes sociales dans les sociétés , agraires", Editions Anthropos, Paris 1969
C+ STAYRIAXOS, Lefteris S.: "I Ellada se epanastatiki période saranda chronia agones" (Creece in a -forty-year revol utionary period), Kalvos, Athens 1974
G+ STAVRIAXOS, L.S;: "The Balkans since 1453", New York 1958
G+ STAYROU, X.A.: "Pressure Groups in the Greek Political Setting", Ph.D.Diss., George Washington Univ. 1970
G STEFANIDIS, Dimosthenis, S.: "Mathimata agrotikis politikis kai oikonomikis politikis epi ton sillektikon ergon" (Courses in agrarian policy ...), Athens 1952
G+ STEFAXOU, S. (ed): "El. Venizelos: Politikai ypothikai" (E.Yenizelos: political heritage),.2 vols, Athens 1965 and 1969 .
M STEPAX, A.: "The Military.in Politics: Changing Patterns in Brazil", Princeton Univ. Press 1971, XIII, p.313
STIXCHCOMBE, Arthur L . : "Agricultural Enterprise and Rural Class Relations", American Journ. of Sociology, Sept. 1961, pp. 165-76
G+ STOIANOVICH, T.: "The Conquering Balkan Orthodox Merchant", •Journal of Economic History 1960
M SEND HAESSEX, J.: "T-he Fashioning of Unity in the Indonesian Army", Asia Quarterly (2), 1971, pp. 181-212
M SUNDHAVSSEX, U . : "The Military in Indonesian Politics", Journ. of Asian Studies 31(2), Feb. 1972, pp. 355-65 ,
G+ SY0L0P0EL0S, K.D.: "To Valkanikon symfonon kai i helliniki exoteriki politiki 1928-1934" (The Balkan Pact and Creek foreign policy 192S-1934, with an unpublished text by E. Yenizelps), Hestia Press, Athens 1974
G+ SYOLOS, Alexandres: "Ta hellinika syntagmata 1622-1952" . 0reek Constitutions 1622-1952), Stochastis, Athens 1972
G+ SYCROXOS, X . : "Histoire de la Grèce moderne", Paris 1953, 3rd cd. Presses Universitaires de France, 1972
M. SZYLIOWICZ, Joseph A.: "Elite Recruitment in Turkey: the Role of the Mülkiye", World Politics XXIII,- April 1971
THE0D0RS0X, Ceorge A.: "Acceptance of Industrialisation and its Attendant Consequences for the Social Patterns of Xen-v/estern Societies", American Sociological Review 18, Oct. 1953, pp. 477-84
G THOMAS, J.: "Aftermath in Athens", New Statesman LXXXVI, 23 Nov. 1973, p. 761 ., <
M TOURAINE, Alain: "Entre la démocratie populaire et le populisme militaire" (Portugal), Le Monde, 22-23 June 1975
G' TOYNBEE, Arnold: "Greek Policy since 1882", Oxford Pamph lets 1914


323
G+ TRIKOUPIS, Charilaos: Speech introducing the 1559 budget to the Parliament, 4 Nov. 1SSS. Available in English as "The Finances of Greece", London 1553
G TRIANTAFILIDIS, Sofoklis: "Oi kolligoi tis Thessalias", Stochastis, Athens 1974
G TSAKALOTOS, T.: "Saranta chronia. stratiotis tis Hellados" Forty years a soldier of Creece), Athens 1960, 2 vols
G TSAOUSIS, D.G.: "Morfologia tis neohellinikis koinonias" (Morphology of modern Creek society), Athens 1971
G TS0P0T0S, D.: "Gi kai eeorgoi tis Thessalias" (Land and peasants of Thessaly), Volos 191'’
G TSOUDEROS, E.J.: "Le relèvement économique de la Grèce", ' Paris 1919 ■••
G+ TSOUKALAS, C.: "I helleniki tragodia" (The Greek tragedy), Olkos, Athens 1974 (also publ. in French and English)
G VAKALOPOULOS, A.: "Historia tou neou hellenismou" (His tory of modern Hellenism), Thessalonikij volA, 1974, . vol.B 1964, vol.C 1968, vol.D 1973
G .VAKALOPOULOS, A.: "I poreia tou genous", I Ekdosseis ton Filon, Athens 1966
M+ VANDYCKE, R.:# "Les appareils militaires dans les formations sociales dépendantes d ’Amérique Latine", Sociologie et Sociétés 3(2), Nov. 1971, pp. 175-53
G VASSILIOU, G. &' VASSILIOU V.G.: "The Implicative Meaning of the Greek Concept of Philotimo", Journ. of Cross-Cul tural Psychology, Vol.4 , N°3, Sept. 1973 •
G+ VEXTIRIS, George: "I Hellas tou 1910-1920" (Greece in 1910-1920), 2 vols, lkaros, Athens 1970
G+ VENIZELOS, E.: "Poioi oi ypefthinoi dia tin mikrasiatikin (Kho is responsible for the Asia Minor debacle), Ethnikon Typografion, Athens 1932
G+- VEREMIS, Thanos : "The Greek Army in Politics - 1922-1935", unpubl. Ph.D.Diss., Trinity College, Oxford. 1974
C+ VERGOPOULOS, Kostas: "To agrotiko zitima stin Hellada: to provlima tis koinonikis ensomatesis tis georgias" (The peasant issue in Greece: the problem of the social inte gration of agriculture), Exantas, Athens 1975
M -VERSER, J.G.: "The Relationship Between Socio-Economic Development and Militarism in Latin America", Journ. of Political Studies 5(2), Sept. 1972, pp. 1-25
M VILLIERS, M.: "De^la place de l ’armée dans l ’Etat sous la présidence du Général de Caulle", Revue d ’Administration, 141, Mai-Juin 1971, pp. 26.’.-72
CM+ VEREMIS, Thanos: "The Officer Corps in Greece 1912-36", . vol.II, 1976, Byzantine and Modern Creek Studies, Basil .Blackwell, London pp. 113-33
i


324
G+ VITTI, Mario: "I ideologiki leitourgia tis Hellinikis ithografias 1S50, 1855, 1870, 1SS0, 1883, 1896, 1936,. 1943’’, Keiniena, Athens 1974
G . VOURXAS, Tassos: "Historia tis neoteris Helladas apo tin epanastassi tou 1871 os to kinima tou Goudi" (A history V .of Modern Creece from the revolution of 1821 to the coup , ■' at Goudi), Tolidis, Athens 1974
G VOl'RXAS, T. : .'’Goudi - to kinima tou 1909" (Goudi - the 1909 coup), Tolidis, Athens n.d. (mentions 1957 as the year of the first edition)
G WALCOT, P.: "Greek Peasants, Ancient and Modern: A Compar ison of Social and Moral Values", Manchester Univ. Press 1.970
+ WALLER5TEIX, F.: "The Modern World System: Capitalist Agriculture in 16-century Europe", Xew York 1974
WEBER, Max: "The Theory of Social and Economic Organiza tion", The Free Press, Xew York 1974
L WEBER, Max: "The Three Types of Legitimate Rule',' Berkeley Publications on Society and Institutions, vol. 4, 1958
M+ WEIXERT, Walter F . : "The Turkish Revolution 1960-1961",. Washington, The Bookings Institution, 1963
M WELCH, C.E.: "Praetorianism in Commonwealth West Africa", '. Journ; of Modern African Studies 10(2), July 1972, pp. 203-22
M WELCH, C.E. Jr (ed):. "Soldier and State in Africa: a Com parative Analysis, of Military Intervention and. Political Charge", Evanstone, Xorthwestern Univ. Press 70, VIII
M . WIARCA, H.J.: "The Latin American Development and the New Developmental Alternatives: Military Xasserism and Dic tatorship with Popular Support", Western Political Quar terly 25(3), Sept. 1972, pp. 464-90
M WILLXF.R, A.R.: "Perspectives of Military Elites as Rulers and ’.fielders of Power", Journ. of Comparative Adminis' , tration 2(3), Xov. 1970, pp. 261-76
L WILLXI.R, A.R. & WlLLXER, Dorothy: "The Rise and Role of Charismatic Leaders", Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 358, March 1965, pp. 77-78
M WIRKUS, W.L.: "The Charging Role of the Military in the Indonesian Economy 1957-1959: a Preliminary Investiga tion", Cornell Journ. of Social Relations 6(1), 1971, pp. 22-47 .
WOLF, Eric Robert: "Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century", Harper O Row, Xew Ycrk 1968
L YELAJA, Shankar A.: Ivtroduction to Part II of YELAJA A^(ed) "Authority and Social Work-Concept and Use", Univ. of Toronto Press 1971


325
G ZAKYTHIXOS, D.A.: "I politiki historia tis neoteris Hellados" (Political history of Modern Greece), Hestia, Athens 1965
M ZOLBF.RG, A.R.: ''The Military Decade in Africa"', World Poli tics 5(2), Jan. 1973, pp. 309-31
G+ ZOLOTAS, Xenophon E . : "I Hellas ei.s to stadion tis ekviomichanisseos" (Greece in the stage of industriali sation), Eleftheroudakis, Athens 1926
GM+ ZORBAS. N. (General): "Apomnimonevmata" (Memoirs), Athens 1912
**
CM "Epetiris ton axiomatikon tou kata Tbalass an Stratou" (Navy List 1933), Athens 1933 s"
CM "Megali stratiotiki kai naftiki encyclopaedia", 6 vols (Army and Navy Encyclopaedia), Athens 1930
G ETHXIKI STASTISTIKI YPTRESSIA TIS HELLADOS: "Statistiki Epetiris" - vols 1930, 1934, 1936, 1954, 1961, 1965, 1967, 1971, 1973 (National Statistics Service-of Greece Stastical Yearbooks, as above)
G ETHNIKON KEXTROX K0IX0NIK0X EREVXOX: "Statistikai meletai, .1821-1971" (National Centre of Social Research, Statis tical Studies 1821-1971)
G MEGALI HELLIXIKI ENCYCLOPAEDIA: vol. Hellas, Pyrsos, Athens 1934
G ELEFTHEROUDAKIS ENCYCLOPAEDIA, vol. Hellas
G- OIKONOMIKI KAI LOGISTIKI ENCYCLOPAEDIA, Athens 1958
MULHALL's DICTIONARY OF STATISTICS, London 1907
WEBB's DICTIONARY OF STATISTICS, London 1909
Sl'NDB.ARG's APPERQUS STATISTIQUES, Stockholm 1910
G 0IK0X0M1K0S TACHIDROMOS: Special issue N°31 on the refugees after the 1922 debacle, Athens 26 April 1973
G ADMIRALTY - Naval Intelligence Division (Ct Britain): A Handbook of Greece , n.d. contains information until 1913-14
G GREEK CONSULAR REPORTS. British Foreign Office, Annual Series, 1889-1910 (incl. Lav's Special Report of 1S93, written before'Greece's submission to the International Financial Control Commission : F.O. Annual Series N°1169, April 1893)