Lecture 1:

I know this is mine.

Alright guys, we can start now.

So welcome.

I'm very happy to be here.

For the introduction of this year's course on the history

of economics, how it's changed its course a really, really

enjoyed teaching and I'm very happy to see a full

room.

And I hope it stays like this during the whole

year.

So let's begin just by introducing our team.

I am Andreas Isaak.

I will be the course convenor and the class teacher

for a couple of groups.

Um, my office hours are on Wednesdays from 3 to

5.

I would prefer if you can book by to start

in half, but you can also send me an email.

And as you will find out throughout the year, I'm

pretty accessible, pretty approachable.

So do get in touch with me.

And that was to, uh, ask Julian to introduce himself.

Okay.

Hello?

Yes, I'm Julian Wells.

Um, I graduated many years ago now.

Um.

I'm crazy for wigs.

And then I came here to do, uh, philosophy of

science.

And somewhat later, I ended up back in to actually,

um, and my research interests, as you might guess, on

the history of economics and thought not quite the same

thing.

I stress, um, and, and also in the history and

philosophy of probability and statistics.

Thank you.

So as you heard, I mean, Julian is very noisy,

knowledgeable.

He knows about philosophy of sciences, science, economics, and he

has a lot of experience teaching similar models right at

the undergrad and masters.

So do, uh, take advantage of Julian as well?

Okay.

Just Julian introduce himself.

And in terms of research interests, I also do research

on the history of economics.

I am interested in the history of development in the

20th century.

So if some of you have any specific interest on

the history of development economics or development interventions, do get

in touch with me.

I'll be happy to, uh, receive in my office, in

my office hours.

But we're here to talk about, uh, the course on

the history of economics you're taking this year.

Right?

So I'll give you some general information.

We have 20 lectures.

Half of them will happen in this room.

Half of them will happen in a different room during

winter term.

Uh, our classes will start on week three.

That means there will not be classes next week.

Just so you don't get confused.

Each class, as I will elaborate on later, will be

about the preceding week's lecture.

Um, and we'll have three, uh, formative assessments and one,

uh, take home summative exam.

I will, uh, discuss in a little bit more detail

later.

This is just for you to have the general information

of the course.

So this is our plan for us today.

We will begin by discussing what this course is about

and also what this course is not about what we

will be assuming, uh, and, uh, this model and what

we will try to avoid.

Then we'll discuss a little bit about the practicalities of

the organisation and what my expectations are from you, and

what your expectations should be from, uh, us.

And we'll close by going through perhaps the thematic, uh,

structure or outline of this course, but also paying attention

to the general arc, the general arguments, general narrative and

storyline we will be studying in this course in the

history of economics.

All right.

So let me begin by just stressing this.

This course is very much unlike any of the other

courses you've had, perhaps in your, uh, economics, economic history,

uh, politics degrees.

It is very much like other EC three level courses,

in the sense that it will ask you to stop

and think.

I look back to assess critically what you've learned so

far.

It is going to be an experience of unlearning what

you know about economics and relearning about it.

Okay.

We will study the work of the greatest economists times,

the classics, the original texts.

We engage in a conversation with them, and we will

treat these economists as intelligent people who serve their own

time and place.

And our aim is that by the end of this

course, you will get a much better understanding of what

you study today, of economics as it is right now.

That's right.

Right.

By studying the past, you get a better idea of

the present of the disease.

But we have perhaps a bolder claim here.

We also believe, as you will see in this course,

that economic theories change sometimes in perhaps, you know, unimaginable

and unimaginable ways, unexpected ways.

And this is also true, because the work that we

as economists are trying to understand is constantly changing.

So our bolder claim is that by the end of

this course, by studying the past, you will have much

more tools.

You'll be much better prepared to address the challenges of

economies in the future.

But studying the history of economics from the vantage point

of the 21st century carries some dangers.

And I would like to warn you about these things.

So the first thing we would like to avoid is

what I will call teleological readings, understandings of the history

of economics.

We will not assume that modern day economics is the

ultimate truth, which is the result of a linear progress

of cumulative knowledge.

We will not then treat past economists, such as people

who were wrong about how the economy works.

We will not treat past economists as unsophisticated thinkers either,

because they don't use the same tools that we use

today, right?

The use of mathematical models, the use of statistics and

recent experiments has not always been the norm in economics.

It has a history.

And this doesn't mean that what economist of the past

had to say is not valuable.

Lastly, we will avoid what historians would recognise as anachronism

to present these readings of the history of economics.

And this is because we will not assume that the

economic world that we're trying to understand, and the economic

behaviour of economic agents have been stable objects across time.

And this hasn't been the belief actually called by some

of the economists who are studying this course.

Right.

So these are the type of things we'd like to

avoid in this course.

But we have to be ready for today's examples.

And this is how we will assume in this course

again, that past economists were partly where market observers, analysts

and theories that we had actually quite an acute understanding

of the economic reality in the wrong time of place.

And these would require from us what I call an

interpretative generosity.

We will be kind and engaged readers with the writings.

This will require us, I will emphasise it's wrong for

us to use our imagination, but this will require from

us as well.

To avoid the.

Bias and the inclination that you will be faced to

in the next couple of weeks, which is about translating

what you read into the language of modern day economies.

This is what it meant before by deep learning economics.

You would need to take critical distance from tools to

use today to try to understand economists on their own

terms.

And this is because we will value other ways of

doing economics will problematise not just how economists, what economists

say, but how they say it will problematise not just

what economists think, but also how they think it.

And we'll also pay attention to both technical tools of

reasoning models, statistics and discursive tools such as concepts, metaphors,

diagrams, as we will see in the next couple of

weeks.

Lastly, we will assume that economics as a discipline has

changed because the present is not the same time, the

same place as the past.

Both the economy and the economists role in society has

changed, as have the social problems and priorities they are

called for to resolve.

Okay, so we will historic ties, the economy and economic

life in this course to get a better understanding of

how these changing contexts have shaped differently and in different

directions.

Uh, the evolution of economic theory.

So this is what this course requires from you.

Use your imagination.

Think out of your 21st century economist box to engage

in a live conversation with this class, because we treat

them as classics, because we believe they still have something

meaningful to say to us even today.

As I've mentioned before, avoid translating.

Don't read modern day economics as don't read past economics

as if the concepts had the same meaning.

Engage with the readings.

The readings of past economists are our main protagonists in

this course.

Uh, they will be difficult, but it will be a

privilege to read them.

And I just want to stress that you would not

be alone.

You will have the lecture to present an introduction to

these readings to prepare you.

Engage with these monsters.

But you will also have the classes as an opportunity

to discuss what you've learned, to ask questions, and to

learn from your peers.

So this is why, um, the organisation of this course

is pretty simple.

I lecture, you read, and then we discuss it.

Right?

And as you will see, I would argue this course

in this case will experience what I call an S

shaped type of learning curve.

You come to the lectures, everything seems to be very

clear, hopefully very easy.

But then you go on, face these readings and you

say, oh my God, I'm not getting anything.

What these guys are, the readings are challenging.

And then you come to the classes and when you

discuss these readings in the classes things will click okay.

So every single step of this course is essential for

this learning to behave in this way.

So let's begin with the lectures.

So what is it that you should expect from lectures?

Well, they are essential to understand the general idea of

the course.

It will be very easy to lose track of how

each of the readings, or how each of the classes

fits within the overall narrative of the course, because we

do have an overall narrative to which it will come

towards the end of this lecture.

But we need from you to come, uh, with an

idea that the lectures will prepare you for what's coming

next, will prepare you for the readings, because the readings

are difficult.

Only if you come to this lecture, you will have

the opportunity to pose questions about what we've learned before

and to pose questions to yourselves as well, when you're

dealing with these texts.

And I will assure you as well, that the lectures

will be fine, that you have a good time, that,

uh, you will learn something you didn't know before.

So please be here.

I will monitor lecture attendance.

So you've probably seen a a sheet circulating.

Um, the purpose of this is to get a good

sense of, uh, lecture, uh, participation.

And also, I want you to be here.

There's much rest.

Uh, if you don't come to the lectures.

And this brings me to, uh, the last bit, which

is this year's.

This year, the lectures will be recorded and the recordings

will only be available for you at the end of

this term.

So I recognise the value that the lecture recordings have

for revision.

When you're coming back, trying to understand what you've learned

so far when preparing for the final exam.

But I would like you to recognise the value of

being here or being in present, listening to what we

have to say of having a space and an opportunity

to ask questions, to interact with colleagues and peers outside

the classroom as well.

Okay, there will be some exceptions for students with inclusion

plans or with the timetable clashes.

If any of you has or thinks they fall within

this group, please drop me a line and I will

make these lectures available.

Uh, after, uh, each week's.

Um.

Okay.

Do.

There is this is a second step.

Past economies right inside stress are the main protagonists of

this course.

It is truly a privilege to have an opportunity to

read those economies you've always wanted to read to others

mean to Karl Marx.

From John Stuart Mill to Keynes and Hayek.

You'll see that each of these economies is regional, is

creative in their own way, and probably you have some

textbook understanding what they said, or you believe what that

you know, you know what they say, but it's very

different thing reading them, uh, from the original texts.

And if anything leaves you, uh, this course, well, you

you can't have, you know, this, uh, of Gossip for

a future cocktail.

Conversations when you're all important people.

About what Adam Smith said on The Wealth of Nations

regarding the division of labour or current markets, arguments about

the limits of capitalist society, and the need for a

communist revolution.

All right.

So it is a privilege to enjoy these readings.

When you are reading, do focus on the general arguments.

So these readings will be complicated.

Perhaps not all of the details are relevant.

So we engaged with the general gist of the arguments.

We'll have it time to discuss the details in the

classes, but also read the article we prepared for you.

Some reading questions that you may find Moodle, which will

hopefully guide you through these readings and will prepare you

to engage in the conversations we have during the classes.

Okay, so I reiterate these these are different difficult readings.

But you will not be alone.

Okay.

And we've prepared some materials that hopefully will allow you

to walk through this journey together.

The classes are that moment in which things do click.

So you come with many doubts from the readings, and

we have an opportunity in the classes both to address

your questions, but also to develop some worksheets which we've

prepared for you to develop together with us during the

classes.

But I want you to take something home that we

hope will serve for you to prepare for the final

exams.

So I mentioned this because I want you, whenever you

come to class, to be much more focussed on the

conversation, on engaging or participating than on taking notes.

You will have some materials to take home to revise

later on, but this requires you, of course, to have

done the readings.

So participate actively and collaboratively.

This is the space in which we learn from us,

but also from your peers.

This will hopefully allow you to develop skills for the

future.

You'll learn how to communicate.

Your ideas will be asked in some courses to debate.

Prefer to participate in group activities.

Um, and this is very important for us, the fact

that you work together because you are at the NSC,

you're at one of the leading universities in the world.

You're sitting next to the brightest minds, even if you

don't perhaps know that yet.

But particularly for this course, you are sitting against next

to people who have very different disciplinary backgrounds, interests in

which you can also learn quite a lot.

So I would like to make a quick boil over

here and ask you, um, what your degree is.

So which students here are coming from just economics or

doing just economics?

Can you please raise your hand?

Please raise your hand.

Okay, so we have a few students here, right?

What about economic history?

Okay, a few more.

Please don't be shy.

So everyone can see you can can the guys on

the back seat over here?

Yes.

Okay.

A few guys from economic history.

What about economics and economic history?

All right.

Bigger group politics and economics.

There you go.

Five people.

Philosophy, politics and economics.

Okay.

The philosophers sitting back over there.

The people.

What about the philosophers?

Uh, philosophy and economics like Julian.

Okay, we have a few more scattered around international social

and public policy.

Okay?

Not not not one over there in the back.

Fantastic.

General students, people visiting us from abroad.

Okay.

Three students here.

So as you can see, I mean we have huge

this is a melting pot, right, of expertise of disciplinary

interests.

And this is these are the numbers I've got, uh,

from the register.

I mean, you can start sort of having a sense

of who comes to the lectures and who does it.

Um, but this is the key takeaway, right?

You can learn from peers, uh, who probably you haven't

met in other classes, particularly those of you who are

just doing a single degree, learn from them.

It is also a an advantage because you can make

friends from other departments.

And, uh, this course is designed, as we will see

in a minute, for those of you coming from all

of these degrees, there's a bit for everyone we'll discuss.

For instance, what is it that makes economics as a

science?

And we'll sort of ask the philosophers on the back

to help us, to give us inputs to understand this

question.

Economists.

You use models all the time.

You know how to, you know, develop complex arguments and

concepts, will ask you to please clarify this from us.

The historians in the room will help you to try

to situate the ideas, the arguments, in their own time

and place.

So make use of your peers as well.

They are as important as we are as teachers for

your learning.

Okay.

All right.

Um, if after the lecture, after doing the readings, after

the regular meeting questions, after discussing classes, after discussing with

your peers, you have any doubts of what has been

said?

Do come to our office hours.

We are quite approachable and accessible.

Uh, I just put here information which I mentioned before

so you can contact us.

Let me give you a few words about the formative

assessments.

Uh, in this course, the first thing I would just

like to stress is that the formative assessments here will

try to push you to think analytically and critically.

They've been designed for you to not just provide information,

not just to identify ideas and concepts and connect them

to different authors, but they will ask you to really

explain these theories, explain these concepts, to compare critically what

different economists or schools of thought are believed about a

particular subject, or to situate theories and their evolution in

their own time and place.

Okay, so that's how the final exam will be designed.

You will have three.

Um.

Sections in which you will have to address.

Perhaps some questions about specific authors and theories would be

asked to write two essays.

Situating these ideas into the wider context and the formative

assessments mirror the structure of the final exam.

Okay.

Um.

In our experience, the degree to which you prove during

your formative assessments is the single best predictor of how

you perform in your final exam.

I remind you, these are formative marks.

They will not count towards your final grade, but they

are mandatory, and it's in your interest to get feedback

from us and don't wait until it's too late to.

Okay, so you've got the dates here.

They're also in the course programme.

Um, just just let me continue with some logistics.

Uh, all of the exams in this course will be,

uh, take home written assignments.

Uh, they will be posted on Moodle a week or

a couple of weeks before they do.

You need to submit them on Moodle as well.

And guys this is a relationship of trust okay.

We prepare our classes, we prepare lectures.

We do our best for you to have the best

learning experience.

I want you also to put the best of you

and follow good academic practices and not just academic integrity.

Okay, so we will screen your scripts using Turnitin to

check if this is the case, but I truly believe

that it's about trust that with the positive on you

okay.

So we will not fail you.

Please do not fail us.

All right.

So this connects to a new policy I will discuss

in a minute.

But first, uh, for the general course students in the

room, uh, you will be examined, uh, with, the final

exam in spring term, but there will also be for

you a class participation grade.

The instructions are happy to discuss about this after the

class.

If you have any questions.

So our department has adopted a new AA policy.

And, uh, we believe in this course about training you

in a reflective use of I.

It's a social reality.

It's out there.

You would probably use it, uh, when you leave university,

and we want you to use it.

Right?

Right.

And something that we all need to learn to do,

uh, together.

So you may use AI in this course, but it

is essential that you cite its usage.

Failing to cite the use of generative AI will be

treated as academic misconduct, and will follow the similar procedures,

uh, to, uh, those when we find out a reason.

Simply copying, uh, what he has said about the prompt

you've asked them will be treated as a misconduct.

Um, and hopefully the form that we are asking you

to submit together with every of your assignments will help

you reflect on how you're using it and will help

you learn how to use it correctly.

So if you decide to use generative AI, you will

have to submit this form, which I will discuss in

more detail in a minute.

I just want to emphasise two things before moving on.

First one is by declaring the use of AI.

You will not be treated differently to students who do

not use it.

Julia and I are and I will mark blindly your

essays and will only look at your form if we

feel there is some sort of misconduct.

Okay, so please report it.

Please report it if you use it, report and tell

us how you're using it.

All right.

Avoid any problems.

And again this relationship of trust we trust you will

do so.

The second thing I would like to emphasise is that

using AI will not necessarily imply that you will get

a better grade, better mark.

And this is because we as economists think, and in

this course we think that the use of tools as

we learn, uh, by studying the history of discipline, allows

us as economists to think to reason.

But we do believe that machines tools do not things

by themselves.

You do?

That's right.

So you do still have to do the work to

do well in this course.

This is just a tool, okay?

And use it as such.

So this is not the form that you'll have to

fill in.

I'm pretty sure from the back you cannot read the

details.

You'll find it there, but it will basically ask you

to do three things.

First and foremost, you should cite the use of AI

as you do with any other reference.

You should describe very concisely how you're using it and

what you're using it for.

And there will be a reflective section in which you

will be asked questions such as, okay, how did it

influence what you plan to write?

How did you optimise your prompts to ensure that accurate,

reliable and useful information is arising from the use of

AI?

How did you verify that this tool actually provided accurate

information?

Right?

So a bad use of AI may actually hurt your

performance if you do not, uh, ensure that the information

is reliable.

Okay.

And lastly, how will you cross-reference across readings with the

AI generating information?

Okay.

This is again, a tool that will allow you to

reflect on the use of these generative generative AI tools.

Are there any questions so far about what we are

assuming in this course?

What we are not?

How this course is structured and how it will be

assessed.

No questions.

All right.

So that means we can move on to discuss a

little bit more in detail.

Our course structure and overview.

All right.

So this course will be divided in some thematic modules

that are roughly split between that next This, and the

next year, uh, you will become quite familiar with this

map.

Uh, along the course.

This is a map of our journey.

We'll be travelling this journey from mercantilism grants to recent

developments in economics in, uh, autumn, in terms of the

first week of winter term will be, if you may

have it, in the world of the 16th century, uh,

from 16th century, 17th century to the 19th century.

Uh, and we will discuss how from discussions about the

benefits of free trade or the distribution of agricultural input

with what we will call the mercantilist and the free

cigarettes we move to this idea with items mean that

economic life, social relations can be studied Systematically in a

scientific fashion.

So the first few weeks of our course will bring

us to the origins of political economy.

As this new science of the statement that I made

about.

Why do I emphasise this?

Because we have reflections about economic life from antiquity.

Aristotle in his politics.

Thomas Aquinas in the Middle Ages, reflecting about the world

prizes.

And also we have reflections about the economy before, but

only after.

Adam Smith would argue we have something resembling a science,

a systematic analysis of economic life.

And we need to understand the precursors, the people with

whom or against whom matter.

Adam Smith was hired.

So that's where we will begin in this course, by

discussing what Smith referred to as the mercantile and the

agricultural system.

Limerick entities and features.

We will see that sort of putting together, uh, bunch

of people discussing about trades and relations.

International power under the same umbrella of the countries is

a bit problematic, but we will try to understand, through

the work of Thomas Moon, how international trade and the

extent to which international trade is in the interests not

just of the merchants, but also of the Crown.

We will then, uh, discuss.

How French economists actually the first people who call themselves

Conscious writing in a very different context will argue that,

no, it's not necessarily international trade.

What the King should be focusing on.

It's not the whole set of restrictions to protect domestic

industries.

It's actually how to ensure that the natural order is

restored and the natural order is not, which allows the

distribution of agricultural workers in society.

Now, why is this important for the fisheries to begin

with?

Because if the king doesn't do that, the subsistence, the

reproduction of this social system is in danger.

Okay.

This will be the subject of our next lecture.

And we'll see how, from this discussion about the relationship

between international trade and national power and the natural order

and the subsistence of Societies.

We will move to this belief in economic progress that

we find in animal meat, through allowing each individual to

follow their best interests.

So with me, we'll see how the question about the

sources and the distribution of wealth, um, will come to

the centre of economics.

The production of wealth will not fall on one economic

sector, industry or in agriculture, but the production of way

of wealth according to what will be the result of

this natural progress of society.

Um, that is further deepened by the division of labour.

This is the birth of political economy, as we know.

But in the next couple of weeks.

We'll see how quickly this optimist's view about the progress

of societies that we find in me leads to a

much more dismal conclusions about the possibilities of human societies

to improve, to accumulate wealth, and to distribute wealth across

all social sciences, all social classes.

So we'll start with Malthus and Ricardo, how there are

natural checks to the progress of society.

Ricardo will introduce a problem that Marx and Mill will

deal with, which is.

Yes.

Well, maybe, you know, capitalist societies have the ability to

produce wealth, but what about distribution?

Are all social classes gaining from this mode of production,

as Marx will call it?

So we'll move from this very optimistic view of human

progress to a much more pessimistic one in classical political

economy.

But despite these differences, we'll find some commonalities among all

of these economists.

They all particularly things, require the will use as a

model the physical sciences.

I will try to argue that economics is a science

insofar it is concerned with studying laws, natural laws.

They all believe that value the value of goods and

value of commodities.

Exchange markets lies in labour, although they will disagree, as

we'll see about what this means.

What are we referring to when we say that the

value of commodities labour?

And then we also use all of them as a

unit of analysis social classes.

Right.

Both in the theories of prices, in the theories of

production and distribution.

This is why we will then move to examine how,

with the Virginia Revolution in the 1870s, there will be

a break with this tradition.

And we will see how individual behaviour became the cornerstone

of economic analysis and how, in a way, this paved

the ground for a synthesis between classical economics that economics

of Smith, Marx and Ricardo, and this new way of

understanding economics as a science of economic behaviour with the

emergence of neoclassical economics, that of economics that arguably you

study today in the late 19th century.

But even here we'll see that there will be different

variants.

A the marginals did not have the same ideas of

why the value of goods is related to the marginal

benefits it brings to consumers, for instance.

And the difference is between these different authors.

Jevons Manga and Walrus will produce different paths for the

evolution of economic theory that we'll discuss later on in

this course.

But we'll also.

See that this period from the late 19th century to

at least the 1930s and 1940s will be an age

of what we will call in this course economic pluralism.

In a nutshell, neoclassical economics, building on marginal analysis, was

not the only game in town.

We'll discuss a couple of alternatives to the neoclassical scientific

program in the late 19th century with the German historical

school and, um, uh, the North American institutionalist.

Uh.

And, uh, we'll we'll see later on how this pluralism

sort of evaporated, uh, in the post-war period.

Okay.

In the latter part of this course, we'll move to

the 20th century and we'll ask ourselves, okay, were there

any other alternatives to the neoclassical scientific program and to

what extent these new alternatives posed challenges or ended up

accommodating, uh, to, uh, this, uh, framework was the maison

of economics, the type of economics you studied today so

flexible as to adapt to challenges in the 20th century.

Or do we find any real alternatives, uh, in the

course of the 20th century?

It is Something happening with the economic context of the

interwar period, which will bring us to question the existence

of an object that wasn't theorised, conceptualised and analysed in

this way before.

And this object is the economy, the macro economy.

So in the second part of this course, we'll read

in general theory and try to understand how the economy

became to start being analysed as an object that could

not only be understood and did not follow, not only

follow its own laws of functioning, but also that could

be intervened in some way or another, and how this

will mark a break with this 19th century belief on,

uh, allowing everyone to follow their own interests.

Right.

Uh, that, uh, economic theory debated with, Adam Smith the

rejection of Lucifer.

But we will also analysing this section of the course,

how the economics became more technical, when and how the

economists began to use models to use statistics to formalise

the researches.

And we will relate the incorporation of these tools to

this aspiration that economists would be interviewed.

Right.

Okay.

This is what we refer to as technocratic economics.

We will deal with some instances of economic planning in

the latter part of this course.

We will then discuss some other alternatives to mainstream economics.

Again asking ourselves, was this the story of challenging, of

oxi or of accumulation?

We will situate ourselves now in the context of the

second half of the 20th century, context in which the

Cold War between two superpowers, but also between two economic

systems, is shaping the way in which economists think about

economic reality.

We also have new economies emerging from decolonisation.

This will be very, very important for development economists.

But also this is a period in which economics becomes

much more of an academic discipline.

We'll see how economists of the past.

Have.

Been promising policymakers.

Whispers to the ear of the King.

In the case of mercantilist and not so clearly academics

as in the second part of the 20th century, these

will be professionalisation of economics will be a much more

recent history.

So how did economic theories emerge and change under the

circumstances?

We'll come back to the ideas of one of our

marginal lists.

Or maybe here.

I'm trying to understand how ideas about the role of

knowledge, the function of entrepreneurship and innovation and change become

became part and parcel of modern Australia.

When we study Schumpeter and Hayek.

We will also see how new institutions like Coase and

North will come back to some of the old themes

of former institutionalist like Madeleine Mitchell, but we'll try to

use and incorporate the tools of classical economics to understand

how economies change in the long term, to understand those

systems in which markets fail and do not solve every

problem, particularly when there are transactional costs, and how they

would suggest a new framework to understand all of these,

which pays much more attention to the institutional settings in

which economic agents make decisions.

We will also try to travel spatially in this course,

not just the first time we've done so already when

we discussed the German school and the North American institutionalist.

But we'll do that again with development economics, particularly because

this is part is an essential question of the subfield

of discipline.

Can we be so sure that at the same time

of economics applies for very different economies and in particular

for poor and rich economies?

Do we need a new type of economics to understand

what's going on in these places?

This is what other human development economists will read referred

to us going against this idea of a size fits

all economics, which has been recently raking in more than

and embroidery and overs.

Okay.

We'll discuss again how the Cold War impacted economics.

We'll close with a conversation about the extent to which

we can use the tools of economics to understand what

has been the object of analysis of other disciplines in

the past, religion, for example.

And we will bring this discussion to the present and

discuss recent developments, particularly in evolutionary economics and behavioural economics.

Okay.

So this course will be a long journey that we

will travel together across five centuries to bring us to

different places.

And our objective again is to understand how theories have

changed and what have been the main drivers of changes

in these theories.

Is there any question about the structure of this course?

I thought about it.

Yeah.

Somehow?

Yeah.

Writing the essays.

Are we allowed to talk about, like, other economists outside

of the scope of what we've been taught?

Or should we just really try to stick within what

we've been discussing?

So you may you may engage with other economists works,

particularly those that we discuss in the lectures.

So even though you will be reading specific authors, we

will bring some other economists into the conversation as well.

Um, you will you can refer to other texts, however,

and we will emphasise this very much and particularly in

the first format, we do want to read very closely

the texts and use the text we read in this

course as your main source.

Right.

If you're relying on secondary literature or other texts like

us economists, just do it in a way that it

shed lights on.

The argument you're trying to do.

Is that is that clear?

Any other questions?

No.

Wonderful.

So I think, I mean, we can leave it here.

Uh, these are the next steps, uh, for this course.

Next week, we'll have our lecture on mercantilism and secrecy

to try to understand how these ideas surrounding the benefits

of international trade and the adequate distribution of agricultural surpluses

were developed and pave the ground for political economy.

Uh, the first classes will be on Wednesday and Thursday

and week three.

Please start preparing the readings, particularly moons.

Reading is quite long, so take some time to do

it.

We've already posted the model, the reading questions to come.

Prepare for the classes and we will make available the

worksheets at the in advance so you can look at

it and compare it to the classes.

Okay, wonderful.

It's great having such a big lecture.

I hope to see you next week and thank you.

Lecture 2:

So welcome to our second lecture.

Uh, in, uh, the history of economics, we're going to

talk today about capitalism.

And so this is the time of our course.

And we will be the first two lectures of this

term, devoting our attention to trying to understand much better

how do we move from these reflections on moral economy?

Uh, in the Middle Ages and in the early modern

period, reflections based on, uh, the understanding of economic life

in relation to the moral behaviour of human beings, to

what we will understand as political economy, focusing much more

on ideas around impersonal forces behind the operations of things

like markets, capitalists, economists.

And in the process, we'll also understand the origins of

a discipline that wasn't even a thing before.

And we will call political economy.

So the war, of course, as we mentioned in the

last lectures, reflections about the economy or economy are in

ancient Greek.

But this referred very much to what we may call

maxims and rules about the proper administration of the household.

With political economy, we will be moving to a set

of maxims and rules around good governance.

Okay, so the idea behind what we will study next

week, uh, when we deal with Adam Smith, political economy,

is that we, by understanding these impersonal rules of markets,

can infer.

fair rules for good government.

That governments could only, uh, ignore to their own peril.

Okay, but first, before understanding the emergence and the origins

of the systematic explanation of how markets work in, uh,

Wealth of Nations, we need to deal with these antecedents

that Smith called in his book, The Mercantile and the

Agricultural System, we'll call them today, the mercantilist and the

fisheries.

This will bring us to two very different worlds.

The first, the world of the capitalists.

In the 17th century, northern Europe has as its background

the decline of the Portuguese and Spanish empires, the Spanish

Empire in particular, whose wealth and mind and power rested

on the extraction of gold, uh, and silver from the

mines in the Americas.

So the decline of these empires raised the question.

If the Spanish Empire had access almost unlimited access to

gold and silver.

Why are they suddenly not as wealthy as we thought?

Why are they as mighty and powerful as the British?

So what is the relationship between money, wealth, and power?

The 17th century will see the emergence of two now

global powers.

First, the British after the defeat of the Spanish Armada

in 1587.

And a new, unexpected opponent, the Dutch.

The Dutch.

Those who did not have any access to natural resources,

be it mines from the Americas or agricultural lands like

France.

How have the Dutch become so mighty?

And this will be a century in which the Dutch

and the British will be in the context for the

seas, both militarily and commercial.

All the Dutch can do when they know how to

do is to commerce, and they build a whole empire

based on commerce.

What can we learn about that?

That's the sort of questions.

That's where candidates like Thomas Moon will ask themselves.

We'll then move to a very different context with the

fisheries, which is that of 18th century France in 18th

century France.

We have the consequences, if you may, of absolute monarchy.

The notion that the king is all powerful.

We also see in 18th century France the emergence and

emergence of mechanised agriculture, particularly in the northern part of

France, as captured here in the Lambert's Encyclopaedia.

And we also have a big problem.

So how come?

In this context of absolutism and in this gradual change

of agrarian societies, we see that people are dying.

We see that people are constantly facing famines and hungry

and hungry.

How can we explain this problem?

And is there something that the enlightenment reason can tell

us to reform the system that is definitely not working?

Okay.

So today we'll live in these two worlds the world

of a competition for disease or might and power in

commerce and work and the world of subsistence.

The question about subsistence in agrarian societies, uh, particularly in

mid 18th century France.

So today we'll study this road from mercantilism to classical

political economy.

And we'll begin with a discussion on the mercantilist arguments

on the balance of trade.

And their argument will be very simple.

Having a positive balance of trade is the main source

of wealth and power for the kingdom.

And we will focus also on the ways in which

the mercantilist raise these conclusions.

So to understand this, it is important to get a

sense of a complex mechanism of how this change of

trade with the exchange of goods for money, rewards And

the mercantilist will build a generalisable theory about the balance

of trade as a set of positive laws, laws that

could be observed from experience.

Too.

To reach this conclusion that the only way to increase

wealth and power is to have a positive balance of

trade.

We will then study with the physical.

That's a very different understanding of the type of laws

that should be studied.

Okay, so whereas the mercantilist will derive these laws from

experience, from observation, from comparisons between, let's say, how things

work in the British Empire and the Dutch Empire and

the Spanish Empire, then the Fisher Price will point to

the existence of natural laws that regulate the production of

what they call produce a net revenue, agricultural surplus, and

the reproduction of this net revenue across all social classes.

And it is only through understanding these natural laws by

the means of research, not observation, that the King, acting

as an enlightened despot, could guarantee the subsistence of all

social classes.

So whereas then we are looking for maxims and rules

to increase the power and might of the King of

the nation, the Fisher Price in a context of absolutism,

will pose their attention to how the understanding of this

natural order, through the means of reason, will set limits

to the power of the key, and these two systems

will set the stage for what we'll study next week

in the lecture.

What we will call Adam Smith's system of natural liberty,

according to which a commercial society in which everyone is

allowed to further their own personal interests, leads to a

stable and prosperous social order with limited government in connection

to what we will study today with the visuals.

Okay, so this is our agenda for today.

We will begin with the American tourists.

Okay.

So who were the American tourists?

Even though they were not a particular school of thought

in the proper sense of the word.

They were a group of policymakers, merchants who shared It's

a common language you make around the relationships between money,

trade and wealth.

The main problem that they were dealing with is how

to increase the kingdom's wealth and power, and what are

the type of activities that each kingdom should focus on?

To do so?

The type of economic laws that they will be concerned

with are the laws that regulate trade, and in particular,

international trade.

How can we understand this complex mechanism that regulates the

exchange of goods wares for bullion money?

And the implications of this analysis will be quite surprising.

For the time, the interests of merchants are in the

in the best interest of the kingdom, and hence the

merchants should be given full economic freedom.

Without meaning that there is no role for the merchant,

for them, and for the monarchy.

For the King.

As we will see.

The type of economic problems that inspired the work of

mercantilism, um, were twofold.

So one of them was the context of the commercial

crisis of the 1620s in England.

What's been known in the literature as the sort of

shortage of money debates.

So an observation money was flowing out of England, and

this was having repercussions on England's textile manufacturers, artists and

manufacturers.

How can we explain this?

How can we explain that this money was flowing to

England from Spain in the 16th century is now leading

the country.

There were different explanations to this problem.

On the one hand, you.

Argue that silver left England actually, because the English coin

was overvalued.

The price of coins held by the king did not

reflect the actual value of the English coin, and hence

the solution needed to be a devaluation.

So a currency exchange.

Uh, exchange.

Exchange.

The solution, uh, where exchange controls to avoid money leaving

from the economic reasoning behind this diagnosis and this proposal

was that the value of money could be set by

decree.

Okay.

So that the king could set what the actual money

in terms of gold and value of all the silver.

Each England coin was valued and it was a very

common understanding of the world of money in the 16th

century and early 17th century.

Mercantilist, like myself and Thomas Moon would disagree with this

interpretation.

Money was not flowing out of England gold and silver

because the coin was overvalued, but rather because England was

experiencing a negative balance of trade.

It was simply importing more that than it exported in

terms of value.

This very simple explanation, however, needed to be explained.

It was not evident in the context of the 17th

century why this was the case.

Then and Thomas Moon, although they agreed on the diagnosis,

they largely disagreed on the solution for misleading.

The solution was just simply to devalue, uh, the English

coin.

Thomas Moon argued something that was perhaps more surprising.

We need some freedom of trade.

We need to code all these regulations that are restricting

not only the export of goods, but also the export

of bullion.

And this should be understood in a particular context of

the early 17th century, in which the East India Company,

that had been created a couple of decades before, was

accused of depriving England for its treasure.

So some people accuse the East India Company of exporting

bullion to bring luxury goods from India, and they pointed

to the East India Company as the responsible for the

shortage of money in the country.

Thomas Moon will argue what we need actually is freedom

of trade.

We need to have freedom to not only export and

import goods as merchants judge reasonable, but also to export

commodity.

So East India trade should be promoted.

We'll see how Thomas reaches these arguments in a minute.

The second question that motivated me to make a distinction

I anticipated before.

Is this paradoxical search of the Dutch as an emerging

military and commercial empire.

Why are the Dutch who, having good access to English,

to Spanish minds, having got vast amounts of land to

export grain like France or natural resources like Britain?

How are they becoming this mighty commercial and military empire?

The only natural resource they have is fish fisheries, herring

fishery, which is, by the way, a very special type

of natural resource.

Why?

Because to get hold of fisheries, the Dutch have had

to build.

A large infrastructure of building.

They have had to use their insight, their artificial ingenuity,

to devise the fish that are necessary and the ships

that are necessary to collect these natural resources.

So we see the Dutch posing a question to the

mercantilist.

What is the implication or the importance of commerce, or

the generation of wealth as opposed to natural resources?

But also how important are our manufacturers for the creation

of wealth and market.

So who was Thomas Moon?

In the presentation of England's Treasure.

The book you will read from him Thomas soon.

Thomas Monson highlighted his father general experience in affairs related

to trade.

He was in fact a London Mercer, a merchant appointed

in 1615 as director of the British East India Company.

And of course, he had vested interests in defending the

interests of the merchants.

And he wrote, particularly in the context of the shortage

of money debate.

This piece, A Discourse of Trade from England into the

East Indies, in which he put forward some of the

ideas that he will elaborate later on on England's treasure

by foreign trade.

Very explicitly defending the role and the interests of merchants.

But while this was an outright defence of the East

India Company, in particular of its right to export silver

to bring goods from the East Indies, England's treasuries perhaps

important for our purposes.

Because instead of making a direct defence, it makes its

use of abstractions from experience and learnings from other geographies.

To put forward this idea that having a positive balance

of trade is the main source of wealth and might

for the nation.

Now, this book was written, uh, in the 1620s in

the context I've described before and finishing in 1630, but

it was only published posthumously on, uh, 1664.

Uh, after we're doing, uh, better, the Anglo-Dutch Wars, and

this probably gave Thomas Moons and mercantilist ideas a.

A better reception and, uh, importance, because what Thomas Moon

was writing in a conversation with the Dutch were the

islands that we should follow.

The Dutch model we should follow.

The example had become clearer or clearer by the context

of the Dutch waters.

So what is Thomas Moon's argument in this book?

How can we understand this abstraction from experience about the

rules and the forces regulating, uh, the balance of trade?

Very simple formulation.

Apparently, he would say that the ordinary means to increase

your wealth and treasure the wealth of the nation and

the treasure, the amount of gold and silver that the

King needs to accumulate to wage its wars is by

foreign trade.

It's the only way to do so.

And we must observe this very simple rule.

We should sell more to strangers yearly than we consume

of them in value.

This seems to us 21st century observers like a very

simple observation, but in the context of Thomas Munch's writings,

this in a way, opposed common knowledge in a couple

of ways.

And the first way Thomas Moon was arguing that wealth

should not be equated to money, to accumulation of money,

uh, of gold and silver in the form of treasure.

So the common assumption, the common idea that received message

from the 16th century is what was called to understood

as Buddhism this doctrine by which.

Each nation should focus on accumulating as much gold and

silver as they can, because this will provide the necessary

treasure to wage wars with contending empires.

Thomas Moon is telling us, wait a minute.

Money is not well.

Even items need to recognise these things.

We can't do.

Lists are not boolean lists in the strict sense of

the term.

They are not falling on the monetary illusion of confusing

at money with wealth.

They will reflect on the role of money.

We'll come back to these reflections.

Our own our lecture on the subject.

But for now it suffices to add that for the

American tourists, money is needed a circulating capital.

They are the life of trade.

Remember The East India Company was accused of exploiting bullying.

It was telling us, yes, we need money, we need

gold and silver, but we need that to provide life

to commerce, to bring goods that we can then artificially

transform at home.

And then we exported higher value.

But it is foreign trade which gives leave to the

Commonwealth and which provides the necessary treasure for the Kingdom.

How well commerce creates wealth for other classes.

Follow the Dutch example by conversing with.

Based in this, the Dutch are building ships.

They are producing manufactures, they are exporting a higher value.

And they are.

All these industries are creating domestic employment.

They are stimulating what we will, uh, Understand in a

minute as artificial wealth, the transformation of the goods provided

by nature, and they are also increasing the treasurer of

the team by raising the revenues via taxes.

So it is by allowing for the freedom of trade

that the merchants private gain becomes an asset for the

kingdom, it becomes the kingdom's public good.

So we should understand Thomas Moon's, uh, book as first

and foremost a book written to merchants.

It's actually a book written for his son.

Remember, it was only published posthumously by his son.

And that's why the book begins with a set of

maxims, a set of rules that merchants should follow to

increase treasure, reduce the value of imports, and increase the

value of exports.

Frugality and the cultivation of arts reduce imports.

Right.

If we produce things at home, we don't need to

import them.

Import goods only if value added in value can be

added by domestic manufacturer, what they call artificial wealth.

Buy cheap from distant countries, not expensive from neighbours and

so on and so forth.

We see here in Thomas Moon, on the one hand,

a message for merchants that they should be focusing on

artificial wealth, because this creates goods that could be sold

at higher value in international markets than natural goods.

Let's not follow the French or the Spanish example, who

have relied on natural resources and incipient arguments about the

natural resource cause that we see today in development economics.

We also see some attention to what we may call

the price elasticity of demand.

We should focus on the type of things that foreigners

do not have, right?

We should pay attention to the demand for goods.

And merchants know this better, right?

They are the ones who engage with them more directly.

We have also some incipient views here about the importance

of the size of the market right by ship from

distant countries, not expansively for neighbours.

We should expand the size of the market so that

this is adding life to foreign trade.

But we can also read Thomas Mann's work, not just

as a book written to the merchants, but as a

book that was trying to shape, if you may, public

opinion by public opinion meaning here a very restrictive view

Of how these ideas on the laws behind the functioning

of the balance of trade can serve to provide counsel

to the key.

So we see in the in the American activists an

early role for the economist, if you may, as that

who is whispering to the eye to to the ears

of the Prince.

The economist has some sort of policy advice.

Okay.

So what will be the message for the king?

What should the king do?

Well, the king, first and foremost, should guarantee the freedom

of trade.

So, Thomas, one would argue, exchange against exchange controls or

devaluation of the English coin.

These people have missed how the balance of trade works,

and hence they have proposed solutions that are self-defeating.

Instead, the king should allow merchants to act according to

their own interests.

This doesn't mean that the king does not have an

active role to play, to increase or improve the balance

of trade in the economy.

First, the king has on its power the use of

tariffs.

He could put forward, but we will call later in

the 20th century when we discuss development economists.

Some degree of import substitution strategies.

It could set low tariffs on imports for the export

and high tariffs on imports for domestic consumption so that

domestic industries are developed.

And he can also encourage colonisation of other lands, using

merchants as an arm of power and supporting commercial monopolies

such as the East India Company.

Remember, the interests of the merchants are in the best

interest of India.

It's the only way having a positive balance of trade

to both increase wealth and power.

However, if Thomas Moon and this will be something we

will discuss in our class next week.

It's also calling for some code of prudence and provision.

From the part of the King.

The one hand, the king should not hoard treasure.

It should not underspend when it gets from taxes.

To prepare for times of war.

It's better for the king to spend the money it

has on defences.

We'll see why when we discuss this.

And after which point.

And it should.

Shouldn't also overtaxing subjects.

Why?

To begin with.

Because, as we've seen before, money is a life of

trade.

Right this morning that the king is accumulating, uh, via

revenues should be actively circulating, uh, in, uh, the kingdom.

And Thomas Moon, as we'll see, will equate the role

of the king to that of the stomach in the

body.

Right.

The king needs to digest, uh, this treasure in order

to distribute these resources across society.

Um, instead of hoarding it as treasure, waiting for the

times of why.

Okay, we'll discuss this, uh, further in, uh, or classes

next week.

So at a more at a more abstract level, the

Thomas Moons work was not only a defence of the

role of merchants was not only a piece of policy

advising to the king, but was first and foremost an

argument about the relationship between foreign trade and national foreign

trade increases the kingdom's pressure for war and defence.

Of course, it serves to witch wars, but it's also

an end in itself.

It is the source of plenty and power for the

kingdom and its inhabitants.

The only, uh, aspect that sets a limit to the

expansion of the balance of trade is the competition with

other powers.

So we see with Thomas more and more countries thinking

more generally a view that there is no harmony of

interest internationally.

That international trade is a zero sum game.

We'll come back to this idea.

We will discuss Ricardo's views on free trade and the

benefits for free trade, the way countries will see international

trade more as a space of contention and competition.

It will be a matter of economic warfare and a

balance of power.

But with the capitalists allied with me, as we'll see

next week.

There is no harmony of interest domestically either.

There is no concern in my country's thinking with notions

of what we may refer to as social welfare.

They will focus on state, on the product, product, productive

activities, and prioritise the foreign sectors at the expense of

consumers and the development of the domestic economy.

Okay, there are losers and winners in this model, Altman

continues.

And this will become very clear for us.

And he would write against us forthwith.

All right.

Any questions about mercantilism so far?

Wonderful.

So now let's jump and discuss our fisher crowds, who

are not only writing a very different economic and political

context, but will deal with a very different set of

problematics and questions and develop a very distinctive argument from

that of a context.

So why are they there?

The first group of property who first properly adopted the

name of economists and academic activists.

They were a group and a school in the full

sense of the world.

They had their own journal.

They read, they had their own textbook economy, a rural,

rural economy.

And we control the economy.

And they were a group that were around, built around

an intellectual leader, uh, under the name of a Francois

Kimi official with a very close relation to the key.

The problem they will be dealing with is not again,

that of expanding the power and might of the kingdom.

Remember, we are in a context of absolutism, but making

the case for actually limiting absolute power.

And the argument they will develop is that there are

natural laws that regulate the circulation of agricultural surplus in

society.

And only by understanding how these natural laws work.

The King can guarantee not only the subsistence of the

population, but the reproduction of the social order that constituted

the basis for the ancient regime.

The.

The ancient Regina in France.

Okay.

What was the economic problem they were dealing with then?

It was a problem of subsistence in a mechanised, agrarian

society.

So what's the background for this?

Just like in Britain, Thomas Mann was arguing, uh, in

favour of the interests of the merchants.

And we have a type of British mercantilism.

We find the same in France, particularly during the reign

of, uh, a King Louis 14th.

Um, and these mercantilist policies became very clear, uh, under,

uh, the finance, the role of the finance minister.

Uh, Colbert.

Uh, basically established a set of policies, uh, according to

which the King would become a sponsor of a manufacturers

in France, in particular the production of luxury goods that

could be sold abroad, uh, at higher prices.

Examples of this type of public support of uh artisans,

uh, are to be found in the French pavilion, in

the tapestries, or in the in the porcelains, in silver.

Um, and, uh, this mercantilist view placed the emphasis on

the production of manufactures as opposed to, uh, the stimulation

of agricultural produce.

And this was particularly problematic in the context of the

19th century of the 18th century in France, because food,

particularly grain security, was a major political and social concern.

There were multiple harvest failures and famines, and this produced

social disorder, as exemplified in the Flour War in 1775,

uh, a set of riots that popped up at different

parts of France in reaction to the rise in consumer

prices of bread.

And if we have some sense of a French history.

We will know that these type of riots around the

problems of access to food will lead, in the end,

to the French Revolution, Towards the end of the season.

So even before then, the rockets were writing against this

program.

We have a program.

How can we guarantee the subsistence of the poorest strata

in society?

And answering this question was of great importance for the

King, because only it depended the subsistence of this particular

social order.

Now, the conventional wisdom to address this problem was that

it was necessary to prevent the export of agricultural goods.

Remember, under a mercantilist framework, we need to prevent the

export of those goods that we need to consume at

home.

We need only also to restrict commerce between cities.

So there was free movement of grains between the countryside

and the cities, but not between different cities, and we

need to regulate prices to maintain these.

These goods cheap.

The mercantilist will rise, so the Fisher Price will rise

against this.

Conventional wisdom.

Uh, so who was Francois Kinnear, the intellectual leader of

this, uh, school of thought?

He was a biologist and a philosopher, and his medical

background influenced his economic thinking.

He will actually use a biological method.

He will he will treat the body politic as a

body as such, as in the body, fluids need to

circulate freely in the body politic.

Agricultural surplus needs to find its way, to circulate freely

to different parts of the body, to different classes.

He was also a person that was very close to

power.

He was a physician to the powerful Madame Pompadour and

a courtier of Louis XV.

15 at the side and the Feast of Rats, imbued

by enlightenment thinker who tried to use spiritual thinking to

recommend ways to reform, uh, the political system, uh, in

France in the 18th century.

Fiscal policy means the rule of nature.

Conveying the idea that there is there are natural laws

that extend over the social realm.

And the type of natural laws that the physical cuts

would focus on, uh, would begin with a very Simple

principle.

Only nature is able to produce surplus over the cost

of production.

Nature alone affords others.

That is to say, the only social class that is

productive in the strict sense of the word, in the

sense of being able to produce more in terms of

value than it costs to produce goods are agricultural fibres,

but not every type of agricultural farmer.

Those are agricultural farmers that have adopted the latest technologies.

Mechanise agricultural farmers.

Remember that image from the physical body?

Uh, by digital and.

Other social classes.

Artisans produce manufacturers and landlords.

Who on the are stereotypes?

However, they are sterile in the sense that they do

not produce circles or in nature is able to produce

surpluses or the cost of production.

But despite being sterile in this sense, they are essential

for the circulation of net revenue across society.

The artisans produce the manufacturers that are necessary for the

subsistence of landlords and farmers, and more importantly, they produce

the tools and equipment that allow for this sort of

capital intensive agriculture.

And more importantly, the landlords.

They are the ones who own the land, and essentially

they are the only social class in society that is

able to advance capital to kick off the production process

in the first place.

The circulation of net revenue through the exchange between these

different social classes follows a natural order as well.

That the King needs to take into consideration in order

to guarantee the subsistence of this world.

And this is the system that can be reproduced in

what was perhaps the first economic model in the history

of the discipline.

The Tableau conomique.

He used again a medical metaphor.

Right.

The circulation of money and goods in an economic system

is equivalent to the circulation of body fluids.

Fluids need to circulate freely across the system so that

goods and money get to each social class according to

their needs.

Understanding the tableau.

This formalised system of exchange between these three social classes

farmers, artisans and landlords is very difficult.

It is a challenge and it will be your homework

to try to decipher these before our classes.

But ask yourselves the following.

What is the time frame of this flow?

What are these units on the sides expressed in money

or goods?

Just like in every type of economic model, there are

assumptions and ads.

The assumptions are right on the sides.

To this diagram, what are these assumptions?

What happens if these assumptions do not hold?

Is the system in equilibrium?

Is it always in equilibrium?

So this is a thought experiment.

It is a first attempt at economic modelling.

The figures that appear here are not arbitrary.

They are actually reflecting what, according to what could be

produced if capital available could be productively employed.

And again, pay attention to the assumptions.

For our discussion next week.

So Fisher grads, like other economists, will study in this

course.

We'll use numbers to put forward a political message.

They will use numbers for a political agenda.

Uh, we can identify some factors of this equilibrium in

the tableau that limit the proper circulation of net revenue

between social classes, and try to infer from them some

implications for stakeholders.

Let's focus on the first one.

Remember the common view they received to you about how

to deal with the problems of subsistence and farming in

18th century France?

Is that actually what was needed?

Was depressed prices controlled prices, either by a quotas or

by a restriction of trade between different countries.

But if we focus on this, naturally, we realise that

under circumstances, under a situation of artificially increased prices, well,

farmers will not have enough incentives to work on the

land.

And if they do not have enough incentives to work

on the land, the agricultural surplus will be decreased and

the necessary amount of goods for to be to for

the subsistence of the other social classes.

I will not be in circulation in the economy.

So instead of restricting prices, instead of restricting trade.

First, a first and big normative implication of mercantilist thinking

is that it's actually good high prices, which will encourage

agricultural surplus.

Previous thinkers have neglected these very essential facts.

Its very essential law.

Only nature provides surplus, and agricultural producers need to have

the incentive to work the land productively in order to

bring this surplus to circulation in the economy.

So policy should aim to keep prices high, not keep

prices low.

We see, like with the merchants, the visionaries are going

through economic reasoning against common sense.

And then the fishing eyes will put forward this idea

with a political slogan that will have its own career

in economic thinking.

Laissez faire.

Let's allow the free circulation of grains, uh, across the

French economy.

Let agricultural producers set their own prices, uh, in the

market.

Let's say, let's say per se.

But there are other implications that can be inferred from,

uh, those situations in which some of the assumptions in

the economic do not hold those factors of this equilibrium.

For example, if we have a predominance of labour intensive

farming, that is, uh, farming that is not using capital

in the most productive way.

Um, this Circulation of net revenue will not bring the

necessary surplus required for the reproduction of all social classes.

Hence, what we need to promote is a type of

agriculture that is incorporating this new capital large scale capital

intensive farming.

What about if we tax farmers?

If we tax farmers, these will act, in today's jargon

as a distortion tax, uh, in the circulation of this

revenue.

Hence, what we need is a single tax on landlords

by the beginning of the experience.

They are the only ones who have the ability to

save from one period another and to provide a capital.

So one single tax on landlords.

Your modern idea of a progressive income tax is preferable

to distortion or taxes that are set on the circulation

process.

Indirect taxes.

So we see how this early economic model serves not

only to put forward the physical idea of how a

natural order could look like, what the natural laws regulating

the reproduction of the social order are, but also serve

as a tool to provide policy guidance for the key.

Right.

Pretty much like modern economic models function.

The economic, uh, was not well received.

Uh, early on, as we know, the French uh, kingdom

did not pay attention to, uh, fisheries policies.

If they have done so.

Probably the French Revolution could have been avoided.

We don't know that.

Um, and it was rediscovered later on in the 19th

century by Marx.

It was influential on Marx, uh, analysis of exchange and

by other econometricians like, uh, in an Irish in the

20th century.

We'll come back to this later on in the course.

All right.

So with Fisher, as we move from this argument focusing

on the national power of the king, right, and how

to increase the increase it, uh, through a positive balance

of trade to an argument about how the existence of

a natural order regulating the production of agricultural surplus and

its circulation in society provides arguments, actually, to limit the

power of the King.

The not the the the rule of nature became for

the fisher creates this basis for the reproduction not only

of social classes, but of the social order of the

Ancien Rgime itself.

And the physics under thinking.

Uh, brings us to what has been known in the

literature as the Fisher parallels.

How come the Fisher crowds can advocate, on the one

hand, for free trade?

Remember this less affair, less a slogan without questioning the

fact that the King is powerful and has absolute power,

in fact.

How can we reconcile this advocacy for free trade and,

uh, the acceptance of the absolute power of the King?

Uh, one solution to that paradox in your thinking is

that idea of enlightened despotism.

This belief that the King needs Economists by his side.

Right.

He needs people like Francois Canet who, by educating people

on how the natural system works, will provide the necessary

type of knowledge to reform the system and understand that

the power of the scheme should be limited.

Right.

In, uh, following this, this type of policies.

We will see.

We need a very different solution to this problem.

Right?

Uh, with Smith, uh, it is it will not be

possible to reconcile this idea that, uh, the king, the

government, the state can be all powerful, uh, for commercial

societies to prosper.

Um, and what we need a to take into consideration

is actually how societies progress is not ready when we

allow everyone to follow their own interest.

With a very limited and circumscribed rule for the whole

state.

Okay, so we'll see in our next class, in our

next lecture, how Adam Smith will write against the work

of ordinary capitalists and Fisher class and attempt to provide

a systematic explanation of how society is built around a

system of natural liberty are, uh, and can be the

most prosperous, wealthy and powerful.

Okay, so for our first class next week, please prepare

carefully the readings from Thomas More.

Time for instruction.

Read actively.

Uh, using the reading questions we've posted on Moodle.

We'll post, uh, the class workshop before the beginning of

that of that next, next class and in our next

lecture outside anticipated will be a little world of science.

If you have any questions, I'll be happy to take

them outside in the next couple.

All right.

Thank you.

I.

Know.

It looks like something like.

This.

Well.

I guess I'll see you.

Okay.

China.

China.

Yeah.

It was the.

Mao, which wasn't working.

So was he disconnected?

Yeah.

Um, so it's like this originally is on the, uh.

I see, I think, yeah.

Here is more.

Reliable than that on the screen.

I'm sorry that happened.

It was working perfectly well.

No, no, no, I finished.

Yeah I did.

It took too long for you to to to solve

the issue.

Oh my gosh.

And it can be seen here like, uh, in ten

minutes kind of thing.

But they've spent some time to figure out what happened.

Okay.

Thank you.

I hope it works better today.

Yeah.

Uh, guys, has anyone got the lecture attendance?

Oh.

It's here.

I see everyone time.

Okay.

How are you doing that?

That's what we were talking about.

Of course.

We got.

Like we just said.

Lecture 3:

Okay, guys.

Thank you.

So welcome to our third lecture on speed.

But before, uh, just a quick announcement, my colleague at

the Department of Arts.

Uh, we'll talk about his new book, uh, on the

monetary policies in, uh, pre-modern Europe.

We know about that because we discussed in the classes

last week all the debate around mercantilism and mercantilist policies.

And we'll come back to the subject of money.

This book is, uh, based on the Holy Roman Empire.

But I hope many of you will find it.

Okay.

Okay.

So we'll move today from the pre-modern world of the

capitalists and the Fisher graphs to discuss, uh, with Adam

Smith, uh, the origins and early developments of classical political

economy, which will be the subject that we'll be discussing

and talking in the next, uh, 3 or 4 days.

Okay.

So we move from this context of commercial expansion and

battles over indices, uh, with the American tourists, in which

foreign trade was seen as the main source of wealth,

and from this context of, um, pre-revolutionary France, of absolute

monarchy, and which the French developed this argument that the

king needed to take into account the natural world.

Right.

Uh, and the fact that only nature affords surplus, and

that this surplus needs to be freely distributed across society,

following this natural order, in order to avoid, uh, this

order to be invented.

Right.

The subsistence and reproduction of the social order Depending on

the king getting, uh, an idea of how this system

will be discussing today a very different approach to the

question about the origins of wealth and what this natural

order, which we will call it today, system of natural

liberty, uh, words.

And which means we'll see some of the elements that

will be common, uh, for, uh, other classical political economists,

in particular, the fact that, uh, the origin of wealth

is, uh, to be found in labour.

And, uh, this means will give not just agricultural production,

not just industry manufacture, artificial wealth a role in the

production of wealth, but we'll posit that it is in

markets and the market is changing, that societies can't find

the cost for human traders.

Okay, but We need to understand that Smith is writing

in a changing economic context as well.

So can anyone here tell me or guess what this

picture here is representing?

And includes.

Yes.

Yes.

I'm sorry.

Division of labour.

Yes.

That idea inspired by this image.

But more quickly, what is this image representing?

Division of labour.

In what type of industries?

What type of production or supply chain structure?

Any clues?

Yes.

In making, remaking, Remaking the Factory again, we have another

picture from the scope of these items meeting you about

this picture.

And why has it been thought to be so important

for our purpose?

Because that's precisely the example with which apparently begins the

multiplication.

Right?

He tells us.

A man will experience.

You will make one play.

An experienced artisan will perhaps make 20.

But in modern manufactures, when the making is divided into

18 operations, they can produce up to 4800 units.

What a remarkable observation.

So we'll be focusing with me on the origins of

the factory system.

This will allow us to move beyond this context in

which, remember, the only gains of trade, the only the

only source of wealth for the beast was to be

found in international trade.

To try to understand how can well be generated in

these societies in which, through mechanisms such as the division

of labour productivity is increasing and wealth is being produced.

And in a way, uh.

Innovations such as the factory where 1st May see an

unintended consequence of mercantilist policies.

This provided the motive for the development of mass production

and mass consumption at home domestically.

Uh, and we'll see how in the next couple of

weeks, we move from these early stages of the Industrial

revolution, focusing on the division of labour within, uh, a

particular firm, for example, a particular industry, to try to

understand, uh, the, uh, origins and the explanations given for

a mass production and consumption through industrial means.

We are all here with Smith in the early stages

of the Industrial Revolution, and these were the types of

things that captured Adam Smith's attention.

Okay, so a good point of departure to introduce Smith

is to refer to his last book, the last book

in the World of Nations.

Uh, it was composed of four volumes, and it is

in this fourth volume that he discusses a critique to

what he called the agricultural and American soil system that

we discussed last week.

So against the mercantilist, he would say, well, wealth does

not consist of money, but actually what money purchases?

And he would provide a devastating critique of what he

called the enzymes of the American system, the system of

tariffs, controls, impositions and monopolies.

He will also take issue at the observation that only

nature of surplus, that wealth production, can only be found

in agriculture.

You have an example here.

manufactures are also productive activities and, as I anticipated before,

will find their production the main cause of the production

of, well, not in one particular economic activity, but rather

in market exchanges and in the division of labour that

market exchanges promote.

Okay, so This is the world will be highlighting today

the world, the early industrial revolution, the world of specialisation

in the factory and other sectors.

Okay, so this is a plan I have for us

today.

First, we need to understand as well, together with the

economic context, the intellectual environment in which I have experience,

right, and in particular the context of the Scottish Enlightenment.

Then I will provide some elements for you to understand

the general argument of the nations will discuss specific details

next week in our classes.

And finally, I would like to close with this idea

that Smith, working The Wealth of Nations, was an exercise

of systematisation.

The first systematic approach to political economy as a science.

But he also provides clues to understand political economy as

an art.

Right.

We can use our understanding of those laws that we

can discover through political economy to inform the king, the

prince, and in this case, the legislature in three societies.

How we can infer norms and maxims of okay political

economy as a science, as an arsenal.

We'll come back to these when we discuss students like

me.

All right.

So let's begin with this contest.

At first was worth the money.

So, Adam Smith, many of you know him for the

word patience.

He was an intellectual Viking during the Scottish Enlightenment.

Uh, there are many accounts, biographical accounts of him being

an.

Absence of mind like the old Wigglesworth.

Uh, he remained a bachelor most of his life.

He lived with his mother.

Uh, but he was also very well connected.

He reached fame when he was living something that might

not be the faith of most of many of the

economists we will discuss today in this course.

He exchanged correspondence with, uh, great intellectuals of his time,

such as David Hume.

But he was also the tutor of the son of

the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Charles Townsend, and was with,

uh, Charles Townshend so on that he travelled to Europe,

to Geneva and Paris in particular, which, as we know,

was particularly important because he had to.

He got to know personally the Fisher crowds, friends, McKinney

and others.

He also knew in his travels a French economist like

to go.

So he was very much aware and part of this

European network of enlightened thinkers writing in Scotland, England and

in Paris.

Um, he, uh, was also an academic.

He, uh, had the shared of logic and moral philosophy

in the University of Glasgow.

This will give us a clue of the type of

discussions.

I mean, it was interesting.

He was first a moral economist and then a political

economist, and as I will develop later today, is political

economy in a way builds from his broader understanding of

moral philosophy.

Um, he wrote about a huge variety of subjects.

Remember, this is a time in which we don't have

specialised disciplines.

Political economy is just emerging as such.

Uh, he wrote on science.

Uh, his first book was actually, uh, a compilation of

essays on astronomy.

He wrote, uh, his first major book, and the one

here, which he which for which he was mostly non-military,

is like Theory of Moral Sentiments.

And then he wrote about political economy, these major authors

into the nature and the causes of the world.

There is a third piece of this writing program that

he never managed to complete, which in his view, will

complete the system.

He was thinking of political thought on a theory of

jurisprudence which would deal with the loss of justice.

So I am Smith's work was went beyond the wealth

of nations, and we need to understand this to get

a better sense of where his ideas about political economy

are coming from.

But I also would like to point out that it

was an unfinished work.

And this may help us understand why many of the

economists will study in this course.

We'll come back to Adam Smith and pick up different

elements.

So you will find people as different as Frank Knight

Hayek, behavioural economists and institutional economists all raising back their

ideas to this very complex and interesting writer who still

today has very much to say.

Now, what was the context in which he was writing?

It was precisely that of the enlightenment and in particular

Scottish Enlightenment.

There are two questions that Scottish thinkers at the time

were interested in.

The first one.

One of the big questions of liberal political philosophy in

the English speaking world.

What holds society together?

How can we explain that society of free individuals is

not falling into chaos.

Why do we see order instead of chaos?

And we have a society of free, equal individuals, right?

We have different responses to this type of question from,

let's say, English thinkers.

Uh, according to Hobbes, the idea would be, you know,

the fear of violence and death forces individuals to subordinate

power to an absolute monarch, to sovereign power.

So it's a sovereign power.

Uh, given this propensity of people to kill each other

by following, because of following their own interest that holds

society together.

So, you know, we have a different view, right?

A society is organised by a preceding social contract.

More interestingly, for our discussion, we have people like the

governor of Mandeville, uh, who wrote this book on the

fable of the peace These without, you know.

You know what?

We can understand social order as emerging not from the

presence of a sovereign, from the previous establishment of a

social contract, but rather by individuals acting on their own

selfish interests, individual vices in a world order, society in

a civilised society will produce public benefits.

So it is precisely because people are at stake, because

people have selfish motives, because they act on their own

interests, that this society can be ordered, such as the

Society of Bees.

Right?

They just work on their own interests and they produce

a collective mood without the need of a sovereign, without

the need of a previously established person.

Now, Scottish Enlightenment thinkers such as Hutchinson will react That's

against Monday's news.

We'll see.

There are some parallels, but some crucial distinctions with Smith's

own moral views as well.

Like Hutchinson and other Scottish Enlightenment thinkers, will actually point

to a variety of motives that guide human action.

Yes, granted, human beings have selfish motive motives, and these

are important to understand, but they have also pro-social motives

that we need to take into consideration in order to

address this question.

What holds society?

The second key question that Scottish in 19 and 1918

years would address is, well, how can we understand the

progress and evolution of societies?

And the Scottish Historical School will develop this evolutionary theory

of social organisation, according to which economic or material conditions,

institutions and moral virtues evolve All together according to different

stages of progress.

Right.

So it is one thing.

So from primitive societies based on gathering activities, uh, societies

then settled into pastoral and agrarian societies.

And the society that Scottish Enlightenment leaders were trying to

understand was precisely what they called a commercial society, a

commercial society based on which subsistence and the means of

subsistence are not provided by the direct, uh, production, uh,

for subsistence goods, but rather are, uh, people obtain what

they need to satisfy their needs and ones by exchanging

and trading with each other and the type of institutions

and moral behaviours, uh, in the societies differ from more

traditional ones and for Scottish Enlightenment thinkers.

We need to understand how these things come together, right?

How people's means of subsistence are intimately related with their

own societies, institutions and moral duties.

So, building on these ideas, um Smith will develop a

program of moral philosophy.

This will be his first, uh, book.

And he asked this question in commercial societies, the societies

we are living in, which is the latest stage of

development of European societies as we know it.

What are the criteria upon which moral judgements, judgements about

what is good and is that should be based?

And Smith will provide These guiding principle.

Sympathy.

Sympathy is what holds the society together.

Among other moral duties and sympathy.

Has a particular importance in a society in which people

stop knowing each other.

This ability to put yourselves on the side of others,

to think about your own moral behaviours from the other

points of view, and to judge your own behaviours from

the point of view of an impartial observer, is for

me.

What is behind the development of social norms of sociability

that keeps societies together?

It is this pro-social behaviour that makes us not kill

each other, but rather develop institutions as we'll see them,

such as markets in which we all can thrive and

progress.

There are other, um, virtues and elements that are particularly

important in these societies.

The desire for approval is countered selfish motives.

And this motive that I will elaborate in a minute

about, uh, this desire to improve one's own condition.

Given that one wants or others approval, one would restrain

our oneself from hurting, uh, the author and acting selfishly,

but in particular in commercial societies, again, in which the

means of subsistence are not obtained directly but indirectly by

exchanging, bartering and trading with others.

Prudence becomes a primary gift.

Now prudence refers both to an intellectual capacity, this ability

to think ahead About the advantages or detriments that would

result from one's own actions.

But also it implies this moral virtue of self command.

This ability that individuals develop to abstain from pressing pleasure,

to endure and enduring present pain in order to obtain

greater pleasure and avoiding greater pain in the future.

This is what is called the virtue of prudence.

Provision and individuals in these societies, in commercial societies are

to, uh, who should share this virtue, are able, for

instance, to foresee that they will be better off by

bringing their goods to the market and exchanging them for

other goods they do not have, and they will also

be able to save what they have today in order

to improve their condition for tomorrow.

What we will see is behind Smith's notion of parsimony.

Right.

Saving their propensity to save.

To increase the returns of our savings and investments.

Right.

So we see how, even for Adam Smith, even if

our sympathy and pro-social behaviours are what keep a society

together in commercial societies, uh, there are some virtues that

are relevant for understanding the behaviour of human beings in

their economic life.

Okay, so his work on the Theory of Moral Sentiments

in a way paves the ground for a new political

economy.

We will not understand his work on economics without having

into account how Fort Smith, uh, human beings have multiple.

There are multiple moral virtues, more moral behaviours, uh, that,

uh, they bring into society, and how he will make

abstraction of all of them to focus on economic behaviours

in the Wealth of Nations, in particular this, uh, behaviour

that he will call self-interest, this motive for action that

he will call self interest or the desire to improve

one's own condition.

Okay.

So this is the point of departure of The Wealth

of Nations.

Adam Smith when he wrote this book, he would assume

that his contemporaries would have read this other book and

would know that human beings are complex and societies and

together because of complex human behaviours.

But he would bring our attention to the following question

in this commercial society that he has described before.

How can we understand?

If a society can prosper when everyone is following their

own self-interest, their own desire to improve one's own condition?

And the same famous quote on the butcher, the brewer

and the maker only makes sense if we consider atoms

with work against his work.

His previous work on moral philosophy.

Right.

He would tell us, it is not true that the

benevolence of the boxer, the brewer and the bakery, that

we fix our dinner.

But from their regard to their own interests, we address

ourselves not to humanity, but to their self-love, and never

talk to them or necessities part of their own advantages.

Okay.

Human beings, following their own self-interest, meet and exchange changing

the market.

And this is the type of behaviour that.

Political economy will be about right, making abstraction of all

other drivers for human action.

We would ask ourselves, can a society in which this

is the main driver of prosper enhancement response with the.

Yes.

So private public benefits will emerge from selfish interests, but

not in the sense that Mandeville was arguing before.

Not because public biases lead to private biases lead to

the goods, but because in the space of sociability, right?

That is ruled by the loss of sympathy and pro-social

behaviours, individuals can meet and find a common benefit with

each other by exchanging in the market.

Right.

So the question that the Wealth of Nations is set

to address is precisely this.

How can a society where everyone follows their own interests

leads to social order, not chaos, to prosperity and wealth?

Now?

The apparent contradiction between the human motives, uh, addressed in

this works, the theoretical sentiments and the wealth of nations,

uh, have led to what in German historiography was known

as the Smith problem, the Adam Smith problem.

Is there an inconsistency between Adam Smith's views of individuals

moral behaviours, and what he thinks about the home economics,

the economic man and his economic behaviours?

If we take into account that Adam Smith is just

making an abstraction in.

The Wealth of Nations about the complexity of human behaviours.

This inconsistency disappears.

So we know that economic relations are guided by some

interest.

But this is just one dimension of social and sociability.

This is an element that behavioural economists will bring back

to economics in the past 2030 years.

There are many other types of behaviours that influence how

economic agents make choices, but we also need to take

into account that economic exchanges, market exchanges occur also in

an institutional space.

These norms of behaviour that emerge from the pro-social sympathetic

drivers of human action result and are embodied in commercial

societies.

Institutions and institutions are tools of justice, right?

And we'll see how Adam Smith consider this the missing

bit of his system.

Right.

He said, well, in my first edition of The Theory

of Moral Sentiments, I said that in another discourse, and

never in the Wealth of Nations, I should give account

of the general principles of law and government, not only

to what is what concerns justice, but even concerns police

revenue and arms.

Remember three things that are crucial in my thinking and

whenever whatever else is subject of the law in the

inquiry concerning the not to and the causes of the

Wealth of Nations, he has partly executed this promise, at

least so far as concerns police, Germany and others.

What remains is the theory of jurisprudence.

Right, So Adam Smith's system is completed when we understand

that the market behaviours and market exchanges are, um, operating

within the norms of sociability that result from sympathetic individuals,

but also operate in an institutional framework that has clear

loss of justice.

Right.

And this, again, will be an idea that institutional economists

will study in this course, such as the North will

come back, right.

Markets need institutions to war.

And our new Nobel laureates, uh, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson

will add.

Well, it also needs rules of redistribute distributive justice, right.

The markets and also pick up on this.

So so we see how Adam Smith is a complex

thinker right.

He will set apart one driver of human action to

provide an understanding of an understanding of how human beings

meet with each other in markets and behave as economic

men, within a context in which he has already argued

that markets are both built on migrations, are both built

on previous norms of sociability and needs, and require rules

of justice.

Okay, so having this in mind, what was the argument

the economic argument developed in the world of nations before

that?

Is there any question about this first part?

Fantastic.

Okay.

So remember the title, the subtitle of his book.

What are the main Causes and Origins of Wealth?

The main source of wealth for Smith.

This would be his main argument is not found in

a particular activity in international trade or agriculture, but in

labour.

The point of departure of his work is then not.

What is it that increases the power of the king,

or guarantees the subsistence of the population, like for the

benefit of us?

But rather, what are the main causes or the main

drivers for increases in what he called the annual form

of labour that is required to satisfy both the wants

and needs of people, but also the freedom and ease

that allows them to live a happy life, a life

worth living.

So wealth is not equated to power or the power

of the king, as with American citizens, or is not

simply concerned with material subsistence, but The Wealth of Nations

is a book about how can societies prosper and have

a happy life and accumulate an annual fund of labour,

a fund of labour that allows individuals to both satisfy

wants and needs, but also have the ease and freedom

that is behind the happy life worth it?

This argument will place a strong emphasis on the idea

that this form of labour is increased not by design,

not by specific, deliberate policies, but rather by a natural

process that operates via the division of labour.

Remember the bean factory?

The specialisation that we see in the factory and the

resulting productivity gains is what is allowing these societies to

produce beyond subsistence and to acquire more and different goods

in the market, but also to liberate our time and

ease to conduct a civilised life.

Second element of Smith's general argument the division of labour

is powered by a powerful force, a powerful engine that

we will associate in the next couple of weeks with

capital accumulation.

So from the Fisher graphs, he would take this idea

that what kicks off the production process is the capital

advances provided by those people in society who have access

to a surplus.

In this case, it will not be the landowners, but

the capitalist class, and the role of capital will be

precisely to employ productive work.

So he will borrow from the Fisher Vichy France.

This distinction between productive and productive labour and the role

of capital would be to use labour for the production

of tradeable things, things that are exchanged in the market.

And we'll see how he builds an argument with capital

accumulation from this observation.

Lastly.

Adam Smith, uh, would argue that these surplus goods are

distributed through market exchanges within and between societies and that

this allows for increasing not only increasing nations wealth, but

also distributing this wealth, uh, across all social classes and

between societies.

So we'll see how, in contrast to the mercantilist Adam

Smith system of natural liberty, uh, we'll posit that there

is a harmony of interests between the country, on the

town, and between different countries exchanging with each other.

All right.

So as you see in these five items, this is

providing a systematic analysis of how commercial societies operate.

We find it gives me, uh, the origins, the seeds

of theory of consumption, a theory of production, and theories

of distribution and circulation.

The four elements that encompasses, say, a translation of an

intimate world, will constitute the subject matter of political economy.

All right.

So let's begin with the first set of arguments.

How can we understand this argument in group one, chapters

1 to 3 about the division of labour?

Well, the point of departure is that Labour, as it

mentioned, Information is the only source of value.

He would say that, um, it is not by gold

or by silver, but by label that all wealth of

the world was originally purchased.

And Smith provides a couple of examples of how this

annual fund of labour can be increased through the division

of labour.

We've seen the first one already.

The first example he gives opening his book then within

any industry is specialisation.

So within specific factory, uh, we see that the division

of labour increases productivity by allowing people to specialise.

Right.

That allows, uh, people to specialise in specific skills and

dexterity.

It saves people time moving from one activity to another.

And of course, the incorporation of complex machinery.

Right.

So these are three mechanisms by which the division of

labour works.

But he is also thinking and you will find examples

of this in the list in the last few pages

of chapter one about a different perspective on the division

of labour.

It's not just the division of labour within the factory

as represented in this image, but also a social division

of labour right, in which different individuals devote themselves to

different types of activities, such as in Milton Friedman famous

pencil example.

Right.

Making it possible that to produce one single good a

pencil, the activities and actions of multiple people from different

social classes, different social standings are needed.

Right?

So he's also thinking, uh, when he has in mind

the division of labour about what we may call is

social division of labour.

I specialisation across society that makes individuals interdependent of each

other.

Hence they need to trade in the markets.

And this is a driver for a human and social

groups okay.

Now when it has to do with the causes of

the division of labour and it leaves this actually quite

underdetermined.

He just mentions, well, the driver behind the division of

labour is just the human propensity to track barter and

exchange.

So human human beings in commercial societies have this drive

to bring goods to the market, to obtain goods they

don't have, and that allow them to satisfy their needs

at once.

But we in this course know that he has written

a book before, right?

And that this propensity to talk by joining exchange has

behind it these views of prudence and provision.

Right.

Individuals know that they would be better off if they

bring this group to the market instead of exchanging it,

instead of consuming it itself.

And they have these spaces in which they have developed

a common language to track, barter and exchange.

They know they will go there and they will not

be robbed.

That this exchange is somehow fair.

It is precedent by institutions.

So the origins of the division of labour have behind

these moral behaviours and these institutional settings that Maine has

written in other books.

Okay.

So what is the consequence of the division of labour?

Well, there is a surplus of goods that are traded

in the market.

Again, people will end up richer than they arrived because

they are able to exchange goods they do not want

for those that satisfy their needs and desires.

It is time and pleasure for joyful activities as well.

And the limit for this mechanism is only set by

the extent of the market, the size of the market.

How big the market is will determine how far their

specialisation driven by the division of labour proceeds and operates.

Right now, Smith is writing in a context in which,

as we saw with the lists, innovations in navigation have

made possible the expansion of the market.

So this principle of the division of labour is not

just operating at different levels within societies, but at an

international level.

And as I see Smith, this will be behind Smith's

Argument for a free international trade based on an argument

on absolute advantage.

Okay, now we need to talk about Smith's labour theory,

right?

I mentioned before, Labour is the only source of value.

This will be a common assumption among all classical political

economists.

But why did Smith mean by that?

Yeah.

Uh, here is reformulations.

Um, Adam Smith of his theory of value that tried

to address this question.

Why do human beings value goods?

The first one, which we will call the embodied theory

of value, will posit a relationship between the person and

the good.

Goods have value because people put labour into them.

He would use the following example.

He would say it takes twice the labour to kill

a beaver than tequila deer.

Right.

Hence, beaver skin is the euro.

It's more valuable for individuals than a beer meat.

That's a formulation of the value that we will call

embodied labour.

Okay.

Would somebody because they have Labour put into this.

But I mean have other formulations of the theory of

value that are of interest for us, because we'll come

back to them when we discuss Marx goods and value,

because they also represent relationships between people.

In his sacrificed version of the theory of value, I

will pursue the following.

Well, killing a deer is painfully putting labour into producing

things is painful.

And by changing goods in the markets, you are relieving

yourself from the pain.

That sacrifice of your time, attention and abilities that producing

a particular good requires, right?

The sacrificed notion of white goods or value.

You would say that for me, the toil and trouble

you can say, he can say to himself, and which

can impose upon other people.

You can save yourself the toil and trouble, or find

the means of your subsistence, and impose it to other

people by exchanging goods with them in the market.

There is a notion also on which you value that

will also point to a relationship between people, and in

this case, a relationship of power.

And Marx will build on this idea later on, as

you'll see.

Smith says the following A person must be rich or

poor according to the quantity of labour which he can

command.

So by bringing goods to the market, you are commanding

power over others.

We call this today purchasing power, right?

But the commanding is not just power over that particular

good, that particular commodity that you acquire in the market,

but about all the labour that the goods you're bringing

to the market allows you to purchase.

Right.

You are commanding the labour of big amount of people

who have been involved in the production of that good,

in a society in which the social division of labour

has fallen.

Okay, so green oceans are honest, meets labour with you,

but you will come back to them, you know, in

class.

Smith will also ask himself okay then how can we

measure value if value is?

Is it Labour is the only source of value.

How can we measure it?

What is a proper measure of the labour value of

goods?

And this will break into a pilot that we will

revisit when we study time manager between the use and

exchange values of goods.

So why goods are more useful, like water are exchanged

for less value than those which are not for example,

like diamonds.

We need to have a proper measure of this exchange

value.

This means will be sceptical that there is one unique

measure of exchange value of goods.

Um, he will posit some approximations, which, as you will

see, will depend on the specific circumstances.

Sciences, we can measure the exchange value in terms of

time.

The time devoted to kill the deer or to kill

the beaver.

Uh, we could use other goods, right?

Exchange value of goods can be expressed in terms of

one particular commodity corn grains.

This will be useful, for example, in the long run,

and in some cases money is a good approximation of

value.

We'll see in a couple of weeks.

Uh, why this is only an imperfect approximation.

Third question that we can ask about this theory of

value.

How are prices determined?

Of course, each of us meet in the market and

what they what they see our prices, they buy products,

um, for the price they see in the market.

Uh, because the division of labour has operated to an

extent that goods are not exchange for each other, but

that a goods are exchanged for a monetary value in

the market.

So how are these prices determined?

No matter how you measure them and meet Will.

We will present a key distinction between what he will

call the market price, the spot price, the price that

individuals who come to exchange in the market find at

one particular moment in time.

And this market price will be determined by the relationship

between the supply of commodities and what he calls effectual

democratic commodities.

We'll discuss about that next week.

But more interestingly, he says, in the normal circumstances, goods

also have a natural price, and the natural price is

that which allows for the proper remuneration of all those

social of those individuals, and in particular the social classes

that were involved in the production of these goods.

And he would say under the not under normal circumstances.

Uh, wages will provide a proper remuneration for labourers.

There would be a profit rate that provides a normal

remuneration for the capitalists, and a rent rate that provides

a normal remuneration for the landowners, and this will allow

for the social reproduction of this society as well.

Okay.

According to the Morse and, uh, costumes of each society,

um, let me say a few words about what they

mean by wages, the profits and rent here.

So, by the way, The notion of wages is determined

by what he called the wage fund.

So every society allocates a proportion of this annual fund

of labour to pay for labourers.

And this places a ceiling on the wages that labourers

will receive.

And of course, wages cannot be below this biological rate

of subsistence.

You cannot pay labourers under normal circumstances less than allows

for the reproduction of this social class.

Uh, profit will be a little bit different from what

we understand as profit today.

It will be the proper remuneration of the capitalist, or

the trading of the person who brings the good to

the market.

We'll discuss later on this.

And unlike Ricardo, Smith also believes there is a proper

remuneration for landlords, irrespective of the quality of the land.

We'll come back to this discussion when we talk about

it.

For now, it suffices to see how this is behind.

This means a theory of distribution, right?

Labour as value is distributed in normal circumstances across social

classes by paying the proper wages, profit and rents, uh,

that are accepted in each particular society according to their

norms and processes.

Okay.

So moving quickly.

Capital accumulation.

So in his discussion of capital accumulation he makes this

distinction between productive and productive labour.

Productive labour is that which forced me Re is used

to bring new goods to the market.

Unproductive labour like services between government services.

Private services will evaporate once you consume that labour.

They do not produce other commodities, so by productive labour,

he is taking into account that type of labour on

which goods capital are used to produce new commodities that

are brought to the mind.

Now capital can have different forms consumption goods.

Right.

The goods that the landlords in the facilities anticipated uh,

to um, the uh, to the producers, farmers, it could

be in terms of face capital machines or circulating capital

money.

Okay.

Now, Smith has this idea that only investments in productive

labour allow for the accumulation of capital.

Why?

Because only by investing your stock, your fixed capital and

your circulating money in labour.

that brings me boots to the markets.

The division of labour mechanisms will be triggered.

And you'll you'll be able to experience productivity gains and

produce more capital, obtain more than you had before.

And in a discussion with the mercantilist, he will say,

well, you know, the immediate costs of for capital accumulation

is not industry.

It's not ingenuity.

It's not individuals capacities to transform nature, but rather parsimony.

It is because individuals have this self-restraint and provision that

we mentioned before that they set apart.

And you know, what part of the.

Stock they have in terms of labour, they restrain from

consumption and they Be invested in productive activities.

They invested in the consumption of production labour to bring

again new goods to the U.S., so the rate of

capital accumulation is determined.

Simon Kuznets had models by the rate of savings in

an economy.

But how parsimonious an economy is?

Okay.

All right, so The Wealth of Nations is a systematic

account of the laws that are regulating the production, distribution,

consumption and circulation of a wealth and the control of

labour in a society.

Um, it's me.

I arrive to these conclusions through a deductive, deductive reasoning.

As you will see, by also providing some examples.

Uh, building on this Scottish historical tradition.

But classical political economy.

For Smith, will also serve as an art.

Will provide the rules for good governance.

So there is a meta narrative here about, uh, what,

uh, free and free societies should follow, uh, if they

are to respect this system of natural liberty that allows,

uh, societies to progress by just letting individuals following their

own interests, their own desire to improve.

Their own.

Foundations.

So what are the characteristics of this system of natural

liberty?

As I mentioned before, there is a harmony of interests.

There is an infinite dependence between country and town, as

we'll discuss in our classes.

Agricultural producers will benefit from exchanging goods with manufacturers.

There is no need mercantilist to artificially identify big winners,

right?

Industrial policy, as we will see, will be, in the

best case, futile, in the worst case, counterproductive.

This also applies internationally.

The International Commerce Minister, Thomas Bowen, is not a zero

sum game.

Countries merchants in each country will just change with each

other if it is in their advantage to do it.

If there are absolute advantages in international trade.

If I can produce something cheaper here than, uh, my

neighbour can do in their own society.

We'll come back to this argument when we discuss Ricardo's

comparative advantage argument.

For now, it suffices to see how Smith is departing

from a his view that there is no hybrid of

interest internationally.

In an ideal type, societies progress naturally and by mercantilist

were inverting this order.

Agriculture was first developed and agricultural surpluses are brought to

town.

This would trigger the development of industry.

It is only at a later stage that societies will

focus on manufacturers, and only when the size of the

domestic market is not big enough, individuals will entertain foreign

trade with commerce with others.

Implication of this is that mercantilist policies of imposing tariffs,

quotas, restrictions, monopolies are only affecting with this natural progress

of societies.

They are slowing economic progress and at best they are

ineffectual.

And the reason for this is that commercial societies self-regulate

without the need of any government intervening interference.

We see here the, uh, the seed.

Where is MIT in the invisible hand metaphor appears.

Just a warning here.

This is a metaphor about the unintended social and public

effects of private action, right.

In the context of this discussion with capitalists.

We'll come back to this in the classes.

This is not about free markets, not about market efficiency

or a tendency to equilibrium.

None of those arguments and can be found in connection

to the invisible hand.

It is about the public benefits that emerge from allowing

individuals, uh, acting on their own.

Now, however, let me close with this.

Government still retains an important role in its work.

First, we need governments to remove these regulations to restore

the natural order, the natural progress of societies.

We also need those.

Lecture 4:

So welcome to our fourth lecture of this course.

We're going to talk about manners and be kind.

But first some of the key takeaways of our previous

lecture.

We are coming from a discussion that is full of

optimism regarding the possibility of progress.

Economic progress in particular, have to happen in civil society,

right?

We discussed with me that the main question is what

makes a nation a country wealthy?

It has a secondary question of importance in this report

is how can we understand the differences in wealth between

nations?

Right.

One question about long term economic development, and I haven't

been able to find an answer to these in the

principles of the division of labour, which is specialisation and

different means allow the production of wealth in societies.

We saw that what makes goods valuable for individuals, uh,

is, uh, the extent to which they allow them to

satisfy the needs, necessities and conveniences of a happy life.

That's value for me, uh, is to be found in

labour and that this mechanism, the division of labour is

fuelled, is powered by a system of capital accumulation, right.

Which is determined by the extent to which the rate

to which individuals are able to restrain, uh, from today's

consumption and with provision to invest this capital, uh, into

employment or labour.

Right.

We also saw that in the Wealth of Nations, there

is a you may make that theoretical argument.

Uh, according to which the proper foundation for a prosperous,

harmonious and happy social order is to be found in

a system that allows each individual to follow their own

interests.

Right.

And we discussed in the classes some of the critiques

Smith makes along these lines to this machine of interventionist

policies that the mercantilist plays.

Right.

It's a harmonious social order because country and town benefit

from exchanging with each other, because different nations also benefit

from trading with each other.

Hence, just by allowing everyone to follow their own interests,

societies are able to prosper and increase economic.

Okay, words of optimism.

Today we'll see how the tone in political economy change

very quickly.

To one of the more pessimistic pessimists, if you may.

Outlook.

And you can also see how the fundamental questions of

economics, political economy also shift in a way from the

question of what are the main causes of the wealth

of nations?

Why are some nations richer than others?

To try to understand something that was becoming much more

visible in the early 19th century?

How can we understand the extent of poverty in the

midst of it?

Okay, we'll see how political economy with the two authors

will discuss today.

Malthus and Ricardo will become a dismal science, a science

that pays attention to the natural checks of progress.

I also will redirect the attention to questions of distribution.

Okay, but first we need to get a sense again

of how the economic context is changing.

Right.

The two authors we're going to read today, we're going

to discuss today.

And you're going to read for next week's classes, are

writing in a context that is very different from Smith,

remember?

Smith's context is one.

Is that all the factory?

The early introduction of machineries and their specialisation at the

firm level.

Uh, and by the early 19th century, we see perhaps

Industrial revolution more in the mechanisation of production.

We will admit that the implications this has are on

society in terms of urbanisation, problem of urban poverty becoming

much more prevalent and important than before.

As we will see also the idea that the introduction

of machines might, in a way repeating the interests of

social classes against the capitalists, the workers, and as we'll

see also, uh, relax.

So first problem, The problem of populism.

Why, in a society that's able to produce much more

things than before with mechanisation, the introduction of things such

as the steam engine, can we see an increasing problem

of openness, of quality?

So when does the first industrial revolution, as you economic

historians in the room know, coincided also with an increase

in population in the late 18th century.

And this led to rethinking the old Elizabethan laws, according

to which the problem of populism was dealt, particularly by

the parishes.

By settling the board in workhouses, you find here a

very idealised version of workhouses.

This was not how they should really look like, with

the idea that by settling the poor into parishes and

workhouses, sorry.

And by restricting their movement into from one parish to

another, uh, it was possible to avoid devices that come

with conditions of material destitution.

Now, in the late 18th century, with these population increases

and a context I will come to in a minute

the Napoleonic Wars and the effects this had on the

high prices of grain.

The poor laws were reformed, and they came to be

known as a land system, a system of order relief,

which we could interpret as subsidies, uh, direct subsidies to

the poor.

Why not necessarily in workhouses was introduced.

Right now we'll see how this created a whole discussion

in the early 19th century in which people like Thomas

Malthus intervene In regard the extent to which these type

of laws addressing the problem of populism in this way,

by giving away goods, by increasing nominal wages, was when

I was going to hear what was going on.

All right.

So first discussion, Will, we're going to uh, uh, introduce

in this lecture in relation to my master's work, the

discussion of how to deal with the problem of cooperation

in a context of an industrialising, yet a staggering society

for.

Okay, I mentioned second element of the history of the

economic and political context, which is relevant.

England is at war with its neighbour, France, the Napoleonic

Wars.

And if you're at war with your neighbour, well, you

need to beat your arm, but also you will not

buy your neighbours grain to feed your army, right?

So the Napoleonic Wars basically, um, blocked international trade between

France and Britain.

France was the main provider of grain, uh, to, uh,

England.

And given the demands and the exigencies of the war,

this led to a height in the price of grains

in the price of corn.

Okay.

And this introduced debates about, okay, these are the landlords

benefiting from this situation because on the one hand, we

see populism increasing.

People are not able to afford grain.

But on the other hand, we see that actually the

rent that landlords are charging for the use of their

lights are also increasing exponentially.

And this is captured neatly in this image here, uh,

in which this, uh, trailer, which is bringing Peace Corps

to Britain and attempting to sell it artificially, is rejected

by the landowners.

Uh, who said we won't have it at any price?

We are determined to keep our our own to 80

shillings.

And if the poor can buy a price, why, they

must start without money to well to our to lower

our rents again this guy says well, let him die,

as we have a family of poor people saying, if

we are not welcome into this country, well, we can

emigrate, right?

So the whole situation about surrounding the corridors and this

policy according to which the input of Covid was restricted

to.

Angeles raised questions about this supposed harmony of interests that

Smith talked about in commercial societies.

For one, we see the interests of the landlords seem

to be pitted against the interests of the working classes,

whose wages cannot allow them to afford even the subsistence,

uh, the necessary for subsistence.

But there's another bit in this historical context that make

contemporary political economists think that the question of distribution, the

question about who gets what from these increases in wealth

was worth of more attention, the introduction of machinery.

So we saw how forced the introduction of machinery was.

Beneficial was one of the mechanisms to which the division

of labour operated.

But when the system became much more generalised in the

early 19th century, the question arose.

Our machines replacing labourers.

And profit and wages increase.

At the same time, when we introduce machines.

Is there any conflict of interest in capitalist societies, societies

in which capital is invested in the production of machineries

between the labouring or the capitalist classes?

This became very apparent with what came to be known

the leads machine learners, who argued that machines would replace

humans, such as contemporary discussions on I and pence, uh,

revolted against the capitalists and the introduction of machines.

This will be one of the discussions that Ricardo will

be speaking about.

And as we will see, he will have a mixed,

if you may, a position regarding, uh, this question.

Okay.

So this is a plan I have for us to

use in a context in which industrialisation is coming more

into the food.

We'll start with Thomas Malthus and his identification, his theories

on the natural checks on economic progress, in particular the

population principle and what he called the possibility of a

general growth of commodities.

And then we will look with David Ricardo, how the

question in economics shifted from one about economic progress to

one regarding the question of distribution.

Right.

These these harmonic interests between different social classes.

Alright, so let's begin with Thomas.

Thomas.

So who was he?

Who was this guy?

He was a mathematician.

He studied English, uh, and was exposed from a very

early age, during the Age of Enlightenment thinkers like Hume,

uh, or Jean-Jacques Rousseau, uh, through his father, who was

this fervent enlightenment, uh, a lower thinker, optimist.

But Malthus own personal experience as an Anglican called him

the poor, uh, powerful story exposed him to the question

of populism.

Uh, very from very early on.

In fact, the essay can be read as writing as

a as a writing conversation with his father and this

enlightened thinkers that believed in what we will discuss in

a minute us, the perfectibility of individuals and society, people

such as MIT, these people who believed that societies can

progress, that progress in society was in fact possible.

Um, was also very much involved in an emerging public

sphere surrounding discussions on political economy, of which people like

David Ricardo and James Mill, John Schwarzman, father, uh, made

part of.

Uh, he was a founding member of the political economic

club in which this man of letters, businessmen, parliamentarians joined

to discuss matters of political economy, which reveals somehow the

status of this, if you may.

some of this emerging discipline in the 19th century.

Right.

Although he was the first chair of political economy in

England, it was not like an academic enterprise.

It was very much concerned with the key concerns, the

key occupations of the right.

So we should read my understanding Canada's political economy as

an attempt to intervene in day to day pressing policy

debates such as the Poor Laws and the Corn Laws,

as we will discuss later on.

All right.

So, as I mentioned, the essay On the Principle of

Population was written as a reaction to these enlightenment's ideas

about the perfectibility of man and society.

This belief, held by French thinkers such as the Marquis

de Condorcet, That a reason?

Science and knowledge, uh, was to be found, uh, as

the main source, uh, for progress.

We saw this type of thinking also with the Fisher

crabs before he was also arguing against a new type,

a new brand of British radical thinkers who we will

come to associate in the next lecture with the utilitarians

people such as Jeremy Bentham or, more explicitly, William Godwin,

who believed that actually institutional reform, uh, can lead to

human progress.

We can use the apparatus of the state and reform

our institutions, uh, in order to engineer some sort of

human progress.

The founders of this university, in a sense, uh, held

this view in the late 19th century as well.

And he was writing against people such as Smith, who

would also believe in the progress of society, but based

on the system of natural rights, just allowing these people

to follow their own natural process.

So Marcus was reacting to all of these ideas regarding

the possibility of progress in society, and this was his

key proposition.

The power population is greater than the power of nature

to produce the necessary goods for subsistence.

The historian of economics wrote, his brother will say that

in one staggering intellectual globe, Malthus and the all the

hopes of an age oriented towards self-satisfaction.

And I come forward to this, that of progress.

And this was a reply to speed, because he's telling

us the limits of progress come not in this machinery

of policies devised by people like American activists, but rather

it comes from nature itself.

Nature poses limits to human beings efforts to better their

own condition.

So, like Smith in his discussion about the poor laws,

he would argue governments, societies should pay attention to natural

laws.

Don't, and avoid designing policies that can be infantile or

counterproductive.

But against me, you would believe again that the problem

lay in nature itself.

Not necessarily on this point.

Right.

So we'll discuss in a minute why he builds from

this idea an argument that wolves giving subsidies to the

poor are self-defeating.

Create more distress and dependency for the poor.

But first we need to understand how might this is

reaching this conclusion.

So please, arguing like a mathematician.

Right.

He's using logical reasoning.

We see we'll see how with Malthus and Ricardo.

Economics becomes much more a deductive science.

Come back to this assertion later on in this lecture.

What is time being?

Let's just, uh, see that he is starting from two

postulates, such as mathematicians, right.

That are undeniable in themselves.

No one in same reason would deny that these postulates

hold true in every conceivable circumstance, right?

Food is necessary to the existence of men.

Men need food for their own subsistence.

And of course, it's provided by nature.

And the reproduction of human societies requires compassion of the

sexes, right?

Requires men and women coming together and reproducing families.

No one would deny that these two postulates hold true

right from these two postulates.

Masters uses what he calls two laws of nature to

either of the laws of nature.

Population, when unchecked, grows geometrically, whereas the means of subsistence,

given that nature is producing foods, are in conditions of

absolute scarcity, only grow arithmetically, right?

If we know something about mathematical series, we know that

if these two laws of nature were not checked, then

population growth would explode.

But this man is telling us is mathematically impossible.

Hence, there are three natural checks that regulate the oscillation

between misery and happiness in each society.

And this is how these three natural checks operate in

the following way.

The first one is very simple, right?

If people do not have enough food to eat, some

will suffer and die, right?

So misery, which is also expressed in famine in wars,

will result.

But there are two checks that, according to Malthus, operate

through human nature as well.

One common among the lower classes, lower strata in society

is vice.

We have here a representation of that.

When this madness was building on common views of the

behaviour of the board, and this is a design by

William Hogarth, whose drawings were actually, until quite recently, here

in the Johnson Museum, uh, representing the vice, uh, of

a badly organised society.

And the woman at the centre of this image as

Sam.

Judith, therefore, was infamous for reclaiming her daughter, uh, from

the workshops to sell her clothes.

Right.

So in conditions in which population increases, press, the means

of subsistence buys things such as infanticide, delivery, abortion will

prevail among the poor.

And these will check, uh, these are laws of nature.

In the second edition of his book, Malthus provides a

more positive check, more restrained, which nevertheless, he argues, is

only present, only observable in the behaviours of the rich.

Right.

Instead of just killing your children.

You can just abstain from getting married, postpone marriage and

a hence a repeat a population growth to increase.

And that's okay.

We'll come back to this one in a minute.

Somehow, just this theorising about this perpetual oscillation between happiness

and misery, right?

There is a novelty in his argument, both in what

he's saying, but also in how he's doing it.

And the question of interest for us is, what is

the implication of this for political economy?

Right.

Very good.

As the beginnings of a theory on economic demography.

But what has this all to be with political economy?

Well, my will tells us that the principle of operation

actually operates through the market for goods and factors of

production, and we need to understand how.

So he asked himself if he thought experiments such as

we do when we develop models.

In a way, what would happen if the means of

subsistence are not in proportion with the population?

This is a hypothetical scenario.

Well, we know that for one, then the number of

labourers will increase above the means of subsistence.

This will have a direct implication on the price of

labour.

The real price of labour.

The price of the provisions needed to feed labourers.

So the price of provisions will rise, right.

However, if the price of provisions rises well, labourers will

find it difficult to sustain their families.

This will would either discourage marriages or make it more

difficult to reach a family.

We see higher infanticide rates.

We see more children dying at a young age.

So the pressures on population are so high that a

population growth at some point should come to a stand

until that point in which it is, it can be

sustained with the means of subsistence.

If the opposite thing happened, right, the cheapness of labour

and the demand for product would encourage the cultivators to

employ more labour upon their land.

This would increase the means of subsistence, and these will

come in proportion with population.

Right.

So we see how these preventive and positive checks serve

to create this perpetual oscillation between happiness and misery, but

also how this operates through the migratory routes and in

particular through the markets of production.

So what is the first and important implication of this

population principle for political economy?

Well, Mr. Smith.

Wages have a ceiling over the long run.

In ordinary circumstances, the population principle will make that wages

keep our depressed.

Our pressure to subsistence levels rise if they rise above

subsistence levels.

All the mechanisms we've just described will operate, at which

point the wages come down to subsistence levels.

Right.

We see how much is developing here.

An argument against the poorer.

Right.

Did he provide any empirical evidence?

Well, he was writing these before the first census was

was conducted.

Um, and he argued very much like the weekend before,

thinking about comparisons for him.

The US provided this hypothetical situation in which the frontier

can always be expanded almost, but not no limit, right?

And he he he used this example to sustain this

claim that the means of subsistence, even in these places

in which land is not scarce, will only grow medically.

Uh, and he used the British case to argue how

population unchecked grows.

Okay.

So what?

I'm what I'm what I'm arguing with this is that

the argument he was putting forward was of much more

of a theoretical nature by nature that's relevant for political

economy, although as most economic historians in that room will

know, this will also open a field of research on

economic demography you, which we will try to test empirically.

All right.

So what were the normative implications of these ideas in

the essays?

First and foremost, abolish the poor outdoor relief and workshops.

These are full time measures.

They can also be counterproductive.

Whereas only spread misery, provide incentives to poor families and

increase dependence, they induce increasing populations, of course, without necessarily

increasing the means of subsistence to sustain them, but also

and something that will become relevant for the next argument.

It will take a share of provisions that could be

coming to these wage funds to sustain productive labourers and

give them to unproductive labourers in workshops.

Right.

So it is also affecting the ability of societies to

provide the means of subsistence in this way.

So we see that with Smith, Marcus is arguing this

nominal thesis.

Increasing the nominal wages of labourers is futile.

Only real increases in wages, in the price, in the

in the, in the, in the, in the ability of

labourers to acquire and more commodities will be, will bring

happiness and relief to misery.

But, Mr. Smith, by ignoring the principle of population, you,

uh, were ignorant about these natural checks to progress that

life of human nature and the ability of nature to

provide the means of such systems.

The problem lies in nature, not in government action.

So this gives weight to my assertion before that with

Malthus, we are moving from a question in political economy

regarding the origins of progress, the causes of progress in

society, to one that focuses on what is it that

looks progress in society?

How can we spin extreme poverty among.

So what should we do?

According to Malthus?

He was a conservative thinker, um, in a way, but

had some interesting clues.

Right?

We've observed that the upper social classes have able to

react and respond through moral restraint, a behaviour that in

modern economics jargon, we could perhaps, uh, refer to, uh,

understanding the trade off between the quality and the quantity

of kids exercising prudence, moral restraint.

And this type of behaviours can be encouraged through public

education.

But not only that.

If we had a more egalitarian society.

Devices that operate as an attraction could be replaced by

these small behaviours of moral restraints.

So in a way, this problem will be less prevalent

in societies in which public education is generalised, which will

be more location and societies that are more equal.

I bet many of you didn't know this aspect about

Thomas Malthus, which is often accused of making economies as

Thomas Thomas Carlyle.

We will say later on a dismal science.

Economics.

Citizen science.

Okay, second argument in Malthus.

We'll have more time to discuss this one in the

classes.

But if the ideas in the principles of population focus

on, in a way, the determinants for the supply of

labour.

He will have an argument regarding the nature checks of

progress that are found to be found in the demand

side of the story.

Okay.

Um, again, he began, he introduced this question with a

thought experiment in the fifth chapter of the essay.

What would happen if the rich put aside a proportion

of their income instead of consuming it?

Right.

We saw with Adam Smith last week that this parsimonious

behaviour is for him, what drives capital accumulation.

But Matthew's answer would be a little bit different than

that, since he would say, well, the consequence will be

that not only will will not increase proportionally to the

amount of savings.

For this office.

Is that what you call a plot of commodities?

Is It's possible.

It is possible that the amount of goods supplied across

all markets will not find a demand.

And you economists know that this goes against what we

understand as this is know that every good brought to

the markets will necessarily find the markets.

Right.

This was behind Smith's notion on the theory of effective

demand.

The goods that are produced but not brought to the

market have no value.

Hence, there are no incentives for individuals to bring these

goods to the market.

They would just use their labour and capital elsewhere.

Thomas Malthus, anticipating some of the ideas that Keynes will

retain in the in the 20th century, will challenge at

least two postulates of this law.

First, he would say, well, in fact, the desire for

commodities is not infinite.

Individuals are driven by a variety of motives, of which

this desire to improve one's own condition by difficulty in

the market is just only one.

For example, they are driven also by the ease.

Let's discuss about this in the classes.

But more importantly, we cannot guarantee that consumers ability to

purchase goods will be there when these goods are brought

to the market.

And this is because savings when they are pushed 26

when individuals restrain themselves from consumption, they at the same

time are destroying the motive for production.

All right.

These folks may not find people who are willing but

have the ability to purchase them.

Over there, what we will call insufficient effective demand.

Is, as an argument, insufficient, effectual.

So what is the solution for managing this type of

situation?

Well, completely the opposite of me, right?

Instead of encouraging self restraint parsimonious behaviours, we should understand

that the solution to this price overproduction lies in increasing

that proportion of revenue.

Vis-a-vis capital.

Right.

It lays in the consumption of the middle class who

by consuming goods.

Right.

Uh, luxury goods, for example, are not putting pressure on

price on the price of factors of production, but are

at the same time providing effectual Special demand for those

woods broke.

Okay.

It's a complex argument.

We'll come back to it in our classes next week.

Okay, so we've discussed the economic context in which Malthus

and Ricardo are.

Uh, I've we've discussed my views and his concerns about

the natural checks on the economic progress of societies.

We will see how the focus of political economy also

shifts his attention to the question of distribution.

Right.

In this context of the core laws and the introduction

of labour saving machinery in the areas of slavery.

So who is Ricardo?

Let's begin by the man.

He is unlike Thomas Malthus or Smith.

He was not academically trained, actually engage with political economy

authoritatively.

He read The Wealth of Nations, as we all do,

right, as a pastime.

When he was aged 27.

And he was also a practical man.

He was a successful stockbroker, probably one of the few

economists that will study in this course who actually made

money in his life.

Uh, he also lost money.

Uh, and get it again.

Uh, as we'll discuss next week, his first writings will

actually be on money, on the nature of money, and

he will side with the Buddhists in the so-called controversy.

No need to know about this now.

He was also acquainted with James Mill, who, like him,

was convinced that political economy should be more of a

science and to be more of a science, it should

proceed through a deductive method.

And it was actually James Mill, John Stuart Mill father,

who convinced him to write the principles of economics and

also to rhyme, to run, uh, to, uh, a parliament

for the Whig Party in order to argue for the

abolition of political laws.

And his main work, The Principles of Political Economy in

Taxation, is the subject of today's lecture.

So, as I discussed with Ricardo, we see this shift

from the question about the causes of wealth to try

to understand better the laws that regulate the distribution of

income between different social classes in a context in which

these conflicts of interest between workers, landowners and capitalists were

becoming clearer, more basic.

Right.

So in this context in which we see technological change,

but at the same time relatively higher cost of the

means of subsistence required to farm.

Smith's price determination is the market price.

Quite right, and we'll see.

For him, the laws that regulate the distribution of income

are following.

He would posit that there is an inverse relationship between

workers wages and capitalist profits.

And we can only understand these when we have a

theory of body that, uh, does not confuse production with

distribution like that.

But we all we will also see that there would

be an inverse relationship between profits and rents.

And even more critical than that.

We will argue that rent.

The remuneration for landlords, we actually tend to freeze with

capital accumulation.

If we add these three things together.

The conclusion is that capitalist societies, as they function as

a capitalist society as capital accumulation proceeds, will exhibit a

downward trend in the rate for a situation of long

run economic stagnation.

Ricardo's argument would be that to escape this examination, there

were two ways Reagan should proceed.

Abolish protectionism, the current laws, and encourage the introduction of

a machine.

Okay, we will see how.

So as I mentioned with the kind Ricardo's principles followed

a deductive method of reasoning very much like Malthus.

And he was perhaps the economy that is responsible for

this drive to reduce the economic system to a set

of very few variables, out of which we can deduct

principles of general applicability.

Two changes from Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations to this

method.

The first one is political economy loses these perhaps empiricist

empirical bent that A and Smith was still had in

the context of the Scottish Tory system.

Economics becomes much more of an abstract science.

But also with Ricardo and his successors, political economy also

detaches Itself from its philosophical basis.

Remember, for me, political economy built on a notion of

moral economy.

Individual behaviour will be taken as granted because we'll accept

the economic man as the relevant individual for economic.

Okay.

Now Ricardo will find Smith's theory of value wide unsatisfactory,

and he will oppose Smith's notion that the value of

abode is in the amount of labour he is able

to command in the market, precisely because he confuses production

with distribution.

It confuses the theory of prices with the input value.

It would say the value of a commodity, or the

quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange,

depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary

for its production and embodied theory of labour.

It is about how much labour you put into the

production of a good, which determines how valuable it is,

not on the greater or less or less compensation which

is paid for that labour.

Right.

I mean, it's commanded notion of labour.

We should disaggregate the theory of production from the theory

of distribution.

This idea led me to the search for an objective

and invariable measure of value, which, in different approximations, equates

to the amount of time put into production.

One way of measuring could be the price of corn

of goods that are paid to labourers.

And very technical discussion will emerge from these that Morris

would build on, because we would find an obstacle here

in the sense that how do you assess for a

marginal and standard measure of value when different techniques of

production are Um, involved in one, uh, a in the

production of one a commodity, a neo Ricardian in the

20th century.

Like, we build on the centralised theory of the production

of commodities and commodities.

Not our concern here, but if you want to look

at that is where all concerned would be.

Where how to understand first and foremost the theory of

prices.

So prices for Ricardo, uh, are, are those that are

necessary to cover the costs of production.

Remember the symbolic theory of value.

So prices would be what's the normal rates of return

of wages profit and rent.

We saw that with Smith.

And remember P is determined by the amount of labour

that is required for the benefit of output is determined

by specific technologies of production, right?

Not by the price of taming the market.

So Ricardo will bring our attention to, uh, in Smith's

notion of natural price.

He will not accept the distinction between the market price

and the natural price and political economy from now on,

will just be concerned with the prices of factors of

production and, more broadly, economic dynamics in the ordinary course

of things.

And the reason for that is that individuals behaviours, in

particular capitalist behaviours, allocating stock between different activities.

We will make sure that more quickly than not, the

market price will equal to its natural price.

Okay.

So we know how B is determined.

If we want to understand your distribution, we should focus

on the second equation.

right?

Prof.

It is not Mr. Smith.

He was a natural return to the capitalists or to

a trader.

Profit is a receiver.

And understanding profit.

Profit is a residual of the price obtained by the

production of food, minus the cost of production.

Right.

All of this means that if we accept that prices

are that wages are determined as much suggested, they will

be pressed by population pressures down to subsistence levels.

There is a necessarily inverse relationship between profit and wages.

The interests of the capitalists are not necessarily aligned with

the interests of the workers, because we argue that this

is ensured by the fact that there was there would

be an equalisation rate of profit.

Capitalists will have it in their interest to devote their

capital to the most productive activities.

Hence, if profit at any particular industry is higher than

its normal rate of interest, capital would flow in.

Competition will ensue to the point in which probably three

terms down to its normal rates to these received.

Right.

All right.

So the price of gold is determined by the technology

production.

Wages are determined by the population pressures.

Profit is a received one.

All we need to understand now to have a complete

theory of distribution is how rent, the remuneration of landlords,

is determined and withhe.

With these we will introduce for the first time a

notion of marginality.

All right.

You will say, missus, me.

You were wrong.

This is not the price paid to nature.

In a hypothetical scenario in which only the most fertile

lands are used.

Actually rent will be zero.

Rent is not a natural price.

Remuneration in factory production.

It is actually the result of different lines of different

qualities being used.

Right.

And rent is determined at the margin of cultivation by

the difference in the surplus obtained by using the same

amount of labour and capital in fertile mans.

So rent is a marginal gain that landlords have when

they are using better lands in the margin of a

agricultural and agricultural frontier, and Not a natural price for

the remuneration of the plant.

Okay.

So what is the implication of this?

It is highly political and pessimistic.

As.

Capital accumulation expands as societies are able to produce more

inputs and bring them into the economy.

There are the corporate frontier is expanding, right, with changes

in technological and technology technology production.

The expansion of the cultural frontier is increasing the the

rent obtained by landlords.

Wages are priced to subsistence levels.

But what happens to profit as rent increases with capital

accumulation probably exceed it.

A secular trend to decline.

Right.

With economic progress, the rate of profits has a natural

tendency to fall.

Now, what could be done to avoid economic stagnation?

This will be the question we will devote our next

classes.

First and foremost, we trade among nations.

We build the corridors by restricting the entry of grain

into Britain.

All that you're making are the the goods that are

necessary for the means of subsistence, of labourers.

The real price of labour is more expensive and you're

making rents higher, introducing pressure over capitalists for lower margin

gains.

Second thing that should be done encourage labour saving technological

change.

Make Britain the workshop of the world.

Right.

Why?

Because this will increase price obtained by a capitalist right.

And at least introduce some ease to this competition for

low profit margins.

Okay.

Third element that we will discuss next week well before

the vote, the value of voting to a standard.

This will allow Britain to reap the benefits from international

trade, but also the benefits from the introduction of machinery

in a context of a comparative advantage and and specialisation

of the internet.

All right.

However, however, if Ricardo at first thought that the introduction

of machinery will benefit all social classes capitalists by allowing

to extract more surplus labourers, by making cheaper the means

of their subsistence and landowners.

In the second.

Edition of his book, he sort of identified that under

certain conditions.

We will discuss these conditions in the classes.

The introduction of labour saving machinery can affect the situation.

In certain circumstances, these could lead to a depletion or

a reduction proportional reduction of the wage fund used to

pay or wages.

So it could be possible under certain scenarios that the

introduction of machinery would lead to higher profits, but not

increases in wages.

We will discuss why in the classes.

To conclude what are what were the influence of Marxism

on classical political economy?

Well, as I repeated, uh, on and on in this

class from a study about the Wealth of Nations, we

move to perhaps focus on those checks to the Natural

Progress societies.

In a way, this.

This also made a question that we saw with regard

to this and to me, whose relevance the question about

what makes one society richer than another.

Questions on economic development.

We'll come back to this towards the end of this

course.

This is my conclusion.

Of course, there are naturally limits to economic progress, with

the principle of population being the possibility of a natural

growth of commodities, or the diminishing return on land that

is behind the downward trend in the rate of profits.

But we also saw that both political economists argue that

there could be some responses to the situation with Malthus.

We saw some corrective measures emphasise moral restraint, landowners consumption

habits, and perhaps a more egalitarian society with regard.

On the other hand, who was a liberal, a weak

eye Item items three.

Trade three.

Foreign trade.

Repealing the Corn Laws and having a stable monetary policy.

Restoring the standard, as we'll discuss next week.

Who prevailed?

Well, Ricardo did in the debate.

The core laws were repealed, um, which became the workshop

of the world, as we all know.

But this open the question of distribution, secondary control over

the question of distribution in more or less radical directions.

And we'll see how don't both John Stuart Mill and

Karl Marx will reach very different conclusions from this idea

that the introduction of machinery may pit the interests of

capitalists and labourers against each other?

Okay, what happened to Malthus views?

Well, his views on population were integral to this corpus

or other political economists after him.

We'll just take us, given that, uh, Wages are pressed

down to subsistence by population levels, and his other idea

on the glut of commodities will take almost a century

to be rekindled by a year by John Maynard Keynes,

the man, as we'll see later.

Okay, so just a reminder, this assignment was released for

Moodle yesterday and then for submitting it next week at

2 p.m. next week.

And next Friday on.

630.

Five.

Lecture 5:

I'm sorry.

So I can see that week five rules has taken

a toll on attendance and a rainy week is coming.

They're all hosted from, uh, the formatting assignment.

So thanks for being here to discuss in a subject

that is a non subject, if you may, in the

19th century, write it as a political economy.

So the key question that we will address today is

why money was relegated to the background of economic theory,

uh, in classical political economy.

Uh, and we'll do that by introducing, uh, the road

on discussions about money from mercantilist thinking, uh, to the

work of Smith, uh, Ricardo and others.

Okay.

So we know that, uh, Smith attempted to make it

showing connection between money, activity and money, the circulation of

bullion and provides light to trade.

And in the case of the pawn, we discussed how

the expert bullion by bringing, um, the possibility of increasing

and improving the balance of trade, created employment and increased

output in the domestic economy.

Right.

Money was at the centre of her analysis, whereas in

the work of economists like Smith, money played no role

in the discussions about the causes of wealth.

Right?

So it was very clear, uh, to argue that a

wealth is not equivalent to the accumulation of treasure or

money, but it's rather the result of division of labour.

You also supply Parliament in explaining the distinction between nominal

and real measures of value.

Right.

And money for Smith is available.

Money is just reflecting the relative scar's relative, the relative

importance of different goods in terms of the amount of

labour they can command in the markets.

Right.

And accordingly on these is that for classical political economists

from Smith.

And we'll see.

And through Marx, individuals will fall in what later monetary

theorists will call the monetary notion.

Right.

Confusing monetary and real values.

Individuals value the real value of goods, right.

And even in the what they find in markets are

monetary prices.

So money was relegated to the background of economic theory

in the 19th century.

But the money question was not entirely absent from public

discussion, as we will see today when we discuss the

work of practical men amplitudes in particular around one specific

controversy in the early 19th century that has been given

the name of the Boolean controversy.

So let's introduce a little bit of the context of

this controversy.

So in 1797, the Restriction Act was imposed by which,

uh, the Bank of England, the convertibility of English foreigners

into gold, uh, was abolished.

So, uh, since 1717, uh, Britain was in fact the

gold standard.

That is to say that the banknotes emitted by the

Bank of England had a an exact, uh, convertibility rate

in terms of gold.

Newton's famous convertibility rate of one game of gold, uh,

equals the value of 21 shillings.

And this was a response to the financial crisis in

the early 1990s.

In part due to the war with France, which were

depleting the reserves of gold.

Now these created an experiment, if you may, of 20

years, we are convertibility of paper notes into, uh, gold.

Right.

And this became a controversial issue as two years after

the Restriction Act was imposed, the price of bullion.

Uh, that is to say, uh, the price paid for

gold and silver went up above the pre convertibility Restriction

Act value and the English coin devalued vis a vis

the Older coins in Europe.

So the question arose.

What is the relation of causality between the end of

the convertibility in 1797 and the high praise of bullion

observed two years later?

Is there a direct connection here?

Can we blame the convert to the Convertibility Restriction Act

for the high priced bullion?

And more importantly.

How we blame the particular institution who is meeting this

paper notes the Bank of England for this.

Are we giving the Bank of England and bankers too

much discretion in setting the supply of money in the

economy?

Right.

This was captured very neatly in this image in which

we find here William Pitt the Younger, who was the

Prime Minister when prime when the Convertibility Act was passed

in Parliament.

And he's trying to get the treasurer to get his

hands on this old lady, the old lady in Threadneedle

Street.

Right.

This at the Bank of England is known today.

And what this image is suggesting is the crowd, the

parliament, the Prime Minister is trying to make a political

use of British treasury.

Right.

Because we are fighting wars and this is having some

consequences on the domestic economy that were unintended by this

measure.

Right.

So we see here in this image this old lady

of Threadneedle Street, a shouting murder, murder.

Rape, murder.

Oh, you've been in.

Why have I kept my honour untainted so long?

For over 200 years.

To have it broken up by you at last.

Oh, more.

The rape rubbish man's ruined.

So this captures how heated debate was in the late

18th century and early 19th century.

And for the purposes of class today, this was an

interesting instance, because it made both bankers and classical political

economists such as Ricardo reflect on a much, much more

abstract level about the very nature of money, right.

And the type of institutional policies and arrangements that needed

to be taken in place in order to guarantee monetary

stability, but also prosperity and growth.

Okay.

So this is the subject of today's lecture.

So we'll travel first.

This road from the mentality lists view of money as

trade to the work of Adam Smith going through the

important contributions by David Hume.

And then we'll discuss what was a stake in the

Boolean debate, and how this very policy practical question raised

an impetus to develop theoretical understandings of how the monetary

system worked and what money meant, what the economic role

of learning was.

Okay.

All right.

So let's begin, uh, with the way capitalists use of

money.

So a little bit of background to the reading of

Thomas Moon that you had a couple of weeks ago.

Ideas on money and work in a changing economic context.

So from the discussions in the 16th century around inflationary

pressures that followed the discovery and exploitation of mines in

America, we see how the discussion veered towards understanding how

these resulted, not just in higher prices, but also in

the 18th, in the mid 17th and 18th century, to

the outflow of bullion and its scarcity to to to

finance foreign trade and wars.

Right.

The type of discussions that we find in the modern

countries.

So in the 16th century, the question posed by the

Salamanca School school of thought in Spain was, okay, why,

if is Spain is exploring all of these mines?

It's bringing new gold and silver.

Is this money flowing out of Spain?

And what connection has this got with the increasing prices

observed in the rest of Europe?

And this allows them to reflect again on the very

nature of money, to challenge this view that money had

an inherent value and constant value that only had to

do with the amount of a few billion in English

coins.

And rather to argue that the value of money depended

on the need for money, for instance, the demand for

money, how much money it's needed to finance transactions.

It depended on its scarcity.

How scarce was money, uh, relative to the needs, uh,

they had for real transactions, but also to their uncertainty.

Right.

wasn't clear if Spain was able to sustain these supplies

of gold and silver.

And for all of these reasons, money was going out

of Spain to those places in Europe which required more

bullion for the commercial transactions.

So this link between the supply of money and prices

and changes in prices became generally accepted by the 18th

century.

So authors like Alan Wooden and John Locke would add

to the ideas of the Salamanca school that the value

of goods not only depended on the quantity of money

right, but also in the relationship between the quantity of

money and the goods for which money is demanded.

Right.

Money facilitated trade.

We have people are also like, you know, and Thomas

Moon.

I mean, that as we discussed, money was essential for

foreign trade, but also the amount of money in the

economy, the extent to which money was circulating in the

economy had implications on employment and output.

Remember the example we discussed in the classes?

Right then we can at least argue argued against the

prince hoarding treasure.

The prince must spend this treasure because it works like

a stomach in the body.

If the prince quotes treasure, if it keeps treasure, then

the amount of money required for productive activities and for

hiring people in shipbuilding, in arts and ships and so

on and so and so forth will not be brought

about.

Okay, so we see in regard his thinking.

Reflections about the relationship between the money supply, the price

level, but also the level of output, right, monetary supply

and extent.

The amount of money in the economy for the capitalists

has effects on real transactions, right on the rate of

real transactions and on the Labour department.

I'm only recounting this thing because we have a very

interesting one in a Cantillon, which will anticipate some of

the ideas of what we will discuss today with you

as a price flow speech mechanism, because you sort of

provide the rationale to what this elementary school zone is.

You know, a Thomas Moon where I would say, actually,

the effect of money supply and prices and output dependent

on the specific source of interest in the case of

Spain, when money is coming directly through mines, this money

is entering the domestic economic circuit by getting to the

hands of consumers.

And when consumers have more money in their pockets to

spend on goods.

This translates directly into an increase in prices in domestic

prices.

These are the international prices.

This stimulates the import of foreign goods.

And this explains why money is flowing out of Spain,

as a very different mechanism operates when the source of

inflow is not mines.

When the supply money does not have a direct and

immediate effect on domestic consumption, but rather when it comes

to the balance of trade.

Why?

Because it comes to the pockets of those producers of

export goods who Instead of consuming everything today, we'll save

something apart and invest it right?

So it will have some immediate effect in output and

not necessarily on prices.

Okay.

So the only way was having hot foods in the

classical world and half the other food in the mercantilist.

But to understand this transition to the classical world in

which money is available, money plays no active role in

the economy.

We need to understand the world of the consumer.

So they become has been considered by so the leading

thinkers about these issues as a precursor of classical use

of money.

Uh, John Maynard Keynes in chapter 23 of The General

Theory, would say that Hume had a foot and a

half in the classical world.

We'll see what he meant by that.

Put in half the remaining and the remaining half.

More like one would go even farther.

Hume, they would say, had both feet.

Not only the glass you can go in the classical

world, but anticipating monetarist ideas about the distinction between the

nominal and the real quantity of money.

And in his entry about the quantity of money, Milton

will Milton Friedman will argue that actually David Hume anticipated

what came to be known and formalised in the late

19th century and early 20th century by Newcomb and Fisher

as a quantity theory of money.

Right?

If your radical relationship about the amount how money supply

relates to prices right at a given range of transactions

and velocity of money.

So in the standard quantity theory of money, money supply

will only have effects on prices, right?

Increases in the money supply will always be inflationary.

We'll see how historians of economic thought had sort of

nuanced these views of Hume as a precursor of the

quantitative theory of money, and would rather argue that Hume,

to paraphrase Keynes, had instead one foot and a half

in the pre classical world in the sense that David

Hume was arguing and using this sort of language pretty

much in a similar way to that of mercantilist.

Right.

So, uh, for the class on money, there are the

suggested readings which appear on his political discourses, particularly the

chapters of money and of the Balance of Trade.

And the main purpose of this study, which sort of

renders the idea that to render strength to this idea

that Hume was writing in a pre classical world was

a question akin to atomic scientists.

Right.

What are the main drivers for the powers of states

of kingdoms?

What is it that makes kingdoms states powerful and strong?

The answer to this question will be a little bit

different, but the main activists say, well, it's not the

accumulation of treasure, less so by the positive violence of

trains.

It explains why this argument is flawed.

It is rather the produce of the kingdoms people.

It is what people produce.

It is the labour of people which is the main

source of stress for a nation.

We see how David Hume is anticipating here some of

the ideas provided by Smith and classical political economy started

before.

Okay, but this time it is a little bit different.

He suggested that human beings had this desire for luxuries,

right, in particular for manufactured luxuries, and the desire for

luxuries, for the amusements of a happy life would make

people work the land harder and trigger a human's ingenuity.

And by incentivising commerce, it will increase taxable wealth, right?

Both in domestic commerce and in international commerce, and hence

make the state more or less okay.

So this is a general argument in his book.

But the subject that we are concerned about today is

how human is arguing against this idea that the strength

of a state comes through a positive balance of trade.

And that in this sense, money and money and increasing

the monetary supply, the amount of bullion that is circulating

in the economy plays an instrumental and instrumental role in

this.

Okay.

So this idea is captured in, uh, this fragment of

history, Simone, in which he says that money is actually

one of the wheels of trade.

It is not the life of trade, Mr. Thomas Moon.

It is actually just the oil which renders the motion

of the wheels more smooth.

Money plays no direct role, uh, in economic activities, in

economic transactions.

And he developed a theoretical Mechanism to explain why this

was the case, which was the automatic probe species, also

known as the price basic flow maintenance.

So let's assume, like the American tourists, that the positive

balance of trade brings more bullion, more than silver, to

an economy.

If this is the case.

You would argue.

This will increase the amount of money people have in

their pockets, which will have a direct effect on prices

as other thinkers have accepted.

But what happens if domestic prices increase?

If domestic prices increase vis a vis international prices, these

will incentivise the import of foreign wares and goods.

Right.

Another way of putting this is the English coin would

be devalued vis-a-vis foreign currencies, and this would occasion an

outflow of bullion out of the economy.

So even in those circumstances, Mr. Cantillon, in which the

money is entering the system through the balance of trade,

the result of this will be not more money in

circulation in the domestic economy, not more treasure for the

prints, but rather only increases in prices.

Right?

An increase of monetary supply, even through foreign trade will

have inflationary effects.

Will only lead to high prices.

The corollary of this is mindless no role in stimulating

economic activity.

But here it comes to the real important issue over

time, right?

This mechanism will operate over time, right?

We'll discuss these in the 20th century as being a

proposition about how the economy operates in the long run,

right.

But this is why a historian of economic thought, like,

might have argued that he was actually having this half

foot in the pre classical world as well.

Right.

Hume accepted that in the short run, money may have

an increasing monetary supply, may have a positive effect on

output, right?

There is a time lag in the mechanism of adjustment

between module prices.

You put it beautifully in this fragment.

In his business, he would say, in every kingdom into

which money begins to flow in greater abundance than formerly.

Everything takes a new phase.

There is more money in the economy, labour and industry.

In life, the merchant becomes more enterprising, and even the

farmer follows his flow with greater alacrity and attention.

So, in a way, Hume provides a fantastic synthesis.

All the money in the classical world, right?

Yes.

Increase in money supply will have over time in the

long run, increases in prices.

It is futile to attempt to increase output, to generate

employment by increasing the amount of money in the economy.

We'll see what the implications of this will be.

But in the short run, he allowed through these sort

of mechanisms identified before by 21, right, and by other

activists in the short run.

Amount increased monetary supply may lead to higher employment.

Okay.

In our meeting, you anticipated what will be the main

discussions on monetary theory in the 20th century.

Now, what were the implications of these views on money

in their writings?

Well, first and foremost.

The amount of money each society needs, each economic system

needs should be equal to the amount of gold and

silver that is required to finance real transactions.

Hence, the states must keep monitoring supply continuously, but its

low will increase right at the rate of economic output

growth.

So he would use a metaphor, uh, to, uh, represent

money.

He says money, like any other fluid, should not exceed

the level of the recipient that it contains.

Right.

You can think of money as in this liquid poured

into a lake.

If the amount of money is beyond its level, money

will just automatically reward.

Right?

The price mechanism showed that.

So the amount of money, the supply of money in

the economy should be kept at its level.

Right.

And if the level is increasing, if economies are growing,

if people are more productive and bringing more to the

economy, well, monetary supply should increase the volume.

Okay, but this should not be done through the balance

of trade.

Of course, we've seen how the automatic flow speech mechanism

suggests that this will undermine the policy.

This brings us to the question of how much money

should the King lay off right up in a particular

year at a particular time.

And we saw with the American activists that the key

monetary policy recommendation was the state more spend because Greece

is the stomach.

The body needs to distribute resources across the economy.

Resource economy.

For whom you would say, actually, if the King spends

more than two, this will have the inflation, the same

inflationary effects of bringing new money through the balance of

trade.

Attempting to artificially affect this mechanism.

What the state should do instead to keep the value

of money up is quite the opposite.

This state was hoard treasure, not spent.

This is the only measure in which you can raise

money over its level, by keeping some of the treasure

out of circulation.

The relative value of money vis a vis the goods

transaction will be higher than expected.

This is the only mechanism that works.

Now you see why Milton Friedman, those of you who

know about his work.

So in David Hume and someone who anticipated these ideas.

Right.

They were not the monetarist rule and also the implication

of fiscal policy.

Right.

Parsimony, uh, spending will not have real effects in the

economy, but oil increase in prices.

And something the state shouldn't do is attempting to raise

money or its level by issuing paper money, introducing new

technologies.

Right?

David Hume was writing in a context in which not

only the Bank of England, but also country banks across

the country, were able to issue their own currency in

terms of their own paper notes write.

And Thomas Moon, sorry, David Hume is arguing against increasing

monetary supply artificially, right, by issuing paper money, because this

will only lower its value.

Write lower its value below its name, write monetary.

If money will become less scarce, right, and it will

be less valuable.

Vis-a-vis the case that the values that are for which

money is required to transact.

Okay.

So we see how daily humour is pivotal to removing

problematic entities to the to the classical world.

Uh, money, as we discussed, played no active role in

the key arguments of the Wealth of Nation.

They played no role in wealth creation.

Right.

The only source for the creation of wealth is the

division of labour, which is the result of allowing everyone

for the level of interest.

Right.

Uh, it played no role in the distribution of wealth,

as you know, because you've written a formal assignment about

this in conditions of perfect liberty.

Um, the world would be distributed in the best way

possible across social classes and individuals.

We will not follow into this monetary illusion of confusing,

uh, the real and the monetary value books.

And it played no role in capital accumulation, right?

We cannot stimulate encourage economic production by just increasing water

supply.

The only way in which societies accumulate more capital increase

their investments is through parsimony.

Right?

Uh, tomorrow's consumption is only funded by today's savings.

So these three assumptions at least explain the neutrality of

money in a system.

Smith did reflect about the nature of money, and there's

also a suggested reading for next week's class.

Or we have to read in this class in which

you will develop this idea that actually money is just

the means of exchange, right?

It's just means and needed to exchange real goods to

conduct real transactions in the economy.

He introduced these with real nominal distinction that we read

about.

And I discussed, uh, this or the other two over

here.

Okay.

so the key takeaway here is from Smith on.

At least in the 19th century, money would be relegated

to the background of economic theory in the sense of

having an active role in responding.

These fundamental questions about the origins of wealth, how the

price system operates or how society.

And we'll see that monetary issues and monetary questions where

we're not entirely absent, uh, from the discussion, uh, with,

uh, a conversation about the debate.

So these are the key readings that you were assigned,

uh, for our class on money.

So I'll just provide an introduction of what this debate

was about, what the main arguments of the contending parties,

where and how this debate triggered theoretical reflections about monetary

policy.

About about the monetary system.

About the role of one in the economy, but also

some policy implications on monetary policy.

Is there any question about pre classical notions of money

so far?

No.

All right.

So let's jump into the controversy.

Yes I have a question.

Sure.

I'm just I'm really intrigued by.

The notion that David Hume said that you should keep

the money supply increasing continually but slowly.

And, you know, I mean, that is obviously a modern

context of low rates of inflation, oiling the wheels of

the economy and deflation being a problem.

And yet in Hume's time you would have had deflation.

So what motivated that particular thought?

Yeah, it's an interesting it's an interesting assertion.

Right.

Which connects to the discussions we'll be having, uh, with

the debate, right?

The economic context is not one, uh, of an inflationary

regime, right, such as the context of the Salamanca school

in the 16th century, or the type of discussions that

would emerge from um, in the modern debate, but rather

one of, uh, in inflationary context.

Um, and his his view, I think it's it's quite

clear.

Right.

Is, uh, we need we need to distinguish between money

as a source of strength and the accumulation of treasure

as a source of strength for, uh, the king and,

uh, the real motivations that producers, domestic producers have to

bring us into the market.

Right.

Um, so, uh, he would place the emphasis on keeping

money at its right level.

Right.

Any other mechanism will just be futile or even counterproductive

if you try to artificially raise money above its level

by, let's say, encouraging the export of oleo, right, and

imposing tariffs and increasing the balance of trade activity contests,

this would be a futile exercise.

The key idea behind this is the king is missing.

Uh, is the monetary authorities, in this case, the previous

king or the Bank of England will not will not

be understanding the macro dynamics of the system.

How is it that individuals make decisions right?

If individuals have more money in their pockets, they will

just spend it, right.

And this and hence for whom?

This is an automatic mechanism that arises of a particular

view of human nature.

Right.

This particular view of human nature.

There is an analogous, uh, argument here to that of

secrets.

And, uh.

Smith.

Right.

The King, Bank of England, whoever is the monetary authority,

cannot trump individuals, right?

They will be able to distinguish between monetary and real

values of goods.

So I think this this this explains why why, why

is why is this the case?

Right.

He's just suggesting that from a, from this theoretical sample

that builds on his understanding of the motivations for production

grounded in human nature.

It is futile for the government to positively try to

answer these mechanisms.

Okay.

The amount of money needed in an economy should always

be equivalent to that which is needed for real transactions.

And this is the key, the key point he was

trying to make.

Even if it's in the context of deflation, this is

this satisfactory answer in a sense.

I mean, I guess I'm interpreting it that money supply

needs to be static ahead of population.

So as the population is growing, you need to continue

in modest increase.

So it shouldn't be disrupted either by the price of

specie flow of net trade or of hoarding through liquidity.

So it shouldn't be disrupted in that sense, right?

Yes.

It is a natural mechanism.

Right.

So this is this is sort of the age of

naturalism, uh, of naturalist arguments of how the economic system

operates.

Uh.

there's there's no way.

Which, uh, the king should interfere in the king.

The monetary authorities can interfere with these mechanisms.

All right, so let's discuss, uh, the Boolean debate.

Thanks for the question.

Um, okay, so the context that I've explained before is

one in which the Restriction Act of 1797 ended convertibility.

Um, the background of, of this is also, uh, a

bank with which the banking system had changed significantly since

Hume, uh, worked on the subject.

Right.

We have an expansion of a country banks and the

the Bank of England, uh, serving us as the primary

lender.

Uh, and we'll we'll we'll come into discussion of the

antiquities position.

Why is this relevant for them to understand?

Uh, what's going on here.

The second piece of context, of course, are wars between

British.

Britain and France, and how the Napoleonic Wars puts pressures

into the reserve Bank of England.

And it generated the outflow of William, uh, to fight

the war, to buy provisions, but also, uh, to, uh,

feed the population in the context in which trade blockades

had recent domestic prices.

Okay.

So this is the overall context in which the debates

generate.

And as I've mentioned, uh, the British economy experienced a

rise in the price of gold bullion above the par

value before, uh, at the end of convertibility and a

devaluation of the English coin.

And the key question, uh, that pitted the Buddhists and

the anti.

antibodies against each other was, to what extent can we

blame this on this policy decision to suspend convertibility?

To what extent?

This is also the fault of the Bank of England's

discretionary emission of banknotes after the end of poverty.

So this the position of the body is it would

be to answer this question.

Preventively.

Right.

We'll see how they would sustain this field.

But the position of the antibodies is rather well, it's

not about the end of convertibility.

This was actually a good decision.

It's not about the discretion of the Bank of England.

This has made the situation better.

Could be worse.

It's rather due to the general economic circumstances in which

individuals are demanding And those really sodium factors which are

very bad harvests and why time conditions explain why prices

have increased and why the Bank of England has been

forced to issue more bank loans in this context.

Okay.

So, uh, the debate revolved around a specific report commissioned,

uh, a by Parliament in 18, publicly presented to Parliament

in 1810, called as the report from the Select Committee

on the High Price of Bullion.

Uh, written by the Unionist position, uh, in particular a

Hoskinson, and with the contributions of our very own David

Ricardo.

So let's discuss these positions in detail.

So what was the strong bullion position?

Involved?

Hold the.

First.

Let me say something about the people.

Uh, who sustains this view we have with them passing.

It was an inconvenience here that will require the autonomy

and vehemence here.

But something that characterises what this position was, what we

call a unity of method.

They discussed about these issues not by references to real

practices, but rather through the use of deductive reasoning.

Right.

We've seen these in Ricardo before, in his Principles of

Political Economy, and their argument is therefore quite theoretical.

And this will be one of the accusations of the

anti-bullying lists.

We've discussed what the main thesis was before.

Right.

But what interests us is the mechanism they are describing.

They provided some sort of abstract application of Hume's automatic

flow speech mechanism right after convertibility, the over issue of

banknotes Above the level needed for transactions rose domestic prices.

This occasioned an increase in imports and an outflow of

Boolean write classified human specie flow mechanism argument.

Hence, the consequence of these has been just inflation and

devaluation of the union of of of England's coin.

It could also be read as are.

An.

Expression of a narrow quantity theory of money.

Uh, if you write increases in monitoring supply, in this

case by averaging nodes will only lead to increases in

prices, will have no results, no impact on output.

And David Ricardo, as you will see, will use a

very interesting metaphor that we discussed when we talked about

and beyond.

Right.

He would say it is like overreaching banknotes is like

finding a new goldmine, right?

If you find that you go, that has nothing to

do with the productive capacities of the domestic economy, with

increasing and improving the technology production, well, this extra amount

of money is flowing to the economy.

We'll just throw out through this automatic mechanism.

The normal implications of this course would be, of course,

to restore strict convertibility.

That's going back to the restriction.

At the moment, we need a stable standard, uh, in

order to conduct ordinary transactions.

And the amount of money supply should be determined.

Exogenous, right.

It should be beyond the discretionary control of the bank.

All right.

This is the point.

What about the anti-bullying position?

Who were the people arguing the Antipodean side?

So we have William Pitt the Younger.

Remember he was behind the restriction, but we also have

some cake.

Uh, who you who you will read about.

I always liked Thomas Malthus, as you see mine.

Something that we could not agree on anything interesting.

Charles wasn't.

He was from the Bank of England.

Why is this relevant?

I mentioned the Buddhists had this unity of method.

They argued through deductive reasoning.

It is key principles of political economy that allow us

to infer these policy conclusions.

Some would argue, as a man of experience, as someone

who knows how the banking system works, right?

And most of his argument will refer to what we

may call the micro level micro economic decisions of bankers,

right from the top, from the Bank of England to

the bottom to the left.

The people who ask for loans in country banks.

Their argument would be the following.

There is no direct link between inflation observed after the

end of the Restriction Act and the quantity of banknotes,

because the retail price of bullion actually reflects real deficits.

There are real deficits in the economy.

In particular, Britain is now experiencing a negative balance of

trade and is explaining this situation.

But what was their theoretical argument?

What were the theoretical underpinnings of this argument?

It's what has come to be known.

The real deal doctrine, and the key idea here is

that the quantity of money in circulation, then, will only

depend on The demand for it.

The quantity of money.

If we assume that if we start from this assumption

that no one will demand more money than they need

to transact, then the quantity money of circulation is always

adequate for transaction needs.

The reason for this is that having money in your

pockets, in particular financial liquid money paper notes us every

one good we know is a liability.

The principle that regulates money supply is not like we

had assumed that of a mind right?

Supply of of a new supply world is not that

of Milton Friedman.

For example, an aeroplane dropping paper money from the air.

It's not often known each of us have faced an

opportunity cost.

They pay an interest on the money.

They ask for months if they have more paper notes

in the money in their pockets, than they need to

conduct the real transactions.

Well they will.

Their demand for money will decrease, right?

And the demand for money by those asking for loans

decrease.

Well, bank bank bankers, uh, will not have an incentive

to hold paper notes.

Right.

Which are for them also liability.

With whom?

With the Bank of England.

Right.

So this mechanism to which every access of paper notes

in the economy will revert back first to country three

banks and then two.

The Bank of England is what came to be known

as the Ravens theory.

The consequence of this, again, the quantity of money circulation

will always be adequate for transaction needs.

So how can we explain what's going on after the

end?

Well, the Bank of England is just doing what it

should do, right?

We are facing real deficits.

Prices are increasing due to real economic conditions.

Hence the monetary supply should raise to this level.

Right?

Should decrease to this level.

Returning to convertibility under circumstances can be potentially counterproductive, right?

We should trust the macroeconomic rationality decisions of the actors

in the banking system, and in particular with the Bank

of England, who played a crucial role in this crisis

by guaranteeing adequate money supply for commercial transactions.

Right.

We see how starkly different this position is from that

to the Buddhists.

Okay.

So, um, I would just like to mention the work

of Robin Thornton.

Uh, who will we will not read in this course,

but Robin Thornton will add to these two positions by

saying, wait a moment.

Money is not just a universal equivalent, right?

And repeating their recommendation of, say, it is not only

also a means for transaction.

Money is also a store of value.

And why is this important?

Because banknotes and deals of exchange, for instance, the assets

that people hold and if they are uncertain, if they

do not have confidence that the value of these assets

will be maintained, they would increase their holdings of more

secure values in this particular context.

Of course, government securities was one option.

So he held perhaps a less strict Boolean disposition.

He accepted the Boolean proposition that the balance of payments

can raise the price of a Boolean in.

The short run.

But he also acknowledged the link between money supply and

output, and not only prices in the short run.

And the key is confidence, right?

There was a crisis of confidence after the end of

convertibility.

In this economic circumstances.

Right.

So individuals instead of investing activities put their assets into

what they consider were safer assets such as government securities.

So restoring this confidence is key for monetary stability.

Right.

And thought and anticipating ideas that will come back a

hundred of years later would suggest that actually monetary policy

is a necessary art.

He would provide the case for making the Bank of

England, not just a primary lender, but also a central

bank.

Right?

The Bank of England, who through increasing not decreasing lending

in times of economic crisis of uncertainty.

Could lead to increasing lending, could be could lead to

restoring the confidence individuals in the economy have on the

value of the domestic policy.

Okay, so those ideas were forgotten for 100 years.

Uh, the position, uh, one with the return to convertibility,

uh, with what came to be known as appeals bill.

Um, the government position, uh, to be overhand right.

This became sort of the norm in 19th century monetary

thinking.

Street that adherence to equal standards and guarantees that these

universal equivalent.

Uh, value is restored.

Arguments against this discretionary use of monetary policy.

Yet with, uh, some amendments to these notions, uh, triggered

by the banking crisis of the 1820s, right.

Opportunity alone will not be enough to guarantee monetary stability.

We need to set some rules on how the Bank

of England, uh, works.

So some of the ideas of the Antipodean, uh, were

incorporated into this debate.

But as you all economy historians in the room know,

the gold standard became one of the leaders of the

19th century participatory right.

And this allows us to connect a little bit, uh,

Ricardo's views on money with his views on foreign trade.

Right.

So connecting this question before, right?

This is a changing world, right?

The world of humans.

Meat was one which the economies were still predominantly agrarian

and commercial.

Right.

In the world of records is a little bit different.

It is one based on the production of manufacturers.

And the formation of fixed capital.

Machinery in this context, requires money as circulating capital, so

that nations exchanging with each other as we read.

So that's where this week's discussion can benefit from, uh,

the advantages, the comparative advantages in foreign trade.

Right.

Having a stable currency allows different nations to focus on

relative prices.

Right.

Not having a stable currency, on the other hand.

Right introduces distortions and make combat with badges less visible.

Hence, the gold standard is needed in order to reap

the benefits of a free trade.

Okay.

Um.

The gold standard provided certainty.

Predictability was an invariable measure, and equivalents measure all the

value of future transactions on the market.

We'll see how Ricardo's work on foreign trade, on machinery

and mining.

Okay, so we will not have a lecture in next

week.

Uh, enjoy.

Reading week.

We will focus on the readings on morning on with

seven.

Focus on fasting and emotion.

Humans.

These are background readings as usual.

To get your answers to a question before class.

And we'll come back to the question of distribution with

John Stuart Mill after.

So enjoy.

Enjoy this very week.

Catch up with the readings.

Uh, I look forward to discussing.

Lecture 6:

I told you guys last night.

So, uh, welcome to this lecture on SB one one.

We're going to talk about John Stuart Mill.

And by now we've travelled an interesting road in classical

political economy.

And we realise that the position to understand how this

idea is made, that, uh, it is possible to conceive

a society that by allowing everyone to follow their own

interests, uh, could lead to natural progress and a harmony

of interests between different social classes to, uh, the critique

of capitalism that we'll discuss next week with Karl Marx.

Right.

So the tale of Smith was an optimist tale tale

in which the natural desire to prove one's own condition

and the natural propensity to exchange.

Uh could lead to mechanisms of wealth creation that operate

by a division of labour and are fuelled by capital

accumulation.

We also discussed how, in Smith's system of natural liberty,

market distributes wealth across social and social classes.

In total harmony, there is no conflict of interest between

the owners of capital, the workers and the landowners.

We discussed in previous weeks also very different approach, if

you may, uh, to political economy, with Mantas and Ricardo

also dealing with a different question related to their own

economic context.

Right.

How can we explain poverty amidst plenty in this industrialising

society?

So moving beyond the commercial societies?

To me, it was talking about my son Ricardo was

this question.

And, uh, they identify some natural checks to the progress

of the societies.

In particular, we discuss the population pressures with Malthus and

the possibility of a general plot.

And with Ricardo, this idea that the diminishing returns of

land could lead to a stationary state.

Right.

The competition of capitalists could drive profits to zero.

And we know that profits, capitalist profits, are the ones

fuelling capital accumulation and bringing these benefits through a division

of labour that's main identified.

Okay.

But there was a glimmer of hope.

Right?

And we closed our discussions in the classes on Ricardo

and last week and this week with this idea that

this possibility could be, uh, in a way mitigated if

the societies exchanged freely with each other by lowering the

costs, Uh, of course, by introducing machinery.

Right, which allows for further specialisation and a growing productivity.

And in conditions, as we discussed last week, of a

strict convertibility that guarantee that the value of money, uh,

is stable and that a money works as a universal

equivalent that needs societies to benefit from free trade.

And the specialisation is introduced with labour saving machine.

Right.

But we also discussed with Ricardo that in his second

edition he had some double thoughts, and he identifies some

potential conflicts on this chapter and machinery between landowners, sorry,

capitalists and workers.

Right.

There were circumstances under which.

the introduction of labour saving machinery would actually worsen the

conditions of the working classes and could lead to mass

unemployment.

Right.

And we'll see how the two economists we're going to

discuss this week and the next will address this issue

in a context in which what began to be known

as the social question became the object of inquiry for

political economists.

Right.

So we've moved from Smith and the focus on the

creation and the production of wealth to the question about

distribution as being central to political economists.

Right.

So by the mid 19th century, we see a highly

industrialising society, mature, mechanised, than when islands meet or even

David Ricardo wrote, but he was not informed.

Service.

It was really clear that the living conditions of workers

in cities where the theory right where meditation was not

necessarily leading to increases in the standards.

This inaugurated the whole controversy and the history that many

of you in the room will know and will come

back to this next week when we talk about the

Engels.

But poverty in cities was visible, right?

And who else that Charles Dickens captured this and made

it part of popular imagination of poverty in, in Victorian

Britain.

Right.

So this is right next to the LSE.

This is in Covent Garden, seven Dials, which was was

at the time one of the poorest areas in the

city.

And the questions that Mill and Marks will We addressees.

Okay.

Um.

To what extent can political economy and this liberal project

that political economy is part of be saved from itself?

Is this the necessary conclusion of the system, this capitalist

system that Ricardo and managers have theorised about?

Or is there a way in which this situation can

be resolved?

It can be addressed, reformed by respecting the.

Core principles of a capitalist society, in particular the centrality

of private property.

Okay, so the social question was the key issue for

John Stuart Mill and Karl Marx as political economists.

But there was there were some many turnovers, right?

Uh, so, uh, one alternative to dealing with this question

was that proposed by what a Marx would call the

utopian socialists.

Maybe people like Robert Owen are.

Maybe the problem is with the institution that is at

the basis of capitalism itself, private property.

Maybe it is the existence of private property and the

fact that capitalists claim the benefits of production on the

basis of the property rights they have on their capital

stock.

Maybe this is the reason for which the system has

led to this situation.

So what if we try a different form of social

organisation in which the interests of capitalists and workers are

aligned?

What if we try a cooperative system of production in

which the benefits accruing from the production of goods are

proportionally distributed between the different social classes that contribute to

the right, not through the price system, not through this

natural price that Ricardo and Smead theorised about, but rather

through a system of profit sharing.

These will incentivise producers, right capitalists to invest their capital.

It will not end with the incentive to gain from

capital investments, but it will also incentivise workers to work

more.

If it's worth much effort in order to get these

benefits right.

So this was an idealisation of a situation in which

by organising production cooperatives such as the one that Robert

Owen himself, uh, instituted in Europe, in Scotland, or he

proposed for new Harmony, Indiana, through these cooperative systems of

production.

Some utopian socialist believed the social question would be addressed.

The problem lies in the institution of transport.

But there were other alternatives, right?

And this brings us to the convoluted period of the

1840s, which is, of course, known as an age of

revolutions across Europe.

Right.

So we see groups of anarchists, socialists and communists organising

from the bottom up and calling for a change all

together, a free for all together on the whole system.

So we have two eternities, right?

One proposed by this utopian idealist.

In some cases clinkers.

But we have also a social reality in which the

workers themselves are organising to ask for changes in this

system.

So this was the context in which John Stuart Mill

was working.

And what I would like to suggest today is that

John Stuart Mill adopted a reformist view regarding the social

question.

He believed that liberalism and political economy could be saved

from themselves.

Okay.

He proposed a renewal of liberalism, but he suggested, is

that it is possible to guarantee to have a social

order that is at the same time grounded on private

property.

There's no need for these cooperatives.

There is no need for mass mobilisation and revolution.

We can still have a system that's based on private

property, without the observed levels of suffering and injustice that

this is the capitalist system of production has produced so

far.

So he provides, as opposed to Malthus and Ricardo, some

qualified optimism.

Political economy as a science can be reconciled with notions

of progress.

But to do so, we need to have a better

understanding of what the science is in itself.

So we will study today how Neil proposed a definition

of political economy.

And this is crucial, he would argue, because the dismal

conclusions of previous political economists like like Ricardo and Malthus

have rested on failing to see the following fundamental distinction

between the laws of production and the laws of distribution.

The laws of production may will tell us capital accumulation,

the principle of population, the diminishing returns, and so on

and so forth are natural.

They take the character of a physical laws that are

truth in themselves.

And this is the proper remit of, of the science

of political economy.

But Mr. Ricardo was wrong.

The laws of distribution are not of the same character,

are not of the same nature.

They are socially determined.

They depend on institutions and customs, and therefore they are

subject.

They are open to reform through what he calls the

art of Providence.

And this was a distinction that classical political economists, he

believed, had failed to make, and this was the reason

for which they reached these these conclusions.

Okay, so we'll see how building on this understanding of

political economy and on the character, this the distinct character

of the loss of production and distribution.

May we provide a defence of private property as the

basis of economic organisation, but we'll take some distance from

Smith's system of natural mimicry, and we'll propose a qualified

defence of laissez faire.

Laissez faire should be the general principle for government action,

but there are some legitimate areas of government intervention and

we'll see which these areas are okay.

So this is a plan you have for us today.

First we're going to talk about John Stuart Mill, his

life as and his influences in particular we're going to

discuss the influences of both utilitarianism and French positivism on

his thinking.

We're going to talk about mill on his discussions about

the nature of political economy as a science.

And we'll close with meals, uh, discussion on, uh, the

principle of fair and the role of government intervention.

So let's begin with these influences.

So John Stuart Mill is one of these figures that

really makes you think, because you, you you've lost what,

most of your life, uh, you've lost the time.

So he was raised by a, an educated by his

father, James Mill, philosopher, historian and friend of both classical

political economists like Karl and Jeremy Bentham.

He was tutored from an early age and education.

He learned Greek by three mathematics, arithmetic by four, Latin

by age and political economy.

By 13, I mean, uh, and, uh, what's important about

his upbringing is that he was raised very closely to

what came to be known, the Benjamin radicals.

Right?

The inheritors of bent philosophy who try to put forward

this project of reform not just for philosophy, but for

society as a whole as well.

Um, Jeremy Bentham, this utilitarian philosopher, um, has was behind

the creation, for example, uh, of the UK.

You can actually come to UCL and see his mummy

over there.

And I'll discuss in a minute how Bentham philosophy influenced

his thinking.

But John Stuart Mill had an uneasy relationship with utilitarianism.

And as we will see, he will use this reformist

input to provide a, in practice, an idea of social

reform, uh, through from a liberal perspective.

So he was also a servant of the East India

Company for most of his adult life.

Um, he then became part parliamentarian, and it was from

Parliament that he proposed some important reforms.

Okay.

See?

So, um, as I introduced before, he had familiarity from

a young age with political economy.

He was also familiar with French social thinking and in

particular the writings of people like the second.

And he did something more.

Um, but a major influence in his life, which is

very interesting, was his wife, Harriet Taylor, who was a

social philosopher and a women's rights activist, and Meles biographers

have actually argued that it was the presence of Harry

Taylor which made Meal in Iran a little bit more

sympathetic to socialist views.

And we'll discuss about that in the class.

You'll see that meal, in his Principles of Political Economy,

does not reject that.

Socialism itself could be a good and composable way of

a organisation.

But his liberal inclinations led him to believe that a

liberalism, in fact, could be the basis of social reform.

There was no need to experiment with socialist alternatives.

Social liberalism itself could be reformed.

Neil was not only a social thinker, but in practice

a real reformer, a reformist.

So when he was in parliament he defended, for example,

a public education On grounds that we will discuss later

today.

But he was.

He also defended the boat for women and increasing women's

political rights.

So he was, in a sense a progressive thinker, uh,

of of his era.

And he was, uh, um, a very prolific writer as

well.

Many of you in this room might know him from

his work on philosophy, on utilitarianism.

Uh, John, John and I were discussing before or on

political philosophy his famous, uh, on, on on liberty.

But we will focus, uh, in this class on his

principles of political economy, which became, in a way, a

sort of the basic textbook, the main reference for political

economy in Britain until the late 19th century, when Alfred

Marshall published a book with the same name.

Okay.

So mill was a towering figure in the social sciences,

and political economy was not the exception.

So I mentioned meal was raised.

Was raised in among these radical Italian communities.

So what did he get from there?

His relationship was most uneasy.

I would argue.

So just sort of a a note on Bentham utilitarianism.

So Jeremy Bentham, uh, attempted to build what he calls

a science of the morals based on, uh, what he

coined the utility principle.

This idea that utility is the basis for human action,

right?

People seek pleasures and avoid pains.

And, uh, based on this principle, it is possible, uh,

for, for, uh, it is possible to conceive a program

of reform based on, uh, what he called principle of

the newly moral right.

The idea that the government should seek to maximise pleasures

and minimise pains at the aggregate level, uh, taking the

loss of production as as as natural.

Okay.

Now, we'll we'll take some distance from this idea that

later some games could be compared.

For example, he would not only raise doubts about the

possibility of interpersonal and desirability of interpersonal utility comparisons, but

he would also suggest that the quality of pleasures and

pains also matters.

Not all glaciers are of equal quality.

There are some glaciers that are of higher order than

others, and everything is more desirable and valuable.

For example, intellectual endeavours Are of higher value are more

desirable than satisfying basic needs.

And this renders different orders of pleasures incomparable with each

other.

And the application of this for political economy is that

it is possible to rank goods using non utilitarian criteria.

And if we fail to do so we fall into

um.

If we fail to understand that, we will not get

a sense of why.

For instance, the there is an angry consumption or disregard

of goods that are valuable, uh, for society, for example,

education.

He would make this case as the starting point, as

a justification for government action in providing quality education.

Parents are not the best judges for the consumption of

education or children, particularly poor parents.

But this is also true for services of public order

services for the youth, like infrastructure.

Okay, so Mehl had an uneasy relationship with utilitarianism, right?

He welcomed his reformist project.

He welcomed this idea that individuals, as we'll see, are

some sort of calculative machines, have this ability to to

make calculus between means and ends.

But he rejected that calculus in terms of utility or

in terms of the comparison between things, or some things

should be the basis of the economics.

What about positivism?

So who were the positivists, the French activists?

I'm thinking here of people like Scott or Henry, Louis

and Simon and the good and the positive is injera.

We place their confidence in recent and science as an

instrument of social reform, not like the utilitarians in England,

but they will have this view about the progressive evolution

of the science right.

Society, they would argue, progresses from placing importance on theology

and theological explanations of the physical world to metaphysical or

abstract reasoning.

And the positive is really that in the 19th century,

society has had reached an era in which it could

be organised by the principles of science.

The positivists also believed that all social sciences could be

interconnected and subsumed under a single social science of science

and society, which they call sociology and that these signs

could be put at the service of reform.

And we have here with Wilson Seymour an example of

this.

Right.

So he advocated for a type of technocratic socialism.

So a different type of socialism to the one we

introduced before with Robert O.

And it was based on this idea that those who

know should govern.

Right.

This longstanding idea in philosophy, since Plato and his notion

of the philosophers key.

And he believed that those who knew how to organise

a system of production were actually the industrial chiefs, those

who were in charge of production, uh, on a daily

basis.

And it was then desirable and possible to give industrial

chiefs the power over determining how society should be organised.

Right.

Technocratic notion of social reform directed by those who know

the technicals.

Okay.

We'll come back to a similar, uh, understanding of how

this machine.

Oriented society, uh, a could.

Be, in a sense, centralised in a way, uh, by

the industrialists when we discuss a person.

Now.

The idea that mill will have about how society could

be reformed diverged from that of a positivists.

He believed, in fact, that it was essential to understand

the edifice of the social sciences, that it was required

to understand also how political economy fit within this general

understanding of social science.

He also believed that political economy could be used as

an instrument of reform.

But unlike the populist the French for centrists and socialists,

he would argue that it was possible to actually construct

a society based on principles of private property.

He was sort of sceptical about this science idea that

it was desirable to delegate rational organisation of society to

a superior elite.

We need the engineers, the industrialists, philosophers on a liberal

basis, right?

A desirable society is one in which individuals should be

able to act according to their own interests, and a

is and respect individual autonomy.

Okay.

So.

How did Mill Basing, based on both his utilitarian and

positive influences, reflected about the science of political economy in

a context in which the social sciences as such, were

just emerging?

Is what I would like to discuss now.

Okay.

So from from Bentham in Compton, if he will adopt

this obsession with trying to understand the edifice of the

social sciences, and he argue that actually, in practice, the

definition of the sciences typically comes after the sciences have

developed themselves.

Right?

He used a metaphor, He said.

Sciences are like cities.

Seeds first grow, right?

And it is only at a later stage that the

boundaries of the science.

Right.

The walls of the city are constructed.

So it is about natural that we don't have a

proper definition of political economy, but it is time that

we do so right.

I mean, we will find faulty existing definitions of political

economy, from Adam Smith's idea that political economy is the

science about the causes and nature of wealth.

To Jean-Baptiste says, notion that it is a science that

study the production, distribution and consumption of commodities.

One first crucial distinction that people like Arabs need to

see is that distinction between science and arts.

Science has to do with truths They study laws whereas

arts.

Question of how?

What makes a society wealthy?

What should they do?

Right.

The question of American artists is the subject of arts,

and we need to distinguish between these two.

We also need to distinguish between two different types of

scientific fields.

There are sciences that study the laws of matter, the

laws of the material world.

And these are what mill called the physical sciences.

And there are different kinds of sciences which study different

types of laws, the laws of human nature.

And among those sciences, a study that also, in my

nature There are some sciences that study individuals insofar as

they may make parts of a society, and we call

these type of sciences social economy.

Now political economy is one of those type of sciences.

So political economy is a science that is primarily concerned

with the laws of human nature taking us, given the

laws of physics, the laws of human world.

But it takes its time, the laws of human nature.

Insofar individuals are part of a society.

There are other types of sciences that study the laws

of human nature.

When, for instance, individuals are considered in relation to themselves

what he called the solipsistic sciences, we may call those

two a The psychology.

There are all types of sciences that study the laws

of human nature in relationship with other individuals.

That's the domain of ethics.

None of those is the domain of political economy.

Political economy studies the laws of human nature insofar individuals

as are part of society.

Okay.

But.

Meall influenced by the positivists will consider that this all

the sciences, although they can be analytically distinguished from each

other, are at the same time interdependent.

Right.

So, so even if political economy is a branch of

the social economy, it also takes us, given the laws

of human mind.

Among the physics of matter and the loss of the

human mind, insofar they relate to individuals, uh, in relation

to themselves alone.

Okay.

It takes us, given the laws of physics, and what

we may call to the anachronistically, uh, the psychological laws

of human action.

Okay.

Is it super important?

Because it will allow us to understand much better how

Mitchell is building his own little miniature political economy.

So this is the third definition he provides in the

text will discuss each of the definitions.

This is not the final definition, but we're getting closer.

So if political economy is no longer the science that

studies the causes of wealth, what makes a nation work?

If political economy is not the science that studies the

laws of production, distribution and consumption of Meat.

We will we'll deal with this third definition.

Well, political economy as a branch of social economy and

so on and so forth is a science.

It's a science.

It's not an art which treats of the production and

distribution of wealth.

Look, it's not including here.

Consumption.

Male does not think that consumption is the proper object

of economics.

There are no such human laws that regulate consumption, he

would argue, besides this just desire for human enjoyment, right?

So political economy is this science insofar as they depend

on the laws of human nature.

But this definition still to general this definition is still

too incomplete.

And to understand why this is the case, I should

say a few words about Neil's understanding of the proper

method of economics, how actually economic science proceeds.

So mu.

Like Ricardo before, would say, the political economy is necessarily

a deductive science.

It operates through the abstraction of underlying causes.

That means that it is through isolating the underlying causes

of processes and things that we can get closer to

the truth in political economy.

Now he's taking some distance with positivists as well, who

favoured an inductive approach to the sciences.

Mean it's telling us because of its nature, political economy

is a deductive science.

It's works through abstraction.

And here is what what was missing in the previous

definition political economy works with one particular abstraction.

It makes abstraction of all the motivations that guide human

action, right?

And focuses on a single one.

It is concerned with the production and distribution of wealth.

Insofar, the guiding motivation of human action is the pursuit

of wealth.

So there might be several motives that help to explain

why goods are produced, how they are distributed.

But political economy.

We will focus on the implications on production and distribution

that result from this basic principle.

Right.

From assuming it's an abstraction.

We know human beings are more complex.

But political economy is concerned with those laws that emerge

from this basic understanding that The individuals are guided by

their pursuit of wealth.

Right.

We have seen this before in the callers.

Right?

It is.

It meets idea that the guiding motive of individuals in

commercial societies is self-improvement.

There are some behaviours that are cognate to this, right?

This is the division of labour.

Labour is painful.

Or the love of luxury, the one, the luxury that

you wrote about in your in your essay for last

week.

And Miele will add to this what we may associate

to the utilitarian categories.

Individuals are not only pursuing wealth, but they know how

to do so in the best way possible.

The leaders are able to discern which calculus about the

most efficient means to achieve desired ends.

Now you see how with me will come in closer

to the type of economics that you know today.

Okay, so it is true understanding that the pursuit of

wealth is the key abstraction of political economy, that we

could complement this definition and reach to the proper definition

of the discipline, and to understand its proper method.

Right.

Well, economics operates through abstraction.

We'll discuss about this with more detail in the classes.

Now, in order to understand how milk moves from this

definition of political economy, to provide an understanding of the

types of laws that regulate production and distribution, we need

to get to grasp this, follow this.

This following.

Fact.

So even if economic life is generally regulated by the

principles That results from the scientific understanding of production and

distribution.

In practice, it is often regulated by customs and habits

because there are already these operators distorting causes to the

generality of the economic world.

And this is this is the reason for which, if

we are concerned with the art of governance, then historical

and institutional knowledge of societies is essential.

We will put government.

This is precisely the reason for which we cannot just

give the power to the economists as experts, to the

technocrats, to direct economic life.

It is not enough for a good government to know

the laws of political economy, although good governance need to

do so.

It is also essential to understand the particular institution, Institutional

and historical realities of the societies are okay, and this

helps us to to get a better sense of how

male is thinking about the loss of production and the

loss of distribution.

So I anticipated before Neal is breaking with this tradition

in political economy, associating the loss of production and distribution.

We saw this very clearly with Smith's theory of the

natural price.

We saw that with Ricardo, uh, as well.

We'll see that with Marx.

How for Marx, the loss of production and distribution can

not be disentangled.

For me, the loss of production and distribution are of

different parts.

They pertain to different parts.

The laws of production are regime laws of nature, such

as physics, such as the loss of matter means they

are beyond human control.

They depend on the laws that regulates natural resources, but

also on these fundamental laws that emerge from individual personal

wealth.

Right.

We have some examples of ordinary laws of nature, equality

and economy, the principle of regulation, the law of diminishing

returns of land, how capital accumulation works.

But it is also a function of the degree of

human knowledge we have about those properties of those magic.

Right?

So mean.

There is some element of determinism in Mill's understanding of

production, but there is some element of contingency as well.

Right?

Mill is telling us.

This is how these principles operate in so far, our

knowledge of the properties of matter do not change, right?

We, the given technologies of production that we have today.

But our knowledge may change in the future.

And this should, uh, lead us to rethink these principles

in a different way.

And the extent to which knowledge changes is in itself

a function of the advance of civilisation is in itself

a function of human progress itself.

Okay.

So mill will use this argument in his case to

actually make a case for investments in science and technology.

Right.

We can break these laws of nature in a way

by learning about it, by learning more about the laws

of nature.

But the laws of distribution are of a totally different

character.

They are not laws of nature like physics.

They are socially determined.

And.

This means they are subject to reform.

But saying they are socially determined does not imply they

are completely arbitrary.

They are determined, he will argue, by the laws and

customs of every society, which is in itself a product

from human nature and the evolution of the sciences.

They are determined more particularly by the ruling classes in

every single society.

Okay, so this means that these laws can be reformed,

but they are not just a requirement.

Okay.

And we see how opening this space for human reform

brings it a little bit closer to the utopian socialist,

like all went on sentiment.

Right?

The capitalist society, um, can be reformed in a meaningful

way.

The question is how?

How can we think a program of the flow and

what should be the.

The basic principles for government intervention.

And this brings me to discuss meals, understanding of basic

fare and the will here to use that to government.

So what was meals reform program?

This is what we will discuss in class.

So the key question is how can we judge in

the face of these alternatives in the face of a

system based approach on private property?

And in the face of these models proposed by utopian

socialists or by anarchist economists?

How can we judge which is the best, is the

best or a better way of social organisation?

And he will tell us, well, there are two.

This is the latter two desired characteristics of the social

organisation.

There are considerations of first order, right, which is the

system that has the best, the best capacity to guarantee

the subsistence of its population.

We see that meal.

We will find some advantages in a system grounded in

private property, on the basis that this provides an incentive

to produce, but search effort in production to gain the

benefits from our own, uh, one's own efforts.

Uh, over the over other sorts of organisations.

For example, uh, a force of organisation based on the,

uh, social, a socialisation of means of production.

We cannot guarantee that people will exert the same amount

of effort, and this will end up really badly.

But meals agnostic about this, and there are Once we

convert the systems on the basis of their capacity to

their subsistence.

There are considerations of second order, a desirable society, a

society in which we want to live in, is one

which is consistent with the highest degree of human legal

aid, a society which individual liberty and autonomy is valued.

And it is on these grounds that the socialist models

think about the technocratic model proposed by Henry Saint-Simon.

Seems undesirable, right?

Okay.

So the problem is you believe this.

Even if a system of private property seems, in theory,

desirable in these two grand rounds, it provides the incentive

for production, and it guarantees human liberty and humanity.

He practice the distribution of well under the current state

of affairs seemed quite unsatisfactory.

So the question he's asking is, in view of the

socialist and communist charities, is it possible to imagine, to

have a social order that is at the same time

based on private property, but allow us to avoid the

current levels of suffering and injustice?

And Mill's response would be, yes, and this is possible.

Once we identify that it's possible to reform the institutions

regulating the loss of distributions, but not on grounds of

despotic social control, not, but by making the technocratic philosopher

king, uh, the organiser of production, but rather on the

grounds of economic effectiveness.

Okay.

So there was a lever, right?

He believed in promoting the social order which prohibited individuals

from filming and the control of their lives.

Uh, in a famous, uh, essay on liberty.

Uh, he defended, uh, individual liberty from government intervention.

Uh, insofar, the actions of oneself did not affect the

action of others.

And as a liberal mill considered that laissez faire allowing

people to follow their own interest should be the basis,

the basic principle, uh, of uh, social organisation from the

science of political economy.

We also know that laissez faire should be the starting

point, right.

Because people understand much better than government than Experts and

technocrats and others.

Their own business and how to take care of it

for it.

But under the court, the current state of affairs.

There are legitimate areas for government intervention.

Particularly militarily, in the region of order regarding acts.

In those acts in which your behaviour, your actions are

affecting and weakening others.

Okay.

So which are some of these areas of intervention?

We'll discuss them in the classes in detail, but I

just I just focus on two very fine, super interesting.

Uh, the first one to which I referred before.

This idea that consumers are incompetent judges.

Uh, the circumstances in which consumers are compared, incompetent judges

of the commodity they are consuming.

For example, milk is a public education, in particular primary

or primary education.

So finding these poor families who are facing the conditions

and situations of material deprivation probably are not the best

in the best position to judge the importance that educating

their children will have, uh, for them in the future.

And this is because of what I introduced before in

Mill's critique to utilitarianism.

There are loads of different order of higher order.

And consumers might not always be the best judges to

distinguish between these modes of different order.

So this provides a ground in which the actions of

some people, the parents are affecting the future living conditions

of their children by not providing them public education, and

this provides a ground for government intervention.

So there is a case for government provided public education,

even respecting laissez faire as as a general principle.

A second interesting case that may provide it, which reflects

sort of the limits of his liberalism, are those acts

done in the interests of the nation and posterity?

And he provided a justification for government support of colonisation.

Remember mill was part of the East India Company.

He left just before he became a form of a

former colony.

And he argued that individuals themselves will not colonise foreign

lands.

It might not be in their interest to do so.

So if this is in the interest of the nature

and posterity.

Colonisation should be an area in which the government should

intervene.

Okay, there are so many interesting words on colonialism and

the extent to which this is contradictory to a liberal

view of society.

But I just wanted to point out these two, because

I think they illustrate the type of areas of government

intervention that need is considering a third one, which is,

of course, relevant for the late 19th century, the provision

of what we may call public goods for construction, infrastructure

and utilities.

Individuals themselves might not have the incentives to.

Provide these services and to manage these services effectively.

And this also provides a ground for government intervention.

So what are the key takeaways of today's lecture?

So we saw with Neil how he argued that the

size of political economy as dealing with truths and dealing

with the loss of human nature should be distinguished for

the Act of Parliament.

Right is a set of rules and maxims of how

the kingdom, the legislature, the government should act.

But science and art are interrelated.

Good government must be informed by the science of political

economy, particularly matters relating to the production and distribution of.

Meal in face of these socialist communist anarchist alternatives.

Will attempt to save liberalism from itself and in a

way, political economy from itself.

Right.

Political economy does not necessarily lead to the dismal conclusions

that we saw with Malthus and Ricardo.

And this is precisely because the loss of distribution are

not of the same nature, of the same character, of

the loss of production.

This means that some degree of social reform is possible

in a system grounded on private property.

So in the broader age of this course, we see

then how mills shift the position of economic liberalism towards

laissez faire from this view of non-interference in Smith.

Right.

Government interference will be either futile or counterproductive.

We should respect the system of natural liberty to a

view that less affairs should be the guiding principle.

Anything deviating from less Less fair is a part in

itself, but there are some legitimate areas of government intervention.

We'll see in the next lecture how our lives will

have a very different position regarding the social question, and

regarding the possibility of reform within a capitalist system.

For Marx, capitalism carried the seeds of its own destruction,

and the only way of changing this situation injustice, poverty

and destitution was through a planetarium revolution.

There is no space for before.

Okay, we'll discuss that in our next class.

Just.

Just a quick note.

The field assignment will be released next week.

Okay.

We have almost finished writing.

It anywhere near like.

I said not to.

Use your own words to.

Talk to.

Me?

I'm here to.

Talk.

Like.

This.

It's also like.

So she's like with.

Like when you teach other levels.

Lecture 7:

And I was hoping that.

You guys would start.

All right.

So we're going to talk today about this right over

here.

Remarks which I presume most of you, if not all

of you have heard about.

And sadly, I know this is going to be our

last, uh, lecture on classical political economy.

Um, we ended up, uh, the previous lecture discussing John

Stuart Mill and, uh, sort of how, uh, he theorised,

uh, that the ways in which political economy, uh, is

a science.

We also discussed how understanding political economy as a science

and Comprehending its proper method.

The fact that it is a deductive abstract science leads

to the conclusion.

Mill will tell us that we need to distinguish between

the laws of production and the laws of distribution, and

we've seen that in the writings of previous economists.

In the classical political economy tradition, the laws of production

acquire these, uh, character of physical laws.

Right.

They are like laws of nature.

They are laws that cannot be changed through human action

and human will.

We studied the population principle with magnitudes.

We've studied capital accumulation, uh, with most of the economists,

uh, actually in this course.

And uh, also, uh, Ricardo's conclusion about the downward trend

in the real world, but merely provided an argument according

to which political economy and this capitalist mode of production,

what Marx will call a capitalist model production could be

reconciled with more humid conditions for autumn, not just for

those who have the means.

Right.

And this possibility of reform we saw in the classes

last week, he's grounded not on any form of social

control, like most brands of French socialism would have it,

but rather on following liberal economic theories.

It was possible to think of the reform of these

societies based on arguments of economic gains.

Right.

And we discussed then how we'll move from this idea

of non-interference to understanding the legitimate areas of government intervention.

So if it has not been apparent so far, We

have studied a group of economists that go from Smith

Ricardo to mill, in which there is a clear link

between political economy.

This reflection about the laws that regulate production and distribution

of wealth across society, and a liberal outlook on the

world.

Right.

So this connection between political economy and liberalism will be

put to the fore by Marx, would be revealed by

his critique of political economy and Marx, in a way,

by providing a critique to classical political economy, as we've

studied so far, will provide the grounds to understand the

limits of, uh, Mills reformism, but also to argue that

capitalism not only cannot be reformed, but capitalism as a

system of Russia is doing.

So.

This is why Karl Marx is still a classical political

economist, but it's the last one of our classical political

economists.

His critique will provide a definite stoke to this idea

that notions of progress could be reconciled with an organisation

of society based on the exploitation market value of workers.

So what is the context in which Marx is writing?

So we are now in my sight seeing the full

effects of the first industrial revolution.

So compare this image of the shadow we wrote in

1878 to what we saw earlier in this course about

the pin factory.

We see much more mechanised processes of production.

The organisation of the factory level of wage employees, workers,

no longer the casual worker or the inventor who is

a key actor here.

And it's really not visible in this image, but this

is not powered by human force, but rather by steam

powered.

Right.

And this allows for the mass production of commodities of

an equal, if you may, uh, equal quantities to be

brought to the market.

So mass production is standardisation, mechanisation and wage workers wage

work would characterise the type of economic Externalisation that Mike

is observing as being the characteristic of capitalism.

But with the generalisation of which wage labour we have

also the gradual emergence, as we've seen in the previous

weeks, of some degree of class consciousness.

The workers are organising, they're identifying themselves as being part

of the same social group.

And this was particularly important in a context in which

it was not clear that their participation in this system

was improving their own living conditions.

And this was captured very well.

As I mentioned in a previous lecture by Friedrich Engels,

my future co-author, sponsored and famous in this book published

in 1846, the condition of the Working Class in England.

the workers were not only working longer hours.

Even weekends.

It was not only clear that they were entering the

labour force at the younger age.

Child labour was becoming more prevalent, but the wages they

were receiving were not enough to sustain their families.

So how can we explain the situation?

The fact that we have now a generalised system that

relies on which labour, in which the labourers themselves are

not improving their living conditions.

Engels response to this question being well, in fact, what's

happening is those who own these factories, the capitalists are

the same people who own the land And who lent

money for interest.

So Engels responds to this question, as we'll see will

be different for Mises later on.

You will not argue that this system is necessarily exploitative

of workers, but rather that it is capitalists also as

landlords, or also as financial renters who are extracting extra

surplus from the production of goods.

So Engels work provides sort of a middle point between

Ricardo's previous idea of distribution.

And what we will see will be today's Marx argument

about the necessarily exploitative character of a capitalist model.

So the context right for the industrial revolution.

Anybody who's, uh, a mechanisation of production based on wage

labour and the predominance of the social question.

Right.

Why is not this system leading to higher living standards

for the workers?

And what Marx will do is that he will take

classical political economy, its assumptions, its uses of concepts, its

theories as the point of departure to produce a critique

of capitalism.

And here lies the ingenuity of Marx's writings.

He is not simply ignoring what classical political economists have

written.

He's using this as the point of departure to identify

the contradictions in this system, and to provide avenues for

thinking about possible alternatives.

So like we tried before, Marx will accept that capitalism

has inherent laws of motion.

But unlike Ricardo and Smith and me, he would argue

that these laws, both the laws of production and distribution,

are socially and historically not naturally constituted.

You will accept from classical political economists that the basis

for the value of commodities is labour, but not any

type of labour.

It's a socially necessary labour to produce it.

We'll discuss today why these rules.

And he will go beyond regardless theory of distribution by

pointing that what we call the highly identified this ability

of Capitalists to extract profit above the cost of production

is not just a consequence of how.

Capitalist societies are organised, but constitute the key trait of

this capitalist system.

It provides the key motive for production.

The key characteristic trait of capitalism is what it calls

the valorisation.

This ability of capitalists to extract surplus value from labourers.

We'll discuss today how he reached this conclusion in the

process.

By showing that this capitalist system relies on valorisation.

Marx is able to also reveal that here lies its

major contradiction.

Where the main driver for capital accumulation is extraction of

surplus from capitalists.

This leads to a competition between capitalists that has, as

a consequence capital concentration, a tendency towards monopoly.

Tendency towards crisis, increasing the misery of the proletariat and

in the process providing the grounds for the emergence.

The development of a class consciousness among the workers that

seeds and sows the seeds for the destruction of the

system.

This system, Marx argues, has contradictions in it that will

lead to its destruction sooner or later.

So, Mr. Mill, Marx will argue, capitalism cannot be reformed.

It is doomed as a system.

But there is room for human emancipation.

It is only a stage in the historical progression towards

a superior, superior social order based on the socialisation of

women's production.

What we know as a communist.

So we'll see how Marx, building on his critique of

classical political economy, of the concepts, theories and arguments of

classical political economists, provides his own arguments about the contradictions,

enter into the capitalist system, and uses these to open

avenues for thinking about other possible ways of social organisation,

in particular communism.

Okay, so this is a plan I have for us

today.

Let us begin discussing by Marx life and his intellectual

influences, in particular the three components of Marxist thinking classical

political economy, French socialism and German historical materialism will then

begin.

We'll then discuss it with the key arguments in the

capital.

His major work, which is, as I've said a couple

of times, a critique of classical political economy from within

and within that discussing, uh, what the implications of this

critique are to understand the inner contradictions of the capitalist

system production and, uh, the possibility of seeking avenues for

human emancipation.

Okay, so let us begin discussing a Marx live.

So Marx, uh, came from a Jewish family, but he

early on converted to Protestantism when he was a child.

He then became an atheist, and his actually first writings

were on religion and the Jewish question in Germany.

Uh, he attended university, studied law in Bonn born in

Berlin at a time in which these universities were under

the spell of German philosophical idealism, from Kant to 252,

particularly Hegel and the Post Hegelians.

My early interests were actually in Greek philosophy, he wrote

on Epicurus and on the notion of a cleaner man.

Uh, this sort of a crazy atom that introduces movement

in a into, uh, Epicurus atomistic view of, um, the

material life.

He, uh, then, uh, worked as a journalist in radical

newspapers in major European cities.

He was exiled from one place to another.

Uh, he, uh, worked first in Cologne, then went, then

went to Paris and, uh, lastly to to Brussels.

While he was in Paris, he met, uh, he's a

later co-author and sponsor of Friedrich Engels.

Precisely at the time in which Europe was going through

these revolutions that I referred to in in the previous

lecture.

And it was in 1949, after being exiled from Paris,

that he arrived in London.

And these are these are able to learn and will

be very crucial to understand how Marx moved from his

early, mostly political, political, philosophical writings to have a closer

sort of interest in a political economy.

As such, from his early philosophy of philosophical writings, however,

we find sort of the seeds of Marx's political economy

arguments in what came to be known as The Irishman,

the various manuscripts, or the, uh, economic fields of these

manuscripts.

Marx provides the first insinuation of the notion of the

alienation of the worker, the idea that the workers, um,

um, are in.

Aim strained from the product of their work.

And this is a form of modern slavery.

If you may, in The German Ideology, Marx provides a

materialistic critique of history that will be sort of essential

to understand his method of historical, um, the materials, dialectics

and the mystery of philosophy.

Crucially, he will critique truth on one of our utopian

socialists and his argument that the problem lies with the

institution of a private property.

Marx will argue that the problem lies beyond this institution

and is connected with the exploitation of labourers.

And in the Communist Manifesto, as is commonly known, Marx

provides this initial formulation of what a communist society should

be right to each according to the news, from each

according to their needs.

But we are interested in discourse, uh, on amongst the

critical political economists.

And he lived after being exiled from Paris, uh, in

London for most of his life, lived and died in

poverty.

Three of his children actually died from hunger.

Uh, he attended, uh, you know, intellectually and materially, above

all, uh, on a further Engels.

Uh, was the son of a Manchester, uh, industrialist.

Um.

He was also actively involved, uh, in the, in the

international organisations.

Volunteering.

He was a key actor in the first International Workingmen's

Association.

And, uh, in this sort of really, uh, suggests or

emphasises that for Marx, intellectual activities, the intellectual endeavours was

connected with political practice and political action.

Right.

So we see here Marx as vital this reformist, educated,

not reformist, but rather activist tradition of intellectual thinking that

we found in socialism before his major works in political

economy are, of course, his three volumes of Das Capital.

But he provides an early formulation or early introduction of

what his project of political economy is in what is

known as his rule.

These were the foundations of the critique of political economy.

If you're interested in getting a better sense of Marx's

method, this is a crucial text I've uploaded it into

into more, and I'll comment a little bit on it,

because it's crucial to understand how much is understanding, uh,

what he means by a critical political economy.

Marx only published during his own life.

One of the volumes of Das Kapital.

Notice he wrote it in 1867, and it was not

published until two decades later, and the second and the

third volumes were completed and published posthumously by Engels in

1885 and 1884.

We'll focus on these scores on the first volume in

the capital, particular on the very first chapters.

Okay.

For those of you who didn't know, Marx is buried

in Highgate Cemetery, which is, I think, one of the

biggest ironies in history right now, just boring, one of

the most expensive neighbourhoods in London.

All right, so we turn three components of Marxism.

And why are this important to understand his method.

So first and foremost, Marx was an avid reader of

political economy, British political economy.

He will take from classical political economists this idea that

the source of value and the measure of value lies

in labour.

But in a way, you see your body, as we'll

see, will come closer to Smith's than Ricardo, even if

this is not clear at first sight, because Marx will

understand that the determination of labour has to do with

understanding that the exchange of goods from each other is

also reflecting the relationship between people and hence goods.

To acquire labour need to be successful in this dangerous

medium to the market.

Okay, so the termination of value will be done both

in the production process but also in its solicitation, as

we will see later today.

He will take from Ricardo's theory of distribution this idea

that profit is nothing else that, um, the.

Surplus that is extracted from.

Uh, selling commodities in the market above production costs.

And he will also show that this is an inherent

characteristic of the capitalist system.

So he will build on, uh, German philosophy, in particular

on Hegel's dialectics.

And you'll see that his writing is not particularly clear.

And this is related to his method.

So one of the key tenets of German, uh, dialectics

or Hegelian philosophy is that what appears as a symbol

object is not such.

Right now there is a divorce between appearance and reality

and the task of the philosopher.

The task of the electrician is to establish the connections

between, let's say, abstract concepts like labour, value, exploitation and

the concrete manifestations includes wages and prices.

And the dietician will do so by revealing the contradictions

in these relations.

Now Marx will move beyond German idealism by providing a

materialist critique of German idealist philosophy.

So he will, in a way, invert Hegel on its

head.

We'll see how.

And by doing so, he'll be building on for your

box materialist.

So when Hegel is concerned in understanding the evolution of

consciousness and how consciousness has evolved into its purest, most

curious manifestation in the notion of the nation state.

Marx will show that both ideas, ideology and political structures

are actually a manifestation of the material conditions of society

at each stage of human evolution.

Okay, so a materialist critique of Hegelian dialectics.

Third, crucial influence to understand the components in Marx's thinking.

Of course, French socialist Marx will provide a critique of

utopian socialists.

I've mentioned his critique to proven, but this critique extends

to other socialist alternatives we've discussed in this course so

far.

So think about Robert own or think about also some

something more.

And his critique would be that utopian socialists are precisely

too utopian because their proposals are relying on, if you

may, the benevolence of those who own the means of

production.

Think about owns cooperatives.

How can we rely on capitalists to voluntarily share the

benefits of their activities with neighbours?

We need to provide a critique to the system that

is not relying on the beneficence, the benevolence of the

wealthy.

And it is only by providing this critique to political

economy that, building on a materialist understanding of social change,

we will understand that it is class struggle and conflict

which lies behind social change, and that the proletarian the

workers when they develop their the consciousness art the only

potential revolutionary class.

So Marx will build on these three systems of thought,

but will provide a synthesis that goes beyond that.

So let's talk a little bit about Marx's method.

So my tour is Hegel on its head with his

dialectic materialism.

It is material conditions, not ideas, which are the driving

force in history.

He would actually say in one of his words in

the ten thesis on four year back, that the idea

is nothing else than the material world reflected by the

human mind and translated into forms of thought.

What is the implication of this?

Well, that all.

All political and cultural phenomenon, what he will call the

superstructure, the leaves in this tree are just some products

of the material conditions of of existence.

They depend on specific social model production prevailing in that

society, social mode of production, of the means of existence,

of what each society requires for its own subsistence and

reproduction is a function of both the productive forces that

give some example of this community and the relations of

production that organise production forces.

Okay, so we see here in example Marxist materialist, right?

It is not through the evolution of ideas or through

understanding changes in ideas that societies change, but it is

rather through changes in the relations between the force of

production and the relations of production.

But this relationship is not harmonious, and it's actually conflicted.

It is a conflict between the material force of society

and the existing relations production, that is the agents of

historical change.

And might we provide some examples of this?

So in ancient times, the prevailing mode of production was

slavery.

The force of production came from the labour of slaves.

Right.

This force of production was organised by this coercive relationship

between masters and slaves.

Right.

But this was not a harmonious relationship.

This was a conflicted relationship.

Right.

And with the contradictions of this system became so operated,

this system collapsed and made its way to a new

economic system for Asian feudalism.

Now, this second system was organised based on different points

of production.

It was not now slave labour, which was on the

basis of rather serfs serfdom, but certainly was organised by

a particular type of relation to production.

Right.

In particular, the idea that landless peasants would be subjected

to the the landlords right, who extracted agricultural surplus from

them.

When the system reached its contradictions, it led its way

to a new system of production, that is, which Marx

analysis would focus on.

And that system of production is capitalism.

What are the key characteristics of the capitalist system of

production?

And this is something that Marx analyses in a chapter

on the.

Original accumulation of capital, the primitive accumulation of capital.

Well, that those people who were formerly working on the

lands, the land and the peasants.

um.

Found themselves in a situation in which they could not

produce the means of subsistence for themselves, and had to

come to cities to work as wage labourers, as free

men.

Right.

And that the only means of production are owned by

the capitalist class.

So in the capitalist system, the force of production comes

from the employment of which labourers.

It's no longer slaves who are coerced.

It is no longer serfs who are subjected by custom

and laws to the landlord.

It is a system in which free labourers sell freely

their labour power to the owners of the means of

production.

Okay.

So it is the conflict between the force of production

in a particular society and the relations of production that

Structure, how these forms of production, um, are organised.

That allows us to understand historical change to one society.

And if we take this to together, then.

Both the set of ideas, what Marx calls ideologies and

the legal, institutional and political structures that emerge are just

a by-product of these modes of production.

They are determined by those social monster production, uh, themselves.

And this helps us understand the nature of classical political

economy so far as a field for Marx, classical political

economy, from me to mill has been nothing else than

a justification of this system.

Right?

The relationship between liberalism and classical Civil political economy I

mentioned before.

Hence the point of departure.

To understand how to move beyond the system is to

provide a critique of classical political economy.

Okay.

And our task now is to understand what this treaty

was about.

So where should we start?

Well, let's take my theories.

Let's take the most simple unit of analysis of classical

political economy.

Then commodity a commodity.

This is the wealth of those societies in which the

capitalist mode of production prevails.

Presents itself manifests itself as an immense accumulation of commodities.

Wealth is an immense accumulation of commodities.

Members need to satisfy needs once and amusements, its unit

being a single commodity.

So our investigation in the capital must therefore begin with

trying to understand this very simple unit.

What should be right according to this type of analysis?

The most simple thing to understand what is a commodity,

right?

And why do we buy new commodities?

So this brings us, uh, to market theory, where a

commodity itself satisfies two things, right?

One, one could think of the commodity as having a

use for its owner.

And in that case, commodities have used value.

They are useful.

We value them because they satisfy needs, desires of wants.

But in capitalist societies, commodities are also exchanged for each

other.

We wouldn't call it something a commodity if it's just,

let's say, a good produced for self subsistence, a commodity

we know from meat, must be brought to the market

in exchange for their commodities.

So if we accept this reality, then commodities not only

have used value, but also what exchange value or what

Marx will call simply the value.

And what all commodities have in common is actually that

they are exchanged for each other, right?

And they are exchanged for each other as commodities.

Right.

So whereas use value reflects to what makes commodities different,

different from each other, right.

Commodities differ in terms of the qualities in terms of

their uses insofar their exchange in the market, commodities are

exchanged.

Um, in terms of the quantitative relationship, right.

We wouldn't care if it's a banana or an output,

but how many bananas do you receive from an apple?

Right?

But to understand where value lies, we need to get

a sense of what is the substance that is common

to all commodities.

And we know from Ricardo, of course, that all commodities

share that they are all the products of human labour.

They all have immense labour on them.

But Marx will tell them Ricardo is missing a crucial

point with this distinction, that Smith had identified a commodity

that is not brought to the market, that is not

exchangeable.

All the commodities would not have value at all, could

not be called a commodity.

So this commodity needs the sanction of the market to

be valued, to be considered valuable.

It needs to pass this dangerous leap from the factory

to the market, and hence what all commodities have in

common is not just that they have invested labour on

them, but rather that they are the product of abstract

human labour, of human labour in general.

And the magnitude of the value of the commodity is

not measured by the amount of time devoted to their

production, but to what Marx will call the socially necessary

labour time, uh, required to produce it under normal conditions

and average skill and intensity.

So let's think of a case in which a commodity

is used in more time than it's socially necessary.

right?

In a Ricardian view, this will imply that the price

is measured in terms of a higher number of labour

hours, and if this commodity has a higher price than

what it is socially necessary to produce it, it will

simply not find a market, right?

Buyers will go and buy though those goods which are

sold at a lower price.

So it is not enough right to produce a commodity.

It is not enough to put labour into a commodity.

Call it a commodity.

That commodity needs to satisfy quarterly past the sanction of

the market.

Hence, the market value of a commodity is measured by

its socially necessary, the amount of time that is socially

necessary to bring it to the market.

Nothing more, nothing less.

Now.

this truth about this right commodity that appears so simple.

Is concealed by the fact that in modern capitalist societies,

commodities are no longer exchange for each other, but are

exchanged for one particular type of commodity money.

Money is a single commodity that has been excluded from

the rest to represent the value of all the other

commodities it plays.

As we discussed when we talked about the volume controversy.

The role of universal equivalence in the exchange process.

It means money has social validity.

We all accept money as the universal equivalence.

But in its money form.

Understanding of the world of commodities.

This conceals the social character of private labour and the

social relations that are involved.

Between individual producers.

When you exchange a commodity for an order or for

money, when you focus on its monetary price, the complex

set of social relations that made the production of this

commodity possible are completely concealed, and they appear as if

they were just a monetary relation between quantities of goods

and quantities of money.

Right.

Monetary prices.

So this is what Marx calls the fetishism of the

commodities.

The commodity appears as something simple, whereas it is the

result of a complex set of social relations.

One is the social set of social relations.

It's what likes explores, uh, later.

So he tells us the relations connecting the Labour one

individual to the West appear not as direct social relations

between you and support.

Right.

This is what is actually happening.

But as what they really are, material relations between persons

and social relations between things.

So to understand this, we need to get a sense

of Marx and my analysis of capital accumulation.

So such as he began his discussion on value with

taking the most simple units of analysis, the commodity, Marx

will tell us.

Okay, let's begin by analysing, uh, the situation that we

see in Smith in which commodities are exchanged for each

other.

Right.

Because the simple circulation of Commodities.

In a commercial transaction, a commodity that is exchanged for

other commodity.

Mediated by money.

Implies the following two things within these terms mean a

that money.

Money is just a medium of exchange, and b that

no value added.

Is resulting from the exchange of commodities.

You will only exchange a commodity for another if that

other commodity represents for you the same value, right?

Now Marx is telling us that the key to understand

capital accumulation lies in identifying that there's one special commodity.

And this is a special commodity in a context in

which the capitalists own the means of production, while the

workers.

To satisfy their needs for subsistence only on a very

special commodity.

They only own their labour.

They are free to sell their labour power in the

market.

So the capitalists, Hugo, the capitalists, he goes to the

market with his money.

Right.

And he buys these particular commodity labourers, labourers, labour, power.

From the perspective of the labourer.

Right.

Is just selling his labour power for.

The amount of money necessary to buy the means for

his own subsistence.

Right.

He says his labour power for wages.

It is for him, right?

See which circulation of commodities it is for him about

the average transaction.

But what does the capitalist doing with this commodity?

With labours labour power, when he buys it with his

money?

Well, he consumes the labour power to produce in the

factory exchangeable commodities.

He brings together the means of production.

The machines, the factory itself with the commodity is what

the market.

Labour is labour power to produce a new commodity right,

that is sold at the market.

But herein lies the crucial characteristic of treating money as

money capital, and not money as just a medium of

exchange.

Money as a means to employ the productive labour.

Later that the capitalists will only entertain this activity if

he is able to sell this commodity for a higher

value than that which causes him to produce in the

first place.

Right.

And this is what he is able to do by

consuming this particular commodity, he is able to extract surplus

value because the value of labour power, the wages he

pays to the labourers, is inferior, is less than the

socially necessary labour that is required to produce this new

commodity that is bringing to the market at a profit.

So this is precisely what Marx called surplus value.

The difference between the price of the commodity right, the

socially necessary labour to produce it, and what actually costs

the capitalist to produce this good, right?

The value of power, labour, labour, power in terms of

wages.

So then Marx deals with the question, okay, what is

it that allows capitalists to extract surplus value?

He discusses a two means to which capitalists are able

to do so.

The first and most common one at the time is

through what he calls option surplus.

And this example will make it clear the labourer himself,

if he owned the means of subsistence, only requires five

labour hours to produce the value of, uh, of his

own subsistence.

Right.

The wage holds the goods that he requires for his

subsistence, and the ones they want is fine.

But through a combination of coercion and the use of

law, and the institutions that allow the capitalists to make

the worker be in the factory longer than he should.

The capitalists able to extract three additional labour hours.

This is surplus value, right?

So the capitalist has to make this war has.

And as it means, it means not just the ability

to discipline the worker in the factory to exert some

degree of coercion, but also the legal institutions are on

the side.

Another way in which the capitalist can extract surplus value

from the worker is by benefiting from the productivity gains

that results from the specialisation of labourers in the factory.

And this is what Marx.

was, right at least.

But the key takeaway from here is that this is

not just an artificial result of the production of commodities.

This is a key driver of capital accumulation and hence

all the production of commodities itself.

The consequence of this is that the capitalist mode of

production is grounded on the exploitation of the labourers, who

sell freely their labour by the capitalists, whose own motive

to produce goods is the extract service from the labourers.

But the problem with the exploitation of the worker for

mines lies not just in the fact that capitalists are

able to extract surplus.

It is in fact, a new situation in which the

labourers are alienated from the progress of the work, and

Marx puts it beautifully in this success.

The means of production are at once changed into means

for the absorption of the labour of others.

It is now no longer the labour that employs the

means of production.

It is no longer the labourer that is using the

means required to produce the work for its own subsistence,

but it is the means of production owned by the

capitalists which employ the labourer.

And here lies the secret of the capitalist mode of

production.

Okay.

So why do the applications of bodies of Marx critique

of political economy for the future of capitalism?

Can this system be reformed?

Is there something that we can do by changing the

laws that allows capitalists to extract surplus from an absolute

surplus perspective.

What can be done?

Well.

Marx would argue that it is precisely in the fact

that producing surplus value.

The valorisation process is the agent of capital accumulation.

That we can find by observing this.

It is here that we can find the contradictions of

the system that allow us to understand why the system

is actually doomed, because as capitalists compete with each other

to extract surplus from workers.

There is a tendency of the rate of profit to

fall.

Not now, due to the fact that there are diminishing

returns to the use of land.

plan in regard, but to the fact that there is

a natural limit to which you can press down the

wages of labourers.

There is a natural biological limit for destruction of capitalist

surplus.

So.

Capital accumulation will bring and drive capitalists into a labour

fiercer competition with each other to continue extracting surplus, and

this will lead to a rate of profit to fall.

Second consequence of this fierce competition over surplus value.

Capitalism has an inherent tendency towards capital concentration.

There are winners and losers.

The winners get bigger and bigger.

Those with more capital are able to accumulate more capital

in the future.

So there is not a tendency towards competition, but a

tendency towards monopoly in capitalism, and this has.

As a consequence, pushing for more capitalists to join the

labour force.

And this will only make wars the misery of the

proletariat.

Former capitalists will join the mass of unemployed.

This reserve army of unemployed are increasing the misery of

the proletariat.

The introduction of machinery will further displace labour, and this

growing reserve army of workers will sooner or later develop

a consciousness about their situation.

Class consciousness.

And here lie the seeds of an entire revolution.

So Marx concludes that capitalism sowed the seeds of its

own destruction.

The driver for capital accumulation is in itself the main

cause for the rate of profit to fall for the

tendency towards monopoly and capital and capital concentration in a

capitalist system, but also it is the source for the

mobilisation of workers insofar as they develop a class consciousness.

Okay.

And Marx predicted capitalism will end precisely with a revolution.

This system cannot be reformed.

Mr. mill, it is doomed to fail.

So what about the society?

And Marx here provides a room for political praxis in

human emancipation.

And this is because we've seen the economy, the economic

loss of production, are not natural.

They are social and historically the way they are.

They are socially and historically determined.

In his early writings, he would write that by asking

on the wall and the external world, and changing it

here at the same time changes its own nature.

So the way in which this system can be changed

is not through the reform of its institutions, but it's

rather through political practice, the organisation of the workers.

This helps us understand the connections between Marx, the writer,

Marx, the philosopher minds, the political economist and Marx the

activist and his participation in the International Organisation of Workers.

Right.

There is room for political practice in human emancipation.

He advocated for the advent of communism.

This idea that a society should be organised by taking

from each one according to their own capacity, and giving

to each one according to their own needs.

But what's interesting in Mark's world is that he actually

left the road from capitalism to communism rather undetermined.

He will not advocate for state communism.

As we will discuss later on in our text on

planning.

And it opened avenues from four different ways of thinking

about how this possible communist system will come.

Okay, so we see here how Marx provides not just

a critique of political economy as we studied in the

course, but from here a critique to the to the

capitalist system on itself.

And we will see how, in a way, the marginal

revolution that we will study in the next lecture will

emerge, particularly in the context of the Austrians, in reaction

to these politically explosive conclusions that emerge from classical political

economy.

All right.

So this is what we will discuss on next week's

lecture, the marginal revolution and how economics moves away from

understanding labour as the main permanent of the value of

commodities.

We will discuss in class the materials and marks in

our class this week.

I suggest you begin by reading the the chapter on

the commodity and the labour process.

And then we want to discuss the Valorisation force.

These are not complete readings.

So, uh, make some questions for the classes.

Thank you.

So it's more.

Like I do it like make sure I like.

Doing things that we like.

Tell me.

What?

I.

Lecture 8:

You don't really expect that.

So why?

Not go.

To the toilet.

Okay, guys.

So in today's lecture, we move to a different section

of our course.

We will start to leave behind as a political economy

by discussing the work of a general manager who made

part of what's known as the marginal revolution.

We will discuss today why this was called a revolutionary

moment in economic thinking, and we'll try to get a

sense also of the main differences between the author, starting

with parts of this revolution, because, as we will see

later in this course are the works of Jevons, Menger,

and we'll see later on.

Belarus will define different ways, different branches, if you may,

in economic thinking during the 20th century.

So we'll come back again to this thinkers as we

move on.

Okay, so we're leaving behind classical political economy.

And to understand the significance of the marginal revolution, let's

just focus on the following thing that we know so

far from the works of Smith retirement plans, where Smith

put all the emphasis of his analysis on markets and

exchange as sort of the space in which people are

where to satisfy their needs, wants and conveniences in the

consumption of goods of different quality and, uh, the availability

of ever more goods, distribution of labour.

We saw that from Ricardo on the focus of classical

political economy, shifted away from the realm of exchange and

consumption, Are two whole foods rather on the production of

commodities.

And as the situation, uh, of the living conditions of

the working classes became, uh, rather a problematic by the

mid 19th century, we saw in the work of Miller

Ricardo's political economy, uh, focussed on questions on distribution.

Right.

This even led, uh, John Stuart Mill to say that

political economy actually focussed on the loss of production, care

about distribution as well, but that there was nothing such

as a theory of consumption.

We'll see today how the marginals will bring again the

attention to both questions of consumption.

Why do people consume as they do?

And, uh, they will provide the ways to see, if

you may, uh, for theories of exchange, theories of market,

uh, equilibrium, uh, particularly in the case of gyms, and

quite nice, as we will see later.

But there was something else going on in the mid

19th century which will allow us to understand a shift

also in the mode of reasoning in economics, from classical

political economy to what we will see will become the

main paradigm, if you may, the mainstream in economics is

neoclassical economics, which is that economics becomes began to be

seen as a science and began in a way to

professionalise.

So whereas most classical political economists were not entirely devoted

to, uh, the study of the discipline, they were not

full time academics in universities.

We will see today the example of two economists, Jevons

and Major, who will devote entirely their lives and to

the study of these issues.

Decisions, right?

So economics as a science begins to professionalise.

And we see also the emergence here for this.

But in the next weeks of this course, we'll see

that different economists in different places will have diverging understandings

of what it means to think of political economy as

a science.

In particular, what's the relationship between economics and other sciences?

Shall economics be based on psychology?

As, uh, the two authors that we will study today

will suggest and the microeconomic behaviours of individuals.

Or we should rather think of a science that integrates

more fully history, like the German historical school suggest.

Or shall we look at the biological sciences?

Is economics an evolutionary science like biology.

This will be sort of the understanding of what makes

economic, scientific or the institutionalist in the US.

So in the next few weeks, we'll study how, from

the case of the marginalised revolution.

The work of Marshall and Burroughs will provide the foundations

for two paradigms or two approaches better to neoclassical thinking

in the 20th century.

But we'll also see that in the late 19th century,

even the divergences between different schools of thought.

What makes economics a science?

Neoclassical economics was not the only game in town.

What?

Right.

And we've studied some of the alternatives with the German

school and North American institutions.

This late 19th century moment would be a period of

pluralism in economic thinking that will remain to be the

norm, particularly until the 1930s, and we'll see why, uh,

this ceased to be the case, uh, later on in

this course.

All right.

So this is a new section of our course.

We'll leave classical political information behind.

And our purpose is to understand what the role of

the marginal distribution was in order.

But as usual, uh, in this course, you're interested in

understanding how economic theories changed.

Also in reaction to, in relation to a changing economic

context.

Right.

And the late 19th century for the economists, the economic

historians in the room was one in which actually focusing

on consumption and mass consumption, uh, made a little bit

of sense, right.

Uh, the reduction of transportation, of transportation costs through the

introduction of steamboats, plus, uh, the technological innovations and the

rates of productivity made the availability of, uh, goods, um,

much, uh, at a lower cost.

Uh, cheaper for not just the rich and the wealthy,

but also for the poorer classics.

Right.

So this is a context in which, uh, the predictions,

if you may, of classical political economy, uh, were not

necessarily, uh, evidenced by the economic reality.

In fact, real wages were racing by the late 19th

century.

And someone tell me, uh, or is someone able to

identify what this picture is about?

Where was this picture taken?

Any of this?

Is that London?

Sorry, is that London?

It's only in London.

And whereabouts in London?

It's Oxford Street, right?

This is the first known picture of John Lewis in

Oxford Street.

Opened in the 1880s, just a decade after, uh, the

Germans and the main road to the matrix.

Right.

So we the the Creation of uh, this uh superstores

in which goods, uh, standardised goods were sold not just

for the wealthy but toward all the social classes.

Right.

Sort of representing how the situation was changing from what

classical political economists like Ricardo and Marx predicted.

Right.

So the question of distribution in a context of raising

living standards in a way lost saliency, the other kinds,

you know, the radicalisation of the labour movements also make

this a very political question.

And in this context in which economics was attempting to

portray itself as a science, we will see how the

notion of political economy starts to be abandoned.

And gradually the term economics, simple economics began to be

used.

Right.

So a shift from questions of distribution, from questions of

production to trying to understand the behaviours of consumers.

So this connects to a moment again in which economics

began to professionalise began to be seen as a science,

and that changing the mode of reasoning, uh, is visible

during these years.

And it is particularly evident in the work of one

of the economists through a study today with Sandy James.

We began to see for the first time the systematic

use of graphic and mathematical analysis.

So now you economists in the 21st century began to

see, uh, how economics starts to resemble the type of

economics you learned today.

And this is connected with the pretension to present economics

as a science.

Right.

So we are trying to understand, uh, today how this

came to be in a context in which a consumption

and theories of consumption and exchange, uh, gain, uh, students.

All right.

So the the the objective of today is to understand

the marginal revolution, right?

Why do we call it a revolution?

Well, there were at least a few revolutionary aspects here.

So marginality, the notion that individuals make decisions in the

margin and this is what matters, to understand economic outcomes

becomes the unifying principle to understand the behaviour of this

economic man that, uh, John Stuart Mill, uh, referred before.

This brings economics closer to psychology.

Economics must have a broader psychological foundation of human behaviour

in order to understand economic outcomes.

We also see that these imply a shift from theories

of value that focus on the properties of objects, and

that objects of production, uh, are uh.

A bit the produce of labour.

Two subjective theories of value, which displays the labour theories

of value and other in classical political economy.

We see here also a shift in the unit of

analysis.

Economics will stop focusing on social classes, workers, capitalists and

landlords, and the attention will shift to the individual who

makes decisions in the margin.

uh, about the consumption, uh, and exchange of tools.

Another aspect in which the work of these people will

talk today is revolutionary.

We will see how, from the emphasis on the causes

and nature of economic growth that were present in this

week's work, and in regardless, ways of trying to send

the focus of economics will be sort of more restrictive

to one in which economists will begin to concern about

the optimal allocation of resources within a framework of a

given endowments.

Economists will not take as its major task to problematise

how these endowments grow.

The question of economic growth is relegated to the background,

but also how these endowments are distributed across society.

Right?

Economists will focus on, if you may, static allocation of

these resources.

Right.

And what makes this allocation optimal?

These will become particularly clear with the work of veterans.

Uh, in a few weeks.

So in this sense, the marginal revolution was revolutionary.

It was revolutionary.

Revolutionising economic thinking was taking a radical departure from classical

political economy.

But there are some reasons to question the use of

this activity.

On the one hand, this was these were not the

first subjective theories of value.

There were some antecedents we've discussed already.

Why, at least in utilitarianism, when we discussed John Stuart

Mill and particularly Bentham utilitarianism, Jevons will build on these

antecedents.

And this was revolutionary if seen from a British context.

If we looked at the type of economic theories that

emerged in the 19th century in the continent, we'll see

some subjective theories of value in France, and meeting these

will be particularly relevant for the discussion on Madras and

the sun later on.

But second aspect for which sort of this objective of

the revolution should be taken with a pinch of salt,

right.

Which is that the authors of the study today are

not portraying a notion of marginality that should be taken

as representing a co-ordinating change in economic thinking.

Actually, we need, uh, to identify the different lines of

reasoning, if you may, that this revolution opened.

Right.

So who were the key actors here?

I will focus on, uh, two of them today.

Uh, current member who will become the father of the

Austrian School of economics.

And William Stanley Jevons will come to the work of

William Burroughs.

us, uh, in, uh, on this code of loci.

Later on in the course.

And when we discuss North American journalism will mention John

Bates blogs, videos.

And even though they all in a way shared these

commonalities, we'll see how it is also important to what

his economics have called the homogenise the marginal revolution, to

understand the further evolution of the discipline in the 20th

century.

Okay, but these two authors would be the focus of

our, uh, lecture today.

All right, let's run out of time.

Okay, so let's begin with really understanding the Germans, who,

as we will see, will provide most of the language,

if you may, that is behind theories of consumption and,

uh, and markets.

Uh, today.

Any particular will put at the centre of our thinking

this very notion of, uh, utility maximisation.

So who was William Stanley Jones?

Um, he in a way, was illustrates this transition from

political economy to simply economics that I've referred before and

the degree of professionalisation of the discipline in the late

19th century.

So he both had familiarity with political economy and knowledge

of mathematics.

So he undertook a degree in mathematics and chemistry at

the UCL, but got involved with questions of political economy,

also as a practical man, when he worried the Royal

Mint in Sydney, Australia, and actually his first work on

political economy.

Uh, the cold question, which we were discussing just before

this lecture, was an attempt, one of the first attempts

to quantify the extent to which coal energy sources post

natural limits to economic growth.

Right.

So we have recently joined, uh, will be one of

the first sort of quantitative economists in a way.

And we will come back to these questions, uh, on

how to measure economic phenomena later on in this course.

But, uh, we'll focus today on his major work in

Theory of Political economy, which he wrote, uh, while he

was, uh, teaching uh, logics, more political economy at what

is today the University of Manchester.

And you've seen his work that actually the graphs that

make them very well known, uh, in the future were

actually the ones that he used in his classes to

illustrate this complex, uh, concept that was discussed.

Okay.

Uh, he was professor of political economy, uh, then at

UCL, Yeah, but, uh, something tragic happened to gentleman.

He drowned when he was 46 years old.

And this is important, I think, because as opposed to

Garner, who will see later on today, Jevons did not

leave behind a school.

So he was actually actively involved in academia and in

teaching political economy.

But he didn't leave a school behind to develop his

ideas.

Some of his ideas would be beat up by economists

in Oxford, particularly, uh, Edward, uh, and this sort of

strand of mathematical economics would find its way to this

bill through there.

But Jevons, uh, himself did not leave behind a school.

All right.

So.

What was the key idea in general.

Uh, what?

How did.

That was really fine.

The problem of economics.

I think this quote here illustrates that very well.

So he says that to satisfy once to the utmost,

with the least effort to procure the greatest amount of

what is desirable at the expense of the least that

is undesirable is, in other words, maximise pleasure is the

central problem of economics.

So the maximisation of pleasures, the minimisation of pains, is

the central problem that should be studied by economics.

Therefore, Jevons would argue, utilitarianism should be the point of

departure.

So contrast this definition with the one we studied, uh,

when we read John Stuart Mill.

Remember John Stuart Mill distinguished between the science of Morons

who thought utilitarianism was the relevant framework for studying morality,

but it was not the relevant framework to study political

economy.

Germans will take a different route.

Who would say actually, political economy is not, in their

terms, a branch of the social science social economy, but

should actually be grounded on a proper understanding of the

psychological behaviours of individuals.

And utilitarianism is the framework we need to better understand

this.

All right.

So utility and the principle of utility is the basis

of general theory of consumption.

Remember again major shift here.

John Stuart Mill did not even consider that the theory

of consumption as such ever existed.

Consumption did not follow natural laws.

Hence it was not the proper object of economics.

James will build on the principle of utility to provide

such a theory of consumption.

So what is this theory?

Consistent?

Well, uh.

The point of departure is, again, this kind of, uh,

pleasures and pains.

And James will tell us that as opposed to what

classical political economists have believed.

Goods themselves, commodities themselves do not have an intrinsic value.

The value of goods is not to be found in

the amount of labour put into their production.

In fact, actually value the value of goods is subjectively

determined by individuals, and these individuals are able to do

so because they are able to identify the extent to

which additional amounts of the consumption of one particular.

It will.

Increase the pleasures and pains.

Produced a religious pleasure and babe.

They are able to measure the intensity, the duration, the

propinquity, how close these pleasures and pains are, and therefore

they are able to attribute some measure of utility to

the consumption of different goods.

So goods may possess utility, right?

But this is nothing intrinsic in them.

It is individuals who personally value these in terms of

the pleasures and pains that these would appear to them.

These calculations of pleasures and pains, sevens without you is

what makes economics is science dealing with quantities And therefore,

as we'll see in a couple of slides.

Mathematics and the use of mathematics is essential to understand

how.

This series provides an essential tool to understand economic, uh,

outcomes.

However, uh, even though individuals are able to subjectively determine

the amount of utility each wood procures produces to them,

Jevons will recognise the problems of Bentham and utilitarianism.

To begin with, each individual mind is inscrutable to others,

right?

What is the implication of this for the analyst or

the economist?

Well, that it is not possible to add interpersonal utilities.

So utilitarianism is particularly relevant at the individual level.

But this philosophic calculus of Bentham, this demonic calculus of

trying to maximise pleasures and pains at their wicked level

is simply untenable.

We cannot compare utilities between different people.

This will be a problem that economists in the 20th

century have to deal with, but.

Utility is observable through the choices that individuals made.

Okay.

And this is how economists are able to get into

people's minds, if you may, to understand how they consume.

So building on the principle of utility, Jevons will provide

the foundations of what we know today is the idea

is the notion of diminishing marginal utility, the fact that

additional quantities consumed of a good produce error, less a

utility than than the previous ones.

He did not.

He did not use this term.

Hence we take we need to take them with a

pinch of salt And actually the term he used was

the degree of utility and diminishing degrees.

So he says in his theory of political economy that

the degree of utility varies with the quantity of the

commodity and ultimately decreases as the quantity increases.

So when Jevons believed that it was actually possible to

measure the total utility produced by a particular good and

it's worth, we'll continue with this agenda in Oxford later

on.

He believed that for the purposes of economic analysis, it

was sufficient to focus on small marginal changes to understand

economic outcomes and economic behaviours.

And this is what he refers to by the degree

of utility.

He begins by an example of non divisibility.

It's assumed that goods can be divided in discrete proportions.

And he tells us, okay, individuals are able to identify

the extent to which consumption of discrete portions of food

at a utility to them or produce utility to them,

right.

He provides example.

For example, he provided an example.

Um, the consumption of water.

So imagine that, uh.

You are in that situation in which water is essential

for your survival.

The first glass of water you have produces pleasures of

such an intensity that the utility that you derive from

it is super high.

But that second glass of water, well, I mean, it's

still providing pleasures to you.

It's avoiding you, the pain of thirst.

But the extent to which you value the second class

of water diminishes in relation to the first.

Right.

Now think about the 10th glass of water you drink.

It might be the case that it stops even producing

pleasures.

You have your belly full of water.

It starts reducing pains.

Right?

So what matters for economic analysis is not.

The addition of the degrees of utility produced by these

ten glass of water, but rather the relative changes, the

marginal changes between the consumption of different quantities.

And this is what he referred by the degree of

utility.

And through the example of water and the consumption of

water, he illustrates why this degree of utility varies with

the quantity of the commodity, but also decreases when the

quantity of goods are increased.

Right.

Which means this is evident.

Right.

And uh, economies.

Uh, is close to how each individual values the consumption

of different types of goods.

Now let's move on from this case in which we've

assumed that goods are divisible only portions glasses of waters

and focus and and take this sort of, uh, idea

to the limit by assuming that actually goods are perfectly

divisible.

If this is the case that we can then approximate.

To a third right.

Say we're focusing on discrete changes in the consumption of

goods.

We can focus on the infinitesimal changes and the extent

to which is provided an additional degree of utility, right.

We see here a first representation of a utility curve.

Right, and diminishing.

Diminishing utility is produced as the quantities of consumer goods

increased.

Right.

So if we accept this assumption that goods are perfectly

divisible, then we can introduce a very important tool to

understand how individuals make decisions in consumption.

There is an innovation in method here in this work.

Right.

We can use not just graphic analysis on continuous curves,

but we can use differential calculus.

Right.

Infinitesimal calculus to study these marginal changes when addition in

UTC when additional quantities of goods are consumed.

Now there's a second underlying assumption here.

In observing these as a continuous curve, in approaching this

as a continuous curve, which is called the law of

indifference, we'll see how this is crucial to understand the

differences with measure.

So by the law of indifference, Jevons refers to this

assumption, which he found reasonable, that individuals do not judge

differently.

One portion of a good to another, right.

It shouldn't matter for you that you have that, uh,

that the fourth glass of water is different to the

third glass of water, different portions consumed for good.

I shouldn't have any implication of the extent to which

the utility from them.

Right.

The third for fourth fifth glass watchers are, for the

purposes of our analysis.

Uh, equivalent in terms of the century state utility.

What matters to us is just marginal changes and relative

changes in the quantities consumed.

Right.

So if that is the case, then we can approximate

this diagram to the core because it implies there are

no changes.

Uh, no.

There are no jobs in the court after it.

Say you consume the fifth glass of water.

Right.

We'll see why a mandate will diverge from the idea

here.

So if goods are divisible, and if you are indifferent

between the consumption of different portions of the code, we

can then understand, uh, this idea of the degrees of

utility in terms of a downward, uh, court representing the

relationship between the potential and the utility.

Right?

So you you might think, okay, you're just telling me

something that I know since I started studying economics.

This.

It seems simple, but we know now after studying classical

political economy, why even representing the consumption of goods in

such a way was so revolutionary.

Right?

And Germans will tell us that actually, what matters for

economic analysis is the last degree of utility are the

infinitesimal margin.

Right.

And, uh.

The quantities consumed will be determined by that additional portion

of utility, uh, that equates the rate of exchange of

that particular the price of that particular variable.

Right.

So this is how he builds from a theory of

consumption, a theory of exchange, and he represents that into

what he calls the two trading models bodies model.

So the main argument of this model is that the

rate of exchange between two different commodities, bananas and apples.

Is determined by the reciprocal ratio of the final degrees

of utility, here represented in infinitesimal terms.

Of the utility of the utility of the quantities of

the commodity available for the consumption after the exchange between

these two trading bodies.

So let's focus on this second mathematical formulation.

Right.

So we have here the utility curves of individual one

and individual two with their downward uh a shape.

And we can assume that individuals begin with a definite

set of endowments of others.

And that's right.

So the extent to which individual A is willing to

relinquish some of his habits to obtain to obtain maintenance,

right, will be determined by, uh, these, uh, rate of

uh, by these by this function.

Right.

So let's assume that this individual starts with this amount

upwards.

Relinquishing a minus a prime amount of upwards will, um,

a would increase the amount sorry.

And will increase will decrease the amount of um, the

degree of utility by this margin.

But he will gain, uh, this.

Utility here.

right?

So the extent to which these individuals will be willing

to exchange with each other will be determined by the

point at which any additional amount of the goods you

exchange, right, will not give you, uh, more utility than

the amount of goods that you are giving.

Right.

Hence, it will be determined by this equilibrium point.

Uh, here.

Now, the law of indifference, uh, guarantees that these would

be a unitary price.

There are no jumps in any of these curves, and

hence that in the same time and place, there would

be just one equilibrium price for this commodity.

There would be just one rate of exchange, uh, between

these commodities given an initial imbalance.

Now This was a theory of exchange, but not a

theory of markets.

So gentleman believed, or he assumed, that trading bodies one

and two can actually include more than one individual aggregate

numbers of individuals who exchange between each other.

But this is a representation of exchanges for one good

to another.

Jevons is not taking into account the more complex problem

of what happens in a market in which we have

more than three commodities exchange for each other, or even

more than that in which any commodities are exchanged for

that or for each other.

Right.

So that's what we will study with a car with

him.

Later on in the course.

But even though Jevons, even though this is not a

fear of markets, broccoli that was believed that it represented

very well all market structures.

We'll see.

We'll see them later in this course.

Why this assumption is problematic.

Now, this wasn't either a theory about the determination of

prices.

James is dealing here with a static problem, right?

Given given a set of initial endowments, Jevons was interested

about the point of rest at which individuals will cease

to exchange with each other.

Right?

Which individuals will no longer want or desired?

The commodities are provided by others.

And he used the pendulum pendulum analogy.

Here he says it is easier to identify the point

of rest of the pendulum when the pendulum reaches the

centre point that you understand the rate, the velocity at

which the pendulum approaches this point of rest.

So for the purposes of economic analysis, what we care

about is this equilibrium price, this rate.

We don't care about the adjustment to this point.

We don't care about the rate of adjustment to this

point of rest.

This understanding of the equilibrium as a point of rest

will have a long history in economics, as we'll see

later on, and will make Germany's understanding of exchange quite

different from the theory of general equilibrium in markets.

That will start with us.

Okay.

So building on the principle of utility, Germans developed a

theory of consumption from his theory of consumption provided an

understanding of exchange between two goods, which focuses on the

point of equilibrium as a point of rest, as opposed

to the adjustments in prices Rises to a level that

we never get from this approach.

All right.

So this is called Jevons.

You begin to see how economics become becomes closer to

the one you study today.

Now these are your second marginals.

Who will provide the foundations, if you may, for the

Austrian School for economics.

So who was her name here?

He was born in Austria.

Um, he was trained in law, which was a degree

in which political economy was mostly taught in continental Europe

at the time.

And his legal training was particularly relevant because it made

card member quite sensible, uh, about the precision in the

use of definitions.

And as we as you will see, he will build

his theory on a precise understanding of concepts such as

value, such as economic goods.

Um, do I understand containers well?

I think it's also relevant to say something about the

intellectual context of a German speaking world.

Uh, maybe we'll build sort of in this Kantian tradition

with faith in reason and search for general and universal

principles to understand economic behaviour.

Um, we'll see also how many ideas on what the

proper method and nature of economics, uh, is differs from

those of the German historical school in our next lecture.

So let me just mention here that the in the

context of this multinational housework empire in which, uh, he,

uh, lived and worked the search for a common element,

that element that is common to all economic behaviours, uh,

was more important than the historical Specificities of each economic

uh sector region, an area which was the main concern.

In Holy Roman Empire, uh, in Germany.

So we will see how with major economies acquire very

high level of abstraction.

The concern would be with these general principles of economic

behaviour.

And unlike Germans, member will actually leave behind this.

He will teach in the University of Vienna for little

more than 20 years, and many of his students will

develop polish further his ideas leaving behind a very clear

and close knit school which will fight against even the

intellectual enemies of the time.

In in the German speaking world in particular.

First, the German historical school, and later on.

Marxism and Marxist theory.

We'll come back to these ideas when we deal with

other Austrians like Mrs. Schumpeter and Hayek.

So such as Jevons, displaced.

If you make the problem of economics too understanding maximising

behaviours, Jevons will suggest that the standard problem of economics

still the determination of value.

However, classical political economists got it wrong because they did

not get that.

Actually, what matters to understand the determination of value are

not the intrinsic characteristics, of course, but rather what people's

economising behaviours, right?

Values has nothing inherent to the property, to to goods.

Uh, it has nothing to do with their properties or

attributes.

and.

It is actually a judgement that economising men, people who

make plans to satisfy their needs and ones make.

About the importance that these have for the maintenance of

their lives.

Okay.

The Austrians and Manga will claim that they are coming.

Then back to this meeting of roots of economics, to

the idea that actually, what matters is the way in

which the economic actors behave to satisfy their needs, wants

and desires and improve their own conditions.

And they will develop this idea further by focusing on

the economising behaviours of individuals.

All right.

So remember, manga was very much concerned with introducing precision

into the use of concepts, and he begins by doing

so with simplest concept of all right, equality or an

economy goal.

For men, the value of economic good derives from its

relationship to unsatisfied needs.

If we assume classical and marginal terms, uh, mango will

bring the question of international value from the notions of

exchange value to the use value, the extent to which

individuals judge these goods useful to satisfy their own needs.

And he will add an element to this which will

resolve, if you may, this classical parallels between the value

of water and diamonds.

Right?

He would say that goods are actually useful for individuals

only.

Goods are useful for individuals.

Right.

But economy cuts are those who are not only useful

for individuals but are also available beyond requirements are not

available beyond the requirements, right?

It is goods that are scarce enough that individuals care

about them are able to value it, that compose economic

goods.

So water is not an economic good insofar is freely

available, but focus on a drought circumstance in which water

is essential for survival.

In these circumstances, people might be we might be willing

to give away diamonds just for a sip of water,

just to recognise water.

Right.

So.

The notion of economic goods needs to be a little

bit more restrictive than the one Germans suggest, right.

It is now not only necessary that goods procure utility.

They are useful for individuals.

They should not be available beyond beyond individual requirements, right?

They should be scarce enough that we value them for

what they are.

Right.

Now.

The understanding about the sparsity.

So the extent to which goods are available or not

your requirements requires that we introduce an additional element here

which is the knowledge about their ability their possibility to

satisfy needs.

And once individuals must recognise first have the knowledge that

these goods are can actually satisfy needs.

And more importantly, individuals must have the power to make

the use of these goods to satisfy needs.

Major Manga introduce another example here, which I think is

illustrative, right?

Imagine that there's a fire in a forest.

If this fire occurs only in a portion of a

forest, but doesn't affect your ability to, let's say.

Acquire wood from this forest, then that is not affecting

you.

You know, in a way, right?

I mean, you wouldn't judge these goods as more valuable

than before just because the portion of these trees were

destroyed.

But now imagine the following scenario.

Imagine that in the middle of the forest, there is

there was a fruit tree, right?

That is essential for your survival.

And you realise that it was that particular portion of

the forest which was affected by the fire then That

particular fruit tree, which is providing the needs for your

subsistence, becomes particularly valuable for you, and the forest is

affecting you even harder, right?

That is an economic good for me.

The tree in the forest that has fruits that is

not available, uh, beyond your necessary requirements, is for the

representation of the economic goals.

But for this, you need to know.

You need to have the knowledge that this tree was

there in the first place.

If you didn't have the knowledge that this tree was

there in first place before the fire, then this will

make no difference to you, right?

So the notion of economising for manager is including this

knowledge dimension that, as we will see, will become part

and parcel of Austrian thinking in the 20th century.

And knowledge is not only censored to make it subjective,

but also to his understanding of how economies progress, how

economies grow.

He will um.

You know, in a way, provide a critical appraisal of

Smith's notion of division of labour.

And he will suggest that it's not just the size

of the market will pose as limits to economic growth,

but also our knowledge about the causes that allow different

types of goods to satisfy different types of needs.

So this knowledge about this causal relationship poses limits to

the extent to which individuals can have control for the

production and consume and the consumption of goods.

The extent to which individuals can plan production and consumption.

And he will introduce this idea that as economies progress.

Individuals will be developing the knowledge to both produce and

consume goods of different orders, right?

First, they will procure goods necessary for our consumption and

then our societies progress.

We will develop the knowledge to produce intermediate and producer

goods, uh, of higher order.

We'll see how this distinction is crucial to understand how

individuals make plans for consumption.

Uh, we've made.

So to sum up, what is economising?

It is this action by which individuals estimate their requirements

when making plans to satisfy their needs in the face

of incomplete knowledge and uncertainty.

Right.

So individuals remember the example of the person in the

forest.

Individuals do not have complete knowledge about goods and about

the extent to which goods satisfy satisfy one's uh and

uh, they only have knowledge about their local circumstances.

Okay.

So, uh, maximising behaviours such as the one, uh, the

ones that we saw with Jevons are not taking into

account how restrictive, uh, the knowledge of individuals is to

satisfy, uh, their consumption.

So this will bring this, uh, to, to measures theory

of imputation, um, which he represents rapidly, uh, in, uh,

what he presents as a shadow of satisfactions, which we

will come in a minute.

All right.

So if we assume, if we consider that individuals do

not have intrinsic value, then it is the economic man

through the process of economising who assigns or imputes values

to these objects according to the extent to which they

satisfy his needs.

Now there are multiple operations here.

Individuals attach importance to different units of Parkwood that satisfy

various needs of declining importance to him.

Right.

So the example he uses here is food.

Remember the first portion of food might be essential for

your nourishment, but then you may wish to consume additional

quantities for particular food or families of food type of

foods.

Because this allows you for having a healthy life, but

then consuming even more quantities of these would satisfy needs

of a higher order, right?

You value eating, let's say pastries, cakes, sweets because these

produce some degrees of enjoyment, right?

And you attach different units different importance than to to

the consumption of the same type of foods.

Uh uh, in in uh uh, according to to to

different types of meats.

Right.

Individuals also compared the declining satisfaction that are associated with

increasing the amount of various goods.

Right.

This is equivalent to the we saw with Germans.

Right.

A consuming one glass of water.

Uh, gives you more, uh, allows you to satisfy more,

uh, your needs than the second one.

But individuals also compare different needs and their satisfaction, uh,

within within themselves.

Right.

So individuals are able to compare the needs and satisfactions

that they arise.

They derive from different types.

So as opposed to general theory, which is about the

extent to which one Particularly good produces utility during diminishing

degrees of utility.

Their matrix theory will provide an understanding of consumption of

meats, baskets of goods, uh, through the extraction of meat,

uh, as opposed to the consumption of one particular group.

This is represented graphically in the schedule of satisfactions.

We will discuss how this works in our classes.

So I will leave it, uh, for them because I

would like to close by then, uh, discussing the broader

implications of Mengers work on its understanding of markets and

institutions and economic developments.

Right.

Um, so we're major markets.

Changes are just a natural consequence of economising behaviours.

So men seek to exchange something that is less valuable

to them for something that is more valuable.

Right.

By comparing the satisfaction acquired through the consumption of different

baskets of goods, and hence market prices are the outcome

of this exchange process and the decisions about the appropriate

equivalence of the goods that are exchanged.

Right.

They have nothing to do with the role of production

costs.

This will be something that other Australians will depend upon.

Now, the behaviour of economic economising agents will only lead

to the emergence of institutions like markets, but also like

money, government and economic development, where he will bear a

close relationship with the availability, the quantity and quality of

goods that are increasing, but also to the increasing knowledge

we have about this means to satisfy our ends.

So just to close, guys, because we are running out

of time, uh, to conclude, there are some.

Lecture 9:

This is.

Oh.

Oh.

Oh, yes.

Thank you.

They shouldn't be so strict.

I.

May be right to be cruel.

You know that place?

Yes.

It's like.

I have time.

I think my friends are like that.

Like we got.

Like.

It is like.

This is like an international thing.

I need to be tired.

Because.

Like.

You know, I don't want to land like.

Oh, well, it's like you grow up.

So much to.

The.

Station.

Because.

You know.

I don't have time for that.

So, yeah, they should be.

It should be.

Good.

For you?

Okay.

Okay.

Let's start in a couple of minutes, guys.

Are.

I want to read.

Okay, guys.

So we're gonna talk about the German history at school,

and in particular the debate that representatives of the German

secret school, like with some smaller, uh, uh, had with,

uh, the Austrian school regarding the proper method, uh, in

economics.

Okay.

So before that, please don't forget to answer in Serbian

about the scores with Alex in the slides for this

lecture and the next one in the class slides as

well.

Alex, you can access, uh, the survey.

We really take your feedback seriously, and we are still

in time to make adjustments for the mixture.

Okay.

So with this lecture and then the next one we

are moving to different geographies.

So this is a map of Europe around the closing

of the 19th century.

And we'll be discussing today about the economic ideas as

they were produced and circulated in the German speaking world,

and in particular Germany and Austria.

So a little bit of historical context to understand today's

discussion.

After the Napoleonic invasion of German lands in the early

19th century, the ideas of enlightenment circulated in German speaking

territories.

And this also very this sort of reaction that it's

important to understand the approach of the German servant school

to political economy.

So one of these reactions was romanticism.

We see this in philosophy, for example, the German idealists

writing after Kant.

Uh, and in economics, this romantic romanticist critique will turn

into a critique of capitalism, and in particular, this idea

that valorisation, or profit seeking behaviours are more important than

other stated motives for human action.

So we will see people like Mueller arguing for what

we call the spiritual izing economically.

Perhaps more importantly for the discussion we have today, the

reaction to enlightenment ideas will lead in the German speaking

world to a set of a movement, if you may,

that it's known as historicism.

This is rejection of the general rules of reason and

an emphasis on the uniqueness of social experience and historical

variation.

Right.

We are not.

General principles, such as those of political economy might not

apply, for every time and place will be part of

parcel of the German historical schools, and this should be

understood within this general, more more general drive towards historicism

in the German speaking.

Element.

The Germans will soon realise that they are in the

periphery of Europe, and they will discuss about political economy

from their peripheral position.

They will ask themselves, okay, to one extent do the

principles of political economy, as written by British economists mill,

for example, apply to the conditions of peripheral countries like

Germany or Russia?

Right.

What the Hirshhorn will call it an event in the

mind in the 20th century, the late industrialised with the

late developers.

Do we need to develop a new type of political

economy, a new science to account for the economics, if

you may, or peripheral countries.

At the broader political sphere.

There's also a changing landscape in Europe that is relevant

to understand the methods.

Right after 1831, the German territories were unified into a

single one by force.

Uh, if you may, under the leadership of Bismarck.

Whereas, uh, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, which came together in 1867,

would represent sort of a different type of political project,

uh, composed of multiple nationalities, and we'll find in these

two different political groupings, if you may, also two different

demands for economic knowledge, if you may.

One approach the approach, the Austrians will be to focus

on general principles that are applicable across different nations, as

represented in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, whereas the the process of

German unification will bring economic thinking in the opposite direction,

focusing on what makes specific each of the histories of

the units that compose the German Empire.

Okay.

So the process of unification in Germany, in brief, will

bring attention, the attention, uh, to the historical development of

different social and economic formations.

Third element of historical context that is relevant to understand

the ideas of Germany historical school is that there was

a tradition of economic thinking may uh, before political economy

in Germany was known as commercialism.

The science of public administration, uh, of which the main

objective, the main state, is how to strengthen the power

of the nation, the power of the state through the

management of the economy.

We see as similar traditions of managerialism in the Baltic

states and in the Iberian Peninsula.

So there would be some continuity, if you may, between

the German historical school and these preceding traditions of economic

practice.

And we will see that we find in late 19th

century Germany, if you may, if first example of the

economists empowered economists, um, organised as a professional group advising

the government on how to direct policies, uh, with the

creation of the Brain Research Politique, the German Association of

Professional Economists, and the role in the government of Otto

von Bismarck.

Okay, so three pieces of historical context, relevant critiques, two

enlightenment ideas in particular historicism, the differences, uh, in the

process of formation of nation states in Germany and Austria

and the existence of these commercialised traditions in German territories.

So we'll start discussing today the German historical school, as

we've discussed some of the tenets of the Austrian, uh,

ideas in our previous lecture, with manner and thinking about

the German economy from the periphery.

The idea is that a new doctrine was necessary to

account for the German economic situation, the particularities of Germany,

of the German state's economic development.

This will lead to illuminate in the policy arena very

different conclusions, as we will see today.

So the German Historical School will provide.

Tools to think.

Why?

Given the stage of development of the German state, the

protection of domestic industries is necessary.

While the state needs to be much more purposeful, involved

in the planning of industrial production, and will provide a

counterpoint to the policy implications of British political economy, remember,

we try to remember Mu three trade and competition.

The German Historical School will also be concerned with matters

of redistribution, but their concern will be how to stop

socialist thinking in in the continent, so they will provide,

if you may, an anti-socialist social policy which will set

the basis for a proto welfare state.

And building on the camera installation.

We'll see in the policy arena.

A close association with the questions about economic development and

the way in which in particular is.

Increasing the productive capacities of the German economy will also

lead to national power and national strength, an idea we

had seen previously in this course, right, with American tourists.

But instead of focusing on the ways in which commercial

exchange can increase national power, the German school will focus

on the sphere of production and in particular, industrial production.

But this was not the only way in which the

German historical school in related economic thinking.

They also proposed a different method for economics.

So building on this idea.

So this drive for hysteresis, They would argue that economic

laws are not universal, but rather relative to time and

place.

They will bring the focus of analysis to the nation

as the proper unit of economic thinking, as opposed to

social classes like in classical political economy or to individual

like marginalised groups.

This idea will become very relevant in the 20th century

once again for economic development thinkers, and instead of presenting

economics as a deductive abstract science, they will emphasise the

role of observation, often using statistics about the role that

institutions the legal, the political, social and cultural ones play

in economic problems.

Right?

So they will depart from this idea that we see

mill, that political economy or economics should focus on the

abstraction of one single economic behaviour and trying to understand

the complexity of social formations, uh, in its own right.

So we can see now how proposing such a change

in the method of economics.

This would lead to a conflict.

Uh, about what?

The proper method.

Uh, it should be, uh, with, uh, the Austrian school

in particular with calving.

So in the second part of the of the course,

I mean, in our classes next week, we will discuss

what were the main positions of both schools in what

is known in the history of science literature as the

methodology right.

The method dispute, which has implications way beyond economics.

Also in all the social sciences, as we will see

today.

And uh, it was a debate mainly in its first

instance speech at Carnegie Hall as the main representative of

the Oxford School versus Houston boy's mother.

The leading actor, if you may, in the John German

Historical School, is that this pulpit was in the circus,

or it was a dispute about the place of the

historical manual of economics.

These are the the role of theory and abstract deductive

thinking.

But as we will see, as I would hope to

convince you today, it was much more than a controversy

about how to do economics.

It was a battle about the definition of the proper

boundaries of the discipline, of what it means to do

economics, what economics meant at the time, what it could

be and what it should be.

Right.

And this, in a way, it was essential to define

the proper boundaries between economics and other social sectors.

Right?

This one is known as boundary work.

defining the limits of a science in the process of

its development.

Okay, so this is our plan for today, guys.

We're going to start talking about Germany's circle school, the

precursors to it, the main figures and the main ideas.

And then I'll provide an introduction to the methodology.

Right.

We will not discuss the details today because we'll debate

about those next week.

We recreate the debate in our classes.

So let's begin with the forerunner of the German Historical

school, uh, Frederick List, least a very interesting figure because,

uh, he provided sort of an early attempt to reconcile

liberalism, uh, with the nationalism in Germany.

He was a university professor of public administration.

Commercialism is long tradition that I mentioned before, but he

lost his position in university to use the word use.

In a way, this was positive for the development of

economic thinking, because these moves forced Leeds to move to

the US, where he found a whole new way of

thinking about economic systems.

He was influenced, for example, by American political figures like

Hamilton.

Yes, same tone of musical who had innovated this notion

of the national economy, this idea that we should take

the nation as a unit of analysis, misappropriated this from

American political thinking.

But also this was influenced by his practical experience as

a landowner in a very changing, rapidly changing economic society

in the US, at least, was able to closely observe

different patterns of developments, and these will very much influence

his view on the stages of development, Relevance, as we

will discuss later today.

His major work was The System of Political Economy.

His ideas were widely influential in the 19th century.

In Germany, they were widely read as well in Meiji

Japan in the turn of the century, and rediscovered by

the mid 20th century by development economists.

So we can think in a way of least a

development economist about it.

Before we talk about developing economies as such, in the

sense that what he proposed was methodologically and philosophically similar

to what development economists see in the 20th century, we're

proposing this idea that we should go against a one

size fits all type of economics, that given that economic

development is uneven across nations, the principles in this case

of political economy do not apply equally to all places

and times least had in a way experienced this in

particular Germany and in changing in the changing US, USA.

Right.

Um, we have are the same similar times in the

19th century, uh, parallel ideas against the one size fits

all economics.

For example, in India we have thinkers like Govind Ranade,

our ally in ideology, who also put forward this idea

that a new type of economics should be developed for

different, uh, political and economic units.

Now, what was the main critique of political economy needs

presented in his book?

First that.

The main one of the main normative implications of classical

political economy, from regards to the idea that free trade

will lead to benefit from ordinations did not apply to

those countries, uh, who, like Germany, were exporter exporters of

food and raw materials.

Because by exchanging with more powerful partners, they risked, they

risk.

They face the danger, the risk of being exploited, uh,

by those foreigners who are exporting manufacturers.

And this is because in doing so, the exporters of

world products will lose their control over the development of

its productive power.

Right?

The second aspect of this critique is that the productive

power of a nation versus direct control with national strength

of that nation.

So the policy implications that will result from this thinking

is that Such peripheral countries.

Countries that, given their stage of development, are not industrialised

and are in a weaker position in international trade with

manufactured powers like Britain, should both protect their domestic industries,

but also focus on increasing the productive capacities through a

rational organised plan.

So we'll see here at least the inhumane seats of

these two elements in economy.

Right.

Any defence of protectionism as a way to build relative

capacities, but also called off our industrial efficiency as a

means to accumulate a national strength.

So the list is probably most known by his infant

industry argument.

So I will, uh, discuss that, uh, in in Britain,

and the point of departure in this argument is something

similar to what we've seen in previous authors in this

course.

This idea is that there are some very logical stages

of economic development.

This view that every society advances progressively through these stages,

from a primitive to a pastoral and agricultural mode of

production, to one that he thought characterised the German economy

at the time, right in which countries focussed on the

production of agricultural surplus that it's exchanged for minor factories

producing cities.

But he believed that only certain countries at the time

had reached the fifth and most developed stage, in which

these surplus manufacture were brought to the market and exchanged

in the market.

Okay, So the way which leaves this building on this

logical view of the stage of economic development, is by

arguing that not all countries are simultaneously at the same

time, in the same stage of development.

In particular, Germany had only developed its relative capacities to

different stage, whereas and it's based in international markets, a

country that was a much more developed Britain that had

reached its fifth stage.

Now, classical political economy, the ideas of Picasso and Mill

were perfectly suitable to describe the laws that apply to

the fifth stage of development.

But these laws were not universally applicable.

They were not applicable to two countries that were in

an early stage of development.

So the key question for country of Germany is under

these conditions, competing with more powerful and industrialised countries in

international markets.

How can Germany move from the fourth stage to the

third stage?

And his his view is that Germany could only do

so by accelerating industrialisation, by protecting its infant industries.

Uh, implementing import substitution policies, right.

Substituting imports from Britain temporarily to, uh, stimulate domestic production

until which point in which Germany is sufficiently competitive in

international markets with Greece.

And this also implies an active role of the state

in industrial policy.

So what significant here for our discussion today is how

list is building on this principle that the laws and

the political economy are not given to the University to

provide a justification of protectionism and state policy.

Right and state direct interventions in the economy.

Right.

The contrary implications of a British political economy.

So what were his legacies on economic thinking?

Well, as we discussed today, historicism, we say that the

economic laws are relative to time and place.

They do not apply equally to different countries that diverge

in their stage of development.

The idea that the proper unit of analysis for economics

is the national economy.

It's the nation, not social classes or individual.

This will open up a new path of reflections in

economics, as we will see later on in the course.

And finally, Ideally, it will provide a different way to

understand the role of the economist or the economist as

a scientist is that who describes economic laws, right?

Which has to do with the truths of the science.

These laws are beyond the economic, the control of the

economist.

They are laws of nature.

But the German historical school building analyst's ideas will provide,

if you may, an early formulation of The Economist as

a social engineer.

As a social reformer.

By understanding these laws, Neil Ellis will argue the economist

is able to accelerate industrialisation.

It's able to engineer social change in a way that

was not acceptable in a classical British political economy.

So this will be sort of a midpoint between the

classical thinking and the general historical school proper.

And to understand the German historical school, we need to

make a distinction between what's known as the older historical

school and the younger one.

The older historical school.

Will differ in, if you may, its approach to political

economy from the younger one, in that it was more

receptive to the role of theory.

Um, it would be influenced by, uh, both the German

School of Law and historical linguistics at the time in

which there was within this process, leading to unification and

attention to fold and costumes, and the association between the

role of language and the nation and the key Figure

in the other historical school is this guy with a

brochure who, if you may, set the programmatic agenda.

Economics must be grounded in the historical myth.

It's interesting to see how he thought this should be

done.

Um, if we if we look at his major work,

The Principles of Political Economy, what he did was actually

taken as a core mill's book, the same name, adding

local histories, not local historical studies, local content.

If you make historical content, uh, to show how this

theory applied differently, uh, to different moments and spaces.

So he withhold that the principles of political economy as

those in Mill's water truth, but simply they were not

true for Germany at that time.

Right.

We saw this idea before in the least.

So he provided an innovation in terms of method in

economics, the way in which he thought that the historical

method should run the economics, and this would represent the

legacy at school, is a blend between theory and history

and historical cases that are content to this theory and

allow us to identify what are the aspects of the

general theory that need to be modified.

We're looking at the brand, and Carney's, uh, took historicity

a step further, if you may.

They were a little bit more critical of the classics.

And in particular, he's very critical of the socialists.

Hildebrand, for instance, uh, will criticise classical theory as being

one sided, ignoring how, in his words, morals, religion, customs

and property loss all affected economic behaviour.

Remember with meal we had seen that all of these

aspects that affect economic behaviour are irrelevant for the economic

science, right?

Only these motivations, these drive sports for wealth is what

political economists will and should focus on.

Hildebrand criticises one sided aspect of economics, arguing that we

need to we need to take into account how this

whole set of moral, political and religious institutions shape how

individuals make economic decisions.

Meese will also argue that these self seeking pursuits, this

drive to improve one's own condition, should not be the

proper grounding for economics, and that these doing this had

Potentially dangerous implications.

It endanger the national unit, but also may in the

pursuit of ideas.

If you may, political economists lose the battle to socialists.

We will not be able to present an alternative to

the socialists and socialist ideas on the materialist version.

If we do not consider how this broader set of

institutions also shape economic behaviours.

Building on this critique of the classes and the socialists,

the other historical school will uh, in in a way

provide different tales of progress.

For Hildebrand, economic change will be rooted in how different

Indymedia societies have used different means of exchange, whereas these,

uh, taken up perhaps much broader in single interview, uh,

we will We'll describe an advancement of societies in relation

to moral progress, how societies develop different moral sensitivities, moral

behaviours that um.

Uh.

Allow us to understand the world of culture, in particular,

uh, in economic development.

The, the younger German history, that school will make a

much clearer break with the.

Classical traditions in economics.

They will push historicity, if you may, to a limit

probably an outright rejection of the very same belief that

there is something such as economic loss, universal economic principles.

The leading figures are in the German school with someone

smaller about whom, uh, you read for next week's classes.

He critiqued, in particular political economy for resting in a

manner of introspection.

Remember what we've discussed from Smith to Mill, and also

with maybe last week, the point of departure of political

economy for me is this this abstraction of one single,

uh, human behaviour is natural propensity to train and backtrack

and to improve one's own condition.

We also saw that with Munger last week, this idea

that, uh, the main driver of economic behaviour is these

inputs of economists of the economic man are to economise

in resources that are not available beyond one's own requirements.

Right.

And smarter Mortar building on Rogers program, which suggests that

all of these generalisations from psychology, from this idea of

how the individual relates to his own needs and desires,

provided dubious generalisations to describe how different national units are

behaved across time.

So economics should move beyond psychology as the foundation of

its science, and it should be grounded in a historical

knowledge about how societies have organised production, distribution and consumption

across time.

So the German Historical School with Muller, which focuses on

very small scale historical analysis of the various statistical, uh,

of different um, economic Organisations in Germany, and they will

reject the idea that the point of departure of a

science is these general principles.

Smalley will argue, as we'll discuss when we talk, about

limited knowledge, that this does not imply an outright rejection

of the world theory.

But he believed that it was necessary to fill the

gap between our empirical understanding of economic organisation and general

principles by first providing a comprehensive understanding of how these

units behaved.

So empirical work provides the basis for further generalisations as

opposed to a starting point with general principles.

So I say, as I anticipated before, we see with

the German historical schooling, Uh, those particularly, uh, who wrote

after the ads of similar uh, in, uh, in Germany

by the late 19th century.

A first instance of the economists in power, the German

school founded the first ever, uh Economics association.

It was no longer this blog for informed readers.

Uh, like the the political economic club, uh, in Britain,

it was a proper professional organisation of economists which had

the intention to responsibly influence policy.

This was, uh, known as a name for such a

politic, and the name had a very strong influence, uh,

on the interventionist policies that this might, uh, implemented in

the late 19th century, uh, like the protectionist term in

1879.

Building on this anti liberal trade and.

Uh.

Quality of industrialism attempts of the German school.

But it was also very influential in uh the early

development of a welfare state in Germany after 18 1883

as a way to counter, uh, the socialist advances, uh,

in the German territories.

But is there any.

Story that school had wider legacies, uh, beyond.

The like.

The late 19th century, it remained this this idea that

economics should be grounded on a carefully historical, often statistical

understanding of economic organisation will remain important.

And until the interwar period, we'll see developments of this

idea in the work of statistical economists, for instance.

And I like the angle.

The angle.

Right.

Uh, business cycle research.

Uh.

That's beautiful.

It's beautiful.

Mind and body.

Mind.

We'll come back to Ballymun later.

Running this course or in economy history.

But the ideas of the German historical school will be

influential beyond the German speaking world.

And this was because Germany was the place to go.

If you wanted to study in a modern university system

in the late 19th century.

And actually the fathers, the leading figures of the American

Economic Association.

Uh, most of them studied, uh, in Germany, uh, under,

uh, leading figures in the German historical school.

The American Economic Association was actually inspired, created, modelled in,

uh, the image of the venerable social politic And this

will translate into something we will discuss in a lecture

next week that will be part of parcel of the

North American institution, which is that.

Economics and economic thinking can effectively be used as an

instrument of social reform.

Okay.

So wider implications beyond the specific time in which I

was writing, beyond the German speaking world.

But the ideas of the German surgical school also impacted

the broader social sciences beyond economics, through the ideas of

Max Weber and Max Weber provides, if you may, with

sort of one example of what smaller, I think was

referring to as this ex-post theorising based on a careful

historical understanding of economic organisation, with this idea of types,

right, that we can construe.

Some.

Middle level generalisations in order to understand economic change across

time, and economic historians in the room might be thinking

about his arguments about the role of Protestantism in the

spirit of capitalism.

This provides an example of how the historical school had

reverberations way beyond their time and place.

But of course, the German school was a target of

critique coming from multiple flags.

So the Marxist rocks and rocks.

And Luxemburg will argue that these microscopic studies that characterise

the German historical school terror are the leading stuff of

social reality, so much that it became possible to dissolve,

theoretically all grey connecting strands.

If we follow the recommendations of the Germany's rural school

of the map of economics, these will be the end

of narratives, the end of theorising as we know it.

And this has political implications.

Rosa Luxemburg, writing from Berlin, is telling us in 1911,

because it will make the capitalist world scientifically disappear behind

the trees.

So without a broader theoretical understanding of how the system

works.

The German historical school is, in Rosa Luxemburg view, obscuring,

right the very same fact of how this system works.

This is not the proper way of providing a an

understanding of economic organisation.

But the German historical school's ideas will find a much

stronger critique from their neighbours in Austria, as became clear

in the method Methodists or the Methodist Church.

So the protagonists do not need any introduction.

We've already discussed our neighbour.

We'll come back to him in a minute.

We'll discuss the English smaller.

And let me just give you the prelude of debate,

which was a very bitter debate, as you'll see.

You'll realise that subject that appears as dry as mythology

can stir up emotions and passions like no other.

So the prelude to the latest major provocative dedication to

Russia.

Remember the leader of the Order Historical School of his

Principles of Economics, written in 1871, conveying the idea that

he major, not the general historical school, was advancing the

programme of reform of political economy, as Richard had intended.

I will read the passage because I think it is

very tame, he wrote.

It was a special pleasure to me that the field

he entreated, comprising the most general principles of science, is

in no small degree so truly the product of recent

development in German political economy, and that the reform, these

reform proposed by Russia of the most important principles for

science here attempted, is therefore built upon the foundation laid

by previous work that was produced almost entirely by the

industry of German scholars.

So we see here major writing a highly theoretical work,

claiming that he is appropriating, that he is pursuing forward

the reform of political economy in the German speaking world

proposed by Russia.

And this will we create.

These will produce a reader response API with a host

of smaller and others would reject Bangor's book as a

form of abstract, a historical authorisation as a form of

arm sharing economics, and the economist sitting in the in

the armchair reflecting on how the economics works without going

to collect the data, the statistics, the information to understand

it better.

And the General Historical school will accuse a maker of

rejecting of ignoring the centrality of the historical method, as

Roger had proposed, and privileging after theorising.

So let's rewind a little bit to discuss what they

make of economics.

What are the main principles?

So, um, major will tell us very technically that it

is mine, with his needs and his command of the

means to satisfy them.

Instead of the point in which human economic life both

begins and ends, man, the individual economic man is the

point of departure and the ending point to understand human

economic life.

What is implied by this?

The first thing he's implying is, is that the proper

method of economics is psychological introspection.

This is the way in which economists can obtain knowledge

about causes.

And the reason for this is very simple.

The economist himself is an economising man.

The economist herself is the subject of a study of

her science.

So she just needs to ask yourself, okay, how is

it that I make decisions in situations of uncertainty and

constant change, to infer from these general principles that are

applicable for all time and place.

Second implication of math.

Yes, economics.

According to me, we should proceed, like mill suggested, through

the abstraction of universal motivations for economising behaviours.

This is why he thinks Austrian economics is just pursuing

the agenda presented by me.

The most important method, the motivation for Economising, is this

man's attempt to better one's own position.

Once other Austrians later in this course will call entrepreneurship.

The interpreter should drive.

But the economist, the economic man, is behaving under a

situation of uncertainty and constant change.

This is why it is not possible to reduce economic

behaviour to.

Let's like with the Italians models of economic behaviour that

can be quantified and have general applicability.

Right.

So uh, mainly in terms of this method, we accept

this idea that economics is an abstract idea of science.

And in doing so, he will depart from the motivation

and tourism of the German historical school.

This idea that multiple factors institutional, social, religious, cultural affect

how individuals.

But we will also provide and this is very important

for you to understand the distinctiveness of the Austrian history

of the Austrian school of economics.

It will provide an alternative to the consequentialism of utilitarianism.

Right?

It is not an, uh, it is not a method

that focuses on the outcomes of economic behaviours.

Under some very critical assumptions of how they behave, but

it is rather understanding the process of how individuals make

decisions in situations of uncertainty and constant change, right?

This is why I mean they will reject the use

of mathematics and as we will see later in the

20th century, or that Austrians will reject modernisation as a

way of doing economics.

Lastly, third implication and method.

The Austrian school and member in particular will hold a

strong ecological influence.

What do we mean by this?

The individual is the point of departure and the point

of arrival of analysis.

Any other social formation, social institutions, or in the unintended

product of the actions of a multiplicity of economising men

making decisions in a decentralised fashion.

So all of these social formations that the German historical

school is attempting to explain according to material are their

research, the historical research, the historical outcome of a very

general principle that has to do with individuals attempting to

better their own position.

Right.

So social formations, institutional formations, like markets, like money, are

just the unintended consequence of individual action.

Hence, economics should focus only on how individuals make decisions

and build a theory from them.

All right.

So what were the parts of the debate is that

we will discuss in detail in the classes?

It was a debate in the arts.

Remember, after this bitter exchanges between many modern mega-hits first

criticising uh a district school uh in 1883, smaller reacted

defending the views of the German historical school and attacking

the method proposed by many, and maybe try to clarify

these views and hit again.

I knew later, right.

And what the reading you were assigned for next week

is reading by a sociologist who is reading some of

the elements of the debate to reconstruct.

Okay.

So what was the debate about?

In the surface, and at its core, it was a

debate about the importance of axiomatic deductive scientific theories as

effectively named vis a vis the role that historically statistical

inquiry play in social scientific research.

Many will take aim at this attempt to place this

recommended as the basis and the basis of economics in

Germany, and the polity will make it very simple.

There is no science without the understanding of the general

principles.

It is not possible to understand the regularities without understanding

what what he calls us, the form of manifestation of

different phenomena.

Right.

So every theory, and this is no less true for

economics, should focus on understanding these regularities.

Right.

Things such as what money what means of exchange means

means of exchange is an interesting example, right?

The regularity.

The form of an infestation of more needs than it

is a means of exchange.

But the specific manifestations of means of exchange across time

has have changed, right?

In primitive societies, and a probably different commodities were used

sometimes, as we will see, with payment in next week.

Woman horses were used as a means of exchange, but

as societies advanced different commodities, different products were used.

Auntie, which point in which one singular singular commodity, right?

Gold and silver, came to be used as a means

of exchange.

Right?

So the form of manifestation here is that all of

these commodities are used for the purpose of exchange.

But the proper concrete manifestation of this has changed over

time.

Okay.

We need to focus on understanding these, uh, regularities as

the basis of science.

It was also a debate about the proper role of

economic theory and history in the production of economic knowledge

by scientific communities.

So a second aspect in the debate is all right.

There are just a few people who know how to

do economics.

What should be the proper division of labour within scientific

communities?

Is this a question of focusing more on history or

in theory, as I would suggest?

Or is this about the confusion between different subdivisions of

the science, as many would propose, and the fact that

some aspects of the science are central are more important

than others, right?

And maybe will develop developed this idea to suggest that

theorising is so important for development of the sciences that

economists should not be losing their time focusing on what

it called auxiliary sciences like history and statistics.

His view is that the disproportionate emphasis on these auxiliary

sciences actually thwarted the process, the progress of theory, the

core of the science, and hence all the science as

a whole.

The German historical school will adopt a very different position

here.

As I've suggested before, the review is that in order

to close this gap between theory and history, a comprehensive

systematisation of our knowledge of economic organisation is required to

produce exposed levels of generalisation that are not founded on

dubious psychological assumptions.

right then.

Collection of data of facts is not a substitution of

theory.

It is a precondition to produce theoretical knowledge that is

a credible, legitimate, and appropriate for the time and place

that is in discourse.

Okay, so these, among others, are the core aspects of

the debate that we will discuss in our classes next

week.

We will recreate the debate in the seminar to discuss

their positions in more detail.

There will be a winner who will be a loser

like in any debate.

In this case, it's not clear who was the winner.

Who was the loser?

In the longer term, probably the member took the upper

hand.

Economics today behaves much more closely to how we saw

it, but in the short term, we saw some developments

in the direction of the German ministry at school, both

in Germany and in the US.

Just to close.

I also noticed that the McDonald's drive was much more

than a dispute about method, but how to do economics?

We've seen that the Oswestry School and the German Historical

School also differed widely in what it meant actually to

do economics, what economics meant, what the boundaries of the

economic science were.

These are mean all disciplines, right?

The unit of analysis of the Austrian School and the

German state schools, different right from the individual to the

nation to provide the different foundations for economic life.

Right.

For economic analysis, psychological introspection in the case of major

historical observation statistics that would indicate Schrder.

They had huge disagreements about the determinants of economic life.

For major.

All human beings have an equal motivation to economise, to

produce goods and consume goods.

They demonstrate that school will adopt a motivation realism.

They will discuss the legal, political, social, and cultural embeddedness

of economic decision making.

Different position regarding the theory and practice relationship.

Focusing on abstract theory that doesn't need to be empirically

testable, or building theory from the bottom up.

From a careful generalisation based on on a different approach

to studying social aggregates, major strongly theological individualism will see

social aggregates as unintended.

Emergent phenomena will adopt a methodological holism.

We may we need to take the whole set of

legal, political, social and cultural dimensions Uh, of economic life.

Last point of departure.

But also epistemological humility.

The economist only knows what other people know about themselves,

right?

The economist is himself an economic man.

There is nothing.

No reason to believe that the economist has a better

knowledge and economic life on how to conduct his life.

He to the Austrian critics, as we will see later

in this course.

Whereas similar had the German history, but school as exemplified

in the brain will provide grounds to think ways of

social engineering.

Right.

Uh, the Economist helping to accelerate development.

Economist providing, uh, policy analysis and policy advice to the

priests.

As we'll see later in the course.

All right.

So we'll recreate the debate in the classes next week.

Our last lecture next Friday will be a North American

institution lesson.

Be prepared to debate.

I look forward to seeing you in class next week.

It is.

Not going.

To be a.

Lecture 10:

Okay, guys, let's start.

Sorry.

So thanks for bearing with me.

Getting to the end of the session, uh, the circulated,

uh, book is like a sheet and some chocolates that

were leftovers from this week's debates.

I'll be bringing them to the lectures until we finish.

Okay.

So we're going to talk today about North American institutions.

So we are moving from Europe to America in the

late 19th century in a context in which we can

see the full scale results of, uh, the second, uh,

interest rate, the second industrial right, mass production and mass

consumption machines producing machines.

And our North American institutionalist would be worried about the

effects that this has, not just on industrial relations, but

also on economic behaviours?

Is technological change changing how people behave?

And how can we understand these changes?

And this was perfectly captured in popular culture by no

other than this guy over here, Charles Chaplin.

So I'll play a small clip to illustrate what I'm

referring to.

Okay.

Given the limited.

All right.

So what is the effect of this organisation, both in

production and also in the availability of standardised food for

consumption is having on the behaviour of economic actors.

Are human beings becoming part of this machine that is

beyond its control?

That's going to be one of the questions that all

North American institutions like somebody I will leave you to

the second question.

How is this shaping social relations?

Do we see the emergence of new social classes?

Did you see in the beginning of the clip the

guy in the screen is designing, presenting a new social

class that we can call a managerial class the engineering

class.

And at the same time, in the late 19th century,

uh, North American institutionalist, we will see also the appearance

of something that was not clear in the understandings of

capitalism before the split between those who managed production, those

who administered the factory and those who provide the capital,

those who provide the money for production.

Right.

So on the one hand, we see the emergence of

managerial class on the other.

On the other hand, we see that those who are

getting the benefits from the productive process are belonging to

a very separate class, which has not only a different

motive, but profit, not that of productivity and efficiency, but

also a different mode of reasoning, as we will see

today.

I am referring to what he calls a peculiar task

or defining series.

Okay, so this brings me to the second aspect that

is of relevance.

To understand how economic theories emerge in the context of

late 19th century Latin America.

We have these financial classes, right?

The financiers, the borrowers of these industries we have George

represented here.

Railroad magnate and financier Cornelius Vanderbilt, uh, who had businesses

in railroads and shipping.

Marshall field, who was the owner of the tomato sauce,

and she was here.

And these guys are sitting on their meal.

On top of their mediums.

Right.

While the working classes are the ones who are supporting

of the boats are at very low wages.

Right.

So I don't know if American institutionalist will be worried

about understanding the effects of corporate capitalism.

This is not what was supposed to happen.

If we let everyone follow their own interests, right?

What we see in the late 19th century is the

concentration of capital.

Quite the opposite of the benefits that earlier political economists

saw in competition.

And the question that an American institution is to impose

themselves.

Is there any way to socially regulate corporate capitalism so

that it brings the benefits that the amount of From

the TV and technological progress that we are experiencing should

be producing not just for the very few, but for

the rest of society.

Okay.

Uh, this will lead to an association between monopoly concentration

and corruption imposed by America.

The treaty, what is known in North American history as

a progressive era of reforms and a North American institution.

Lists will use their scientific understanding of this particular society

for the purposes of reform.

Okay.

So we see like in the context of the German

history, but school a more activist view of the role

of the economist and of economic sciences.

Right.

They use these, uh, theories to inform monopoly regulation, tax

reforms.

And uh, as you will see, uh, much more.

So what were the intellectual influences of North American institutions.

To begin with, a very long American social and progressive

tradition, which argued that scientific knowledge could be used for

the purposes of reform.

These will be activists, economists, and they will be building

on this tradition, which has a religion origin on on

tourism.

And tourism is second key influence in philosophy, American pragmatism.

So people like John Dewey, um, Henry James will be

major critics of what they call formal, formalised and, uh,

formalism in philosophy.

They would argue that the only way to get the

knowledge to objective knowledge of reality is through an active

involvement with reality, right?

Through experimenting, observing, collecting information.

And then, uh, rethinking our priors.

Okay.

So this will have an effect in economics, the kind

of economics that some North American institute analysts will conduct

with the experimentalists in nature.

It will have to do necessarily with interventions and the

evaluation of these interventions as well.

Third, intellectual inference.

We already know about it.

The Germany surgical school, as I mentioned in the previous

lecture, uh, the leading figures of the North American institutionalist

school of thought, uh, will study in Germany under, uh,

the younger historical school, and they will model, uh, on,

uh, the American Economics Association, uh, on the Professional Association

of German Economists in the way they will take from

the German historical school this attention Tension of how institutions

shape economic behaviours, but also this of sensibility.

To understand patterns of historical change and in particular institutional

change, how can we understand changes in economic behaviour that

become a system that sort of coalesce in institutions?

How can we understand the ways in which these institutions

change across time?

And it is to understand these patterns of change that

our North American institutions, artists will bring a new element,

if you may, into economics, evolutionary thinking.

So if previous economists in the classical political economy tradition,

so in physics, the model of what political economy should

be or if the marginal tests.

So in psychology, the proper basis for economic analysis, the

North American institutionalist will turn to biology and in particular

to Darwinian natural Darwinism and Darwin's understanding of evolution of

species.

Right.

And they would argue that there's no reason to believe

that human societies do not evolve adaptively to changes in

the environment like any other animal and are living beings,

right?

So the example of Darwin's features over here is applicable.

They would argue, to understand the ways in which institutions

and the society is based on these rules of the

game.

I will be across time.

Okay.

So for intellectual influences, I'll come back to this, uh,

later on this, uh, lecture.

So how can we understand North American institutions?

As you'll see, I'll discuss quite a few authors today,

which partly do not have very much in common.

And this is particularly problematic if we attempt to use

the notion of the school to define them in a

way.

We see here a couple of dissenting authors.

They descend from the ways in which economics was traditionally

done, both in classical political economy and in the new

marginal distribution.

But they share some commonalities, right?

They share the unifying project in this context of progressive

reform.

They all will argue, in one way or another, that

the social control of business could be informed by a

scientific understanding of economies.

Uh, this would lead to what we can call the

regulatory phase of interventionism in early 20th century North America.

They also share a scientific aim.

They want to provide both an explanation of individual behaviour

that takes into account processes of being to institutional change.

Methodologically, this has crucial implications for economic analysis.

They will reject the strong.

Methodological individualism of the Austrian school of the Austrian School.

Sorry.

We need to take into account individual behaviours insofar they

make them within an institutional setting, but they will also

reject this idea of the German historical school that the

nation should be the basis of analysis.

Uh, Berlin will talk about social norms, institutions as a

proper basis.

We will discuss a John, a Commons, who will talk

about transactions, transactions between individuals and those.

And the Wesley Mitchell will bring our attention to the

study of cycles and the very first empirical a notion

of the economy as a whole.

Okay, so even though we cannot properly call this a

school, they were reconstructed as such by a 20th century

American institutionalist, as we'll see later in the course.

And, you know, in a sense, they represent, um, the

pluralism, uh, in economic thinking that characterises economics, particularly in

North America, way into the interwar period.

Right.

We have a different North American institutionalist who are writing

at the at the same time as marginal lists.

And it's the, uh, some, um, uh, reverberations of classical

political economy.

We'll say later on in this course also the decline

of this way of institutional thinking, but also this pluralism

as the new classical paradigm, then a classical program, if

you may, became dominant, uh, in the 1930s and 40s.

All right.

So this is the plan for us today.

We'll focus our attention on first and babbling.

You'll read, uh, these three pieces.

Uh, for our first class, next turn on the leisure

class machine in the business enterprise.

But I also provide an introduction to Wesley Mitchell and

John Thomas work on business cycles, research and transactions theory.

Because these will be sort of the foundations, uh, for

understanding, uh, considerations or problems of macro dynamics in the

next, uh, in terms of this course, but also to

understand the world of Ronald Coase, uh, on a new

institution of economics, building on this notion of transactions, uh,

by John Combs.

Okay.

So it starts with them.

But first, who was better than arguing against who had

bearing in his mind when he criticised when he coined

the term neoclassical economics to refer to this very specific

way of doing economics.

He was thinking about migration, as we will see later

in the course, but he also had in mind his

teacher, John Bates Clark.

So John was one of only members of the American

Economics Association.

He studied under a classical political economy tradition in the

US, but had some sensibilities towards institutional racism and historicism.

Uh.

He later said he would take distance from his initial

sensibilities and would publish what would become sort of the

two main works of marginal thinking in the US.

First, The Philosophy of Wealth, in which, uh, he provides

sort of an attempt in his way to apply to

economics and organic concept of society.

It is a very interesting way of thinking about marginality,

because what he would suggest is that value is the

quantitative measure of utility in the sense is coming closer

to Jevons, it appears, but he will take distance from

this idea that the measure of value could be provided

by individuals.

He would argue that prices are actually not.

Defined by individual valuations, but rather by conventional valuations of

the value of goods among different social groups.

Okay.

So his notion of value of valuation of, of of

marginality uh, is, is sort of trying to thread this,

uh, a link sort of trying to, to, to, to

be in a middle ground between the classical marginal ism

in, in the writings of Gerard and Major, uh, and

this attempt to understand how individuals make decisions in the

context of a particular society.

But more importantly, uh, John, bit.ly will provide also a

way of understanding the marginal principle, uh, in the context

of production.

So in the distribution of wealth, he will provide the

first definition or formulation of our modern notions of marginal

productivity.

Uh, to understand the distribution of wealth and across factors

of production, um, he would argue that the wage rate

will equal the amount of money that an employer will

lose if he had to employ one worker less.

So it's a slightly different understanding of how we understand,

uh, wages as equivalent to the marginal of labour, uh,

in equilibrium.

Uh, he would also argue that the real rate of

interest should equate it to the remuneration of capital, and

this is defined as that additional revenue that could be

obtained if capital is increased by one quarter.

Okay.

So you see the resemblance, right.

It's still grounded on in late 19th century understanding of

the concepts that he's providing, both in consumption and in

production, the marginal principle as the main tenets to understand

both the how goods are valued and how prices are

determined in a particular geometric like, will differ from all

other North American institutions.

It is relative optimism about capitalism.

He argued that, yes, monopoly concentration was a reality, but

he had faith under the entrepreneur as the heroic figure

in economics, the entrepreneur that introduces innovations in product, in

opening markets, in, uh, in, in the cooperation of technologies

that reduce costs.

And he believes that it is the innovation by entrepreneurs

will lead which would lead to a competitive environment.

And given that the main purpose of producing goods is

to, uh, profit to the owners of capital.

Financial deepening will trigger a response of innovation and competition,

therefore preventing monopolies and generating growth.

What is the implication of this?

We don't need the state to regulate monopolies.

We should just allow economic actors, and particularly entrepreneurs and

financiers, to do what they don't miss to follow their

own interests.

In this sense, he was still sort of in this

classical tradition of non-interference.

We'll see how Tourism Berlin and other North American institutions

will differ from a John Bates position.

So, uh, who was there in Berlin?

He's one of these sort of very sweet, generous and

interesting figures in the history of economics.

He grew up in this insulated Norwegian agrarian community, Wisconsin,

which he experienced to transform by the arrival of the

railroad and of the monetary economies that came with the

railroad.

So he was quite aware from an early stage on

how, uh, monetary economies and modern technologies of production shape

communities and societies.

Uh, he was a college student of John Clark, as

I mentioned before, who actually thought he was a misfit.

He was he was not, uh, he didn't have what

was needed to be to the appropriate economists, and they

didn't have any.

Uh, he then obtained, actually a PhD in philosophy of

jail, but failed to secure a post and returned home.

And he wrote his major first book without being in

an academic position.

And you'll notice that the theory of the leisure class

doesn't seem to be written by an economist.

It feels more the work of, uh, sociologists or an

anthropologist, um, and published in 1899, and this May gained

him renown across the economics profession.

He joined Cornell in 1991, and then he went to

this new university in Chicago, to which will come later

on in this course.

And he was a major figure and influential figure on

this institutionalist origins of the University of Chicago that might

surprise some of you.

He then published The Theory of the Business Enterprise, which

in a way provides a completion to this system.

In the theory of the leisure classes, you will see

he will be focusing on the effects that standardisation has

on consumption habits and of the business price.

He'll turn to the run of production, uh, to discuss

how mechanisation and standardisation is creating the split between two

social classes, the managerial and the pecuniary.

So, for the purposes of this course, what makes Berlin

super interesting is how he's introducing evolutionary thinking into economics.

As we'll see later on in this course, different approaches

that try to rekindle this.

So what he thought that conventional economics failed to understand

is not how individuals behave, but how these behaviours change

across time.

Okay.

So he believed that, uh, existing theories of economics had

failed to provide an explanation for endogenous processes of institutional

change.

He would build on Evolutionary thinking, and in particular this

idea of social Darwinism, that.

Evolutionary thinking could be applied to the social world to

argue that societies.

In particular, will see institutions are adapted pragmatically by individuals

to changes in the material environment.

So how is he thinking about this?

So he argues that whenever there is some technical innovation.

This will trigger some specific type of instincts that will

lead to new ways of thinking and doing.

New modes of thinking and acting.

But these new ways of thinking and doing, when they

are appropriate for these changing environment, they sort of stick.

They become repeated and with time they formalise Into a

specific type of loss.

Right?

So there is thinking about institutions in these two levels,

right.

What modern institutional economists call informal institutions.

This is for him the first sort of instance of

change.

Right.

Habits and conventions emerge adaptively to changes in the environment.

But as these institutions become accepted and repeated, they eventually

get formulated into formal institutions, the laws that regulate how

societies govern themselves.

Now, both these informal institutions, to use this modern understanding

and informal institutions will provide the context for the next

stage of technological change.

And this will trigger a new and adaptive process of

these institutions.

So Bailey believed there were some progressive factors that introduces

dynamism in May that allowed for technical change, for so

easy to change.

Um, a couple of them had to do with a

specific instance, what he called the idle curiosity of, uh,

human beings and their parental bent to care for others.

Uh, these, for example, deliberate care to avoid human suffering.

And the second progressive factor is technological change itself.

Right.

This would become clear in his understanding of, uh, the

matching process.

But when a particular innovation is introduced, this acquires a

logic of its own right.

And under the right ways of thinking and doing, these

innovations can be pushed forward.

Okay.

So these are the progressive factors.

But Institutions again, they stick.

And this also helps explain why some institutions persist in

relation to others.

Right?

This is what he called.

And this was driven by what he called the restricting

factors.

The first reason is what he called ceremonial ways.

The fact that these habits and conventions are difficult to

modify, right?

People get used to them, and there would be resistance

to change because of the performative effect this had on

how people think and act.

But with any technical change, there are winners and losers,

right?

There are vested interests.

There are people who are willing to maintain the status

quo.

And we will see that for Beverly, in the pecuniary

class in particular, will represent this idea that vested interests

are against institutional change.

Okay.

So crucial right?

When introducing evolutionary thinking to understand how behaviours change in

the context of why their change of the formal and

informal institutions, the habits and conventions and the laws that

regulates how people behave.

Okay.

So how do you apply this model, if you may,

to understand his contemporary society?

The first example of this is his theory of the

leisure class.

And the key problematic, if you may, that Barron is

trying to understand is the rise of consumerism, mass consumption

habits in an economically affluent society.

Right?

Think about the Roaring 20s.

This was written 30 years before.

Think of this is the sort of behaviours, The Great

Gatsby sort of guys that he was trying to understand.

He will provide us has been sort of usual in

this course and understanding of the stages of human evolution.

He will argue that two human beings have moved beyond

the savage and barbarian modes of society that is grounded

on the property of others, first of all, of women,

and then of other human beings.

Slavery to wine, which people procure their means of subsistence

through the application of their creativity and innovativeness in the

transformation of nature to this later stage, which is what

he believed, uh, characterises contemporary society, in which we have

machines producing machines, but also human beings.

Part of this large machine process and going back to

its history.

But the question he's asking himself in this book is

a very interesting one.

Right.

So why do some predatory barbarian habits prevail even in

the most advanced stage.

Why do we observe predatory habits, particularly in the consumption

habits of what calls the leisure class?

In a context of a society that is mechanised?

He finds and an illustration of this in what he

calls conspicuous consumption.

So for those people who do not leave from productive

work, they do not work themselves.

The purpose of consumption is not the satisfaction of their

needs and wants.

It's actually to acquire goods that become the measure of

their own self-worth.

They consume goods because they signal to others social status.

And you read some of the examples he gives.

But the irony is this at the at the same

time, they are procuring goods for the purposes of supply,

but they exhibit an aversion to every sense of productive

labour.

They are an either class.

They do not work themselves, they value labour and they

value leisure.

And they are averse of the productive labour that will

provide those foods that they seek for their self reward,

and for showing others time stamps.

Okay.

This, for Benton, was a habit that lead that led

to wasteful consumption.

Remember the classical distinction between productive and unproductive labour.

The conspicuous consumption habits of the leisure classes are leading

at an aggregate level to higher levels of Unproductive consumption

until the labour.

That would be advisable for this machine process to produce

the biggest amount of wants and needs satisfied in this

society.

So how can we explain the persistence of these barbaric

habits among the richest ones, among the ghouls, the Rockefellers,

the Vanderbilts?

So he would argue that this habit is grounded on

a previous institution, a previous way of thinking and doing,

a previous habit, previous convention, which is the institution of

origin.

This belief, justified by philosophies of natural law, that people

can own the products of other people's neighbours and own

women, can own domestic servants, have ownership property over the

produce progress of the natural world and of the 99

themes of politics.

It is the institution of ownership that has been formalised

into laws around private property that has prevailed into this

later stage of development, and that helps explain the persistence

of these predatory habits.

What is interesting as well is that the behaviours of

the leisure class for bedroom also have effects in how

other social classes behave.

So there would be an effect on those lower classes

to what he calls pecuniary emulation.

So the lower classes will feel anxious because they do

not have the means to consume those goods who provide

them so forth.

Right.

They will see the consumption habits of the rich and

try to emulate This blazing needs and wants as the

main more motive for production, right?

So we see here that these habits in consumption for

Berlin are leading to a contradictory result.

This is a society that's based on the productive capacities

of mechanised, efficient activities, but it is a society that

is destined in less and less resources to productive activities,

and more and more to unproductive labour, to the employment

and productivity.

So Berlin will then sort of complete his project, if

you may, by understanding what the influence of these customs

and habits are in production.

Uh, in these two pieces that you will read The

Machine Process and the Theory of the Business Enterprise, which

was published 20 years later after the leisure class.

So the arguments in this text are very simple once

we understand that this evolutionary institutionalist way of thinking.

So he would argue that there is standardisation of consumption

requires implies a instant standardisation of the process of production,

as we saw in the clip by a chance topic.

Right.

And what he understands is the machine process.

And this is where the analogy with Charlie Chaplin ends,

is that this is standardisation, which is required for the

most efficient use of resources, does not occur only within

the factory, but it is occurring at the societal level

as a whole.

National economic production works like a big machine.

And this requires.

This introduces a problem of coordination that is quite complex.

So the institutional innovation, if you may, was the emergence

of one particular class, the managerial class.

Who has as its main characteristic thinking in terms of

causes and effects.

So these managerial class will concern itself with how making

specific changes or decisions in the productive process will have

an effect on the quantities and prices of the goods

produced.

It's a form of eng engineering managerial thinking that is

emerging, uh, to coordinate us to deal with this Complex

coordination processes that arise in a society that is organised

as a machine.

Right.

So the mechanical standardisation of production rules for consumption has

driven the appearance of this cause and effect.

Effect.

Habits of thought that are better exemplified in how the

engineering class thinks about production.

The problem is that both the aims of this social

class productiveness and efficacy, efficiency in production, and the most

reason in terms of cause and effect relations, conflict with

the modes of reasoning and the aims of those who

actually provide the capital from for production class.

So, as I anticipated before, Berlin is discussing a distinction

that we did not see in early capitalist understandings of

capitalism.

Like Marx write, for Marx, the owner of the capital

was the same who all provided oversight of the factory

of production.

He's telling us in the contemporary society, those who are

focusing on production and making production work efficiently are different

from those who provide the capital.

What do those who provide capital want?

They want to increase the profits.

And this habit of accumulation is grounded on a prior

institution and institution that worked for a prior stage of

development, and that institution is an institution of ownership, formalised

minutes in the concept of a private property.

This the persistence of this institution has led to also

the persistence of these conventions of thought, which bending idea

contradicted what was required for the most efficient production in

a context in which society behaves in that condition.

Right?

So it is the tension and the conflict between these

two social classes, these two ways of approaching the production

of commodities.

That will be for Bevan.

And the key tension, the key conflict in a capitalist

in a capitalist society.

Okay.

Barry was sort of optimistic about the resolution of this

conflict in a piece written in 1925, the year of

the crisis.

And, uh, he we he predicted that the revolt and

revolt of the managers and the engineers will lead to

the displacement of the owners of capital and the establishment

of a Soviet of technicians that will take care of

production at the national stage.

This is an interesting idea, which will come back in

the technocratic models of planning that we'll discuss later on

in this course.

Okay.

So this is another example of how he's thinking the

application of this evolutionary institutionalist model of thinking.

All right.

So we discussed an institutional experiment who provided an evolutionary

model of institutional change.

That was centred on understanding this perhaps in formal institutions,

the emergence of habits of thought and practice in both

consumption and production, and how we formalise them in proper

institutions, in formal institutions.

And he builds from here a critique of financial capitalism

and property theory of the social class, which you considered,

uh, was representing the resilience of Barbary pirates.

We will deal now with other two institutional lists that

did not necessarily argue for an overhaul of the capitalist

system, but rather will provide ways to think on how

the system could be regulated.

I will discuss with Michal his research on business cycles,

which will be quite crucial for the design of counter-cyclical

policies during the Great Depression in the US, and we'll

discuss also a commons, um, who would provide sort of

the grounds for what came to be the law and

economics tradition in the 20th century.

Uh, and initially through his influence in the Wisconsin school,

this idea that economics could be used as an instrument

of Three four.

Okay, so, uh, let's start very quickly with, uh, Wesley

Mitchell.

He was a statistician, and he was the key figure

organising the National Bureau of Economic Research in the 1920s.

He pioneered statistical research in the US, uh, in this

institution, as we will see later in this course, what

it meant to do statistical work and the role of

statistical work will differ among different economists.

For a Mitchell, this implies measuring.

So these would be one of the first drives to

measure statistically the business cycles uh without necessarily introducing models.

Yet we are not yet in the world of the

econometricians of the 1930s.

Okay.

So it has to do with measurements of, uh, the

business cycle.

Uh, he published, uh, a few books which were, uh,

influential and mentioned he shaped institutional studies on this subject,

inspiring at a later stage.

New deal countercyclical policies.

So building on Beveren.

Com a Michal will argue that the modern economy is

characterised by being a money economy.

It is an economy in which acquiring money, accumulating money

is the main mode of production, right?

Not buying goods that satisfy needs at once and therefore

it is the main drivers for the production of goods,

are making money and spending money.

Right?

Uh, not just again for satisfaction of needs and wants,

but also for these conspicuous consumption habits.

As we have discussed, the question is, okay, how is

this affecting the economy?

Economic activities at a macro level.

How are these behaviours shaping the ways in which society

procured those goods at a national level?

So Michel will provide one of the first understandings of

the economy as a whole, which will be an entire

subject in the next term.

And he will argue that production depends primarily on realised

and expected profits.

But economic activity as a whole is subject to different

sorts of adjustments we cannot take.

For given that people will find in the market what

they want.

Right.

And these adjustments are due to several factors.

Some real factors whether over saving.

Remember magnitudes under consumption.

Remember once again.

But he believed that the biggest source of money adjustments

in the economy were monetary factors.

Was this pecuniary motive.

It was the behaviour of investors and those who own

financial capital which introduced a cyclical behaviour.

Right.

So, uh, Baron Mitchell, sorry.

Uh, we'll build on various ideas to explain why business

cycles exist.

He will provide not a real understanding of business cycles

as will become the norm in the late 19th century

20th century, but rather a monetary explanation for the systems

of business.

So this technology, it's introducing instability.

And this is why we need to regulate, goodness.

Uh, um, monetary, uh, motives, uh, corporate capitalism, uh, to

make this economy work for the second, uh, example of

institutionalised economies, economies that I would like to introduce today

is, uh, Joint Ventures Commons, which is a very interesting

figure.

Um, because he was a practical reform.

His methodology for doing economics was quite different from that

of, uh, Mitchell.

It is not about collecting statistics and data about the

economy as a whole, but rather working in a field,

work with large teams, gathering facts and opinions that could

then be used in a, in a legislative commission.

So it's this investigative rule of the economy, the economy

as an inquiry, uh, that characterised not just confluence, but

with Wisconsin's approach to institutional economics in the early 20th

century.

Um, he, uh, would work himself as a counsellor for

the state of Wisconsin, helping draft different types of legislation

on public utilities regulation, uh, workman's compensation and safety and

employment insurance, factoring in the legislation.

Just to give you sort of examples of how he

practised, uh, the art of using economics as an instrument

of reform.

But he also sort of developed a theoretical understanding, uh,

of out of his investigative, empirical, driven activities, which helps

us understand how institutionalist economists thought about the role of

the law, uh, in economic activities.

So the theory is work is that economic activity depends

on the legal and institutional framework in which it operates.

Precisely because the law is essential on economic life to

do nothing less than defining value.

It is not against individuals who are defined by the

value of specific goods, as we will see in a

minute, is defined through negotiations transactions between private individuals.

This is what is known as the history of reasonable

or negotiated value.

People arrive within a given institutional framework, within an even

legal framework to the specific value of goods.

As we will see, what is alienated in this process

of transactions is not.

the hood itself, but the property rights over the extension

of that good in the future.

Without these contracts, without these accepted negotiated transactions, there would

be no production or consumption.

This is a pretty requirement for the production and transactions.

And he explained that the courts and the legal system

give a concrete, practical content to this notion.

I agree even that it is not economists with their

abstract work who has provided a reasonable notion of value.

It is actually the practice of the courts themselves, and

in particular the Supreme Court, which have been the first

authoritative faculty of political economy in the world history.

We should treat the decisions of people in the courts

of lawyers and judges us economic decisions they are constantly

facing.

Considerations of what role will be will be on later

on.

Opportunity costs, whenever they are defining, are questions that affect

the transfer of property rights.

So the basic unit of analysis here is the transaction

the transfer of property rights, the alienation property rights from

one person to another.

Again, this is not about exchange of commodities in the

physical sense of a delivery of one would, but rather

the acquisition between different individuals about the rights of future

ownership of things and institutions matter because these transactions are

not happening in a void, they are occurring within the

regulation of specific institutions, and the property rights are determined

through an iteration of voting in rules, in a given

society, and able to negotiate not between individuals, but between

different parties concerned with this property rights.

Think about labour unions, business associations, corporations, families, the church

who also are concerned with the enforcement of these rules

through mechanisms of collective action.

Precisely this sort of stuff that he was doing in

the courts activism, the use of bodies, right.

And political oppression.

So comments will provide sort of a way of understanding

this regulatory phase of interventionism.

He argued against this idea of collective fare and the

minimum state.

Someone needs to take care of property rights.

Someone needs to enforce also this property rights.

So he referred to the state as this nightwatchman watchman

of the property rights institution.

However, he was far from being a socialist.

He believed that competitive markets are important institutions.

People like, uh, Buchanan from a public, uh, choice school.

We will build on these ideas.

He's far from being a socialist thinker.

But in contrast to Smith, he believed that markets are

one institution and one another.

Right.

I suppose we system of natural liberty in which it

is through the deployment of markets, through allowing everyone to

follow their own interests, that public benefit will emerge.

He developed this very interesting notion of the couriers.

Right.

So it is not really visible that public benefit arises

from private ownership.

It is actually, in practice, through the hands of different

individuals who are assembling groups to negotiate, to define the

working rules of the institutions that govern them And also

the enforcement of these rules, which in turn translate into

a transfer into the specific transactions of the transfer of

property rights.

All right.

So we've seen today, uh, three approaches, uh, to north

to institutionalist thinking in North America during the late 19th

century.

And as we discussed earlier, uh, it is a bit

problematic to consider this as a unified school school.

Uh, historians of economics typically treat them as a rather

similar group of scholars where at the same time, statisticians,

social reformers who wrote between the late 19th century and

early 20th century but shared some commonalities.

Right, uh, in the importance of institutions.

However, they understood them, uh, in this attention to also

how institutions Change and how institutions shape individual behaviours, but

also a common project, if you may, which was represented

in this regulatory phase of capitalism in early 20th century

America.

They contributed very nicely to this pluralist environment in the

United States up to the interwar period.

So we see we will see that Berlin had a.

Influences on different understandings and approaches to economic planning meet

on business cycle studies from the 20th century.

Comments on this law and economics tradition.

But we also see the at the same time neoclassical

economy economists writing from the US.

This institutionalist thinking declined in the 1940s for reasons we

will explore in the second part of this course, displaced

by both Keynesianism to understand macroeconomic behaviours and the dominance

of the neo classical paradigm.

But interestingly, uh.

And I will close with this.

The new institutional economists, people like to bless North people

like a roller coaster.

In a sense, people like Asimov, Johnson and Robinson will

begin to some of these institutional spaces in the late

20th century and link their work to this administration, which

writes a very interesting example of why the ideas of

the past mature.

Right?

We can find inspiration of the ideas of past economists

to provide understandings that understandings of phenomena that contemporary economics

we're not allowed to do in the same way.

Okay, so, uh, just a reminder, the formative assignment was

released earlier this week.

Now you have until the end of January to submit

this assignment.

It will be an essay based response.

Uh, the instructions are quite clear and modal.

We'll come back and discuss between and this works.

And for this class reunions return and we begin discussing

our lectures in a pleasant program.

We are pretty much okay, so wish you all happy

holidays!

Thanks for bearing with me.

It's been a fantastic term and I look forward to,

uh, a continue discussing all of these subjects with you

next year.

All right.

Thank you.

Lecture 11:

It was, it existed.

Hello They small ones.

kind of.

I.

I don't Hi Lorenzo, how are you?

Oh really, Professor, are the slides posted?

They should be.

They are, can you see them?

No, I don't, I don't.

Just give me a second.

OK, I haven't been able to Get down.

Um, According for the projection, but just give me one

second.

Pick it up you can cram like a study sash.

I mean half the time I should this should happen

automatically it's not working.

Can you see, can you see there well?

I mean, I know, I know it's not perfect, but

are you able to see the slides clearly from the

back, yep.

OK.

I keep trying though.

Like I'm ready for new content and I'm also ready

to like.

Yeah, they, they, they are, they are, they are on

the Mutter page Neoclassical.

This is Marshall.

Oh, that's my bad.

OK.

Uh.

We leave some chocolates here so you can see collect

them thank you.

OK.

I was like God We will start in a couple

of minutes.

Uh, thanks for bearing with me today.

I know that it was uh quite a last-minute change.

Uh, I have an unexpected commitment later this week, uh,

which means I had to cancel, uh, Friday's lecture, and

now you'll have to stand, uh, me speaking with, uh,

the mask, um, If you can't hear me on the

back, please do let me know.

I might be having to rely today much more on

the microphone than, than always, OK?

But let me know if uh Eva and Emma, if

you, if you can hear from there.

OK.

Fair.

Yeah, I don't feel good about it.

But it was like I find, I find it weird.

When you like but like I could have.

I like stuff though.

Yeah.

As a Wait no one.

That.

I like the name of my things last like because

I'm on.

OK.

OK, now this is an issue.

It's there you go.

I got this habit of now all my readings.

He because I had to like.

OK.

Yeah, I know I'm saying.

I spent like a day just memorising everything.

Oh my God, you have to like memorise it a

year, yeah, like because like a lot of them just,

you know, money and finance oh my gosh, I think

it just says I memorised.

I have like a.

I just got a time, but um.

I think Please.

I like tried to memorise it.

The authors, and I remember I did, and I was

able to like you, but he was like, it's not

essential.

He was like, it's nice.

What is this?

OK, guys, I think we can start now.

So for those of you who just arrived, um, do

let me know if you can hear me well with

the mask.

I, I will be more static and relying on the

microphone, uh, and thanks uh for uh adapting to the

changes I made uh to this.

Uh, first lecture of winter term on Alfred Marshall.

You're all excited to be back here talking about the

history of economics, and with Marshall, we'll be starting to

discuss the origins, the emergence of the type of economics

that you guys and I, when I was a student,

uh, study, uh, today, OK?

Well I'm talking about neoclassical economics.

We'll have two sessions on this subject.

First, we're gonna begin by discussing the life and work

of Alfred Marshall.

Uh, who will provide what I will call in this

course the Marshallan Foundations of New Classical Economics, and we'll

see in the next lecture how these foundations differ from

what I will call, we will call here, the evaluation

foundations of neoclassical economies.

Now, these two pillars, if you may, will set the

basis for the development of a scientific programme throughout the

20th century that I will elaborate much more on, uh,

in the next lecture, OK?

So why do we start with Marshall?

Well, because in the long history of this course, after

studying classical political economy, we discussed a fundamental break that

occurred in the late 19th century uh with this classical

uh way of theorising about this discipline.

When we studied the marginalist revolution, we discussed two ways

in which Jevons and Menger We'll come back to ARAS

next week.

Broke with the classical tradition.

We also discussed towards the last weeks of the previous

term, some alternatives, uh, if you may, uh, to marginalist

thinking, uh, when we discussed the German historical school and

North American institutionalism.

And today we'll see how Alfred Marshall will build on

the contributions of marginalist thinkers.

2, if you may reconnect with the classical tradition, he

will provide a synthesis of marginalist thinking and classical political

economy, uh, into what I will argue will become one

of the foundations of neoclassical economies.

So this is the subject of today's lecture.

How did Marshall understand this synthesis?

What were its key components and what were the, the,

the main attributes of Marshallian economics.

Uh, and we'll discuss again how this differed from by

Russian foundations next week.

So to understand the significance of Marshall's work, we need

to come back to something we've been talking about uh

in this course, which is this drive from the mid-19th

century towards uh the late 19th century to turn economics

into a scientific discipline, right?

We discussed Jon Stewartzmill work, uh, and his distinction between

things like economics as an art and as a science

and his argument that the proper definition of economics should

be based on understanding the behaviours of uh the economic

man, right?

Economics as in, if you may, a science grounded on

understanding the behaviour of economic agents.

And we saw with Jos also how this attempt to

make economics a scientific discipline implied a change of status

in economic thinking, if you may.

So from political economy, we start simply now to talk

about economics.

This meant a retreat from politics.

Which was Uh, in view of the implications of classical

political economy considered essential to build the scientific and academic

discipline, uh this interested objective science, we also saw with

Jeons how this opened, if you may, a door for

the incorporation of different modes of reasoning, mathematics and diagrams.

And interestingly, the Palgrave uh edition of uh Marshall's Principles

of Economics, which is a text you're gonna read for

this class.

illustrates this change uh in uh the cover of this

edition, right?

We see here something that is familiar to you all,

the Marshallian Cross, the equilibrium between supply and demand.

We also see the mathematical expression of this equilibrium.

And this is relevant because with Marshall, equilibrium thinking will

come to the centre, to the fore of economic theorising,

all right?

This became the main textbook in economics in the Anglo-speaking

world up to the 1950s.

So Marshall in a way replaced Mil as the pedagogue,

as the main reference, if you may, of what economics

is and how economics should be studied.

We'll come back to this, uh, in a minute because

Marshall was also a key figure in the professionalisation of

economics here in the United Kingdom.

Uh, he, uh, influenced economics, uh, uh, and his legacies

are to be seen at least in two ways.

Uh, he was behind the creation of the first economics,

proper economics degree, uh, here in Britain, in Cambridge with

his 1903 tripos.

He was also the father of what came to be

known as the Cambridge School, one of the leading intellectual

centres in economics in the 20th century through his students

who were not enrolled in the economic stripers, but in

the most prestigious at the time degree of moral philosophy.

Uh, I am talking about people like uh Piggu to

to whom we'll come, uh, later on when we discussOs.

Who was actually his heir and successor uh in uh

Cambridge and of course also his student and the centre

John Maynard Keynes, who will be the subject of a

lecture of his own.

So with Marshall again, we see this trend towards economics

becoming more scientific and also more professionalised.

Now, What were Marshall's key legacies, if you may, on

what came to be known as the scientific programme of

neoclassical economics?

Let's begin by talking about the term.

I referred in our previous lecture to the fact that

it was actually Thorsten Bevlen, the North American institutionalist who

coined the term neoclassical.

He coined it with a meaning of a term of

abuse, a sort of critique, uh, to, uh, particularly the

word of Alfred Marshall.

But this term, although problematic, does captures some of the

elements that Marshall wanted uh to uh incorporate uh into

economic thinking.

In particular, this attempt to reconnect with the theories of

the classics.

The subtitle, uh, or the, the opening epigraph better of

Marshall's principles would be Natura non fascial saltus nature doesn't

make jumps, and this really reveals how uh for Marshall

societies and sciences evolve in an evolutionary fashion.

And hence British political economy should be grounded on classical

theory.

Marshall was concerned with reconnecting to a classical tradition and

saw his work as a natural continuation if you may,

with the work of Smith and Mill.

He, uh, expressed this from uh early on.

He attempted to translate uh Mill's principles uh into uh

mathematics using graphs and algebra.

But this continuation with the classics also implied a change

in, if you may, the focus of economic theorising.

With Marshall Equilibrium through his theories of demand and supply

will become the foundation of economics.

Now, his theories of supply and demand will be grounded,

if you may, on theories of production of production and

consumption of a reinterpretation, if you may of classical accounts

of production and consumption, but this will be relegated to

the background.

Economics will become a science, not about production.

Not about uh the distribution of wealth, but rather about

how Markets self-adjust into a situation of equilibrium, a point

of rest.

A second big contribution of Marshall to the scientific programme

will be, will be one of methods.

So following meals.

Message that economics is in its nature, by its nature

an abstract deductive science.

Marshall will pioneer what we know today as partial equilibrium

analysis.

His realism, as we'll see in this lecture will lead

him, will lead him uh to.

Consider To make abstractions, sorry, of the interdependencies between multiple

markets.

And we'll provide them with tools to study one market

equilibrium at a time.

This is related to what he understand was the main

purpose and objective of economics, which is to give sense,

to make sense to how uh individuals make decisions in

uh the ordinary, in their ordinary lives.

There are multiple things affecting prices and quantities provided at

the market, but Marshall will be concerned with those normal

prices.

Those prices that prevail under unchanged general circumstances.

So, equilibrium comes to the centre, starting one market at

a time, as opposed to the interdependencies between markets will

be two of the main uh pillars of this Marshallian

foundations of neoclassical economics.

But Marshall will have also some other legacies uh through

his students.

He laid the foundations for welfare economics, understanding the implications

of equilibria through the understanding of equilibrium, understanding the implications

of, let's say, different types of policies or market imperfections,

uh, on, uh, uh, social and economic welfare.

And uh as we'll see today, the incorporation of the

time dimension will be crucial not just for Marshall to

make sense of how the the, the, the, the theories

of the classics relate uh to those of the marginalists.

But also we provide Uh, tools for the or the

origins, the emergence of macroeconomics, uh, in Keynes, OK?

So we'll come back to these two points later on

in the lecture and in the course.

Now, let's try to take a step back and ask

ourselves.

How did the specific political, economic, and social context in

which Mar Marshall lived, that is Victorian Britain.

Affected the emergence of neoclassical economics.

Why did neoclassical economics of this brand emerge in this

context?

So I have 4 hypotheses that I would like to

suggest with you.

None of this, no, no, none of them captures in

totality, uh, uh, the answer to this question, but I

think it provides some interesting hints to situate Marshall's work.

The first one is something that should now become clear

for all of you.

The vast majority of classical political economists in the British

tradition, with the exception of Marx, of course, who identified

this very clearly.

We'll have some affinity with liberal thinking, right?

We see a continuity in economics in the liberal project

that links Smith, Ricardo and Mil.

The key cornerstone of this liberal project is that the

point of departure of economic theory and of economic reality

should be individual freedom.

Right?

This self-interested individuals who uh make Decisions to improve their

own condition as we saw from you.

This, uh, will become not just for Marshall, a key

normative point of departure, but also in his view a

representation of how markets really worked.

Markets were in reality competitive.

The competitive character of markets was much more the norm

than the exception.

Second interpretation.

As we see, as we saw last lecture with the

North American institutionalists.

Social Darwinism, that is to say the application of this

innovation in biology to the world of the social sciences.

Had an influence also on martial thinking.

We saw this in uh the epigraph of Marshall's principles,

this idea that Natura nonfascial saltus, nature doesn't make jumps.

And uh Marshall will be concerned with understand these gradual

changes.

That help us to explain uh the adjustment to equilibrium,

right?

Will be in a context of equilibrium and not disequilibrium

precisely because societies, sciences, and economies evaluate only in a

gradual fashion.

A third hypothesis in the turn of the century, of

course, the increasing flow of these socialist ideas had made

classical political economy even more contentious.

The world of the work of Marx was very well

known and read in late 19th century, hence the political

implications of classical, uh, political economy.

And uh within this liberal tradition, if you made your

classical economics provided the counterpoint uh to uh this explosive,

if you may, consequences of a classical theorising.

So, Marshall will be like other marginalists, providing if you

made tools to understand how uh the society can uh

live harmoniously and how markets can provide benefits to all.

We'll come back to this point in this lecture, but

it also provided a counterpoint to a different sort of

brand of socialism, which is very closely related uh to

this university, Fabian socialism.

Which will build on the ideas of Saint Simon, uh,

in France, uh, to provide uh arguments that some degree

of social engineering intervention on markets, uh, was, uh, required

to improve human condition.

So, neoclassical economics in this context provides a different picture,

a picture uh in which uh markets are not only

harmonious but they self-adjust and provide benefits uh for all

the actors involved.

And finally, equilibrium thinking, if you think about it, uh,

is, is very well attuned uh with the context of

political stability and prosperity of uh Victorian Britain.

In this context, the question of what are the main

causes of growth?

What are the main causes for the development of nations?

The key fundamental question in Adam Smith's work, suddenly lost

to relevance?

And we see with Marshall then a transformation from a

concern about the causes for the production of material wealth

to the concern of equilibrium, how to keep this social

order.

What is it that keeps this social order together?

This is a question that.

Will become part and parcel of economic theorising throughout the

20th century.

We'll come back to this question when we study the

work of Kenneth Arrow next week as well.

All right, so that's enough for this very long introduction.

Hm Let's now discuss uh in more detail uh the

man and his project.

And then let's move on to uh uh uh talk

about the specifics of the Marchellian foundations of neoclassical economies.

So, who was Marshall?

Uh, he, uh, was someone, uh, from London.

He was born here, but he studied at Cambridge Mathematics

and as a mathematician, he knew very well what were

the uses, abuses, and limits uh of uh mathematics, uh,

for economics analysis.

Marshall was above all a pedago, a teacher.

He demonstrated this from a very early age.

Uh, he was, uh, uh, he taught political economy in

Bristol and Oxford before, before his appointment as the first

professor of political economy in Cambridge.

But even before that, with his wife Mary Pelley, he

wrote The Economics of Industry, which was a very interesting

piece because it was a textbook.

That was written to educate in economics, million economics in

particular, non-specialists, particularly businessmen.

Mary Paley, now his wife is a very interesting figure

because she illustrates the early role of women, women in

the history of economics.

She actively collaborated with Marshall.

Uh, some, uh, historians of economics have even argued that

it was she who wrote, wrote most of the economics

of industry, yet, uh, she was not given the credentials

at the time.

Uh, this, uh, would be more, more, more the norm

than the exception, uh, uh, in the contributions of, uh,

the visible contributions if you may, of women, uh, to

economics up to the mid-20th century.

Now, uh, his most influential work was the principles of

Economics from which he also uh received the, the collaboration

of Mary Paley.

It was first published in 1890.

It went through eight editions.

And Marshall saw this as the first, if you may,

piece of a three book, uh, opus, if you may.

Uh, these principles of economics focused on how markets behaved

in ordinary conditions which he associated to those in which,

uh, individuals are allowed to make decisions on their self-interest.

situation that we call today of perfect competition.

And he continued his work with the publication of industry

and trade, which focused on the exceptions, those circumstances in

which imperfect competition for whatever reason uh prevails.

Marshall, uh, with his second book will also open a

new field of research, which unfortunately, we won't have the

time to discuss today on industrial economics.

We'll probably come back to it uh later on, uh,

in the course.

And finally, the third piece.

Uh, of Marshall's oppus was money, credit, and commerce in

which he presented, uh, perhaps the, the, the, the first

formulation of what came to be known as the Cambridge

cash balance approach, uh, to the quantity uh theory of

money.

We'll, we'll come back, uh, uh, to this when we

discuss Keynes, OK?

So today we'll focus on, uh, the principles.

But first, What was Mar Marshall's project?

It was first and foremost a theoretical project.

Again, I've mentioned it already, a project that will bring

equilibrium uh as the central organising notion of economics.

But here some distinctions must be made.

He was concerned with equilibrium in so far it relates

to processes of adjustment to this point of rest and

not to, let's say for example, characterising what an equilibrium

position is.

This will be the central concern of Vras as we'll

see next week, not of marshals.

Marshall will assume That a point of rest exists, uh,

but he will be more interested in understanding how Mar

itself adjust to this, and this was beautifully captured by,

uh, his most brilliant pupil, John Maynard Keynes, when, uh,

he argued that Marshall created a whole Copernican system.

In which all the elements of the economic universe are

kept in their places by mutual counterpoint and interaction.

It is this mutual counterpoint and interaction, the self adjustment,

self correcting.

Characteristics of markets that Marshall will be interested in study,

OK?

So first element of Marshall's project.

But Marshall's project can also be considered from a, if

you may more method theoretical level.

As one of drifting away from the political and political

economy.

Like Jevons, but keeping its moral foundations, and this is

important to understand his theory as well.

Because Marshall believed that economics was a science, yes.

But it was also a means to improve society.

Economics should be of practical use for ordinary individuals and

for decision makers, for policy makers.

Marshall was of course, not a reformer.

Joan Robinson would say that he was a great moralizer,

but uh somehow the moral always came out, whatever is,

is nearly best.

So when Marshall meant that economics should be used to

improve society, he was not talking about the major reform

or overhaul of economic and social organisation, but rather to

understand how given markets as they are.

Policies should be assessed, uh, uh, to understand how this

could bring benefit to the most.

So for Marshall, the economics as it is, remember what

it is, uh, is nearly best was uh competition.

The norm was the competitive interaction between individuals who are

enjoying economic freedom, what Marshall called self-reliance and a free

choice, and this is the order that should be preserved.

We'll see how this will have implications uh on, on

his view on welfare analysis.

But uh this realistic view of economics, the idea that

competition was in reality, not just in the model, the

norm, and not the exception, helps us to explain also

his uh commitment to realism and his preference for a

literary exposition of economics arguments.

So, Marshall was an excellent mathematician and you'll see that

uh he explains, uh his Theories in a narrative fashion.

But he relegates the algeographic and mathematical formulation of these

theories uh to the footnotes and the appendixes because this

is where he believed they should belong.

This was connected uh to his definition of economics in

the following way.

He provided a definition which in a sense builds on

John Stewart's meals but also differ from it in, in,

in, in, in relevant ways.

He suggested that political economic or economics simply should be

the study of a man's actions in the ordinary business

of life.

That is why why economics should be written in a

language that is understandable to all and should be building

on intuition and common sense and not just on, on,

on abstractions.

But here is where it builds on meal, he says

it it inquires how a man in his under ordinary

business of life gets his income and how he uses

it.

It is on the one side the study of wealth,

yes, Mr.

Smith.

But on the other and more important side, it is

a study of man, right?

It is a study of how the economic man make

decision on the margin.

So we see here.

A commitment to realism.

That provides an understanding of economics that is not an

esoteric science.

It is a science that should be understandable to all.

And this helps us explain uh why for Marshall, mathematics

and diagrams, although relevant to illustrate some complex aspect of

economic theories.

I should not be at the centre front of theorising,

but rather an aid uh to uh building economic theories.

Uh, Keynes will joke that uh it was actually quite

the opposite with Marshall's work, that his narrative is very

complex, and that one could just read the footnotes, uh,

and the appendixes and ignore the rest.

I invite you to read both, OK?

So with Marshall, given that you have now the tools

to understand diagrammatic and mathematical economic analysis, to understand his

work, please, when you're reading the principles, I encourage you

to read also the footnotes and uh if you want

uh to delve in deeper, the appendix as well.

But remember, for Marshall, the core of the argument uh

can be expressed uh in narrative way.

OK.

So we've discussed Marshall, his project from both a theoretical

and meta-theoretical perspective.

How this had implications on his own understanding of economics

as the study of the ordinary businesses of life and

how this had implications also on pedagogy and method, right?

Uh how economics uh should be taught and what mode

of expression, if you may, should be at the centre

of the discipline.

Now, we'll discuss uh some of the key elements of

his, uh, what we call here the more sallient foundations

of neoclassical economies.

OK.

So his, his first contribution is something that is very

familiar to you, the Marshallian Cross.

The equilibrium between supply and demand and uh of course

uh the demand, the theory of demand and supply.

Uh, as represented, uh, in the course.

So the point of departure is a million one, abstraction

is needed.

It's essential as a method of economics.

We saw how this build also on a commonsensical understanding

of economic relations.

This meant for Marshall that the satirist Pari was assumption.

Was acceptable as a scientific way of inquiry.

We can for a moment consider one market at a

time, neglecting mutual interdependence, how changes in different markets and

in different conditions uh affect the quantities produced and demanded.

And he gave this example by discussing the fishery industry.

There, there are multiple factors that influence the supply and

demand for fish, and the price paid by consumers and

agreed by producers.

This could be affected by the season, by the weather,

by ra sudden changes uh in the tastes and behaviours

of consumers, but what is the proper object of economics

is to understand what is the price and the quantity

that is, that are determined, uh, in this point of

rest under normal circumstances.

We can make abstraction of all of these things.

And study one market at a time.

We'll see next week how this approach will differ starkly

with the question posed by Barras who will be much

more concerned with understanding uh how one price of equilibrium

can uh avoid uh all markets at a time, very

different problem to that of Martians.

Now, Marshall's aggregate demand and supply curves are The key

cornerstone, uh, to understand equilibrium.

They are, they are based on the individual scales or

plans of consumption and production.

And The assumption that we can focus on the, these

plans for a representative agent or, or firm allows Marshall

to represent the supply and demand curves in an aggregate

fashion.

So, uh, in Marshall's understanding of supply and demand, the

marginalist theories of production and consumption are in the background

and what comes to the fore, uh, is what Makes

this adjustment between uh demand and supply based on the

decisions made by a representative agent or firm.

So marginal utility theory, as you know it, and marginal

cost theory which Marshall helped pioneer, uh, will be in

the background, uh, of his understanding of demand and supply.

Remember, the focus of economics, the centre of economic analysis

is now the equilibrium uh between supply and demand.

As you very well know, demand and supply curves represent

quantities demanded and supplied as a function of prices.

They are not spot prices.

They are functions.

And this uh constitutes synthetic representations of markets that reflect

the relationship between quantities and prices for each market independent

uh of others.

Now building on his theory of supply and demand and

his definition of equilibrium as the intersection between the supply

and demand curves, Marshall will delve deeper into trying to

make sense of these processes of adjustment uh to equilibrium.

And for this, uh, it will be crucial for him

the introduction of time.

So by introducing time, as we'll discuss in the class,

Marshall will provide a synthesis.

Uh, of two, if you may, understanding of prices that

we've seen since classical theory.

Remember Smith's distinction between the natural price, that price that

uh prevails under the ordinary circumstances of each society or

neighbourhood, and the market price, the market price that is

a result of the bargain between different.

Uh, suppliers and demanders of a particular good.

Classical theory from Ricardo onwards focused much more on, on

trying to understand the natural price that now we're able

to call it in this way, price which prevails in

the long run, whereas marginalists came back to Smith understanding

of the market price and try to understand how this

price.

That is the result of bargaining between different agencies is

determined.

So the notion of time for Marshall is the key

to bring these two programmes together, and we'll see in

a minute why.

So what time Marshall is not meaning the historical time,

the time in which economic transactions occur across history, but

it's rather the time in the model.

Is what, if you may determines.

The type of things that can adjust within each of

the periods.

So in the shortest time of all, in the, what

Marshall calls the market period.

In which the production level is fixed.

Let's come back to the example of the fish industry.

The market period is that period that occurs when You,

as a consumer, come to the market and you find

already all the stock of production available there.

The stock of production, the production level is fixed uh

in this period.

And what determines the equilibrium price in this context will

be uh the uh demand for this good, the tastes

and fashion, uh, that are prevailing in that particular day.

So Marshall will provide to understand, uh, uh, this more

clearly a very interesting metaphor.

He will say that, uh, in order to understand.

Whether supply or demand prevail in the determination of the

equilibrium price, we can think of his Marshallian cross as

a pair of scissors.

Like in every pair of scissors, one blade is more

active than the other.

In the market period, in that period, on the spot

where production is fixed.

The price is ultimately determined by demand, by the tastes

and fashions of consumers.

But what happens if we allow the production level to

change?

In the short run.

Which is the blade that that prevails?

Is it supply?

Is it demand?

Well, Marshall will argue that in this hypothetical scenario of

the fish market, those producers who are experiencing a pent

up demand for fish.

Uh, we'll hire more people.

will bring new uh uh salesmen to catch fish in

the sea, so they can bring new fish to the

market, but they can only do so by increasing its

unit costs.

They cannot make changes if you make to the technology

of production.

And they will face higher unit costs to satisfy this

uh pent-up demand.

It's in their interest to do it.

They will still uh make more profit than before.

And in, in this short run period, supply, of course,

plays a role in determining, uh, The equilibrium price, but

demand, the tastes and fashions prevailing among consumers still have

the upper hand.

But what about in the long run?

What about In that circumstance, situation in which we give

enough time to producers to Find solutions to this increased,

increasing uh unit costs, for example, by getting uh bigger

ships that are more productive, uh, in capturing fish or

training new salesmen.

Who are more efficient uh in capturing fish from the

sea.

In this situation in which we allow producers to shift

the technology's production, if you may, to shift the balance

between capital and labour.

They are able to bring and satisfy this uh new

pent-up demand uh at falling unit costs.

And in this context, demand might play a minor role

in the determination of the equilibrium price, and it is

supply and in particular, uh, the marginal cost of production

which will determine uh the equilibrium price.

Marshall believed that this 2nd and 3rd time periods were

the ones that were of concern for economics, but he

allowed for a 4th 1, the very long run.

In which production level is completely variable.

And in this context, he would argue the equilibrium price

will be solely determined by supply.

No matter how much changes the tastes and fashion of

consumers, the willingness to acquire a particular good.

It is the fundamentals of the economy, if you may,

the level of population of capital and knowledge which determines

uh the price of a commodity.

This, the very long run is of course the period

which Marshall believed.

was not the subject of economics, but rather of economic

history.

And economic history, guys, you know, well, uh finds uh

its birth as a sub-discipline or discipline of its own,

if you may, around the same, uh, this very same

uh time, OK?

So the incorporation of time with Marshall is essential in

multiple ways.

It's essential to understand how he breaches.

The gap between the classics and The marginalists?

It is as if Marshall had made that chapter 6

in the wealth of Nations that you guys read and

wrote an essay about what economics is all about, right?

It provides the foundation to understand how in different circumstances,

agents, decisions uh make uh adjustments uh uh to equilibrium,

uh, happen automatically if, uh, you may.

Now, bringing together his theory of supply and demand.

His theory of equilibrium and the role of time in

understanding market adjustments.

Marshall provides us with what can now be called a

proper model.

SINT as a synthetic sorry, representation in this case of

one market in abstraction of others.

That, like any other model, can be manipulated by economists

to do multiple things with them.

Economists can think with this model.

Right?

The model becomes a world of its own to think

about economic, uh, uh, the, the interesting theoretical features, uh,

of economic categories like supply, demand, and equilibrium.

We can study features, for example, uh, in terms of

the graphic, the graphical representation, we can study the shape

of the curve.

And try to understand why this tells us about uh

the elasticity uh or the price elasticity of demand, the

extent to which uh prices will change.

Uh, two changes, uh, in the demand for these goods.

It Also allows us to, let's say compare.

Equilibrium positions through comparative statics.

We, uh, can make Then Inferences about the extent to

which consumer and producers benefit from changes in uh the

equilibrium price.

With the notion of consumer and producer surplus.

But we can also conduct thought experiments of policy relevance

with this small machine if you may, that is Marshall's

a model of markets.

We can ask questions of practical relevance.

What are the effects of taxes and bounties on consumers

and producers?

Is there any surplus loss as you study in your

microeconomics courses, if we introduce, let's say, a tax on

The consumption of fish.

But Marshall's little model, synthetic representation of how markets work,

also allowed him to propose provocative, big fundamental questions of

general philosophical interest.

Do equilibrium prices where supply meets demand, maximise overall satisfaction.

He's coming back to this old bentami question about what

causes what makes general happiness.

Do my kids In a competitive scenario, leads to a

situation of, of maximum happiness, maximum general satisfaction.

And Marshall will argue positively to this question, but with

a caveat, which is very important.

So he would say yes, equilibrium will maximise welfare in

a very limited sense.

It is true then that the position of equilibrium of

demand and supply is a position of maximum satisfaction in

this limited sense.

That the aggregate satisfaction of the two parties concerned increases

until that position is reached and that any production beyond

the equilibrium amount could not be permanently permanently maintained so

long as buyers and sellers acted freely as individuals, each

on its own interest.

So what equilibrium prices guarantee.

Is the production level that is consistent with full liberty.

No higher production level is possible is what an equilibrium

position is telling us.

No more transactions in the market are possible.

If we allow individuals to act freely and in their

own interest.

In this very limited sense, yes, equilibrium positions lead to

the maximum satisfaction.

But not in the perhaps fuller sense of, of the

expression.

For example, this doesn't take into account considerations of distributed

justice, who comes to the market with higher endowments, who

ends up the market with more, who benefits more from

uh this, the realisation of these exchanges?

It's a question that cannot be explained, that cannot be

addressed by just looking at the equilibrium position.

So this is not a point of maximum happiness in

the beam utilitarian sense of the world, but in the

limited sense of the degree of, of the level of

production, the amount of transactions that are consistent with uh

the liberty and freedom of the individuals exchanging uh goods

and services in markets, OK?

A view that is consistent with Smith's system of liberty,

of course.

All right, so, uh, this.

Uh, if you make a synthetic representation of markets and

Marshall's provocative.

Answer, uh, to this question will provide the grounds for

a whole agenda on welfare economics that will be pursued

further by his student, Piggu in Cambridge.

We'll come back to this when we discuss Ronald Coso's

critique, uh, to, uh, Peguian welfare analysis uh in week

7 of this course, OK?

So To conclude Let me just Drink some water.

To conclude, what changed with Marshall in the history of

economics?

At least 3 things changed.

With Marshall, the status of the discipline was uh now

radically transformed.

Economics left behind uh the political elements uh that characterised

classical theory and became simply economics, scientific discipline, which for

Marshall, as we saw, had to do with the ordinary

businesses of life.

But of course, as we saw with his meta theoretical

projects, always with a moral basis, Marshall will always be

concerned with the ways in which economics can be used

to improve the living conditions.

Uh, of, uh, individuals.

This will, uh, leave an imprint, if you may, uh,

in the Cambridge tradition as we'll see with Pig and

uh Keynes.

Second fundamental change.

Transformation of the central question of the discipline.

The key question from Adam Smith.

Two marks had been what are the causes of material

progress.

This had led the classics to focus on the study

of production and Marshall.

We, if you may provide elements for a narrowing of

this question to a concern with the analysis of market

equilibrium and welfare under free competition, taking stock.

And productive capacities as given at a particular moment of

time.

Economics will move away from considerations of economic development and

change and focus instead on understanding the automatic self-adjustment uh

of markets.

This Copernican system.

That uh Keynes referred to.

Third, fundamental change.

A change of method and approach.

Building on mill, economics is an abstract and deductive science.

Marshall will make abstraction of the interdependencies between different markets.

And uh we'll If you may provide a justification for

the setterist Paribu's assumption.

Given that we are concerned with Uh, the determination of

prices in the ordinary circumstances of life, we can make

abstraction of what happens in other markets and this.

I abstraction and simplification was essential to provide a model

of markets, a model with which we can think.

We can evaluate policies and we can pose questions of

fundamental importance with a high degree of simplicity uh by

uh just uh using static and partial equilibrium.

Mathematic demonstrations and and graphs, of course, are useful for

this, but with Marshall, we are not that far to

make them the way of expiration uh of economic thinking.

We can still do things these things uh with words,

with narratives.

What are the consequences of these changes?

Well, A return to the fundamental questions of the classics,

particular chapter 6 of the Wealth of Nations.

On uh price determination, but now more fully grounded on

individual behaviour.

Uh, using the tools provided by uh the marginalists.

So the focus of neoclassical economics uh will be uh

individual decision making and not uh social classes.

Second, associated consequence, Marshall will provide one foundation for neoclassical

economics in the sense that he provides the tools to

understand one market at a time.

And not the economy as a whole, not the interdependencies

between between markets.

This will be the main and crucial difference between this

programme and uh Valras.

Brand, if you may, of neoclassical economics as we'll see

in the next lecture.

But Marshall also left some legacies that reverberated in the

20th century through his students.

I discussed how Marshall analysis of market equilibrium provided the

pillars for one approach to welfare economics uh in the

work of PIU.

We'll come back to this uh in week 7.

But also his notion of time, in particular, his distinction

between the short and the long run, highly influenced Keynes

and Keynesian macroeconomics in ways that we will study in

our lecture on week 3.

All right?

So we'll leave, uh Marshall for now.

We'll come back to him uh in next week's classes.

For these classes, please prepare the readings.

As usual, sketch your answers to the reading questions.

I've ready the class worksheet.

And uh our next lecture will be on a continuation

of this neoclassical scientific programme where we study Balraz and

night, OK?

Just a quick note on the formative assignment B, uh,

we are, we are still marking your essays and the

feedback will be released later on this week.

Thank you for bearing with me and I look forward

to seeing you next week, uh, in class, this week

in class, sorry.

Mhm.

Well, I think, I don't.

That's nice.

It's, that's what I'm trying to do.

No, like that's why I like, um, they do, but

like it's.

Yeah, I know, me neither.

Well, I did like a little bit but not much.

OK, but I actually like.

Thank you.

Mhm.

Yes, yes, I have to.

Thank you, Ken.

Lecture 12:

I allege my complaint, there's been fraud here.

There's been negative, um, and.

that they had Right and effectively.

Sitting Yeah.

Yeah, I mean, yeah, as I was saying, you probably

would.

I Show the judge.

Uh Yeah Uh And Oh.

Sure Thank you OK guys, we can start now.

So welcome to our second lecture on neoclassical economics and

as I mentioned in the previous lecture last Monday, our

objective in in these uh two classes is to use

uh neoclassical economics as a way to understand how a

scientific programme was built and developed.

And we've studied how Marshallian economics built on.

The contributions of previous economists to reinterpret what the classics

had done before.

And neoclassical economics as a scientific field would deal with

the analysis of the behaviour of economic agents we studied

before, uh, in the case of the marginalists, two ways

of interpreting this homo economicuss, uh, the economising man in

manger and the maximising man with geons.

In a market system and the mechanism, the mechanisms through

which equilibrium as a point of rest as we studied

with Marshall could result from individuals acting free, right?

This is the core object of neoclassical economics and uh

it incorporates contribution spanning from the 19th century up to

the late 20th century.

The marginality principle, the notions of diminishing marginal utility and

satisfaction, for, for instance, from the marginalists.

And the interpretation of the scientific programme that I want

to bring today is that there are at least two

foundations, one based on uh the Marshallian principle of a

partial equilibrium which relies on a static method, the the

the centre is Paris assumption, this idea that economists.

Understand that there are many things affecting prices and quantities,

but that we can make abstraction.

Of what is relevant to understand market behaviours right in

ordinary times.

We saw how this Martial and partial equilibrium provides the

tools to understand the equilibrium as a point of rest

between the supply and demand prices, the supply and demand

curve, the famous Marshallion Cross, and how the main concern

with Marshallion.

New classical economics was to understand through comparative static analysis

equilibrium adjustments, right?

We are not here concerned about explaining the existence of

equilibrium, it's stability, but rather how economies move from one

equilibrium to another, right?

And we discussed how the incorporation of time was relevant

here.

The second pillar of neoclassical economics of the scientific programme

that we'll study today is evolved Russian general equilibrium.

The main object of this study of equilibrium would be

to prove its existence, it's uniqueness, and it's stability.

By general equilibrium we mean relaxing the centerist Paribus assumption

and understanding how can it be possible that from the

decentralised actions of multiple individuals.

There is one set of prices that vatiates markets across

the board, right?

Not just, uh, between two trading agents, not just in

one market, but in all markets at the time, right?

And we'll discuss today how Marshal and general equilibrium provides

also the the tools, the foundations to understand this relationship

between the market operating in perfect competition and uh the

optimal allocation of resource.

OK, so we'll see how as Marshall provided the foundations

for one particular approach to welfare economics grounded on the

analysis of how for instance economic policies affect a consumer

and producer surplus.

Varraz will provide the tools within this general equilibrium framework

to understand a much more restrictive.

To provide a much more restrictive notion developed by Pareto

later on of optimality and build from there the two

the two welfare theorems uh developed by economists in the

20th century.

OK, so this is the plan uh I have uh

for us today.

We're gonna discuss the ration foundations of the scientific programme.

Understanding how can a society of freely acting individuals can

lead to a situation of order right represented in market

equilibrium.

And like Marshall Balraz believed that his model of the.

Was grounded on how the economy actually worked.

And this is interesting because as you will read he's

provided a very formalised vision of what an economy is

and how it operates and yet he believed it was

an image, a representation of how markets actually worked.

But the type of markets that Barra had in mind

were somewhat somehow different to the ones that Marshall was

thinking about.

Remember we discussed in the classes earlier this week how

Marshall used the example of the fish market to illustrate

the importance of time in market adjustments.

The type of market that Vras is thinking about resembles

much more the wholesale market for agricultural products or even

the stock market.

What he was concerned about was how prices are determined

across markets by supply and demand without the collision by

different actors.

Think about stock market or wholesale price.

And the fiction that Barraz imagined, and I'll come back

to this fiction later on, is that of the auctioneer,

an auctioneer who's shouting prices which are on time written

on the board, and this is relevant because everyone has

access has information about what these prices are.

This means that if these prices are public, if information

about commodities.

Is accessible to each economic agent.

There is no possibility for arbitrage because if there is

this maximising agents who are rational and want to take

advantage of this arbitrage.

Will do so and the prices will adjust so the

type of markets that Paras is considering and is interested

about is that in which again the prices.

Work as signals of opportunities for different economic agents.

And agents respond to the excess demand for specific goods

in order to decide how much quantities they bring to

the market, how much how much quantities they buy in

the market as well, right?

So in this context, but as you say it is

telling us one can think of a following fundamental question

for economics is there a better price?

Is there a set of prices that will allow each

of the economic actors here to satisfy both their demand

for.

Baskets of goods and will provide the incentive for producers

to bring enough goods to the market so that all

markets give.

This is the fundamental question that Baraz is interested, and

this is the type of market you you should think

about when you're reading Baraz because this is what he

believed general equilibrium theory was an image of, OK.

So after discussing Valra's work, we'll discuss some developments in

neoclassical economics through the 20th century.

We'll go fast forward here and our purpose is to

understand precisely through the object of neoclassical economics the main

question of this course how do economic theories change, right?

And This is because as we've seen in the early

20th century.

After Balraz and Marshall had published their main works, economics

was a very pluralistic field.

And it was only gradually that neoclassical economics, the type

of economics you study in your degrees, became a dominant

part.

OK, so we need to understand or better New classical

economics provides the objects to understand how a scientific programme

develops a core, a scientific core of irrefutable theoretical assumptions,

and this was the work done mostly between the 1920s

and the 1940s.

We'll discuss Frank Knight's theory of price to understand perhaps

a Uh, a, a, a way in which these pretensions

of realism that we still find in the Russian work,

uh, will leave places, uh, to a view that all

we need is a set of consistent coherent assumptions of

a fictitious world to pose economic questions we'll study how

equilibrium rationality and perfect competition were becoming the three legs

of the stool, if you may, of.

Um, new classical thinking, the core, if you may, from

a lacatos, uh, a lacatoian perspective.

We'll study also how In the making of this score,

New classical economics left utilitarianism behind and left in this

way as well the psychological foundations of the discipline that

the marginalists, particularly generals had attempted to give economics.

We'll discuss in a few in a few minutes the

theory of preferences of what what this means, and we'll

see how this cord of based on equilibrium rationality and

perfect competition hardened in the context of the 1950s and

1960s, a period of high theory in economics.

When Arrow Derea and Han rekindled the Russian programme and

provided a mathematical proof for the existence, uh, the uniqueness,

and an attempt to provide the proof for the stability,

uh, of equilibrium, OK.

We'll just close by making a few remarks on the

outward developments.

How did neoclassical economics incorporated the critiques to its core

assumptions and the extent to which it provided also mechanism

to colonise other sciences, right?

So from a core from a mains the making of

a mainstream, uh, to its expansion if you may in

the social side.

What some interpreters have called uh economic imperialism.

OK, so as you can see we have a very

packed agenda for today.

But you have now sort of a general idea of

what this lecture is about.

So let's begin by discussing the Russian foundations in New

classical economics to then move and talk about these developments

of the new classical framework programme in the 20th century.

So who was uh Leon Varraz?

As always, we start by introducing our characters.

He was a very interesting figure.

He was trained as an engineer and mathematics in what

was at the time, uh, the main, uh, school of

engineering in France, the Coin.

He dropped out.

He was, uh, a genius but not a, a great

student, and he's.

He, he moved uh to uh the University of Lausanne

in French speaking Switzerland in where he was appointed professor

of political economy.

This is important because like Valra like Marshall sorry Valraz

we leave behind the school, the school of Lausanne, which,

uh, in which he.

Here with Frido Pareto will continue the work and the

programme that he's presenting uh in his main work, The

Elements of Pure Economics, which was published in 1874.

As happens to be the case, uh er in the

history of economics, this work had a very poor reception

initially among French economists.

It wasn't well received as well, uh, here in Britain,

uh, but it had a very good reception among the

Italians and among uh the Scandinavians in particular Gustav Cassel,

uh, who popularised his work in what became known as

uh as the school and we'll see in week 4

why this is relevant to understand the connection between Russian

economics and macroeconometrics and the macro econometric world.

So as I mentioned, Barras uh here Brido Pareto.

Despite the early bad reception of his work, continued his,

uh, legacy, uh, in, uh, the school of Lausanne and

in a way push forward his agenda as we'll see

by providing an.

If you make a utility, uh, for, uh, what was

interpreted by contemporaries at the time at a very formalised

mathematical way of understanding economics, Pareto, uh, will make uh

the Russian general equilibrium the foundation of a particular way

of understanding welfare economies.

Now, uh, interestingly, Barras considered himself a scientific socialist.

But he made a very stark distinction between what he

called pure economics.

It has to deal with matters of truth.

Shap between the positive dimension of economic science and the

normative distinction.

And the normative aspect of that science, right, about what

it ought to be.

And this is what he calls social economics which has

as its main object not deliberating, not arguing about matters

of truth, matters of fact, but rather about aspects of

justice but as as others believed that normative economics should

build on the positive understanding of economic laws on matters

of truth.

And he will provide, we won't analyse this in this

course, a very interesting, if you may, alternative uh to

uh provide a much more just and equal world.

Which taxes?

Collected by the state would be replaced by the nationalisation

of landed property and uh the state's role would be

to.

Relocate, redistribute resources, uh, through the income it derives from

the rent of land, OK?

And this was consistent as we will probably have the

chance to argue with his understanding of the conditions under

which a general market equilibrium uh leads uh to efficient

outcomes.

Now Walras, given his distinction between pure economics, applied and

applied economics, held the methodological conviction that pure theory.

Must draw from the empirical reality, but it will, it

must make abstraction of this empirical reality.

And the key relationships between an economy must be expressed

in a mathematical form.

So this will bring Balraz apart from other.

Marginalist that we've studied this course, particularly Meer, in the

sense that he would argue that mathematics is essential, not

just accessory as Marshall considered is essential to understand the

key fundamental theoretical relationships of how markets work, right?

And this is particularly clear uh in his approach to

the question of general marketing.

But first, let me say a word about Braz as

a marginalist thinker.

So we include typically Braz as one of the authors

in the marginal revolution because.

Contemporarily with Menger and Gros and John Bates Clark, he

provided an understanding of the macroeconomic behaviours of economic agents

and how value is determined by the decisions individuals make

in the margin.

For Valraz, the source of value is what he called

commodities rarity.

The principle that the chair in right there was not

that of utility like for Germans, but rather scarcity brings

Badras a little bit closer to men.

And he referred to Raias, I quote, the intensity of

the last one satisfied by a quantity process.

It it is important for us to acknowledge Balraz as

a marginalist thinker.

Because this was what allowed him to introduce a dimension

of agency in his general equilibrium field.

The mechanisms as I introduced when I talked about the

stock market, right, the mechanism that is bringing markets to

an equilibrium.

Is this agency of individuals making decisions in the margin

such as it was uh in the theory that we

discussed last week uh with Marshall.

But now what was Barrao's approach to the question of

general equilibrium in uh his elements of pure economics?

The problem he's posing is the follow.

First, he's starting with a hypothetical, mathematical theoretical problem.

He is positing the problem of exchange of a system

in which all prices or quantities are determined simultaneously.

And all markets clear.

And he's proving that this system, which is nothing else

than a system of equations, has a mathematical solution.

See what he's doing he's telling us this is a

theoretical mathematical problem.

This has nothing to do with economies or how economies

work, right?

And I'm proving that this mathematical problem has a solution.

I will talk about this solution in a minute.

And the generality of Barras is to show that.

A market situation of perfect competition, an economic problem.

Is formally equivalent to that previous problem of exchange.

Of a system in which prices and quantities are determined

simultaneously.

And that this problem of economic relevance has a solution

and very specific unacceptable he considered economic assumptions.

First, of course individuals exhibit a maximising behaviour and crucially

individuals have complete information about markets.

Why is this complete information about markets crucial?

Remember the example of the stock market I argued before.

Individuals must have perfect information about the quantities.

Provided and the quantities demanded in each particular market so

that there will be no opportunity for arbitration.

Because if the exhibits maximise the behaviour, these opportunities for

for for arbitration uh will uh be if you may

taken by agents and absorbed by the prices.

OK, so maximising behaviours and perfect and complete information are

the assumptions under which this economic problem can we find

a price.

A vector of prices which clear all markets at the

same time has a solution that resembles this formal mathematical

solution.

So you see what he's doing.

He's thinking like a mathematician.

Remember his training, his background in engineering?

To provide a theoretical solution to an economic.

Now I mentioned before a key difference between the Vasian

approach.

To market equilibrium and the Marshallian approach to market equilibrium

as being that.

Valraz was much more concerned with the existence, the uniqueness,

and the stability of the equilibrium, whereas Marshall was focusing,

as we discussed in the classes with the adjustments between

equilibrium, right?

So for for Marshall, as we discussed last time, the

equilibrium would be, uh, would resemble this point of rest

around which, uh, the decisions of economic agents make the

market to gravitate if you may, such as the pendulum

gravitates around its centre, right.

Uh, for Valraz, the main question was to prove that

such vector prices which cleared markets actually exist for him,

as I mentioned in the previous slide, this was just

a purely mathematical problem.

It was a a quite a matter of finding a

solution to the system of simultaneous equations.

And by positing that the number of unknowns equal to

the number of equations, he believed he had proved the

existence of a competitive general market equilibrium.

He had proved that this system of simultaneous equations had

a mathematical solution.

As we, as I will discuss, uh, in, uh, in

a minute, uh, this was only unnecessary, not a sufficient

condition.

This was unbeknownst to Ballarraz, but it was proved by,

uh, mathematical economists later on in the 20th century.

However, he posed the question, does this vector of prices

actually exist?

This is a fundamental question for economic theory, but rascal

you.

He also posted without proving that this system of equations

had a unique solution that is to say that this

was not a system in which multiple equilibrium coexist.

This would introduce fundamental problems, right, because, uh, it would

be impossible to know a priority then, uh, which was

the equilibrium in which a particular economy uh would be.

But he considered that the uniqueness uh was uh theoretically

possible as we'll see, uh, Arro Whan managed to prove

the uniqueness of this solution by introducing innovations in formal

mathematical.

Barraz was also interested in proving that.

This equilibrium was stable, that is to say if any

disturbance deviates the prices from this equilibrium.

The market by itself through the action of this maximising

individuals will bring the price back uh to equilibrium.

And the fiction that Baras contrived.

To justify that this equilibrium was stable was that of

an invisible auctioneer that guy was shouting virtual prices.

And a process that he called tatoimo, a groping process

according to which agents react to the prices shouted by

the auctioneer, then the auctioneer looks at markets, sees if

markets clear or not, and if they don't, if they

don't, he shouts them again at a different price.

Until which point all markets keep, OK, so this groping

process.

Uh, is what, uh, Brasotatomo and is the mechanism through

which he theorised that, uh, these, uh, markets, uh, were,

uh, this market equilibrium, uh, was stable.

Now very important difference with Marshall with Marshall we discussed

how the process of adjustment to equilibrium was mediated by

the period of analysis.

And the extent to which in particular producers could adapt

to uh a demand signals in the market.

In the case of a last general magne equilibrium, no

exchange will happen.

Until which point.

That vector price which clears the markets has been decided

through this voting process.

So this presents an iron on the one hand by

age telling us that this figure, this invisible auctioning is.

Uh, through shit crisis, what is Bringing economic agents uh

to a situation in which the prices will determine the

necessary system of incentives for them to transact.

But there is no transaction unless this price has been

determined in the first place.

Some critiques will say that this figure of the auctioneer

does not emerge from.

The assumptions of the model from the maximising behaviour of

agents or from the perfect uh uh competition, but rather

it was a sort of des ex machina external fiction

introduced by Bara uh to prove the stability uh of

the market.

OK, this will be one of the critiques made, uh,

to this whole research agenda.

Now what were the implications of general market equilibrium for

welfare analysis?

To understand this, we need to uh.

Make a distinction between what Varra claimed and later the

developments made by uh his uh heir and successor in

the loss.

Varra suggested that his general equilibrium theory.

Presented an argument to sustain that a system of perfect

competition.

That is to say a system in which all Agents

have complete and perfect information and uh have and do

not have the possibility uh to collide with each other.

Is consistent with the maximising behaviour of economics.

So From the maximising behaviour of economic agents.

We can think of a system in which perfect competition

leads to a situation of equilibrium that clears all markets.

OK, so this was the contribution made, uh, by Vans.

His successor at, uh, the Loan school in Fredo Paette

will go a step farther.

And we'll come to the question that we discussed in

the classes Marshall was also interested about to what extent

market equilibrium.

Is at the same time.

maximising social welfare, providing a situation of maximum satisfaction, maximum

happiness across society.

And Wilfredo Pareto proved that this competitive general market, which

is compatible with the actions, the decentralised actions it made

of economic agents who are maximizers, is also maximising social

growth.

And this is of course what you know uh by

Pareto optimality.

He proved that in equilibrium.

It is impossible to make anyone better off without making

anyone worse off.

Now see the contrast in this approach uh to welfare

economics with that of Marshall, right?

where whereas Piggu and those who continued on the Marshallian

programme.

Uh, approached questions of welfare of social welfare through a

comparative statics lens by evaluating, let's say the effects of

policies on consumer and producing surplus and of overall market

efficiency.

The Marshallgo approach did not take into account the general

equilibrium effect of those policies.

In that sense, the notion of Pareto efficiency is much

more restrictive, is much more imposing.

Because it is proving that taking the general equilibrium in

all markets simultaneously at the same time.

That position of equilibrium is efficient and uh it it

is impossible to divert with from that position without making

everyone uh worse.

OK, so we have here also a divide in terms

of how the questions of social welfare will be approached.

We'll start in the next couple of weeks how Piggu

and uh others will pursue the Marshallian agenda.

And we'll come back in our discussion of our role

in the 1960s to see how picked up uh on

uh this approach to welfare economics to pose an important

and interesting question, right?

What happens when there are market failures.

How can institutions make up for markets to correct these

markets?

OK, we'll come back to these discussions later on in

the course, but I just anticipate them so you see

how they are relevant and connect, uh, to the validation.

So the Russian programme.

It was an act of geniality.

It was very bold.

Kenneth Arrow Will pose it that Valgraz was posing no

other question than the fundamental question posed by Adam Smith

earlier on.

How can A society in which actors are acting in

a decentralised fashion without speaking to each other without colliding

with each other, arrived to a situation of order.

Right, fundamental question of economics for Kenneth Aro was posed

by.

In Leon Barra, who also provided a method.

However, the general equilibrium, uh, theory programme had uh some

issues that we need to take into account.

The first, which I've mentioned, but that only provided the

sufficient conditions for the existence and the uniqueness of a

competitive.

General mag equilibrium.

Did not provide serious icing conditions, only the necessary conditions.

Uh, now the solution provided by Vardass requires rests on

the assumption, as you will see that one commodity serves

as a common measure of value.

This is what we know as the numerator for others.

Uh, without these assumptions, uh, the number of equations will

not equate the number of, uh, variables, and, uh, the

system will not have a mathematical solution.

Some critics have said that it is impossible uh to

pose at the same time that there is one acting

as a numero.

Without attempting to describe a monetary economy, this was not

a monetary economy and and this has uh implications uh

on uh how the economy is modelled.

Fundamental theoretical problem, the general mag equilibrium mathematical solution can

be economically admissible.

Butra did not.

Provide the conditions to prove that all, all vectors of

prices will be positive or all prices in the vectors

of prices will be positive.

A better prices which includes negative prices could provide theoretically

a solution to this problem, and this is mathematically acceptable

but economically inadmissible.

This at least these two problems will be addressed by

Arrore and Han in the mid 20th century.

But the general equilibrium problem posed also a much more

fundamental if you may make a theoretical question, particularly we

think like Ken Aro that Valras is modelling a decentralised

economy.

And Italian economists like Barone and then Oscar Lay here

at the LSC, as we'll discuss later in the course

showed that the general equilibrium system can represent both scenarios

of decentralised and centralised economies, that is to say a

centrally planned economy can be represented using Palrazzo's system.

So this poses the question, is this actually a model

of how markets work or is it a model of

how central planning works?

If these two are not.

If the model does not allow us to distinguish between

these two, then what is it representing?

Is this an image of the economy as as I

was uh asking as telling us.

I mentioned before how the figure of the auctioneer cannot

be explained by the assumptions of the model by maximising

the high behaviour of agents, so it is an an

external assumption that there was ex machina, uh, and this

poses theoretical problems for the coherent set, uh, of formal

assumptions that Farra believed uh should be the basis of

economic theory.

And uh some critiques have argued also that the general

uh market equilibrium is a solution to a static problem

of exchange, not a dynamic problem of exchange, and this

problem, as we'll see, will be addressed by the Scandinavian

school and by the macroeconometrics.

So the fact that the gene quilibrium theory programme had

so many problems in the beginning.

Was actually an asset because it opened an agenda that

a myriad of economists from all political colours from uh

different inclinations will attempt to provide a response throughout the

20th century.

It provides sets of questions that helped this core of

economics harden, if you may, in the course of the

20th century.

OK, this is just a table, uh, for your reference

comparing what I've just mentioned about the different ways in

which Braz and Marshall address the question of market equilibrium.

We'll get a chance to discuss that in the classes

because I want to use the rest of today's lecture,

uh, to move fast forward, uh, into the developments of

any classical programme in the 20th century.

So let me begin by Uh, discussing the work of

Frank Knight, uh, he was an interesting, uh, character as

well, born in a strict religious family.

Uh, he, uh, is one of the fathers, if you

may, of the Chicago School of Economics, uh, uh, and

his most known work, uh, is probably, uh, his dissertation

which was published as a risk, uncertainty and profit in

1921.

And here, uh, Frank Knight provides, uh, if you may

the best characterization of what we call here in this

course the three leg so of New classical economics.

Equilibrium, the notion of equilibrium which we've seen with Valbasa

Martian.

Rationality.

The rationality of maximising economic agents and perfect competition.

And in particular In the excerpts that you will read

in the classes.

We'll discuss how important these assumptions of perfect information and

rational behaviours are for this system if you may, to

stick to it.

In this work, famously, uh, nights also distinguish between risk

and uncertainty and we won't discuss that this about this

distinction, uh, in, in the classes, but we'll come back

to it when we discuss, uh, the explanation for profit

and the emergence of profit, uh, in our class on

Ronald coast.

So Uh, we'll leave that for, for later on.

He, uh, was very influential, uh, in Chicago where he

developed the standard the classical theory of prize.

He was the teacher of, uh, people like Paul Samuelson.

Uh, to whom I will refer in the next slide,

but what's interesting about Ron Knight is that he still

represents sort of this transitional period, uh, in US academia

and in particular in the University of Chicago in which

institutional economics.

coexisted cohabited with uh the nuclear airport.

And Frank Knight was also in that case an influential

social theorist, and what we will discuss in our classes

is how his views as an economist about the virtues

of a competitive.

System Somehow clash with his social understanding of the effects

of the competitive of of the markets as a competitive

game which in being competitive creates competitive behaviours which in

a way clash with the moral values of a well

ordered society so we'll discuss the ethical implications of market

competition uh in our classes, OK.

So What's important about this period is that these sort

of three main pillars that we we've seen with the

marginals and with with Valgas uh will become now the

centre, the core of the neoclassical problem.

And in doing so, Frank Knight.

Move from this realist pretension that we still see in

Marshall and Bama's work.

And he will post it that neoclassical economics was not

such as an image or a representation of the economy.

It was not the economics of ordinary life.

He recognised that the classical economics dealt with an abstract

idealised system.

Which like any other abstract system relies on assumptions.

And That these assumptions allow us to understand how these

three legs of the soil hold together in a coherent

theory of markets.

I've discussed already uh the ethical critiques uh Frank Knight,

uh, will do and we will discuss uh in our

next.

So in the course of the 20th century.

With Frank Knight and others.

Neoclassical economics.

We leave behind Israel realist pretensions.

It will Be based on an abstraction of how markets

work without pretending to describe how they actually work.

But by the mid 20th century.

Economics, particularly in in its understanding of the rationality of

economic agents, still relied in what social psychologists considered very

flimsy and shaky psychological foundations.

Utilitarianism.

Social psychologists.

would say it's not describing how individuals actually behave.

Individuals have prosocial behaviours as we saw with Peter and

Berlin.

Individuals also follow social norms.

So this idea that.

Economics is scientific because it has a strong psychological foundation

in utilitarianism is rather flimsy is rather shaky.

There have been attempts since since Pareto to divest, if

you may, the Russian economic system from any traces of

utilitarianism of psychologism.

So Pareto innovated uh by showing that we do not

need uh a cardinal ranking of preferences but rather an

ordinary ranking of preferences would suffice.

Samson will take this a step forward.

Uh, with what came to be known as his uh

theory of reveal preferences.

So we do, we, we do not need to make

any assumptions of what individuals preferences are or how they

form their preferences for economists this could be a black

box.

Any psychological theory could be used to try to understand

preferences.

And actually the reason for which we do not meet

this is because but what we economists actually observe are

consumer and producer choices.

And through observing these choices.

We can infer the unobservable ranking of preferences, and this

is the core idea of what is a very complex

mathematical proof.

Of what came to be known as Samuilson's theory of.

The key importance of this for the purpose of our

course is that this provided economics.

With a defence if you may, from this critique by

institutional economists and other social scientists that it was grounded

on shaky psychological foundations.

All that we need someone to telling us is to

be able to observe in fair individual's preferences without attempting

to prove how these preferences uh were formed in the

first book.

Leaving utilitarianism behind in a way strengthen that core of

economics and in particular.

Uh, the, the assumption of the rationality of the economic

agent.

Economic agent is rational, and this is an assumption in

so far it is able to optimise.

Given a a set of endowments and uh given its

set of uh a preference preferences between and by choosing

between alternative means to achieve things this is all we

need to know about rationality.

We do need to know uh whether this is psychologically

based or not fundamental innovation.

Now the making of economics more abstract.

And the theory of preview preferences provided if you make

some of the economic innovations for rekindling the Russian programme

in the 1950s and 1960s and the people who did

that these were the economists Kenneth Arrow, Gerald Deer, and

Frank.

For I This was the fundamental problem in in economics,

Adam Smith question of economic coordination in a free enterprise

economy.

And incorporating.

New advancements in formal mathematics, particularlybato's formalism and Caanno's fixed

point theory.

We don't need to discuss them here.

They worked out the stability, the stability and the existence

proofs that Faraz was had not been able uh to

provide.

They provided the formal proof for the two fundamental theorems

of welfare economics.

Every, uh, general market equilibrium and specific assumptions is efficient

and uh it is possible to.

Redis redistribute the allocation of uh initial endowments and in

that sense reach to a.

New market equilibrium through uh the market system to welfare

uh fundamental to fundamental problems of welfare economics and uh

very strict conditions on uh the structure of of preference

in particular non association and monotonicity.

And this programme set the foundations also for further developments

in the course of the 20th century, uh in particular

uh the operationalization of a Russian economic theory with computers

with general economic theory in the 80s and macro DSG

models uh in the late 20th century.

So we've seen in the course of this lecture how.

New classical economic theory developed some core set of assumptions,

how this core hardened in the course of the first

half of the 20th century.

By making economics and abstract science, by depriving it from

its psychological foundations, and how, uh, it's if you may

strengthen further with the introduction of mathematical formalised economics which

proved some of the things that the Russian initial programme

had not been able to do.

And this became a sort of an uncontested for in

the course of the second half of the 20th century

which nevertheless was able and this is sort of an

interpretation that I want to pursue here was able to

incorporate some of the critiques made to his fundamental assumptions,

so, uh, the critiques uh to the assumption of perfect

competition.

Led to the attention uh to imperfect competition.

And the corporation uh all these elements uh into uh

the the the outer if you may, uh, a core

of economics.

Uh, neoclassical economics has been able to incorporate also critiques

to the second leg of the stool of individual rationality.

We'll discuss Kenneth Arrow, uh, and how he incorporates into

general economic theory considerations of imperfect information and asymmetric information.

Later on in the course, we'll discuss how critiques by

behavioralist economists on the idea that.

Uh, individuals are rational, um, will be also sort of

incorporated, uh, into, uh, a modern economic theory.

Uh, we'll discuss contracting when we talk about course game

theory to incorporate strategic behaviours and so on and so

forth, right?

So these critiques, uh, to the fundamental assumptions of neoclassical

economics had not sort of done enough to weaken its

core, but rather the incorporations of these critiques have served

to strengthen it and to make the neoclassical mainstream so

flexible that it allows the.

Incorporation and the study of a wide variety of economic

phenomenon.

Uh, which Um, other, uh, uh, social scientists have, uh,

called in a way an attempt to colonise the domains

of other social sciences, OK, so there there was a

return of psychology of economics with the Austrians with the

institutionalism with the behavioural economists.

These developments at the micro level also served to close

the definitional gap between macroeconomics and neoclassical microeconomics uh in

the late 20th century with the Lucas critique to which

we will come back later on, so.

We have here a scientific programme whose strength is.

That it relies on a very simple assumptions on rationality,

competition and marketing.

And is able to incorporate these critiques.

In order to expand, if you may, it's explanatory part

on different questions uh in the social side.

And this explains the strength of the paradigm that has

become the mainstream in the discipline throughout the 20th century.

So To close, what is scientific economics for?

We've studied two ways of approaching economics scientifically in the

previous two lectures.

Marshall and Balra still thought that their economics was an

account of how the economy actually worked.

But we saw how Frank Knight rejected this idea that

scientific economics could be used to discuss and intervene effectively

in the actual economy.

It was a fiction.

Right?

It was an abstract word that allows us to pose

fundamental theoretical questions and nothing else.

Aro de Rehan explicitly defended the general equilibrium theory as

a purely formal representation of economic equilibrium in a decentralised

competitive economy.

And they they they did not assign to it an

immediate practical value.

But Paul Summerson, by operationalizing economic thinking, provided the scientific

foundations to justify government intervention.

And we'll come back to this question in the next

two lectures to see how Keynes on the one hand

will build on a rational understanding of markets.

Uh, to provide an argument for government intervention in the

economies, it would provide the first way of understanding the

economies as a whole in a way using a mode

of reasoning that resembles very much muchent thinking about.

This will be ironic as we've seen it, and we'll

see how the map econometricians will build on the on

the ration programme to provide a different way to think

about the role of economic planning.

Lecture 13:

So welcome to this lecture on the history of economics.

We're gonna talk today about Keynes and Keynesian economics.

Uh, first, a recap of what we discussed in the

previous lecture we talked about the neoclassical, uh, framework to

understand uh how markets function.

We discussed two pillars, the Marshallan approach and the Brasian

approach.

And we also use this as a case study if

you may, to ask ourselves the question how the theories

change and what is scientific economics for, right?

And we saw how in the course of the 20th

century.

The realist pretensions that both Marshall and Barras had about

their models of markets were gradually abandoned.

We saw that with Knight first who, uh, rejected the

idea that scientific economists.

Could be used to represent and actually intervene in the

actual economy.

The models of markets we have are just fictions.

We see this recognition as well, uh, in, uh, the

art of the Han general equilibrium theory programme in the

post-war period and this idea that economic theories are valuable

in themselves, uh, to pose fundamental questions of markets, they

do not need to have any practical value.

But we also saw with Paul Samuel on an idea

that will bring us to the new section uh of

this course that economic concepts can actually be operationalizable they

could be used uh into practise and, uh, particularly in

the post-war period we'll see later on it could serve

as a foundation uh for justifying government interventions.

So we are now moving to a different section of

this course, uh, with a new set of questions uh

in particular uh surrounding the idea of economic management.

Can economies be managed?

And this implies a transformation uh in the way in

which we approach economics in multiple ways.

First we'll discuss today how Keynes, but not only Keynes,

other macroeconomists at the time will bring the attention of.

to focus from the decisions of individuals to treating the

economy as a whole as their unit of analysis.

This is a whole new idea that is emerging in

the context of the 1920s and the 1930s, and we'll

study how and why did this happen.

But the economy became not only an object of analysis.

The economy as a whole became not only an object

of analysis but also was seen as an object of

intervention.

How can the economy be managed?

We'll study, uh, in the next couple of weeks different

ways in which this question was addressed.

We'll talk today about Keynes and macroeconomics, uh, on what

John Hicks called the economics of depression.

How can we intervene on economies, uh, to, uh, manage

the economic cycle.

Uh, we'll also discuss, uh, next week a different approach

from the economists in the Scandinavian school, uh, to this

notion that cycles could be managed, but this approach will

bring together economic theory and statistics in the econometrics programme.

We'll discuss the practical implications of this in the class

on week 5 when we deal with different approaches to

economic planning in the 20th century.

And we'll come back to this question again a weekend

when we move beyond if you may, advanced industrialised economies

to pose the questions can we actually transform economies uh

from underdeveloped to developed modern economies, OK.

This whole package of ideas, uh, in, in a way

address this fundamental, uh, a question of how can the

economy be both understood as an object of analysis and

as an object of intervention.

And in a way this also implied a change in

the mode of reasoning of economics and about the position

of the economists and the economist by the end of

this period will begin to perform that role that Thorstein

Veblen was associated to the engineers.

How can how did economics adopted engineering modes of reasoning?

Was Bern right in his predictions?

Do we need experts controlling how the economies work?

Can this be possible?

We'll come back.

Then to this question when we deal with the Austrian

critique of this view of economic engineering represented in all

of these approaches uh on week 5, OK.

So this is a fantastic new section uh of the

course and first we need to understand uh how uh

the specific economic and political context of the interwar period

shaped this type of ideas.

So let's move on uh to uh talk a little

bit about the economic history of the 1920s after the

end of the first World War.

Uh, we have a period of relative instability in the

business cycle, a, a crisis in the twenties and uh

in the early twenties was perhaps followed by a quick

recovery, boom, and the stock market crash in the United

States.

And this posed a specific question there that we have

already addressed when we talked about Wesley Mitchell, right?

How, how can we understand the effects of a business

finance and monetary impulses uh in uh the.

Dynamics of this business cycles questions that people like Milton

Friedman will come back uh to ask later on was

the Fed responsible uh for the bust uh in uh

the United States.

What is the link between money and stability and the

level of economic activity more broad.

Germany provided another example of this, of course, with its

hyperinflation crisis.

So in both cases there seemed to be a very

clear link between the level of economic activity and money.

And finance.

Now, the situation uh in the countries in Northern Europe

provided perhaps a different set of problematics, if you may.

The UK, Norway, the Netherlands, and Sweden did not experience

the same recovery after the 2022 uh crisis, and, uh,

this period was characterised as opposed to the US by

a higher levels of unemployment, low levels of productivity, and

this posed an interesting question.

Is unemployment perhaps a more structural problem?

Is it probably related not just uh to the instability

of the cycle caused by monetary shocks but rather by

the whole setup of these economies is unemployment and structural

problem.

This is the central question that will occupy Keynes uh

in uh his general theory in the 1930s as we

will see today.

But the way in which we answered this type of

questions had also implications uh in the 1930s on the

practical question of how to deal with unemployment.

If we thought like some.

Economists such as people who argue that the causes of

unemployment were temporary where we uh could, for example, try

out monetary policies reducing uh the nominal rate of interest

to stimulate investment.

We can uh build a system of welfare policies as

well to provide revenue for the unemployed uh in between

uh their job searches if we think that uh unemployment

is only frictional that people are only unemployed because they're

moving from one job to another, but the reality in

the context of the Great Depression seemed to suggest that

unemployment was more than a temporary issue.

That there was something much more permanent about the levels

of unemployment seen in the 1930s.

So what could be done in this case and Keynes

and others will provide tools uh to if you may.

Understand what the role of the government could be in

lifting economies out of the depression and in particular how

deficit spending can help recovery.

There were instances before even Keynes wrote uh the general

theory in which these practical policies were tried out think

of think about the new deal uh in uh the

United States, how uh public works was were used uh

to bring the economy out of the depression.

Later on, some economists would argue tax cuts could be

equally used to.

Uh, encourage consumption and investment.

And to an extent, and this is important to understand

this policy, uh, solutions, practical policy solutions preceded the advances

in theory.

And they pose a question to economists like John Maynard

Keynes.

We have a new problematic if you may.

We need a new theory of aggregate economic activity to

understand this type of outcomes and to understand when different

type of policies could work to address this problem.

Um, Keynes will provide such a fee.

It is a theory about not just markets, self regulating

markets, but about the aggregate level of economic activity.

Keynes will provide a theory that is based on a

functional set of relationships between aggregate variables such as employment,

income, consumption and investment.

A theory that we cannot derive from the maximising behaviours

of economic agents without falling in what logicians called the

fallacy of composition.

There is A different way of functioning of these particular

laws that regulate aggregate economic activity to those that regulate

uh markets are taking individuals.

And this is what Keynes is trying to provide here.

And his breakthrough in the general theory would be to

provide a theory.

That explains.

This type of phenomenon as being the result.

Of How the economic system as a whole works, it

will provide a theory of involuntary unemployment.

It was no longer possible to believe that all these

people queuing.

We're not working because they were not willing to accept

the level of wages uh that they were offered.

We need to have a theory to explain this, if

you may, oxy oxymoronic notion of involuntary unemployment which the

classics had been unable to account.

In this sense, he argued his theory.

Was more general to that of the classics.

The classics could only account for circumstances, uh, or situations

of full employment.

And they had failed to see that there was one

particular market that did not work like all the others

that did not self adjust like all the others and

that was the labour market.

So Keyne's general theory would subsume the theory of the

classics, he thought, in that sense and provide a more

general theory of economics.

Metologically speaking, Keynes will bring our attention to the study

of the aggregate economy.

He will move beyond the methodological individualism that we've seen

in neoclassical economics both in the Russian and in the

Marshallian strands, and he will provide a holistic approach to

the study of economic activity.

And he will pose that the laws that regulate this

economic system, if taken as a whole are very different

for that from those uh posited by the new classical

thinkers.

If we look at the economy as a whole, we

are no longer in that marshalian world of self adjustment

and self regulation, but rather this equilibria and dynamism.

Change is the rule and not the exception.

Despite Kaine's attempts to move beyond the marshallian tradition.

In a sense, Tunisian economics will still be inscribed, if

you may, in a Marshallian understanding of markets in a

in the following way.

The economists will then try to interpret the ideas that

Keynes posed in the general theory.

We'll use the tools of analysis of Marshallian economics to

treat the macroeconomy as this microsystem that could be analysed

just like any other independent market.

And in the readings assigned for this week, in particular

that of John Hicks, Mr.

Keynes, and the Classics, you will see such attempt uh

to understand Keynes's general theory using this type of very

synthetic machaian models of markets.

And this is because as you will see, Kane's work

is very complicated.

And in order for his ideas to circulate more widely

in the economics profession.

They in some sense had to be translated into a

language that could be understandable to others and the 1940s

and the 1950s we'll see this translation of Kene's general

theory.

Uh, in a way that facilitated the circulation of clinician

ideas and the construction of a scientific programme, if you

may, uh, for macroeconomics, uh, in the Anglo speaking world,

people like John Hicks, Paul Samuelson, and, uh, Alvin Hansen,

who you will read for next week's classes, participated in

this.

And this helps us understand how.

Economists try to bridge in the 1950s.

What we knew about the functioning of markets with the

tools of neoclassical economics with the ideas provided by Keynes

in the general theory.

Resulting in what came to be known the neoclassical synthesis

which provided uh tools and a theoretical justification uh for

the use of fiscal policy in the case of Paul

Samuelson's work, for example, or monetary policy in the case

of Federico Modigliani to stimulate economic activity in the long

run.

But in this translation, and we won't have time to

focus on this in the lecture or the classes, some

important aspects of Keyne's original work got lost in particular,

Keynes belief that markets operated under situation investment decisions to

be more specific, operated under circumstances of radical uncertainty which

could not be reduced to risk as Knight had attempted.

This idea that this equilibrium is the norm and not

the exception and the very crucial importance that Keynes will

attribute to the role of expectations in understanding these dynamics.

This will become part comparison of the post-Kyneian critique, uh,

which, uh, will, uh, rekindle these ideas and continue, uh,

a tradition a little bit different to that of uh

macroeconomists, Keynesian macroeconomists uh in the US, uh, particularly at

the University of Cambridge, OK, so it's important for you

to know the different directions, the different paths, if you

may, that Keynes's general theory opened, uh, for the study

of macroeconomics.

All right, so this is the agenda I have for

us today.

I would like to begin by discussing, uh, as always,

uh, the author and his work.

First we'll sort of come back to this idea of

why is Keyne's theory a general theory and to do

so we need to understand much better who were his

key theoretical targets, how he's constructing these targets to present

a critique, and finally we'll close by discussing the key

components of Keynes's general theory and Keynesian macroeconomics more broadly,

OK.

So let's begin by talking about cases.

So Keynes was one of these worldly figures uh in

the history of economics.

He was a Cambridge stone.

He had a degree uh on mathematics, um.

Uh, uh, from Cambridge, uh, in which, uh, he, uh,

received, uh, uh, uh courses he, he was taught by

Alfred Marshall, particularly, uh, while he was preparing himself for

the civil service examination, he wrote, according to his biographer,

19 essays uh in 2 months, very intensive course in

economics, uh, I bet I, I would like to see

you guys doing that for for this course.

Um, he was also a civil servant, uh, from, uh,

his early career.

Uh, he was very much interested in monetary questions, particularly

related to, uh, foreign exchange when he worked for both,

uh, the India office and the treasury.

And he became in the 1920s this maverick figure.

He opposed the reparations, uh, agreed in the Treaty of

Versailles and the restoration of the gold standard by Churchill

in 1925.

Uh, these public writings came Keynes wider renown, um, but

he was not an ivory tower economist by all means.

He was.

Of many of the economists will study in the next

few weeks, a man in the world, a worldly figure,

as I've mentioned.

He was a public writer.

He wrote, uh, on the newspaper The Nation.

uh, he was a socialite.

He made part of the Bloomsbury Group, this this group

of artists, uh, writers and public intellectuals who convened, uh,

in, uh, this part of London where we're sitting now.

uh, he was, as we were discussing with John before

also a private investor.

He had a very close personal if you may familiarity

with the bearish and bullish uh sentiments that influenced investment

decisions uh in the context of the 1920s and he

in the post-war period became very important, uh, in the

planning of the post war or the reconstruction.

And he was an architect of the international economic system

agreed in the Bretton Woods, um.

Uh, a conferences, uh, in the United States, very interesting

character that we need to take into, uh, it's full

account of, of, of, of what were the multiple sources

of influences cultural, intellectual, economic, political, practical and theoretical that

shaped his work.

Now Keynes as an author.

Uh, he published multiple works.

His first, if you may, big piece of writing was

the Treaties on on probability which he completed before the

First World War but published in 1921 in which he

was very interested in study, uh, the role of expectations,

uh, uh, in economic decision making under uncertainty.

Uh, this will feed into his work later on.

Perhaps uh the the writing that first made Keynes uh

very well known, the economic consequences of peace, uh, in

which he intervened this controversial economic debate about the possibilities

and the effects of the domestic and international trade, uh,

the effects on domestic international trade of reparations agreed in

the Treaty of Versailles.

Uh, since the 1920s he began to make a case

for economic interventionism.

This is first visible, I would argue in the track

of monetary reform in which he makes the case for

the abandonment, uh, of, uh, the gold standard, placing responsibility

over foreign exchange and monetary management, uh, in the in

in the hands of, of, of the central banks, the

Bank of England.

He then generalised this beyond the realms of monetary and

foreign exchange policy, uh, in this beautiful philosophical piece, uh,

that I've posted the mural, The End of laissez-faire in

which he in a way.

Uh justifies that a new approach is needed that goes

beyond the laissez-faire liberal paradigm that uh characterised economic thinking

from the 19th century, uh, to save liberalism from itself.

He'll come back to this point in the last chapter

of the general theory.

His first theoretical approach to the study of business cycles

is to be found in the Treaties of Money, a

piece with which Keynes was from very early on very

at ease, uh, he established there a first theoretical argument

linking money interest and prices and the unsatisfaction that Keynes

had with both his own work and the reception of

his ideas.

Let him to rethink this more truly and uh in

a way the general theory of employment interest and money,

his major work was the result of these reflections of

what he had got wrong in the treaties of money.

This is the book that we'll focus on today, but

I'll make a few, a few mentions uh on he

said more ideas on the treaties of money as well.

So how has been Keynes work received then and now?

So someone like Paul Samuelson, a Tunisian macroeconomist, would write

this puzzling, uh, uh review if you may, of, uh,

the importance of King's work.

He says it's a badly written work, it's poorly organised

any layman, any person in the street who who was

trumped by this author's reputation would feel that he has

been cheated by buying this book.

This book is arrogant, it is badly tempered, it's political.

It's not overly generous in acknowledgment.

We don't know who who he's referring to in the

boun in confusions, but it is the work of a

genius, OK.

So you'll you'll find out that Kane's work is difficult

to read and in that sense my recommendation for you

is that when you're reading his work, please also have

by the side the works by Hicks, Sam Wilson, and

Hansen because they will provide tools to understand what Keynes

is trying to say in this work.

How is Kane's work now?

I mean, 1992 seemed to be able to to refer

to now, but, uh, Gregory Man Q, a, a neo

Keynesian economist, will write that the general theory is an

obscure book.

It is outdated by the late 20th century.

Modern economists are in a much better position than Keynes

to figure out how the economy works.

More importantly, economists by the 1990s have become much more

interested in the long run equilibrium.

And this means that the classical theory that came so

much criticised has become much more acceptable.

So even people like uh Gregory Mankiw, Neil Kians will.

Argue that Kaine's theory was perhaps not as general as

he wanted and in a way we'll posit that uh

it was a specific case as well for understanding how

the economy works specifically in the short run, OK, so

this sort of reflects the trajectory of Keyne's ideas throughout

the 20th century and uh how from providing what.

Though the was a general theory of markets, uh, his

ideas became in the mains incorporated into the mainstream of

economics as just representing a simple and uh special case,

right?

This is the type of of if you may reception

of Keynes that you may have had in your macroeconomics

classes.

But now let's come back to his general theory and

and try to understand why did Keynes believed that a

general theory was necessary and to do so we need

to understand what Hicks calls the satiric element uh in

Keyne's work.

This idea that he's building constructing his own enemies, his

own targets, uh, to, uh, provide a critique to classical

economists broadly understood.

So Who were the classics?

Keynes in a sense invents a tradition, the classics which

encompass at least from Ricardo to his contemporaries, Marshall and

in particular Piggo.

This is a conveniently vague characterization as historians of economics,

uh, have argued.

And his concrete target is actually Pico in particular in

this book published in 1933, The Theory of Unemployment.

So Kain's main argument against Piggu's views is that Piggu

represents this broader tradition that has been incapable to think.

That or to provide the theory about involuntary unemployment as

opposed to this view that unemployment is just the result

of the voluntary decisions uh of labourers or uh to

the existence of frictional unemployment uh the idea that people

are just unemployed because uh they are moving from one

job to another, right this problem of coordination.

So for Keynes, the classics as represented in people's work

have failed to provide a theory of unemployment uh in

a community.

So what were the postulates of the classical theory that

Didn't enable them to provide such an understanding.

Two fundamental posts.

One related to the demand for labour, the idea that's

the normal real wage.

Uh, is that is equal to the marginal productivity of

labour and that at this equilibrium point, the equilibrium level

of uh uh uh uh demand is um.

That this is what determines the demand for labour this

this uh equality.

Uh, the second postulate.

That the supply of labour is determined uh by the

equivalence between the utility that labourers derive from wages from

the consumption baskets that they can buy with wages at

a given employment level.

And this the labour will be supplied at the level

in which this is equivalent to the marginal this utility

of work at that.

Given level of employment.

In a way, the classics are treating the labour markets

like any other markets.

In which equilibrium is determined by the intersection between the

demand price and the supply price as we've studied with

Martian.

James will accept this first postulate.

But he will Argue as you read in the first

few pages of the general theory that this second postulate

was what the classics got wrong.

Let's take a step back and try to understand what

this means.

This second postulate means that the labourers, the workers are

able to determine.

How much work is put into an economy they are

able to determine the supply of labour.

So the implication of holding these two postulates together for

the classics was that no unemployment was possible in equilibrium

unless the labourers made the arbitrary decision of stopped working.

To stop working, to ask for higher wages beyond the

margin the marginal productivity, the marginal productivity of labour.

It was the labour unions because were argued who were

to be blamed for this level of unemployment.

It it is just people who are not willing to

work at the fair wages that they should receive given

existing levels of productivity.

Keynes found this explanation unsatisfactory, uh, in two grounds first.

This argument misrepresented industrial disputes.

In particular, uh, it was monetary wages, not real wages.

What were the key variable, uh, for, uh, labour union

decisions we'll discuss in the class, uh, this, uh, uh

critique, but more importantly he questioned that it was wage

bargains between labourers and employers which could determine the level

of employment.

And his whole theory will be built to argue that

the level of employment in a particular economy will be

determined by a very different set of forces, so the

problems of the classics, their incapacity to provide a theory

of unemployment in equilibrium meant that a new theory of

employment was needed that.

Was able to explain which were the forces that determined

the aggregate level of employment in a given economy.

OK, so the classics, the first target.

The second target is a law which we have discussed

in the past when we talked about Malthus.

Very simply put, the law would hold that the economy

is always in full employment.

Because The level a crisis of overproduction are impossible.

Uh, the, uh, concrete formulation, uh, that's made in this

treaty of economy of political economy was that the demand

for products, uh, in general will always be equal to

the sum of the products.

This builds on what we study with uh Smith.

That no one will bring goods to the market unless

they are exchanged for other goods.

There will be no incentives to bring goods to the

market that are exchanged for goods which have less value

and hence no crisis of overproduction is possible we discussed

before how Malchus was alone among the classics in identifying.

The possibility of a general glut, uh, in particular due

to insufficiencies in effectual demand, what Keynes will call uh

effective demand.

And uh we saw with Malchus how this glot could

be solved, particularly if they do classes spent more instead

of saving uh in productivity activities uh to make up

for the difference, right?

So Malthus established from very early on he was the

only classical economist for Keynes established from very early on.

A relationship between the aggregate level of income and the

aggregate level of economic activity, and this means uh the

aggregate level of employment.

And Keynes will provide a similar critique to the classics

by focusing on what is the situation of effective demand

at the aggregate level.

What characterises this situation in which.

We are in a in a circumstance of unemployment in

equilibrium is particularly related to what Malthus had already identified

an insufficiency and a deficiency of effective demand.

Keynes will associate this uh to the stickiness uh of

prices, particularly wages in the downturn of the cycle which

will lead to lack adjustments uh in uh particularly uh

the the the the investments, uh, due to the accumulation

of inventories.

So In his critique to says law, Keynes will attempt

to provide a theory that explained like Malthus had done

before, their relationship between income and employment.

Second element of his general theory.

But there was a 3rd target of criticism uh in

Kane's work, uh, that could fall under this big umbrella

of the quantity theory of money.

Again, a subject that we've discussed in the past when

we read Hume and, uh, uh, others, the general argument

uh of the general quantity theory of money is this

idea of the long run neutrality of money.

The presupposition is behind this is that money operates as

a bail money is only needed for transactions.

The older approaches think about Hume emphasise the role of

economic adjustments that mean that increases in the monetary supply

will only lead to increases in prices and not in

economic activity we saw that through the analysis of the

price flow mechanism.

Keyne's contemporaries like Irving Fisher uh would use uh this

mathematical.

this accounting relationship as a way to understand, uh, this

not so simple relationship between changes in money and uh

prices that will build an understanding of the mechanism better

uh through which increases in the money supply lead to

increases in prices.

But in this case again, money only functions as a

medium of exchange.

It is only needed to complete transactions.

The implication of this type of bills.

Of those who held the quantitative theory of money including

Fisher, was that uh active monetary policy was supplied by

a central authority was necessary to match the economic levels,

the levels of economic activity required by economic transaction and

stabilise prices during the cycle.

So the solution to the instability uh of uh the

business cycle is monetary.

Right?

Um, Keynes will build on The monetary contributions or a

reinterpretation if you may, of that equation uh in the

work of a Cambridge economist starting by Marshall.

So that equation could be rewritten uh in the following

form expressing a relationship between money and income.

That is mediated by this parameter K.

Uh, which refers to in Marshall in Marshall's work to

the psychological desire that individuals have to hold a fraction

of their income, uh, in the form of cash balance

balances.

This is what's known as the Cambridge cash balance approach.

And in this case, the cost of money uh in

the form of liquid assets uh will be uh the

opportunity cost of holding liquidity that is to say the

interest forgone.

And the link between the supply of money, the level

of money in a particular economy and prices is determined

uh by the relationship between people's preferences for liquidity in

Ka's terminology and uh the uh.

Interest rate, the cost of foregone the opportunity cost, uh,

of holding a liquid assets.

Keynes will build on these ideas and the work of

heat or like heat tree and uh others uh in

uh his treaties on money to provide a first if

you may.

Relationship between prices, income, and interest rates.

Keyne's argument in this work is that individuals demand money

for different motives, not just for transactions.

Money is not just a means of exchange, but also

they do so for precautionary purposes.

And the link between money and interest rates in this

case depended on the bearishness of markets, the extent to

which investors had bad expectations about how the economy will

perform, uh, in the future, the degree to which people

worried about the future will lead them to hold cash

balances.

And this will delay the Mechanism through which increases in

monetary supply will have implications uh on prices and through

this means it will have a consequences on the level

of economic activity uh in particular uh through a reduction

of income.

Now Keynes, as I argued, uh, found this argument was

wanting because a full fledged theory linking his theory, a

theory of income, money and interest was missing, and this

was precisely his role, uh, in the general theory, OK.

So, uh, very quickly, what was his general argument?

The main contribution that Keynes is making here is to

provide a theory about the economy as a whole.

Functioning In terms of laws that operate as a system

of functional relationships between aggregate values.

The point of departure of this theory is a theory

of income and not a theory of prices like had

been uh for the new classicals for Marshall in particular.

In a circular economy in which The remoderation of the

factors of production is equivalent to household incomes.

The national income could be expressed.

As Uh, being equal to national expenditures.

And in a situation outside of full employment.

If the existing level of income is not able to

employ the full population, this implies logically that the level

of expenditures in that economy.

The level of consumption or investment with private or government

must also be efficient, right?

Now Keynes will provide an understanding.

Uh, of 4 functional relationships, uh, 2.

Uh, the case will provide for functional relationships to understand

under which circumstances, uh, this, uh, deficiency occurs under which

circumstances an economy uh is uh not at the level

of full employment because of deficiencies uh in effective demand.

The first functional relationship will relate.

Changes in the level of income with changes in the

level of consumption.

This will be determined by what he will call the

propensity to consume.

The second functional relationship, the multiplier will relate changes in

the level of income with changes in the level of

investment.

The third functional relationship we'll see uh we uh.

Really discuss.

What are the determinants of investment decisions and investment decisions

in this case, uh, will be determined by the relation

between the rate of capital and the rate of interest.

That means established a relation between the aggregate level of

investment and the rate of interest in a particular economy.

And to close the system in a monetary economy, the

4th function, building on the idea of liquidity preference will

relate the rate of interest to the demand for liquid

assets, OK?

Um, this system will have as a practical and policy

implication.

That the way to deal with these deficits with this

insufficiencies, deficiencies in effective demand could not be through monetary

policies.

The liquidity preferences of individuals will lead to a liquidity

trap as you'll read with uh John Hicks' work, but

rather through deficit expenditures through public investments or tax reductions

is the way in which governments uh could restore full

employment.

So let's start in much more detailed this functional system

of relationships.

This is the general argument that Keynes is building here,

OK.

So let's start with the propensity to consume.

So, uh, Keynes.

Will posit that this link between income and consumption was

given by a fundamental psychological law.

He would say, I quote, that when someone's income rises,

their consumption rises, though by less than the full amount.

He will not attempt to provide a microeconomic justification of

this.

He believed this was a natural psychological law, um.

And he believed that this relationship was stable.

It could be included if you may as a constant.

Uh, later, this could be interpreted if you may, as

the reciprocal of the propensity to save.

From a household perspective, saving decisions in casework are are

residual that are determined from the propensity to consume cases

provided here an inversion of the classical theory of consumption.

Uh, will this will open sort of a new agenda

in macroeconomics in which, uh, people will, uh, try you,

you'll see, uh, the, the work of Paul Samuelson to

estimate econometrically what the propensity to consume in each society

is, uh, and, uh, later on there will be attempts,

uh, to model.

Uh, this relationship, uh, as the result of optimal decisions,

uh, Franco Modigliani, uh, will provide that, uh, view in

the in his life cycle hypothesis and similar attempts will

be pursued by Milton Friedman, uh, in, uh, his work

on on permanent income.

OK?

First relationship, second relationship, the multiplier.

This idea of the multiplier was motivated by policy and

debates about the effects of unemployment of public works in

the 1920s and 1930s.

The rationale behind this was that.

When additional workers were employed in public work schemes, they

will spend additional, the additional income they receive uh uh

in uh consumption goods.

And through this means multiple rounds of consumption of expenditures

will have positive effects of unemployment because it will increase

the demand for labour and through that means uh increase

the level of employment in a particular economy.

Two basic intuitions are behind the idea of the multiplier.

The first one is that the economy did not just

operate to satisfy the needs of individuals, the wants of

individuals, but aggregate effective demand and in that case opening

holes to fill them, if you may could have multiplier

effects on income through consumption and private investment as.

Uh, Samuelson will attempt to to measure.

Uh, through his analysis of the accelerator.

The second key intuition is that the central characteristic of

how this economic system works is the flow of income

from hand to hand, right?

And.

This public works will accelerate the rate at which income

flows from one hand to another and encourage further investments

uh uh to satisfy this new consumption needs, OK.

Uh, there were some elaborations that you, uh, read when

you deal with Samuelson's, uh, work in particular in trying

to operationalize this concept by measuring econometrically what was the

what it's simulating what could happen with the business cycle

if both the multiplier and the accelerator had different values

in a particular economy.

So this shows how Keynes theories could be translated into

econometric quantitative statistical tools that could be used to inform

policy analysis.

Third relationship, the endorsement to invest.

Keyne's key intuition here is that.

Against what what Smith had said before, it is not

saving and saving behaviours, the parsimony of individuals rift which

finance investments or which determines the rate of investment, but

the other way, the way around that it is investment

decisions which determine how much each society saves in a

particular time.

This means that savings and investments are an identity.

But they are not an equilibrium position, they are the

outcome of investment decisions.

If investors do not believe that they have profitable opportunities

for investments because of the lack of effective demand, they

will not invest.

Keynes will say it is the enterprise which builds and

improves the world's possession.

If enterprise is afoot, wealth accumulates whatever may be happening

to Thrift, and if enterprise is asleep, wealth decays whatever

Tri may be doing.

So Keynes is coming back to the ideas of the

Americanantilists.

Inverting the relationship between parsimony and industriousness between savings and

investments, and he points to the role of expectations and

uncertainty investors follow their animal spirits they.

Invests depending on how they feel what the the expectations

of the markets will be in the future bullish and

various markets is what determines the level of investment because

they will determine the specific relationship about their expected marginal

returns from different investments, the marginal efficiency of capital.

And the cost of acquiring money, the interest rate at

uh this uh in the present.

So the role of uncertainty here is crucial.

Investment depends on the state of confidence on the economy,

not on the degree of parsimony and savings in a

particular economy.

To close the system, the liquidity preference, the rate of

interest is here defined functionally as uh to the amount

of cash balances that people desire to hold.

Cambridge cash balances approach, and Keynes moves beyond his ideas

in the treaties to emphasise here not just the precautionary

method uh motive but also the speculative motive.

Uh, when people have liquidity, the speculative motive, uh, will

lead them to, um, uh, uh, demand more and more

liquidity, and this could lead to a liquidity trap that

sets a limit to the ability of monetary authorities to

bring the interest rates down by increasing cash balances uh

during uh depression, OK.

So let's close with this idea here because we need

to leave the classroom.

So Keyne's major contribution was characterising the economy as a

system of functional relationships between aggregate buyers.

This was in a sense a revolution in in in

economic thinking.

His was not the only approach to macroeconomics as we'll

see in the next week class when we talk about

real approaches uh in the tradition of Scandinavian economists.

But Tunisian macroeconomists in order to translate the ideas that

Keynes posed in the general theory developed this tradition within

the macro the Marshalian tools uh of comparative studies and

in that sense Keynesian macroeconomics was not necessarily a genuine

dynamic system.

Keyne's ideas were later on operationalized influencing concepts such as

national income accounting, for example, and Keynes, if you may

other broader contribution was to create the expectation that governments

could and should manage the economy and that economists could

provide the tools for doing so.

OK, so let's close with this idea for our discussion

in the class.

Lecture 14:

Hello.

Shoot, that's fine, thank you.

Hey Jack, how are you?

Hey Shruti, Hey Ma.

Hi Oliver.

Hello Walter.

Yeah.

Hello.

It's Hi OK guys, let's start.

So last week we studied a first way of thinking

about the laws that regulate the economy as a whole

when we discussed Keynes and his general theory today we're

gonna discuss another approach to this question of the economy

as a macro unit, uh, which, as you will see,

uh, we'll build on both different theoretical foundations.

But we'll also attempt to provide a statistical way of

understanding uh the economy uh in what came to be

known as the macro econometric programme that we associate with

people like Ragnar Frisch or Jan Tinbergen, the first two

Nobel Prizes in economics, and we're gonna discuss today why,

uh, what were the main drivers of this programme.

And why do we argue that this programme as opposed

to Keynes will focus on the dynamics of uh economic

uh change uh in the context of the economy as

a whole.

Uh, both Keynes's ideas and the econometric programme that we're

gonna discuss today were driven by similar historical circumstances, the

interwar period, uh, in particular, and the problem of the

Great Depression, and we'll come back to this.

Discussion in the classes when we deal with how uh

this way of thinking about the economy as a whole

provided some grounds to think about government intervention uh by

the use of economic planning, OK.

So first, let's, I just want to invite you all

to please come to our public lecture.

organised by the Department on Economic History, uh, Cormac O'Grada

will be discussing perhaps this sad book about the hidden

victims of the second, uh, of both World Wars, uh,

and you're all invited.

It's gonna be next Thursday, uh, in the Sheikh Sayed

theatre in the CKK.

You're all invited, OK.

And the macro the macroeconometrics programme is very interesting because

it reflects, it illustrates very well, a shift in the

mode of reasoning in economics, uh, that is very much

visible in the 20th century.

It illustrates how throughout this century economics begins to behave

like an engineering science, so historians of, uh, economics, particularly

in this department, Professor Mary Morrigan have argued that there

was a fundamental shift from the interwar period to the

post-war period.

Uh, in the way in which economists studied the economic

world, economics became a tool-based science.

We've seen some elements of this in the course so

far.

Economists use models to understand economic reality.

These models could be used like Kenne Talos Economic, perhaps

the first model of all, to represent, uh, the economic

world.

But these models could also be used to explore theories.

The models themselves are a world that could be explored

by economists.

We saw that in Marshall supply and demand model, how

we can uh inquire things such as uh the elasticity

of demand and supply or the effects that different types

of policies will have on economic welfare.

And econ and models can also be used to intervene

in the world.

Think about the Higgs ISLM model we discussed in the

classes.

You can use these models to compare different policies and

the effects different policies could have uh in the economy.

Economics became a tool-based discipline also through the incorporation of

mathematics and the mathematization of economics.

Not all models are mathematical.

Particularly Kennes model and Higgs model are uh diagrammatic models,

uh, but we've seen the incorporation of algebra differential calculus

when we studied geons also formal axiomatic mathematics in the

case of the general equilibrium theory programme with Aro de

Roy and Han.

And in these ways economists begin to approach the world

uh through the lens of the mathematical systems that people

like Valraz uh provided grounds for.

Third way in which economics became a tool-based science.

Well, they collect numbers.

They use numbers.

To approach the economic reality and this is connected uh

to uh the necessities or the drivers of states to

gather information about the societies, the economies they are governing

on.

We'll talk today about the creation of uh business cycle

uh institutes uh throughout the world during the 1920s and

the 1930s, and we'll explore this third, if you may,

way in which economists use tools to approach the economic

reality.

And having all of these elements into account is essential

to understand the origins of the econometrics programme because people

like Ragnar Frisch will bring together economic models, the use

of mathematics, and.

The avalanche of numbers collected by states statistics uh uh

to provide a dynamic sense, a dynamic understanding of how

business cycles uh work, OK?

So econometrics could be interpreted as the marriage of mathematical

economics and statistics and of all of these developments that

we've been discussing so far in the course.

And this development is interesting in a second way because

it positions economists in a different way economists vis a

vis the economic world economists behave now like Belen's engineers

in some ways, right?

They are engineers in at least two senses.

They become tool makers.

They devise these tools.

And use these tools.

Think about Keynesian economists, Paul Samuelson's use of simulations uh

to account for the effects of different values of a

multiplier and accelerator parameters.

And most of the work of economists in the second

half of the 20th century.

Will be devoted to the design and use of these

tools, but economists are engineers in a second sense which

we will discuss in the class.

They will use these tools to attempt to design whole

economic systems to redesign economies, and we'll explore this in

the context of post-revolutionary Russia of the Great Depression and

uh of a post-war reconstruction, OK, so.

We'll discuss about the perhaps the practical institutional implications of

this role of economists as engineers, as social engineers, uh,

by discussing and contrasting uh the work of Bukharin and

Provasensky and how uh the Russians dealt with the idea

of turning a previously capitalist economy into this utopian socialist

one they want to bring forth.

We'll discuss with Ragnar Frisch.

Just how like Keynes he attempted to provide a response

to the Great Depression in the Scandinavian countries in his

homeland in Norway, but.

As you will see, the proposalri will attempt to provide

the first very much from Keynes, and it will include

a much stronger and bigger role of the state replacing

markets uh through a system of circulation planning.

We'll discuss that in the class and we'll also deal

with how Jan Tinbergen will build on a clinician framework

to provide practical policy.

Tools to deal with reconstruction uh in postwar Netherlands.

OK, so this week, uh, the distribution between the lecturer

and the classes will be a little bit different than

in previous ones we'll discuss today.

The road to the macroeconometrics programme and then in the

classes we'll deal with very concrete practical applications if you

may of this way of thinking uh in uh in

the world and uh this way of attempting to design

and engineer change in the world.

So this is what we'll study today we'll study the

road to dynamic macroeconometric models, uh, as I discussed in

the last lecture, there is no sense both theoretically and

empirically of something such as the economy as a whole

in the 19th century.

Uh, there is some attention, uh, by people like Malthus,

Marx, and Jews, uh, to try to understand empirically, uh,

cyclical behaviours in population in crisis and in trade, but

nothing such as cyclical behaviours in the economy as a

whole.

This will change in the 20th century and, uh, as

opposed to the Keynesian system.

The programme that we will study today by Ragnar Frisch

and Jan Timber and the macroeconometrics programme will be dynamic

in the sense that it will not address the problem

of uh.

Change across time through the lens of comparative statics but

rather by trying to understand what are the main impulses

that bring economies to change and what are the main

mechanisms through which different economic actors react.

We will not rely with Fri and timbergen on aggregate

macroeconomic units like with Keynes, but they will provide a

way of bridging the micro macro gap to understand dynamics

in the economic system.

So To understand much better how this programme came to

be, we need to understand these three parallel developments, uh,

the statistical studies of the business cycle, uh, how People

like Ragnar Frisch built on also variable theories of cycles

in particular provided by a big cell from the ESOO

school and then how uh models of the economy as

a whole could be used to understand again the dynamics

within the system, OK.

And we'll see then how all of these elements will

come together uh in the first macro econometric model uh

provided by Frisch, uh, which is very known as the

rocking horse model because of a metaphor I will describe

later on.

And this will provide also the grounds for Tibergen's Dutch

model, the model for the for for the Dutch economy

that will be later used in the 1950s to inform

policymaking in the Netherlands.

OK, so this is the plan we have for today.

We'll begin by studying, uh, by discussing the statistical studies

of the business cycle.

We'll then move to discuss particularly not Vickel's real theory

of the business cycle.

Uh, and then how the econometrics programme is bringing these

two together and adding models to understand the dynamics of

economic movement across time, OK?

So let's begin with uh this statistical programme to study

business cycles.

Mm And uh a little bit of background here, as

I mentioned before, there were a few efforts in the

late 19th century we can think of Jugler, Jevons to

try and understand the cyclical behaviour of trade and of

money.

But what will characterise the empirical studies of the business

cycles in the 1920s and 1930s would be that there

will be no attempt to provide a general theory.

Of this uh cycles but rather the emphasis would be

on the description and the decomposition of the cycles using

statistics and the reason for this is related to the

intellectual environment in which these business cycles are operating we'll

discuss Wesley Mitchell in the United States and the idea

they had is that each cycle each.

Economic cycle uh within specific national units was singular and

unique.

They would use the metaphor of a living organism.

Living organisms grow and decay and no living organism is

equal to another.

So people like Wesley Mitchell will oppose the idea that

we can theorise about cycles to measure them next, and

he will suggest that actually measurement should be a precondition

for building a more generalizable theories about uh how economic.

behaviour operates across time.

So this will be a purely a statistical enterprise, no

attempt to theorise from the data, at least to begin

with, and this will oppose this uh empirical studies on

business cycles to the work of previous econometricians like Jevons

who had attempted to simulate a trade.

Uh, cyclical behaviours, uh, by observing a natural.

Uh, cyclical behaviours in in in the appearance of sunspots

in the sky.

So as opposed to the econometricians, the empirical studies of

business cycles will emphasise the rocked nature of the data,

the irregularity of the cycles.

And they will oppose future econometricians like Slotsky and Frisch

to whom I will refer, uh, above, below, sorry, in

the sense that they will not try to understand the

regularity of the cycles in connection to random events, but

again the route they would be focused on trying to

explain and account for the rock nature of the data

they observe.

So a first example of this is uh the work

conducted by Wesley Mitchell who we have already talked about

in the course, uh, who will make this the main

programme of the National Bureau of Economic Research in the

United States, one of these institutes out of many that

were created across different countries during this time to try

to understand through measurement what the.

behaviour of the economy was over time.

Again, Wesley Mitchell will emphasise.

Inconsistency with institutionalist thinking that there are no universal laws

and that each cycle is unique and hence no general

theories is completely adequate to describe the economic behaviour of

uh aggregate activity.

His aim would be just to provide a description and

a measurement of real business cycles.

He will adopt a very strong position even regarding the

possibility of even conducting statistical analysis like uh capturing aggregates

or or building indexes of economic activity and instead he

proposed a method of decomposition that operated visually.

So uh this method implied decomposing the business cycles into

a specific observed cycles and reference cycles and just through

this visual means uh trying to understand how uh they

uh.

What was the average duration of each reference cycle as

oppose us uh against its mean and comparing the behaviour

of these economies in this particular ways.

So the key message here uh would be that.

The emphasis of this type of empirical studies would be

just to focus on the measurement of the business cycles

and a visual description of the characteristics of a particular

economy as if it moved across time.

Uh, a second example, uh, in the United States which

will perhaps incorporate elements of statistical analysis if not theoretical

ones, uh, to this programme would be Parsons, uh, Harvard

ABC Business barometers, and Persons here is, uh, providing a

different aim.

If you may, uh, for doing statistical analysis of business

cycles, it will not be as in the case of

Mitchell just to describe how the cycle looks like and

how different specific cycles behave in in relation to the

reference cycle but rather using statistics to forecast economic activity.

Uh, Unlike Mitchell, he will attempt to provide what he

called business barometers, general summary indexes of economic activity, and

the ABC barometer is perhaps the most famous one, he

will, uh.

Collect and construct aggregate indexes of speculation variables related to

speculation, the behaviour of of of the business and monetary

categories uh for a a yearly period and uh he

will focus on using these aggregate indexes to forecast what

the behaviour of the economy uh could be in the

future.

Again we have here an attempt which focuses on measurement

and forecasting but not on modelling economies and deriving general

theories out of these economies consistently with their views of

economic cycles as, uh, if you may singular creatures uh

in each particular context.

So this was a very institutionalised programme, uh, multiple business

cycle research institutes opened across, uh, uh, Western Europe and

North America, uh, in other places this type of research

was conducted in central banks that is the case of

countries in in South America with which I am familiar,

uh.

And the the core idea of this is that business

cycles exhibited national characteristics and hence they could be studied

through the collection of statistics about the national economy we

had discussed about this unit of analysis when we dealt

with the German historical school.

And uh that is one of the interesting cases I

want to just very briefly discuss the Berlin Institute for

Business Cycle Research very much informed by the German historical

school approach uh to the collection of data, uh, and

the use of data.

Uh, as a precondition for generalising about economies, and a

second interesting example is that of the Moscow Conjuncture Institute

directed by Nikolai Kondratiev.

Some of you might be familiar with Kondratyev's idea of

long cycles, the long choratiev cycles, and this shows the

perils of doing a statistical work in a post-revolutionary society.

Because of his work, which Konrariev believed was Objective, uh,

Kondratiev was sent to the gulags because the idea that

every society or the Russian society in particular.

Despite Of its mode of production despite being a capitalist

or a socialist economy could have cycles run against Marxist

ideology, the idea that the socialist transition will end up

with the cycles that characterise the capitalist society, OK?

So this is an interesting case again it shows the

perils of doing careful statistical work in this type of

settings.

But I'll I'll I'll I'll I'll refer to this institute

in relation to the person who replaced Nikolai Kondratiev in

the Moscow conjuncture Institute, uh, Slotsky, uh, which will provide

a crucial experiment that will influence the work of the

econometricians in ways that I will discuss.

Now even if The econometrics programme.

Superseded this empirical works on business cycles.

This type of work continued to be done uh in

both government.

And uh commerce after the 1930s and the 1940s, it's

not unusual to see this type of visual representations of

economic behaviours which are used to inform decision making in

a way that is very different from that of the

econometricians that I will discuss in a minute.

So just a brief mention of these two examples, this

is for the, for instance, uh, uh.

This represents the type of work conducted by Vann in

the Berlin Institute for Business Cycle Research and see Van

is collecting here uh.

Representing diagrammatically uh the movement of economic activity of monetary

categories and uh and using graphs as well to compare

production and prices so inconsistency with the German historical school.

This programme will produce avalanches of numbers about the behaviour

of economics of the German economy across multiple variables going

beyond what Mitchell and Parsons had done in the United

States.

Slutsky Slutsky's work is actually very important to understand how

The the econometricians in particular, Fri will attempt to understand.

The what it will call the impulse mechanism.

This energy that introduces dynamism uh into the system because

what Slotsky will prove is that it would, it would

be possible to model.

The rocked cyclical behaviour observed in the data.

So I think, I think here the the the continuous

line is representing an index of uh uh stock prices

in England.

It would be possible to model this by just.

Producing random numbers by just taking the numbers produced by

a lottery.

So what he's proving here is that.

This rock behaviour.

Could be modelled Through randomness.

Just by including the data provided by a lottery, you

can observe the same behaviour that is captured by the

data.

The significance of this perhaps is not well understood yet,

but we'll see why this will be so important for

uh the macroeconometrics programme.

OK, so keep this in mind.

We do not need to include.

Detailed descriptions of the data in order to understand the

rogue behaviour of the data.

This could be captured by external random shocks, OK?

Alright, so keep that idea in your heads because first

we need to understand then the second element.

So if the statistical programme provided ways of describing, measuring,

and observing the business cycle statistically.

The theoretical foundations for the work of Ragnar Frisch will

come from the theory of the business cycle proposed by

Novitzel and elaborated further by the Essoon school.

So, uh, who was not viel, he was, as many

of the economists studied in this course, a very interesting

character like many other econometricians, he was trained in mathematics,

but specialised in economics because he thought this was a

much more practical way to change society and to influence

society.

Again, think about this idea of economists as engineers.

It's not using mathematics for formal analysis like Arrow and

the Bre, but rather as a way to engineer change

in the societies that we're living in.

And his particular peripheral position in Sweden actually gave him

access to different.

Sorts of influences, so he was influenced by the Austrians

theory of capital that we'll study next week, particularly Bomba's

theory of capital.

Uh, he will be uh influenced by a Russian understanding

of markets, and you'll see that this will be particularly

present in Ragnar's rich work.

We will be living with the Scandinavian school in a

Russian world of interdependence between different markets.

But he will also incorporate elements from British neoclassical thinking,

in particular, Marshall's idea of the marginal productivity theory.

So all of these eclectic eclectic elements will come together

in what was Sn Witzel's main contribution to economic theory,

uh, which is known as the description of the cumulative

process.

Uh, first, if you may step towards a real theory

of the business cycle.

and The work of not big cell, which has been

recovered by historians of economics, provides a Elements to see

that Keynes was not the only macro game in town

in the interact period.

Actually, not Wixel's work, uh, was developed before Keynes, before

the First World War, but it was only translated into

English in the 1930s and published almost simultaneously to Kes

general theory.

So notviel will provide if you in a different way

to theorise about the economy as a whole and a

real.

A theory of business cycles as opposed to Keyne's monetary.

So what is this theory and why is this so

important for the econometrics programme?

Let me just say a little bit about it, uh,

because we won't have enough time to discuss it in

the class.

So just like the Cambridge school just like Marshall's cash

balance approach, Viel will adopt an income approach to monetary

theory exposed to the transaction approach of the quantitativeists like

uh Fisher.

This means that uh he uh will be focusing on

how changes in the price level occur uh due to

the general monetary demands for goods rather rather exceeding or

falling short of their supply.

And the question will be uh why and how can

this occur?

Why can what Keynes called effective demands be below or

above, below in particular effective the supply of commodities.

And Viel will provide a very different response to Keynes,

which is grounded on the distinction between the natural rate

of investment and the loan rate of investment.

The natural rate of investment for Pixel resembles Keynes's marginal

efficiency of capital, uh, variable.

In the sense that it relates to the expected rate

of return from capital investments, but as opposed to Keynes,

the natural rate for Bel is actually a rate of

equilibrium.

It is both representing the equilibrium between consumption decisions and

investment decisions.

Consumers decide how much to consume today and how much

to save to consume in the future, and investors make

decisions between investing in short term assets or long term

uh assets and the equilibrium between these decisions is what

characterises the natural rate in a particular economy so it

is an equilibrium rate.

The loan rate, on the contrary, is the rate charged

by banks in the present.

So for Vixel.

Uh, this is an equilibrium position.

An economy is in a state of rest when the

natural rate is equal to the loan rate.

But When a random shock uh introduces a disequilibrium between

the natural and the loan rate of interest, the cumulative

process is triggered.

So in this in this uh in the case of

Bigel, the dynamism to the system is introduced by a

shock.

That is causing a disequilibrium between these two rates, but

to understand the behaviour of the cycle, we need to

look at the macro microeconomic decisions made by different agents

and in particular we should focus on what happens with

investors' expectations, investors' decisions, and with the decisions made by

those who provide loans uh in the banking system.

So just to give an example, if due to an

external shock, the natural rate of interest is above comes

to be above the loan rate of interest, then investors

will call will have uh an incentive to call for

uh factors of production to bring more goods to the

market.

This will lead to increases in people's income and prices

and uh then the bankers will react given these increases

in prices by increasing the nominal rate of interest, the,

the, the real, uh, the loan rate of interest, to

which point this comes back to an equilibrium.

So the cyclical behaviour observed in economies is motivated by

real factors, by real shocks that affect.

The natural rate affect the equilibrium position, but also by

the behaviours of economic agents reacting to this new business

opportunities that emerge uh in these cases, OK?

So if in Keynes the factor of this equilibrium has

had to do in particular with insufficient effective demand, particularly

because of a low propensity to consume for Vixel.

The source of instability in an economy will come from

uh investments, uh, investment and lending decisions and hence the

policy implication of this way of understanding real cycles would

be not to focus on.

Arriving to full employment, this economy is still within the

classical world of full employment.

This equilibrium position is consistent with the full employment position,

but rather, what should be the policy, uh, measures that

are necessary to stabilise uh the system, the monetary policies

to stabilise the system, OK.

Monetary stabilisation will be the policy target uh within this

view of business cycles.

OK.

Um, the ideas of notviel were further developed by other

economists within the Scandinavian tradition.

Uh, you might have heard of particularly Goner Mural and

Bertil Oin because of their work, uh, on both, uh,

development and, uh, trade.

Uh, and these ideas developed further, this cumulative process theory

in parallel together with Keynesian macroeconomics, Keynes again was not

the only macro game in town.

And it's interesting to think, uh, how does this way

of thinking about business cycles differ uh from uh Keynes

besides the points I've already made.

This is a new theory of a monetary equilibrium.

It is not an idealised optimal position like we have

seen in Valraz and Pareto.

It is monetary because it we are talking here about

the monetary economy, remember that was one of the limitations

of Valraz general equilibrium theory.

But as opposed to Keynes, uh, this is a situation

in which, uh, actually the the the economy is in

full employment and it is in a point of rest

when the rate of interest is equals the natural rate

of interest equals the loan rate of interest.

As opposed perhaps to the development of Keynesian theory, think

about Higgs ISLM model.

This will be a system that will try to understand

dynamics.

Uh, without relying on the set parables assumption, without relying

on uh static comparisons.

And here the key elements of the decisions would be

to compare the ex ante plans, particularly of investors versus

the exposed realisations at the individual level, not at the

aggregate level, and just have this into into account when

you're reading fish fish uh for next week and how

he is describing the encapsulating phenomenon, the problem that for

him is behind uh the Great Depression, OK.

So in that sense, The Scandinavian school will provide a

view of macroeconomics that will try to understand instability as

relating to the problem between the micro and the macro

fi, the micro decisions of individual agents.

Are not necessarily consistent with the macroeconomic outcomes and the

macroeconomic results and this uh misfit is what explains why

economic activity uh is cyclical uh and uh uh not

uh steady why economies are not always in a stationary

state in a steady state, OK?

So key differences here from Keynesianism.

Uh, that I want you to take into account particularly

when comparing in the readings the work of Frisch and

the work of Tim Bergen, uh, for planning for reconstruction

and planning for the Great Depression.

OK.

So we've discussed so far, the first element.

Of that was influential for the econometrics programme.

This statistical studies of business cycles we've discussed Novixo's real

theory of the business cycle and how it built on

a microeconomic understanding of the behaviour of uh different agents

and about all of the misfit uh with the aggregate

macro outcomes.

It's now time to explore in more detail the econometrics

programme where did mathematical economics uh made statistics.

And to do so we need to introduce this person

over here.

Uh, Ragnar Frisch, who is by all means the father

of econometrics, both econometrics as a scientific programme and as

an institutionalised programme of research uh in economics, uh, he,

uh, was the founder of the econometrics Society and the

editor of its main journal for over two decades.

I've mentioned before he was.

Awarded at the same time with Jan Tinbergen, the first

Nobel Prize in Economics and uh he received this prize

for.

This model, the rocking horse model, as proposed in a

paper in 1933.

Which had the merit of both illustrating how?

An econometric model could account both for the well behaved

oscillations of economic cycles, the regularity of economic cycles, and

the rock nature observed in the data.

As we knew from the empirical studies of the 1920s

and 1930s, this was his key contribution.

He the key of his model and of his approach

will be the distinction between what he calls the propagation

and the inputs problems.

He will use a fantastic metaphor that gave name to

his model.

I will discuss in a minute.

And the propagation problem.

Should focus on explaining by the structural properties of a

swinging system from macro systems.

What the character of the different swings would be if

the system started in some initial position.

So think about think about Vixel, right?

After a system starts in a particular position in which

let's say the natural rate of interest is above the

loan rate of interest, what are the structural characteristics of

this system that will help us explain.

The decisions of individuals in reaction to this and the

regularity in the behaviour of the economy that emerges as

an outcome, OK?

This is what Frisch called the propagation problem.

And Fri considered that this problem could be.

By the use of econometrics.

Analytically distinguished from the impulse problem.

Which related to those external disturbances that energised the system.

And here is where.

Slotsky's crucial experiment proved so important.

Because this Could be approached by incorporating random shocks.

That Bring the economy to a state of disequilibrium.

OK.

So the impulse problem could be approached by focusing on

those random shows.

That provide external disturbances that bring the system out of

equilibrium.

And the third element he's incorporating here is he's building

a very simple macroeconomic model to explain why both of

these elements were needed to understand cyclical behaviours so basically

his model will include a.

Simplified tableau economic.

Uh, and, uh, Slotsky's uh random shocks.

Uh, to explain both again the structural components through the

economic and how without including these shocks, this is lot

key shocks, the system would be in a complete state

of rest.

So let's discuss both elements of this model the tableau

economic, this macro model of the economy, and this, uh,

uh.

A slotsky, uh, a random shocks which uh help uh

uh introduce uh and provide a response to the impulse

problem.

But first, let's discuss the metaphor that he used to

describe what this model was about.

He's referring to the work of Novixel.

He says Novixel recognised that these two problems of propagation

and impulse could be distinguished.

And he illustrated this uh through one of those perfectly

simple yet profound illustrations.

If you hit a wooden rocking horse with a club,

the movement of the horse will be very different to

that of the club.

In this metaphor, the random shock is like the movement

of the wooden rocking horse.

It is hitting the horse once in a in a

particular direction, but the resulting model is one of oscillation,

right?

So we need to understand then.

Separately, what is this force energising the system and how

is the system using this energy?

Uh, uh, uh, to, uh, propel the economy forward, right,

to move the economy, uh, across time.

To understand the propagation system, the movement of the rocking

horse.

Frisch very ingeniously used a model that is known for

to every economist, the tableauconom we've studied it so far.

It's a very simplified model on the eco the economy.

Uh, which has three main economic variables as we discussed,

the starting capital provided by the landlords, right?

Uh, or by whoever's on the capital in this particular

economy, the consumption of each of the social classes that

guarantees for it's, it's own reproduction at each time period

and the exchanges between social classes, right, the carry on

activity, uh, between each of the social classes.

Fri was well aware that this was a very simplified

model of the economy.

But it was a very useful model to understand dynamics,

uh, because it allowed to build a very simple yet

sophisticated system of equations that related these three variables initial

capital, consumption, carry on activity across time.

We'll we'll see a diagram uh later on in Teamvagen's

model which exemplifies very well how they thought about process

analysis in this case.

So interestingly enough, uh Fridge did not input statistics uh

to this model rather what he did was to uh

simulate how the economic system worked based on guess parameters,

guessed values.

This is right now very standard way of dealing with

macro, uh, dynamic models, uh, today the DSG models operate

initially on simulations.

Fri uh started with a simulation.

He did not provide statistics.

We'll see with the Timbergen how this could be done.

Um, and this provided again a dynamic understanding of how

the system starting in a particular position will react to

a shock when uh we uh simulate the behaviour of

this system across time given a specific parameters, starting parameters

for this virus.

The dynamic part of the system, the energy of the

system was introduced by adding to this model, uh, the

stochastic element of Slotsky's random shocks.

So this provided a response to the impulse problem.

And what was the result of Plugging in this uh

very stylized model of the economy of a tableau economic,

these random shocks, well, an understanding, a simulation of the

cycle that both captured the regular behaviour expected from the

theory from.

The pro uh Vixel's real theory of cycles and the

rocked nature observed in the data, right, so this is

a simulation.

Resulting from this model that again captures regularity.

And yet the rock nature captured by the data.

So fresh Through this model showed how cycles could be

modelled.

By both incorporating theory and we'll see with Tinbergen uh

statistics by distinguishing between the propagation and the impulse programme

and this is this is the geniality for which he

was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics.

But let's now try to see what could be done

with this type of models, right?

This was just a simulation.

It was not representing or attempting to say something on

a particular economy.

It did not use statistics to feed in to the

model, but this was precisely what uh Jan Tinberger did

in 1936, uh, with his first macroeconometric model, uh, for

the whole Dutch economy.

Tinbergen illustrates very neatly this idea of the economist as

an engineer.

uh, he was not only trained in physics and engineering,

uh, but, uh, worked uh for uh many uh governmental

and international institutions.

Which collected a lot of data but also attempted to

use this data to intervene in the world.

Uh, this will become particularly relevant when he directed the

Central planning Bureau, uh, after the Second World War in

the Netherlands and we'll discuss this in the classes.

But let's talk here about his mother.

So I supposed to free.

Tinbergen did not start with informed guesses about what the

parameters of an economy could be.

Uh, he incorporated statistics, but he also complicated the model,

right?

The model that Frisch had provided had 3 variables and

a set of 56 equations tops, uh, but Tinbergen, uh,

model of the Dutch economy had 16 equations accounting for

different identities, 31 variables including prices, quantities, income, spending.

And uh for Tinbergen building these models were was some

sort of a craft.

It depending depended on the institutional knowledge that you had

about each particular economy so there was a tradeoff between

being attempting to be realistic to include as many variables

as possible uh in your model, but also making this

model workable right fitting these sort of variables was not

easy.

So, uh, you, the econometricians were phased through this tradeoff

between realism and workability, and this was the outcome of

uh Tinbergen's first model, uh, in the 1950s and 1960s,

there will be elaborations that attempted to complicate this model,

but a second element I should capture your attention here,

which is this diagram.

Which is precisely what illustrates why this model is not

a static model of the economy but rather a dynamic

one because these arrows are relating variables in one moment

of time, uh, two variables in different moments of time,

OK.

So these arrows represents, if you may, the logical structure

of dynamic economics.

This is a model that is grounded on sequence analysis

of the sort that you read about, uh, in the

Hansen reading assigned for last week.

And now this might seem just, you know, like a.

An in ingenious intellectual innovation, but it was revolutionary work

because it meant that the governments could act extensively in

the economy using these models and that specific policies could

uh be formulated through the models.

This was a major shift in the history of the

connections between economic theory and statistics and action.

Actual policy decisions could be used by a complex model

of the economy which also incorporated real economic statistics about

that particular model and I want to leave this key

message to close this session.

So we studied how from statistical studies of cycles, um,

the econometrics programme incorporated both theory and numbers, theory and

statistics to build this first macro econometric models.

Fri model at first was a simulation of a fictitious

economy, but Tinbergen and others will develop actual models of

functioning economies that served to just not understand how these

economies behaved.

But just not to predict how these economies will behave

in the future, but to actually intervene on them to

evaluate different policies, right?

This will be part and parcel of the work done

in the Kas Commission in the 1950s and 1960s by

uh both Marshallian and by Russian macroeconomists.

And this informed programmes of postwar reconstruction.

This provided also forecasting models used not only by governments

but also by businesses and in the next couple of

weeks we'll discuss how this whole programme was contested on

several fronts.

We won't discuss Keynes's critiques uh to this programme, but

we will come to Hayek's critique to the idea that

economies could be modelled in this particular way and that

they could be planned and we'll come back to the

Lucas.

Critique to macroeconometrics models when we talk about developments in

recent macro in one of our last lectures in the

course.

OK guys, thanks for bearing with me today.

Uh, I, I hope this gives you some grounds to

discuss how economics can be used to intervene in the

world next week in our classes.

Thank you.

How are you today?

OK, and you?

It's here's here and it blow.

But the day today was nice, you know, the sun

came out.

It's cold, yeah, this week in particular has been rather

cold.

Well, hope you have a good class today.

Lecture 15:

OK guys, I think we can start now.

So in our previous lecture we discussed how the technical

turn in economics enabled, uh, some forms of economic engineer

that we discussed, uh, in the classes, right?

We've seen with Keynes, with Fri, with timbergen and other

economists at the time how the reflection about the economy

as an object as a whole.

And the expertise this gave economists in terms of diagnosing

what the ailments uh of economies under free market competition.

Uh, R gave them also expertise of intervention, right?

And how, uh, in the econometrics programme statistics, mathematical models

came together to provide an understanding but also policy recommendations

on how to deal with problems such as the Great

Depression or post-war reconstruction.

Today we're gonna study a school of thought that we

have already uh started to learn about earlier on in

the course when we talked about Karl Menger.

I'm referring to the Austrian school.

And the Austrian school is very interesting because it's a

school of economics that was the centre of uh most

of the economic approaches that we've studied so far and

particularly so uh of all of these attempts uh to

uh engineer economies uh using uh modern tools of analysis,

OK, so.

The Austrians from the late 19th century to the present,

I would say, have always been in the defensive in

a sense, uh, so we explored Menger in his discussion

with the German historical school, the first target of the

Austrians was this idea that every society has its own

economics.

Uh, and, uh, Menger, as we discussed before, would argue

that that was not the case and uh he provided

the foundations of uh theoretical deductive axiomatic science of economics

grounded on the understanding of the behaviour of economising men

right?

but.

In the late 19th century, Meger students uh will find

another target, uh, in the different approaches to economic planning

first Marxism, the economics of socialism, we'll come back to

this when we discuss the socialist calculation debate today, but

also the type of approaches we've studied in the past

few weeks, so we'll see people like Frederick Hayek writing

against Keynesian macro macroeconomics and microdynamics.

But interestingly, Hayek in particular will see a relationship between

the mode of reasoning of all of these.

Design thinkers.

The Marxists, the econometricians, and the.

Economic framework of uh market equilibrium, particularly in its vibration

stand.

So the Austrians will also be very critical of neoclassical

economics and in particular of this pretension that economic behaviour

and markets could actually be modelled because this implies posing

on both individuals and the economists that are studying them

knowledge of a type that they do not have, OK.

So Let's think about the Austrians as being again the

centres of economic thinking.

Uh, throughout the 20th century and it all started here

in the University of Vienna with Karl Menger and like

Jevons as we discussed before, but like Vras, Mr.

Menger left the school behind.

He was a very good teacher, uh, he was very

influential uh on his students.

He set a journal on which Austrian ideas circulated within

the German speaking world.

Um, um, Vienna is a very interesting place, particularly in

the late 19th century, early 20th century as the capital

of the of the Austria-Hungarian Empire.

It was actually an intellectual hub in Europe.

This was not only the case in economics.

Think of philosophy, those of you who are familiar with

the Vienna Circle and think of the sciences, the physical

sciences, uh, but.

The First World War and its aftermath, forced a 2nd

generation or 3rd generation of Austrian economists to to exile.

Again this also happened to philosophers and scientists economists are

not alone in this, and this in a sense was

sort of a course, a blessing in disguise for Austrian

economics because it allowed for the circulation of their ideas

internationally more widely so the Austrians in a sense exemplified

this broader international movement of economists and social scientists in

the interwar period.

Uh, people like Lawrence Klein, another econometrician, also fled to

the US during the war, and many German economists did

so as well, and this allowed for the circulation of

economic ideas internationally.

The Austrians again were a very good example of that.

One of the places to which the Austrians migrated was

this very same university, the LSC, and here we have

a picture of Mr.

Hayek with his very smart.

And well dressed students in 1948, uh, and the LSC

was a very interesting place in the 1930s because it

was a centre of intellectual pluralism.

You would have people like Mr.

Hayek who will defend a liberal view of the economy

and a liberal philosophy as the grounding of economics thinking.

But the LSC also had other exiles coming from Poland,

from Ukraine, like Oscarlange and Avaerner who would actually hold

that we could use neoclassical tools to think about market

socialisms.

To, uh, think about how economies could be planned, and

this was a very fruitful intellectual interaction occurring here at

the LSC which very much shaped Hayek's ideas about economics

as we'll see today.

The other place to which the Austrians migrated was the

United States, uh, in particular, uh, von Mises Hayeks.

Uh, in a sense, a mentor, uh, in Vienna migrated

to NYU, which became a main hub of Austrian thinking

in the US.

Uh, the other person we'll talk about today, uh, Schumpeter

migrated to Harvard, setting there, uh, a very influential, uh,

school of business, uh, and a tradition of thinking about

entrepreneurship.

And later on Hayek himself will migrate to Chicago and

in a way he will find uh a tactical alliance

if you may, a tactical alignment with the Chicago School

of Economics, although in terms of his liberal philosophy both

Milton Friedman and his gang and Hayek will differ greatly,

OK, but the important thing is that.

Austrian ideas circulated more widely in the 20th century due

to the exile of these economists and uh to their

success in persuading colleagues about their own views.

And the focus of Austrian thinking also changed and evolved

in tandem with the problems of the time, so von

Mises and Hayek and Schulpiter will write in the 1920s

and 1930s, providing very different understandings of the business cycles

and business cycle theories and actually Hayek was awarded the

Nobel Prize in Economics in part because of his contributions

to the understanding of money.

But gradually and this is particularly true of Hayek, his

attention will shift to a concern about economic planning and

what this told us about economics as a study of

different economic orders.

OK, so we'll focus on this second part of the

story, but I'll make a few mentions about their contributions

to business cycle theory.

The Austrians, the Austrians are very much alive today.

Uh, the centres of Austrian thinking, uh, in the US

remain to be NYU, but also George Mason University and

Pete Botke, uh, who is an Austrian economist but also

a historian of economics, refers to the five tenets of

Austrian economics in this sense.

The first one, and this will be very clear with

Hayek and in Hayek's reading, is that economics is the

science that studies economic orders.

And the Austrians from Mrs on would adopt this word

of catalaxy.

Caalaxy comes from the Greek for exchange and bringing a

stranger into friendship through exchange.

So the focus of the economic order for the Austrians

will be the interactions of these people who do not

know each other.

Who probably do not care about each other as other

individuals in so far, uh, they are not exchanging with

them because they have prosocial behaviours.

But they come together in the market.

Because they have an interest in doing so.

And the Austrians from Menger, as we've seen, will attempt

to study what are the characteristics of this economic order

that emerges from the interaction between strangers.

Second tenant, a strict methodological individualism we know this from

Menger, this idea that the point of departure of economics

and the point of arrival of economics are the individuals,

and this is the case because only individuals get to

choose.

This point is related to.

5 in a way I will elaborate in a minute

because aggregates, these aggregates about which people like Keynes theorised

are just emergent orders, emergent outcomes of individual decisions, hence

the Austrians will remain very strongly committed to this methodological

individualism that we find in Manger and remember.

According to Menge, we can study the behaviour of economising

men because we are all economising men, right?

We don't need to assume that the economist, the expert,

has more information than ordinary individuals.

Third tenant of Austrian thinking.

What is significant about markets?

Is That it is the only institution.

That has emerged.

That allows the processing of information.

That is required to satisfy people's needs and desires and

the Austrians and in particular Hayek will.

Praise the price system as a marvel.

In the sense that it economises all the information that

individuals need to make decisions like no other system could

do.

Uh, if it were designed, right, this price system emerges

from the actions of individuals.

It economises in the best way possible this information, but

it is not the product of human design.

Again, this point is connected to 0.5.

The Austrians from Manger, and this is the 4th point,

will also emphasise.

That competition in the market is not just an assumption.

Like in a Russian framework or like Fortnite, it's not

a fiction, but it's very much a very real process.

And it is the process of individuals trying to better

their own condition and finding new combinations, new innovations in

production.

New combinations also in consumption between baskets of goods and

needs to satisfy their own needs.

And Schumpeter in particular will emphasise this process of entrepreneurial

discovery as that which introduces dynamism and change in economic

systems.

And this point guys will allow the Austrian tradition to

connect what they are proposing back to the ideas of

Adam Smith.

For them, the main driver, the only thing we need

to assume about individuals is that they want to improve

their own condition, and this is true about every singular

society, OK?

Talking about the connection with Adam Smith, point number 5.

Social institutions like markets like money for the Austrians are

the result of human action of these strangers interacting with

each other and they are not and cannot be the

result of human design.

Again, the connection with Smith is very clear.

Think about Smith's system of perfect liberty.

This is what the Austrians would mean by an economic

order.

And think about the mercantilist artificial system.

That attempts to design a system of exchange replacing a

system of perfect liberty.

So for the Austrians, the social institutions again will be

just emerging orders from individual activity, OK.

So if we stop here, you know everything you need

to know about the Austrians, but we want to historicize

this as well.

So uh let's uh jump very quickly to uh the

uh plan of my lecture for us.

So we'll first start studying the early Austrians how from

these ideas of Manger, uh, Boba.

Von missus and Vier uh will provide an argument against

the possibility of socialist calculation.

We'll then see how Hayek builds on this discussion to

redefine the problem of economics as a problem of economising

knowledge and information.

Resting on the virtues of the price system and we'll

close with Schum Peter's ideas on entrepreneurship and importance that

first movers, innovators have on triggering processes of cumulative processes

of economic change.

OK, so just a recap on Manger, uh, we've discussed

before that uh One of the distinctive characteristics of men

as a marginalist is that the focus of his analysis

is understanding the behaviours of this economising man.

Again, men are not maximizer, they live in a world

of uncertainty.

They have limited knowledge and all that that they can

do is economise their resources, the limited resources they have

to attain what they need, what they want.

Uh, we also discussed this idea of entrepreneurs seeking new

combinations to satisfy needs.

This was particularly important in terms of innovations and production

under uncertainty.

But we had also in Manger, a notion that economists

are never in equilibrium.

Economies are never in a point of rest.

And actually individuals need to change to make decisions, right?

And we saw this in Manger in the attention that

he gave to the forces driving the division of labour

and remember that for him.

The limit for the division of labour was the knowledge

that individuals within a particular society had about the means

to satisfy our needs and the cause effect relationships between

uh goods and uh wants.

OK, this is a recap of Meer now.

Viser and Bombay, although they were not directly Minger students,

they were very much influenced by Minger's magazine de Grunzade,

um, and They will bring the Austrians from a critique

to historicism, remember the Met strike with Menger, to a

critique of Marxism and socialism as it was gaining ground,

uh, in the German speaking world in the late 19th

century.

The key message of Viser and Bombai is.

Central planners.

Can disregard economising behaviours or can only do so at

an immense human cost.

How did they justify this claim?

Well, Vier in particular in this work.

Uh, entitled Natural Value.

would argue that the consumer is sovereign.

No matter the society in which you are living in.

Consumer evaluations are exogenous for the planner.

And are irreducible to a plan.

So think about what we discussed on fish.

Even, even a central planner in this economy that wishes

to respect sobriety needs to take into account consumer evaluations.

This is something that the planner cannot just define by

attributing some by using some accounting techniques.

And this is the case because value assigning value to

commodities through a process of economising.

Is A universal general phenomenon which has different manifestations in

different types of societies.

But it is unavoidable.

He would say, and I quote, that any rational.

Any rationally ordered society regardless of its institutions would have

to make valuations and evaluations about the effective value of

goods for people.

OK, so first message central planners cannot disregard consumer evaluations

of goods only consumers who know about their needs and

wants are able to make such valuations, OK?

Bob Baer will complete the critique by developing a theory

of capital.

And uh for bombaic interest.

Is the price of time.

The interest paid on capital is the price of time.

And this is important because the future cannot be perfectly

discounted today.

There are 3 factors determining interest for him, 2 of

them psychological, people overestimate their future resources, people underestimate their

future wants.

This is so because they are living in a situation

of uncertainty, but also, given technological innovations, goods available now

will yield goods of higher values in the future and

it is not.

easy for individuals to assess to what extent this will

be the case.

So what are the implications of this theory of capital

of paying attention to how individuals discount the future he

would say that socialism may affect a change in the

persons who receive interest and in the quantities in which

it is distributed.

But it cannot change the fact that the possessors of

present goods when they exchange them for future ones will

obtain an interest.

The implication for this is that planners can only substitute

individual discounting value of future goods at a huge human

cost.

If planning authorities, for example, did not place a lower

value on future goods.

Productive resources will always be channelled into their technologically most

productive uses yielding output available in the immenserably remote future,

he would say, at the cost of present death and

distress, and we saw with Bukarin and Provasensky how, uh,

the Bolsheviks in power were willing to make the sacrifices.

But Bob Baer will argue that tinkering with this process

of how people discount the future and how people value

goods uh will only cause human distress.

And uh I think I mean the the example of

these early stages of a wartime planning in Russia rendered

some credibility and some value to the views of Bombaric

and missus.

OK, so the key takeaway from this slide is that

the developments in the theory of value and theory of

of of capital uh provided grounds to argue why socialist

calculation is not possible, OK.

Planners are not able to value as well as individuals.

Commodities but planners are unable to value as individuals do

uh and do to discount the future as expressed in

uh the interest rates that they receive for capital investments.

OK, these two valuations cannot be replaced by just accountancy

techniques.

And Ludwig Visus will build on these ideas in his

critique to every form of planning in uh what became

uh the.

Peace that inaugurated what is known as the socialist calculation

debate.

We'll come back to this in a minute, but let's

talk a little bit about miss uh before getting there.

So.

Uh, Ms will develop, will be known at his time

for developing a monetary theory of the business cycle.

That is to say, money is not neutral in the

cycle, but he will reach a very the very opposite

conclusion to that of quan quantitative.

The problem behind business cycles is not the scarcity of

money, so in times of crisis we don't need active

expansionary monetary policy, but it's rather.

Expansionary monetary policy.

What is driving the crisis?

How is he building this theory?

Well, he's taking from Bombaer and from Vixel that the

natural rate of interest is the price of time, the

return to capital is the price of time.

And Bankers will feel under pressure to keep market interest

rates low, particularly in times of depression, and this, remember,

uh, big sales cumulative process this will push the market

rate of interest below the natural rate interfering with the

inter temporal decisions that individuals make in the economy allocating

resources, right?

And this will introduce instability.

So it is this drive by bankers, by those who

provide loans to keep interest loans low.

It is expansionary monetary decisions worsened by monetary authorities which

are to be blamed for the Great Depression and the

crisis, not quite the opposite, OK.

Uh, this view of monetary business cycles will become very

common among among the Austrians.

Hayek will have a very similar view.

We won't have enough time to get into that.

We will discuss though, uh, in the last part of

the lecture how Schumpeter's understanding of the business cycle will

differ from missus in the sense that he will pay

much more attention to how innovations and the entry and

exit of firms have implications on the business cycle, OK.

Now, uh, Mises migrated to the to the United States

and at NYU he opened sort of this hope of

Austrian economics as I've referred before, and he became from

the 1920s a very outspoken person in his criticism of

the Soviet Union and of any attempt to organise economies

around any notion of central planning.

OK, so let's jump to uh.

Menger's misses first attack if you may, in the socialist

calculation debate.

So the core of this debate in the aftermath of

the Bolshevik revolution is that Ms argued.

In a very persuasive way that rational calculation.

In socialism is impossible.

It is not that it is difficult or that it

requires computational capacities that people do not have.

It doesn't have to do with a technical problem but

with a fundamental one.

And the point is the following.

In a static economy where nothing changed, rational calculation would

be impossible.

Individuals are only able to economise, to make rational decisions.

If they are faced to decide between alternatives, right, this

is the notion of economising inherited from anger.

Now in the absence of prices.

People will not know what it means to economise.

Rational calculation requires the price system.

And misses will go a step further.

The price system as an emerging institutional order that has

developed across time.

is very fragile.

If we replace the market with the central planner, then

people will lose this commercial mindedness that is essential for

markets to function.

So Mises is providing me the grounds for Hayek's future

argument that any form of socialist planning is sort of

a slippery slope that will degrade.

The Abilities and capacities that individuals have to make autonomous

decisions about what they need and about what they want

in markets.

So the consequence of miss first attack is that rational

calculation.

Requires The existence of a freely established system of prices.

For both producers and consumer goods because prices will work

as scarcity signals that will provide the necessary signals to

economising men.

In a world that is constantly changing.

And The type of knowledge that the price formation process

generates will always be inaccessible to central planners, so Mr.

Frisch, no matter how much effort you take in asking

people about their demands for goods, asking people about their

preferences, you will not be able to react as quickly

as the economic system changes, right?

After a month.

The technologies and tastes in this particular economy will have

changed completely and your coupon system will not work, right?

This is what Mr.

von Ms would have said, Mr.

Frisch, if they had had this conversation.

Now, this was a debate because there was another part.

Uh, sitting here at the LSC, which replied to me

that actually Socialist calculation is not only possible.

It could be practically implemented and even more, it is

desirable.

So, uh, Lake built on the writings of Enrico Barone,

an Italian economist very much influenced by the writings of

Balraz and Pareto.

Who built on Valrao's general equilibrium theory.

To actually demonstrate, as I've anticipated before, that the problem

of exchange in a centrally planned economy.

The mathematical format problem is exactly the same of a

decentralised economy under perfect competition.

So Barone demonstrated that we could use general equilibrium theory.

To demonstrate that.

Mark that centrally planned economies.

Not only lead to a situation in which all Markets

or the supply of commodities uh satisfies the the excess

demand functions of everyone but also to results that as

we know from Pareto are efficient centrally planned economies can

be as efficient as the centralised economies, OK.

So Baroni thought this was a very interesting formal intellectual

finding, but he believed actually that to implement this system

in practise uh will have such complexity of calculation which

requires such degree of computational capacities that it was rather

sort of a theoretical finding more than something as an

argument for socialism.

So the geniality of Oscar Lange, uh, in a couple

of essays on the economic theory of socialism published here

at the while he was at the LSC.

Is that socialism centrally planned economies were not only possible.

Did not lead only to efficient outcomes, but we actually

could actually be implemented in practise.

So what was the main idea of uh Oscar Lange's

work?

He believed that it was possible to design in practise

a system that replicates the theoretical conditions of a Vasian

general equilibrium market.

This requires a combination of central planning and markets.

So This is why he's known as a market socialist.

He would argue that uh labour services and consumption goods

uh should be allocated by means of free market exchange,

so he grants that visa was right, value is inevitable

and only consumers uh have sufficient knowledge about their tastes

and about their preferences uh to uh define what they

want to consume.

But this was not true about production, Lange mentioned.

It was possible for language to Assigned to factors of

production accounting prices so that this mirror the equilibrium conditions

of a general equilibrium framework that is to see central

planners could assign accounting prices uh to capital and labour

that are equal to their marginal productivity.

And they could assign to the prices of commodities, the

level of output, sorry, at which the commodity price is

equal to its marginal cost.

So if they have sufficient information about technologies of production.

They can actually replicate the conditions of a general market

equilibrium in the context of production, OK?

Now how to do this in practise once you've collected

all of this information like Buren and Provazensky and socialists

attempted to do well, the equilibrium values will determine in

a Russian fashion by an iterative trial and error procedure

analogous to the role of the auctioneer.

The central planner in this case will replace the auctioneer,

uh, in the centralised markets.

So look at the implications of Oscar Lange's work, right?

He was able to argue that based on an argument

about the formal similarity between how a market system of

perfect competition and ration system works and a central planning

system, socialism can mimic deficiency conditions of competitive markets, but

even outperform capitalism in practise.

We know that the assumptions of a general market equilibrium

and perfect competition are very stringent.

They do not always hold in reality.

We'll come back to that when we discuss Arrow later

on in the term in this course.

But with the right institutional design, central planners could not

only achieve this efficiency instruments but could also attain all

their desirable social goals that we know that decentralised markets

do not do so well with, for example, fairness, we

can lead we can engineer fairer distributions of commodities and

goods without relinquishing efficiency, OK.

So this was the debate in the 1930s and remember

this was a time in which the superiority of markets

or centrally planned economies had not really established.

And the way in which this debate played out had

wider implications for younger Austrians.

It demonstrated that socialism can be defended using a neoclassical

toolkit.

But also that philosophically speaking, neoclassical theories of competitive market

equilibrium resemble very much systems of control and tools of

social control, and this will influence Hayek in his writings

about the importance to pay attention to the fundamental problem

of economics, economising knowledge and to the marvel of the

price system.

So, uh, Frederick von Hayek is uh.

He was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1974, I quote,

the Nobel Prize Committee for his pioneering work in the

theory of money and economic fluctuations, his work in monetary

business cycle theory.

But also for penetrate for their penetrating analysis of the

interdependence of economic, social and institutional phenomena, and this is

important because Hayek was not only an economist, he was,

if you may, a social philosopher.

And from his early interests on the theories of the

business cycles, Hayek Hayek's writings will move to a broader

reflection on economic orders at the LSC.

In reaction to both Soviet planning but also to the

Keynesian idea that began to circulate in the 1930s and

also to these professors for him.

Attempt to build a welfare system, the beverage report, uh,

from ideas that grew here within this very same institution,

OK, so Hayek will become very critical of every attempt

to manage the economy from, uh, socialism, uh, to this

new form of market, uh, capitalist managerialism represented in Keynes

and Beveridge's work.

And he will argue that in a in a very

uh Popular piece that circulated widely after the war.

And every form of planning is like a slippery slope.

Remember, If You start planning this will change people's behaviours,

right?

And there's a risk that we begin with economic management,

management of cycles, and end up in this total totalitarian

systems that uh we see uh in the Second World

War and after, right?

Nazism, fascism, and, uh, uh, communism in the Soviet Union.

So Hayek's works were a sign of warning, right?

And redefining the nature of the problem of economics for

him was essential to.

Demonstrate why we should pay attention to these type of

questions and he expressed.

I think in the best A more rigorous way, his

views on the role of knowledge in two pieces, one

of which we will read for this course, the use

of knowledge in society and his book on markets as

a discovery proceeds.

So look, Hayek's concerns were very much concerns about Totalitarianism

in the context of the post-war period.

And the way in which she intervened in these discussions

was by redefining the problem of economics.

He associated this slippery slope towards control and totalitarian rule

with a bad understanding of what the economic problem of

societies are.

So in discussion with his colleague here at the LSC

Lionel province, he would say that the central problem of

economics is not one of optimisation.

Is not one of efficient allocation of resources but rather

one that had to do with how to make the

best use of knowledge in society.

He was against Las drawing canonical definition of economics as

a science of human behaviour.

As a relationship between ends and scarce means which have

alternative uses.

Because this view of the economic problem presupposed that both

individuals who are making decisions and the economists, the experts

that are modelling their decisions have the sufficient knowledge about

those ends they know everything about themselves, but also about

the alternative means they live in a world of complete

information.

And I believe these two forms of knowledge were both

inaccessible to the individuals and uh to the experts, so

this had led to a wrong understanding of the nature

of economics which he associated to a bad methodological habit

that he called scientism, which is to base our views

of the economic science.

modelled on other natural sciences which are dealing with different

types of orders and for Hayek, the social order, the

constitutional order and economic order is of a very different

nature to that of the natural order, hence.

Mr.

Valras, the methods that you've incorporated from physics will not

help us understand how economies behave, OK?

And it will lead, it could lead to catastrophic mistakes

if we derive from their conclusions about economic management.

So let's pay attention to how Hayek is.

Perhaps elaborating further the role that knowledge plays in economic

orders, and he distinguishes between two kinds of knowledge in

society.

One type of knowledge, that knowledge that is accessible to

the central planners, to the economists, to the modellers is

central knowledge, the type of knowledge that you get, for

example through statistics.

And this is a knowledge of scientific or theoretical nature.

Uh, which is very different from the type of knowledge

that individuals have in societies, the type of knowledge that

individuals require to make economising decisions.

And this knowledge is what he refers to as local

knowledge, which is the knowledge of the particular circumstances of

time and place of market participants.

This local knowledge is so disperse, so fragmented across society.

That no Tool, no technical tool, no instrument will ever

allow the scientists, the economists, the technocrats to have access

to all of this knowledge.

Rational planning building on misses would only be possible if

only if 2 was known to the expert, but it

is never the case.

And the marvel of the price system.

Is that Given that it is the outcome of strangers

meeting in the market, right, of the overlap between these

spheres of knowledge of individuals operating in a local circumstance.

Given these characteristics of the price system, this is the

best mechanism that there is for communicating this necessary information.

This system cannot be replaced by any form of design.

And this is the case because prices serve as signals

for economising individuals about the whole structure of means and

ends uh in a complex way of wave of exchanges

that constitute the markets.

Now these markets are in constant change.

As well, right?

And the price mechanism is the best system we know

to transmit this information as fast as possible as individuals

require them, right?

And only the necessary information they need to make decisions.

Building on Austrian thinking more broadly, the price system cannot

be designed because it is a spontaneous order just like

language, like culture, like legal institutions that have emerged gradually

and historically uh by the interaction of strangers meeting in

the marketplace.

So Hayek's critique has several implications for the history of

economics.

Against the Russian general equilibrium theory programme, he would argue

that markets are knowledge systems that can never be replaced

or reduced by or to a mathematical or a computational

model.

So Menger's distaste distaste for mathematics is still visible in

Hayek, who will never use formal uh mathematical analysis uh

to present his theories.

Against neoclassical's view of competitions think think of night, competition

is not an assumption.

That we make it's not a fiction.

We have a very realistic definition of competition with Hayek.

It relates to the discovery of new ways of doing

things, innovation, but also new ways of uh introducing combinations.

We'll see that with with Schumpeter against Keyician macroeconomics.

The economic order is constantly changing in ways that a

statistics, for example, national income accounts and comparative static analysis,

think of Higgs and the ISLM model, will never be

able to capture.

OK.

Against every form of planning, every attempt of social engineering,

historically tested institutions like money, like markets cannot be replicated

by design no matter how complex the science and the

technology behind them are, OK?

So we see how high high critiques are.

Touching All the core elements of neoclassical thinking and of

macroeconomics that we've studied so far, we'll deal with with

with Peter we'll come back to a question that was

somehow abandoned in the late 19th century.

Uh, and in the course of the 19th century, to

be honest, but was very much at the centre of

Adam Smith's work, which is how can we understand the

main drivers of economic development, of economic change across time.

So Schumpeter is a very interesting, uh, Austrian because he

uh was both taught by von Mises by von Bauer

and was a colleague from Bon Ms.

He was not a mathematical economist, but he actually admired

the world of econometrics, so he had a much perhaps

wider view of how economics uh could be conducted.

Um, and he was also very interested in the history

of economic ideas.

He, he wrote still very influential work on the history

of economic analysis.

And his main contributions uh were on understanding the business

cycle, the the the the drivers of business cycles in

terms of the exit and entry of firms, but also

the role of entrepreneurship and uh innovation and creative destruction

processes, uh, in long run economic development.

So, uh, How is Chupiter understanding economic development?

He's distinguishing between two types of changes in this book.

He distinguishes between changes in the data.

Cycles And changes that kick the board altogether that change

the system completely and this is the second type of

changes that he would refer to as economic development.

Now the second type of changes for Schumpeter are the

result of innovations which he understands as new combinations in

production.

These new combinations can be seen in multiple ways the

introduction of a new good, uh, of a new method

of production, the opening of new markets, right?

Smith is very clearly.

Uh, represented here, the conquest of a new source of

supply or any other form of industrial organisation, monopolies, for

example.

And uh economic development and innovation also triggers processes of

cumulative change that help us understand the cyclical economic behaviour

of economies across time.

Because since new combinations are often embodied in the introduction

of new firms, new firms are most prone to innovate

than incumbents and the demise of old ones, then, uh,

business cycles will be the result as well of economic

innovation.

Now for the purposes of our course, Schulitter is posing

himself a very pertinent question Why is profit possible in

a circular economy?

Remember, in neoclassical theory under equilibrium conditions, imperfect competition.

Profit equals 0, there could not be profit, right?

This is an implication of the notion of equilibrium.

And then if profit is not possible, why do we

see profit happening, accruing in real world economies, but more

importantly, what would be the incentive for producers to bring

new goods in the markets to introduce these innovations that

kick off the process of economic development.

So without understanding the origins of profit in a circular

economy, the drivers of profit, we are not able to

understand why economies develop across time.

We would have to live in a static world and

as we know for the Austrians, this is never a

good representation of the world that we live in now.

Schumpeter will say something that is that should surprise us

that profit falls to the entrepreneur, not to the capitalist.

Not to the people who put the money, to the

financiers, not to those.

Who uh introduce the provide the knowledge for the innovation

but to the entrepreneur, this new economic actor, this hero

of capitalism whose only contribution to the production process is

his will and action.

It's his desire to do things differently.

OK.

To carry out new combinations.

We'll discuss about this in the in the in the

classes, but For Peter, profit is only short-lived.

It occurs under very specific circumstances again we'll talk about

that in the classes, but it is short lived because

this information about this innovation will flow through the price

system in a way that allows competitors to imitate these

innovations to the to benefit from this business opportunity, OK?

So economic development is introduced by this innovation, this will

and action by entrepreneurs, this new combinations that lead to

the entry of new firms who adapt to these innovations

and a new equilibrium is temporarily established, OK, and economic

development is the result of all of this process now,

now Peter built on this idea to uh make a

broader claim about.

Uh, the future of capitalism and in a very interesting

work, uh, during the Second World War, he argued that

capitalism carried the seeds of its own destruction not due

to its contradictions like for Marx, but rather due to

its success.

This process of economic development had led to a process

of bureaucratization.

Firms have this tendency to grow larger and larger and

become much more impersonal, and this creates these new two

classes of absentee stakeholders who are divorced from the management

of their companies and a class of salaried people who

are disconnected from profit making and again we see here

a deterioration of these commerce minded behaviours that are behind

entrepreneurial activity.

So should be predicted that unless something is done, both

classes will lose their attachment to private property and the

freedom of contract and uh will adopt this bureaucratic managerial

logic so he read Keynesianism across this lens and only

the entrepreneurial elite could save capitalism from its instruction by

triggering this process of creative destruction that he's referred to

before, OK.

So what was the impact of Austrian economics?

Remember they were mostly throughout the 20th century in the

defence.

Their ideas had limited impact in the mainstream in the

50s and 70s, but I would argue that they have

found their way in the mainstream thereafter.

Hayek, I remind you, was given the Nobel Prize of

Economics and this illustrates how his ideas are recognised by

the mainstream and we see in modern economics uh very

much this idea of price as signals and markets as

systems of information.

Some acceptance to this Smith Mer Hayek link about institutions

as emergent spontaneous owners and what about in popular economic

discourse today?

The role given to entrepreneurship, we all want to be

entrepreneurs now to innovation and its role on economic development,

right?

So the Austrians from being dissenters have come in a

sense through the popularisation of their ideas.

To frame how we think about markets, how we think

about development, and how we think about innovation in a

way that I think we cannot ignore.

OK guys, uh, so we need to leave now.

There's no lecture on or class in reading week and

I just want to bring your attention to this activity.

So Julian and I will be organising.

After the lecture on week 8, a field activity around

the LSC campus, and we planned the dead economist walk

which should take around 2 or 3 hours.

Participation is non-compulsory.

It will be greatly encouraged and you will be invited

to a treat in the walk.

I will send an email about this with more information,

OK, so keep an eye on that.

I look, I look forward to seeing some of you

in a much more informal setting walking around London.

Lecture 16:

OK guys, OK guys, we can, we can start now.

So, so before we, before we start, I would like,

I would like again again extend our invitations join us,

join us around your your campus that Julian has created

and that and that bring us bring us uh to

place places, uh, where, where the economist.

Uh, in the course work and, and so, so should

be fine.

You still sign up sign up, uh, please, please do

so we have so we have the numbers and they

will be they will be not you not you with

this, this, uh, in the next, in the next couple

of couple of sessions uh before, before the, OK, so

we're we're gonna talk about new institutional economics, but 1st,

1st let us.

Get a sense a sense where we where we are

now in this in this trajectory in the in the

history of economics.

So we've stu study how from from the marginalist revolution

and the and the corporation corporation elements elements of marginal

thinking uh a new a new classical programme both in

terms of in terms of Russian foundations uh uh uh

kicked off in the late century century we studied studied

uh how how uh.

This theory what we we call tool based based on

study of equilibrium situation competition as rational age age mark

marked the development of scientific programme that that became the

main part in economics in the 20th century we discussed,

discussed developments talked about talked about and and theory developing

in the Chicago.

We also foundations welfare analysis uh we'll talk we talk

today about one of them analysis analysis of course cost

in one of our next election will come to to

the uh the type of that could be done on

the on the basis of generally framework frame when we

study the work of Kenneth.

But we've we've seen that even though we see we

see the pluralism in the late century there are ways

ways of doing economics dominant dominant scientific programme.

The neoclassical programme there are there are still some critical

critical voices to solve the the assumptions of of neoclassical

economics classic classics also suggested that the statistics and mathema.

really really understand dynamism last week last week we talked

about Austrian critique, this school which is which is always

in the defensive pushing, pushing against the orthodoxy and how

how they they place the emphasis on knowledge knowledge in

the in the case of entreprepreneurs in in understanding dynamics

in the in the future and in the next in

the next.

Couple of lectures today and the next week we'll talk

about talk about two alternatives you may you may that

that happened in the past in the past half a

century or so we'll talk about new institutionalism and and

the core here will be that you you see the

prices that really stalled was really really worried about it's

actually quite costly.

So, so if, if we, we understand and we accept

that that they are, they are making making market transactions,

then we also, we also have to pay attention we

left behind uh in this in this course which is

which is about the about the role of institutions and

in particular those institutions setting setting the property rights that

that's the term how costly.

These transactions, OK, OK, we, we bring with new the

the attention back to institutions in particular the legal institutions,

uh, with the with the work of and and Douglas

North and in the next in the next lecture we'll

talk about a different, a different sort of critique to

the to the classical paradigm which which resemblances.

With at least at least the of the of the

German historical school in the same the same development economists

writing writing in decolonization of new economies of period that

that probably is not there is 11 that feels that

feels that fits all all realities and maybe a maybe

a specific.

Of economic needs to be developed to be developed to

to understand uh the circumcircumstances backward, OK, OK, so this,

so this is uh uh our our agenda for the

next couple of lectures.

So then, then let's try and try and understand it

much better what we what we mean by new institutional

here because we are we've studied some some institutional economists

before, so what is the what is the relationship between

both trad traditions.

There are certain there are certain points and points of

coincidence, uh, with the, with the older institutionalist economies be

commons, for example, for example, the focus of attention of

attention institutions of analysis.

People like people like will, will bring, bring back the

conversations and the idea that we should transactions such as

such as as much as I suggested before.

This attention also processes process evolutionary change we do institutions

and economies over over time to to new technological changes

and innovation as we have as we would be would

be a key concern for people like to understand evolutionary

change time time.

The use of the use of some talk about the

what about norm.

Discussed that evaluations of modities decisionssumption uh and and which

different classes of production production was crossed by the prevailing

and such.

uh, or, or in inherited predatory predatory habits habits, uh,

in, in the the case property class or the peer

classes and and modern modern institutional economies le these ideas

not only not only legal.

Formally formalist matters but also but also formal institutions in

in the in the in the in the sense of

a cultural social and social norms, but here, here is

where the points of contact and and unlike unlike the

we want to see with the new an attempt to

to.

Build a low net connection to this tradition tradition of

institutionalism in the in the states.

There will not will not be an attempt to trace

trace the origin roots of this idea in this in

this economists, but rather rather new new social economics emerge

a critique to to some fundamental fundamental principle in neoclassical

theory.

The first one, first one, which I already Ronald Ronald's

the price system is not costless.

We understand why, why and this attention to transaction costs

implieslies paying attention as well as well to to those

those processes.

Particularly, particularly outside the reality of my court courts which

the the limit property property rights that are that are

necessary necessary for individuals to make to make decisions, uh,

uh, transacting with each, OK, OK, so, so paying paying

attention to transaction costs and to and to the centrality

of property rights would be the key the key contribution

of of new new institutional economies as we as we

will see today.

And this will, this will lead radically radically different implications

in terms of policy to those to those previous institutions.

This is this is important, remember the term for for

Beverly and Michelin Commons was to to understand what was

the what was the regulatory framework.

To avoid uh uh problems of their own, this is,

this is the stage of regulatory capitalism.

44 The new institutionalists that the discussion about how to

deal with deal with markets will not, will not be

one bringing the the government in.

But rather, rather trying to trying to understand what are

the the opportunity costs of intervening visa vis a vis

letting letting these things as they are, OK, OK, and

the and the concern would be with those those property

property rights structures that we will allow to to fund

as as efficient as possible, OK, OK, very very different

implications for for this from this set of analysis.

So, so Uh, we will we will start our discussion

today with this awarded the Nobel Nobel Prize in the

1990s was a late recognition of the importance of work

as we'll see his, his semi contributions were, were written

in the 9 the 1930s and the 90s.

it was it was only 40 years later that the

the No committee decided to to uh give give the

prize so so this sort of sort of suggests how

how late these these ideas, ideas of new economists were

were accepted as as being important for the mainstream in

the discipline of course we are all we are all

familiar now with their with their concept, particularly, particularly historians,

but this, this took some time.

Uh, to, uh, to really, really come as as becoming

part of the mainstream and Ronald andronal calls, uh, will

do, will do something that, that, and this is is

relates to the to the following something that can use

it unusual for the time for the time he attempted,

he attempted to start the field, the field of economics

beyond beyond classical semi seminar objects well, well, to, to

tell us that tell us that.

The law, the law and particular courts are, are as

objects objects of economic analysis, and he will be, he

will begin new tradition and and some of the field

in the dismay that is that is known by the

by the that that he create he created with our

director in 1550 law and law and economics and law

and economics to come together.

And this is the this is the case because because

judges economic decisions when trans transaction costs and the cost

and the cost rearranging property property are non non negligible

are non non zero.

Then, then the decisions made by courts courts directly directly

influence economic activity.

They change the system, systems of incentives we would say

today that economic agents face so econ economists need to

need to take into account the decisions of courts and

in a sense, in a sense.

The courts have been more, more aware of this economist

economists ever ever been the economist, court, the courts federal

court in the in the United States in particular, he

would say he would say were the were the first

economist in a sense because they because they really understood

what the what the cost and opportunity cost is.

We'll we'll discuss his early contributions to the fear and

we'll, and we'll we'll talk we'll talk in the class

with the relationship between both the texts are.

So this is the this is the first economy today.

Today we'll discuss we discuss also a northern laureate, Douglas

the Northern Prize just two years after and this is

this is coincidence.

Douglass building building on the work of of uh uh

this this idea that when transaction was negligible.

This is typically the case property property rights and how

how are essential essential to understand not just not just

the economies of the present but also also economic economic

change across time and in particular be moved by this

by this graph which which economic economic historians sitting in

this room had seen now now.

How can we how can we understand that some economies,

some some countries formed much much better over time than

others?

How can we how can we understand that this, this

great, great divergence between between.

The United Kingdom, England, Netherlands state states and others and

those who were left behind.

Why, why are rich and, and also why, why are

some nations persistently so poor.

How can we how can this difference on long run

economic growth.

This is, this is the key question that we, we

attempt to answer building, building on the work of coronal

cause and the the the answer will be very simple

market market structures and for market markets to behave in

an efficient in an efficient fashion require require two institutions

and there are some there are some institutions that that

lead to efficient efficient outcomes and there are and there

are others that do not that do not.

Institutions understood both as the formal formal rules of behaviour

law law and informal formal rules, social, social norms can

block, block low low economic growth, and Douglas and Douglas

laws will also bring the attention into institutions formal informal

rules, and the organisation operate operate on the basis of

this institution state states fear fear pressure pressure groups.

And to understand the pers persistence inefficient institutions we need

to we need to understand how how the the institutions

that prevail are are those those who are in the

interest of of ruling ruling people ruling.

Ruling sectors in society which wish to preserve, OK, OK,

so the connection connection with work in this sense is

very clear.

We need to understand we need to understand the political

economy well as well of of institutional change to to

understand why why others what others are.

But more broadly, broadly will cover this this lecture lecture.

To to get a get a good sense of how

it change change we need to treat to treat this

process process of social social learning that is that is

mediated by systems of belief, cultural cultural norms.

And there is an institution for for new institutions in

this in this share shares some resemblance to the way

the way the Austrian Hayek Hayek market money money in

the sense the sense that the of this long running

processes of of social learning by different by different factors

who have who have interests right right so political culture

culture and institutions are all are all relevant to to

understand.

Economy economic progress across.

OK, OK, so, so this is, this is the lecture

lecture miniature but now now let's jump into the key

the key contributions of each of these authors and why

they why they matter for the the purposes of this

course.

So let's begin with with Ronalds.

So, so who was was.

He was, he was also someone from the house here

at the LSC, uh, he didn't study economics that is

that he studied commerce, and this will be very, will

be very important to get a sense, a sense of

the theology of analysis in his early work on the

on the firm firm, um, uh, he, he, uh, uh,

didn't take didn't take any course in economics here.

He actually, but he actually gave in.

Into how how uh firms firms behaved by travelling, visiting

specific specific factories and in particularly in the in the

United States, and it was and it was servation of

the behaviour of firms that made that made him realise

that actually neoclassical economics could not answer a particular apparently

simple simple question why why do films exist.

Why, why are some organised.

We'll discuss discuss how he how he answered this question,

uh, uh, a minute, a minute, and, uh, he, he

will, will take take such action as the as the

commons and, and pay attention, pay attention to, uh, uh,

how, how transaction costs provide both want an answer to

the question to the question of the system and to

the role of legal legal institution in shaping in shaping

out.

Outcomes 44 join joined the University of Chicago in the

in the law school director created the Economic, the seminar

in in the field of discipline and and his his

seminal seminal contributions were written at an artist just just

before I joined I joined the the of the firm.

Which you will use will use the contractual transaction cost

playing la the existence unit units of decision making in

the economy.

And then generalising this to the problem of of social

costing he he will will discuss the role of course

in making decisions, particularly regards situation situations are hard and

we would we would associate with existence of externalities and

how do court court react, react to this to this

instances in which in which the actions the actions are

one part affect the actions of another.

So let's start, let's start with his first word again,

again.

By observing serving how fear fear may behaved to pose

to pose when he was 2 years old.

This this seminal seminal question, why why does this exist?

And and what what limits their their size.

So, so he, he read this question following the following

sense the existence of suppose that there is some some

degree of planning planning market economies.

So why do do these economies require a degree of

planning within the level.

But also, but also their size size.

Why is why isn't the whole economy a a single

planning body?

Why don't, why don't we see this tend tendency to

ever, ever growing of, of, uh, planning, planning, uh, units

units in, in an economy?

How do we, how do we understand the coexistence firms,

firms with markets?

This is the this is the central question.

And in particular, why, why is economic economic coordination the

war the world price of cases and and of of

planners in the other.

And, and this approach to this question resembles in a

sense in a sense he was he was looking for

both the theory was real realistic think about the martial

idea of the economics of life life.

And and the theory that that could that could incorporate

incorporate the tools of classical economics margin marginality and and

between between different different factors of production, uh, uh, to

account to account for the existence of and he found

he found that this existing alternative nations did not did

not satisfy these conditions so, so like people like don't

march on.

that the existence of marriage to the to the depreciation

uh between different units units due to the labour which

requires integrating force, uh, uh, to avoid this this system

collapsing.

So if we left, we left the division of labour

expand without check check then then all.

Into a problem coordination and the fear and the fears

emerge to address this issue issue of issue of coordination.

Frank Knight Frank Knight, I said that it is, it

is due to the existence of certain certainty and some

degree of control is needed and firm may mitigates the

risk and the cost associate risk.

From the from the Mian tradition, uh, the, the economist

economists such as Robin Robinson, uh, the only only woman

economist in Cambridge at the time to time develop develop

what what going to be known as the Martian and

argue that.

is limited uh by by the system of diminishing returns

to scale so there is, there is a point at

which at which it is, it is not beneficial beneficial

for firms to grow and to internal internalise transactions with

firm, uh, because, because of the of diminishing returns to

scale.

Royal Royal found unsatisfactory because they because they did not

allow where where.

To put through the the limitation between the centralization of

of transaction within the fear and outside and outside the

field, OK, OK, so what was what was his, his

solution problem problem.

Well, starting, starting from the transaction cost the transactions or

should be taken as analysis analysis, he argued that actually

markets are organised around the decisions taken by individuals who,

who are disconnected from each other but rather organising around

transactions and in in particular contractual transactions.

Some some transactions organised within the the firm think about

think about structural arrangements over the over the use of

production whereas whereas others are not.

And this this transaction market market transactions have have some

some costs.

That that would be when they are when they are

organised firms he will discuss different costs uh of of

making action action in the market, for example, example this

information.

The prices, prices as Hayek argued argued before not not

communicate perfectly relevant relevant information that anyone wants and needs

actually, actually finding, finding the information information about prices and

about the actual prices of factors, factors of production and

commodity quite costly.

This is why this is why firms hire higher, uh,

marketing.

Agencies to try to try to understand consumer behave to

understand consumer behaviour this implies this implies a cost that

could be avoided if these these transactions were uh organised

organised with the the the firm firm.

It is also it's also very difficult to negotiate contracts

constantly, right, right.

Think about think about the following the LSC is providing

providing to you clients service classes and classes or the

economics.

I imagine, imagine how costly would it be for the

for the LSC to go to go every, every single

day but there is a there is a lecture find

someone in the market to provide to provide this course

for you.

So so firms avoid, avoid this constant renegotiation of contracts

by by defining long long term contracts with specific duties

duties that are open open so that so that my

boss my boss and this week this week here this

year, this year you're teaching next year, next year you

will be teaching a different course, right?

So, so firms, firms in.

Integrate this this content within the organisation, this transaction transaction

within the organisation to avoid, avoid the cost of of

finding, finding information re renegotiate contracts, but also, and also

enforcing these contracts.

I have very, very specific obligations set in my contract

contract and there are some there are some key enforcement

mechanisms to to.

I can't come here my lectures and I give and

I give my class I should, I should, right, right.

So, so films, films address, address all of these problems

that will be just be just too costly to do

if, if every every time it produces it produces seeking

seeking factors of production, for example, it, it would have,

would have to go to the market arrange and arrange

these transactions, uh, 11 time after.

So address this problem of transaction costs.

But, but the 2nd, 2nd part, of course, and this

is and this is where the where the problem is

nice amenable to the terms of economic analysis is that

is that management management cost to cost is also the

cost of of trying to trying to increase size of

by by incorporating multiple transactions in it.

That is why that is why the LSC has this

management, uh, uh, department needs to hire human uh resource

resources people take care take care that we teachers are

are performing our duty duties on our contracts.

There is, there is a of these people are not

adding to the production process, right, right?

They are just, they are just coordinating how the how

the process the transaction the transactions within this particular firm

they're firm.

So that's 11 potential potential limit to the size of

the fear, but there is there is also a second

potential which which paid much more attention which will become

become also very important when we when we discuss the

problem of course which is which is us us grow,

grow.

The complexity of transactions that that are are uh centralised

centralised within the firm grow to grow to an extent

that entrepreneurial mistakes, mistakes, mistakes by those people coordinating production

are more are more likely to occur, right.

So, so this, these two considerations, the cost of cost

of administration and the pos possibility of making mistakes within

and within and every conflict a limit to to the

size of the fear, right, right.

So, so cause is cause is providing the solution he

wants.

It's a solution that is that is realistic.

It describes how operate, but it's also.

It's it's nice it's nice, right?

It's the type, the type of answer that we economists

like.

What is, what is the size efficient, efficient size of

the film?

Well, it depends, right?

It depends.

It depends.

There's the threshold after which firms will not grow and

will and will not take on transaction transaction would be

better, be better taken off by by uh through or

or in the market.

OK, OK.

So, so ideas are actually actually already there in that

in that 19336 article on your theory of the field

he will cost framework to to make a critique of

of what he called oral oral traditional analysis the tradition

of of social theory.

We already had this discussed about this territory of Mars

Marsha in the Cambridge in Cambridge in varsity in the

school.

And and economic welfare would be on a framework to

to address the problem of those of those circumstances in

which in which the pri private private and so and

so social.

Social product diverge.

We we understand this as a situation of negative externality,

right?

How, how should governments re regulators react in in circumstances

in which action actions of one of one particular part

are harm harm to uh to others.

And, and as you as you all know from your,

from your class classes, the classical classical solution to this

problem is whenever whenever market failures, uh, such, such as

government intervene, right, right, the the the famous people tax

or or subsidies to make to make that private and

social product uh a uh a con converge again.

Um, um, now, now causes causes critique of, of analysis

analysis externalities later on later on extended to, to a

wider, wider approach dealing with dealing public public goods uh

in uh in 19 the 1950s and, and building on

building on similar to of analysis, uh, people are people

for example, are also a key government intervention in the.

The provision of public which will which will not result

from from decisions private private in in interested in in

allocation allocation of radio and television frequency a big question

in the 1950s when when these technologies were first incorporated,

should we leave these markets or should we, should we,

or is there, is there a case for natural monopoly

state a state providing this this.

And both tradition traditions tradition of negative negative externality and

and the public tradition tradition uh fail fails to see

uh uh that that government government intervention could also be

harmful, uh, in, uh, in a way that cause uh,

uh, develop, develop in in in this in this article.

So, so cos critique is tradition is based, is based

on the following assertion assertion.

Government intervention deal with deal with to provide public could

be could be either redundant redundant in those in those

circumstances in that transaction cost 00 or potentially potentially harmful

when when there are there are transaction costs in this

economy, economy the the structure of property rights.

So let me let me elaborate each of these two

quotes.

If if transaction transactions for 00 if, if my agents

do not do not face costs for, for finding, finding

prices, they are perfect perfect information about the commodities they

are transacting.

If, if they can, they can.

Without negotiate contracts and make enforcement of these contracts contracts

work then then there's no, there's no need for intervention.

We can just we can just allow these people to

to get together together and arrange a specific specific.

Uh, uh, contract that will that will allow allow harming

the to to compensate the harmed you will you will

exemplify this as you will see with with very specific

cases think of the think of the case in which

the owner owner of cattle is neighbour neighbour who has

has who is an agriculture producer cattle cattle products products.

If there are no there are no transaction on this

property rights then then these people, these people better off

if if the cattle rancher negotiate negotiates with his neighbour

in the local and and define define fair, fair and

just uh compensation for for harm that the cattle is

causing uh the, the agricultural producer.

So, so without, without a transaction costs, government, government action

is red.

The actors, the actors themselves can find efficient solutions.

But what happens happens when transaction costs are not negligible.

Which is which is typically the case well in this

case again depends.

On the one on the one hand there is for

government intervention.

Uh, definition property needed needed.

And, and there might, there might be some case in

which government, government intervention to force force compensation on the

on the production of car is is is is just

just justified.

But, but you also need to take into account.

The harm of the government the government actually harm caused

by the government actually intervening in this in this circumstance.

So what, what the tradition and the and the tradition

had failed to see is that every government intervention, every

every decision made by the courts in particular will harm

will harm one of the parties if if it leads

to the redefinition of of property rights.

So, so what the, what the courts do, and this

is this is what the courts do when they're making

decisions is is to compare the the opportunity opportunity costs

of of acting acting and the and the opportunity cost

of not not acting, OK, OK.

So courts courts make economic decisions in this case when

when property rights, government, government intervention is just under certain

circumstance not but not in others.

It's all it all depends on how how the intervention

vis a vis a vis not doing, not not not

doing anything, not doing doing anything allowing allowing for.

agents find their own solutions might not might not lead

to the most efficient outcomes but could be could be

the potential second best vis a visa intervening in these

markets.

So, so in that, in that sense this art this

article read read critique the analysis of failures and the

policy recommendations derived from a government intervention is not always

justified and the court, the courts and judges judges know

this very well.

And this is why, why every time they take take

into consideration of this type of facts they take, they

take they address this through the through the land and

an economy should be doing the same.

It shouldn't shouldn't the government intervention case in case where

where there there is, is this, this is not justified.

Alright, alright, so this this brings us really to really

to the the the the the idea idea that that

it.

Royals displacing the problem from from either question is it

is it about about respecting respecting the natural market market

or or increasing increasing government intervention is about the opportunity

cost.

Alternative social arrangements he put his, he put his, he

puts this in that in the following way.

He says, he says we have to take into account

the costs in various social arrange arrangements whatever ever it

be the be the working of a market or of

a government department as well as as well as the

costs involved in moving to a new system we need

to need to think in terms of opportunity costs when

dealing when dealing with this situation when dealing when dealing

with market failures.

And this is this is necessarily an alternative choice, a

choice between, uh, uh, imperfect, imperfect alternatives.

It is a it is a matter of choosing between

not no reto efficient, uh, uh, or the or the

efficient but rather but rather decided between second bests.

The aim.

The criteria criteria to which the best the best social

arrangement is what is the what is what is the

structure of policy of property rights right which actually actually

maximising the value of output and the and the solution

might not imply bring the bringing the government in these

these fact facts might be harmful certain certain circumstances.

So look at look at the implications of what is

telling us he's telling he's telling us that when when

transaction cost non-negligible.

Then the then the limitation rights common economic issue because

the influence influence economic activity influence the system of incentives

of different of different economic actors actors.

But also, but also telling us then then that economists

should pay attention pay attention to whatever happens at court.

The law, the law is the object of economic analysis

and this is what this is what his problem and

economics will be will be all about.

So this is this a seminal analysis that that combined

situations with equity with with efficiency through a through a

tractable frame framework that could that could incorporate elements classical

sis and margin and marginal to try to try and

understand how court makes that this type of decisions.

Alright, alright, so, so.

for transactions as an analysis in real world problems for

example, for example, firms decisions and legal legal matter because

they limit the property rights that are that are necessary

for specific specific individual to make to make decisions when

they when they.

Exact with each other.

They shape they shape individual incentives building building on Douglas

Douglas North will, will provide, provide insights, not just, not

just study study historically theorised about about that role that

institutions have in understanding how do how do economies grow

or exact name across across time.

So who was, who was he, he was an American

economist obtained obtained his in the in the 1950s.

He was not a particularly good student.

He was not very good at maths.

He didn't actually didn't actually like economics, um, um, but

then, but then he with with time became the.

Perhaps economic history of the of the second half of

the 1 and in a sense in a sense Douglas

North's own personal history res resembles the tell us tell

us something about the history of economic history as economics,

uh, uh, his first his first publication in 1960.

Uh, really, really illustrates the origins of geometrics this idea

of using economic theory to study, study history, uh, uh,

he, he like like the methods of analysis and and

economic theory try and try and understand economic economic growth

in the in the United States over a long period

time time.

But then, but then Douglas Douglas in his own recollection

of story will will voice his frustration with the agenda

in particular neoclassical theory he believed.

That's not allow to understand how how economic change occurs

in very very different contexts.

For example, for example, North claims that I visited 191977

to Geneva.

He decided he decided that it was important to retool

in his own words, to develop new to new tools

to understand.

Such as the societal change that took that took place

uh in in European economies from modern times we cannot

we cannot understand these these periods very, very rapid growth

and the drivers of very very rapid in the pre

in the pre-era era by using by using the tools

of new classics we need, we need a different type

of economic economics to deal with that.

And this and this led Douglas North to go back,

go back to to the ideas of previous socialist economies

and conceptual role, the role they could play through an

interdisciplinary lens incorporating the the cognitive sciences from cultural and

cultural style and from.

So, so the main, the main question that Douglas was

interesting is how can we how can we understand economic

change, run.

This is, this is a this is a there is

a very different focus to the to the analysis of

change that it that its course it is not just

not just understand dynamic dynamics economies of economies like the

like the macroeconometrics, uh, programme.

programme to do it is, it is not quite not

quite problem problem that you would be interested about it

is not it is not understanding this this continuous jump

in one clear another another structural change.

It is rather about understanding economic performance across time.

I'm, I'm as a graduate as a graduate student, Douglas

Douglas Nord has read, read and Commons, but they did

not provide a theoretical framework useful, useful plain plain and

analyse economic history.

He believed that he believed that all economies never actually

serious alternative theory.

So where, where can we look for for this new

tools required study economics and maybe maybe Marxism.

Well, well they pose question they paid attention to institutions,

but he believed he believed also that Marxist Marxist theory

has flaws in the sense that class of unit of

analysis.

But actually actually something that play blame through through historical

tools.

What about, what about neoclassical economics?

Well, well, uh, um, they had, they have strength of

focusing focusing scarcity competitions of providing providing elements, elements to

understand the conditions under which by which markets are efficient,

but they, but they fell into one specific and big

big mistake.

Neoclas classical economists believed that that institutions are always always

efficient markets are always always efficient irrespective irrespective of the

institutional frame in which they which they operate.

And, and we know we know from the work of

that particularly particularly when it is to try to transact

institutions matter and and.

Efficient, efficient institution as it will will be more, be

more the exception and the norm and politically efficient institutions

will never, will never be be seen or or or

or or seen in place so what so what do

we understand by institutions here.

Most people, most people here really familiar with this quote,

uh, uh, code refers to institutions as both formal formal

or informal behaviours that shape shape incentive structures and determine

determine a transaction costs you would say that that humanly

constraints that structure human interaction.

formal constraints, rules, laws, constitutional institutions, formal constraints norms of

behaviour, convention convention self-imposed conduct and their enforcement characteristics, and

they both they both defined incentive structures and and the

cost of transactions producers for each economy.

which distinguishes between institutions set of norms and norms and

and organisations operate operate within within uh these these existing

rules and also able to change them according to their

interests and economic change result from interaction between between two

institutions existing existing norms and rules and organisations.

Entrepreneurs who are trying to to modify this according according

to their own their own interests.

Economic change in this world is ubiquitous incremental incremental process

that is the the concept of the choice the choice

individual actors and entrepreneurs of organisations are there every day

so so institutional change, uh, in, in, uh, uh.

Cause causes also allows for human agency.

It is not it is not an institutions determine everything.

Right, they set their their foundations for individuals making decisions

within organisations, and we need to we need to understand

how, how these organisations make decisions, uh, uh, to get

a get a sense why why some economies are more

are more successful across time than uh than all and

this is this is particularly the case in inefficient institutions

are are both per pervasive and dependent.

So if if good good institution lend that lend itself

to to the functioning functioning markets.

Which produce produce efficient outcomes, uh, uh, then how can

we how can we explain the situation of inefficient institutions?

Why don't why don't organisations like states for example have

an have an interest in in.

Putting in place these institutions that lead to more efficient

outcomes and and uh to higher higher economic growth.

How, how can we understand we understand that it is

inefficient tend to tend to perpetuate over over time.

uh will bring, bring the attention to the political economy

of the making the making of rules.

This, this blamed by the institutions are actually often created

to serve the serve the interests of all the bargain

bargaining power to create new rules.

We've seen we've seen something of this previously previously reports

in John John Smis before about the origin the origins

of property rights.

Remember he told, he told us organise around the property

rights around private private property rights best system we know

we know about.

The problem is that that this property property rights were

the were the term by by those who had the

the.

political power in society, particularly the military power to define

the boundaries of property rights.

So we need, so we need to take into account

how what is the balance of society of power power

in society between different different pressure groups and what their

what their interests are in in determining some some specific

groups of the game and others others.

And this this gives a clue to understand the persistence

of this institution, well those those benefiting from from existing

arrangements.

Half half force incentives sustain them think of Bank of

already we already know this since since then since then

is this notion of vested interests.

People who benefit from inefficient inefficient institutions with a vested

interest in sustaining as long as long as they can,

even though, even though this will not will not lead

to good to good economic outcomes for our economies as

a whole.

Now some now some people have criticised that that there

there is is perhaps an ideological elements in Northeast thinking.

Uh, in a in a sense is, is suggesting that

some institutions are good those those institutions, uh, uh, uh,

by the by the successful west economies at first industrialdustrialized

and developed while others are bad.

Uh, uh, isn't this illustration with history of winners in

the in the present to project to project back what

bad and bad and good institutions are are something, something

to think about, think about and and something to take

when reading a work but the the truth, the truth

is that was aware that that.

This shouldn't shouldn't be the frame uh to uh to

the question of instance and in particular it is not

it is not that institutions can be brought from one

context to one transplant in one context to right right

economic economic development and long run is not is not

as easy just copy copy what what those those countries

countries that succeeded have done in the past.

And this is and this is truly truly connected with

with the important importance social social learning and to and

to culture in in the development of of of of

institutions across time.

So, so course course we all know we all know

that I know that those institutional setting in which property

property rights are well defined to lead to more outcomes

outcomes.

But, but to understand how is it change change we

need to need to take into consideration that that involves

a matter that is that is set of how the

specific beliefs beliefs mental mental models of particular particular country

allow allow entrepresentrepreneurs in organisations to adapt.

Different, different tech technological and institutional changes.

So, so the main the main economic growth is not,

is not just about the definition of rights, but about

but about but about the societal process social social of

learning and adapting to change and incorporate incorporate rules rules

and norms and behaviours that that are most most amenable.

And more and more efficient in different specific contexts.

So in this, in this sense for for Hayek institutions

are the embodiment of this long running process of collective

learning we cannot we cannot transplant from one context to

another without without taking into consideration that that this this

product product long long process of change all all syms

which also which also involves and political.

OK, OK, what is what is it that you've learned

from socialism?

I like I like the Austria they are not, they

are not following, following a long traditional thing going back,

going back to the late late late y century, although

there are there are parallels that are that are interesting

and there's a concepts that in the in in particular

the actions actions in.

So new new institutionalists are actually actually reacting reacting theoretical

limitations of the class to address concrete real world of

the existence of uh negative negative externalities and and economic

change across firms, firms me mechanisms with both with the

real costs using the transaction costs more broadly, more broadly

general generalise this idea to.

To emphasise emphasise the dedication of legal rights as an

economic question insofar court court system system of instruction and

incentive for individuals who others built on both both ideas

to to justify justify institution institutions matter for long run

change def definition of property rights essential for markets to

work, but we should, we shouldn't.

Well under the idea that institutional change can be engineered

in in a particular way.

It's not about not about bringing the institutions that they're

successful in in Western Western Europe and the United States

to poorer to poorer regions in the world in in

Africa and Latin America, right, because good good institutions are

the are the embodiment of this long run process societal

learning uh by culture.

Lecture 17:

OK, guys, Welcome to this class lecture on development economics.

This is one of my favourite uh lectures in this

course, and we're gonna again continue studying these different approaches

to the study of economic life that emerged in the

20th century challenging some of the assumptions of the new

classical paradigm, right?

And this is very interesting as a subject because the

rise of development economics as a sub field in the

discipline.

Was closely interrelated with broader developments in the international economic

world order of the post-war period, right?

So the development of economics in a sense was.

Part and parcel and came hand by hand with the

making of the developing world, what we understand today as

the underdeveloped world or the developing world.

So 3 major changes to understand why development economics came

to be a subfield within the discipline.

The first one, of course, the changes in the international

economic order, so the mid 20th century saw a movement,

a change from an international system organised around empires and

colonies.

To one that is organised around independent nation states which.

Should be seen as equal to each other, right?

So the process of decolonization, as we'll see today, crossed

the field of development economics in ways that we need

to take into account, but the international world order of

the post war period also saw the emergence of a

new type of organisations, international institutions such as the United

Nations, the World Bank, the IMF.

In which most of the development economists who study today

uh found a institutional site to think about the specific

problems of these countries that came to be seen as

underdeveloped.

OK, so major change in the object of analysis, right,

the the the idea of the existence of underdeveloped economies

but also of the institutional sides in which knowledge about

these economies is produced, right?

It's not not only in academia, not only in government

offices, but also in these multilateral organisations that emerged in

the postwar period, right?

But there are some general changes in within the economics

discipline that we've studied in this course that help us

understand also uh the specific characteristics of development economics as

a sub field we've seen uh some.

Changes in the conceptual framework of economics that made it

possible to think that government intervention can be justified in

certain circumstances, right?

And many development economists will build on the arguments of

Keynesianism on this idea that the economy is not always

at full capacity, it's not always at full employment.

To make claims that government intervention is actually needed to

accelerate development uh in the poor world, in the third

world.

We also saw, and we'll discuss about this today that

there were not only developments in economic theory but also

developments in econometrics and the statistical tools, the technical tools

used by economists to observe, measure and act on specific

economies, right?

And uh we will discuss today about a specific set

of tools, national income accounting and how.

This way of approaching the economic reality through statistical lens

allowed economists to observe, to reason, but also to act

on development economies.

Developing economies.

Finally, This conceptual apparatus to think about government intervention and

this.

Technical apparatus to observe, measure and act on economies came

together with the example of previously planned economies in the

case of uh interwar Europe or uh the wartime economies

so development economists will see to these experiences to actually

find in them examples that could be perhaps replicated, reproduced

not now to.

sorry to to uh stimulate economies of depression or to

plan economies of war or to plan post-war reconstruction but

rather to develop economies to change the structural characteristic of

these poor economies to bring them into a path of

self-sustained growth, OK, so these three developments within economics, if

you may came together uh in this development paradigm.

And the result of this will be the emergence of

a new object of intervention.

It's not just now, the economy as a whole, of

macroeconomics, but a subset of economies that came to be

seen as.

Sharing specific characteristics.

And all of these economies fail under this umbrella of

the underdeveloped economy, OK.

And this Trends also led to the emergence of a

new role of the economist.

That is perfectly exemplified in the persona of the author

that you will read for next week's classes, Albert Hirschman

that figure of the foreign expert, the economic missionary who

is travelling around the world to learn about these new

economies but also to inform governments about specific type of

policies.

So this idea of the visiting expert, the foreign expert,

the policy advisor will be a new figure.

That emerges in the post-war period that we can associate

with development economics.

All right, so let me tell you about this, uh,

man that you will read about Albert Hirschmann, he had

a fantastic life.

There's a beautiful biography uh written on him.

He uh was uh Jewish.

Emigre who had to flee Nazi Germany he fought with

the resistance in France he fought in the Spanish Civil

War, and then he found himself pushed to the United

States, uh, to basically keep his life and while being

in the United States.

In the market surges of the post-war period, he found

himself without employment in the state, without employment in academia,

and the world that hired him to serve as the

economic adviser of the planning office set up in Colombia

in the early 1950s just after the first development mission

of the World Bank.

So Aldred Tiermann here represents the two ways of observing

that we will discuss today that would characterise development economists

approaches to this new object of study, the underdeveloped economy.

On the one hand we have economists working for international

institutions, national statistical offices who are using secondhand data statistics

to learn about the developing world.

But people like Hirschman and others that we'll study today

were also firsthand observers of this particular realities of the

realities in developing countries, right?

So we have on the on the one hand Albert

Hirschman with his statistical reports sitting on top of this

palm tree.

On the other, he's been visiting coffee plant plantations in

Colombia with his wife and his colleague Charles Lindon, an

expert in policy analysis in the US, two ways of

observing and then this will be a process of discovery

and confrontation with previous experiences and biases about what characterises

this developing world.

Now these observations are served for two purposes.

On the one hand, they allowed people like Albert Hirschmann

to think from experience about the specific characteristics of these

economies, what is it that makes a developing economy different

from an advanced rich economy.

So we see with Hirshman and others a process of

theory building from the bottom up.

We'll discuss some of the theoretical ideas of Hirshman today,

but also these observations, measurements, and ideas about the developing

world also serve to inform policy and in particular a

development planning, right?

So we, we see hereman a caricature here, a comic

here, uh, really in an ironic fashion.

Uh, describing how Hirschman felt about the idea that economies

could be planned, it says over here an excellent food

is the banana.

Let's eat it today and plant banana, sort of saying

that, well, there is sort of this drive for planning

economies for being privisive about the future, but uh these

people uh in the developing world have real time necessities,

right?

We'll eat the banana today and let's leave planning for

for for tomorrow.

So here's what will be a big critique of economic

planning and this will transpire in the reading that you

will do about ECLA and ECLA's ideologies.

Alright, so two ways of observing by this visiting economist

direct observation, but also second half observation, uh, with statistics

about these economies that they knew so little about.

So why do I mention here'sman's experience?

The reason I do this is because development economics was

from very early on and applied discipline.

The early theoreticians of development economics were first and foremost

observers of these new realities and as we will see

most of the early development economists will not come from

the centres of the production of knowledge.

We'll talk about Roses and Roland who is approaching.

The question of underdevelopment from the perspective of East Asia

we'll talk about Sir Arthur Louis, someone from the house,

who probably was more influenced by the experience of a

Caribbean countries, right, being himself, uh, born and raised in

Santa Lucia.

Albert Hirschmann, although a German emigre, found in Colombia an

experimentation ground to reflect about development.

So we'll start by discussing how observation motivated.

The development of theoretical developments and this realisation that To

understand how these economies work, we need to reject what

Hirschman called the monoeconomics claim, that is to say that

there's one size fits all economics.

That neoclassical economics serves as a framework, as a theory

to explain each and every economy.

And The development economists will study today will defer in

their theoretical understandings of uh under development.

We'll come to this in a minute, but they all

shared this idea that a new sort of theory could

be.

Developed to understand the specific characteristics of a poor economies

of the underdeveloped economy, OK?

We see here a similar critique in a sense.

To that which we have already discussed when we dealt

with the German historical school, remember?

Looking at economic theory from the peripheries.

Requires a different type of economics that is more attuned

with the stage of development in which these economies are

in.

All right, so we'll have this type of reasoning among

development economists.

So there were different, differences in theories that we will

study today, development economists could not agree whether economies in

the underdeveloped world should follow balanced or unbalanced paths of

growth.

We'll come back to this.

Some others like Arthur Lewis will emphasise the existence of

dual economies, economies that have some sectors which are performing

uh badly because they they they exhibit the tra traditional

characteristics of a low productivity sector whereas other sectors are

more modern so dualism as a characteristic of underdevelopment.

While others like the economists working at the Economic Commission

for Latin America, ECLA will emphasise the problem lies not

in the characteristics of these national economies but rather in

how these economies are incorporated uh into international trade, right?

It is this.

Uh, an equal distribution from the gains of trade between

peripheral and central countries that explains underdevelopment.

We'll go through all of these explanations in this lecture.

And lastly I mentioned development economics was an applied field

and this means that it was a policy oriented field

at the same time and from these variegated theories what

will result would be an eclecticism in the type of

policies needed to face with the problems to face the

problems of underdevelopment.

There will be generally speaking a bias towards industrialization, uh

protecting local industries uh through uh import substitution uh policies.

But also we'll see that building on the idea that

balanced growth is necessary, some of them will advocate for

planning as I've discussed, Albert Hirschman, a major critic of

planning, would go instead for a more strategic approach to

development and nearly all of them will agree that some

sort of foreign aid and international cooperation uh will be

needed, OK.

So a a policy mix uh will characterise the normative

implications of this type of theories.

OK, so let us begin by discussing these two forms

of observation that I've referred to, uh, through the example

of Hirschman, this idea of observing economies secondhand, uh, through

the, uh, use of statistics in particular national income accounting

and how direct observation.

Sometimes went against uh what we could observe using this

uh technical tools.

All right, so let's begin with the notion itself, the

concept of economic development.

So we've seen uh that from Smith to Marx economists

have been concerned with the causes for growth, right?

What explains the causes for the for the wealth of

nations is the key, the subtitle of Adam Smith's work,

uh, it was a main concern for.

For Karl Marx right to try to understand uh how

is it that capitalist societies are able to produce so

much wealth and at the same time so much misery

we discussed a notion of economic development in Schumpeter in

Douglas North, but actually, uh, the idea that economies could

be developed in a transitive transitive sense that we could

that that the state in particular can do something to

develop economies is a rather.

New concept that we can only trace back to the

mid 20th century.

So we have, we have seen as well the idea

that uh material progresses proceed in different stages but we

do not have here a sense that states could do

something to accelerate this process.

There were early attempts in colonial economics to document uh

the resources available in the colonies and in a sense

to develop these resources but not the economy as a

whole.

So this idea that underdeveloped economies as whole entities.

Could be developed was underpinned by new measurement techniques like

national income accounting.

It is only in so far we have a statistical

construct of these economies and the relations between their parts

that the idea that these economies could be developed through

policy came into being, OK.

So let me give you a brief history of national

income accounting and why it matters uh for uh this

discussion.

So national income accounting as we've discussed before, developed in

the 1920s and in in the 1930s uh independently uh

in the United States and uh Britain, economists like Simon

Kuznetz or Stone and Maid developed.

Uh techniques, standards to measure, uh, economic activity as a

whole, right, um, particularly CNET had some reservations about the

extent to which the same measurement techniques could be used

for different economies.

Remember CNETS was writing within this institutionalist tradition according to

which each national economy is like its its own species,

right?

So each economy required specific forms to measure what is

produced uh under each specific characteristics so Costs had reservations

about the universalization of these accounting techniques, but these reservations

were not shared by people like Colin Clark who believed

that actually national income accounting could be.

Used as a tool for international comparisons.

So Clark was in a sense the first economy to

think about the first economist to think about the economy

in terms of GDP of a standardised measure of GDP

that could be used uh to account for uh the

level of production and income uh in economies across the

world.

And for him the world economy was nothing more than

a mosaic of national economies that could be compared with

each other.

This view came together with this new form of universalism

that was gaining shape during the Second World War and

in the post-war period, right?

And it was based on this idea that there are

no meaningful institutional and cultural differences, uh, to understand why

some economies grow faster than others, why some economists are

richer than others.

So Connie Clark using national income accounting techniques attempted to

provide this mosaic, right, to get a better understanding of

how rich.

Some countries are if compared to others and what he

did was that he developed this uh artificial unit.

That allowed him to rank economies.

According to their level of income.

So notice this is not a a modern notion of

GDP.

This is an arbitrary measure.

But it served its purpose, right?

It allowed comparing countries across the world in terms of

income, right?

Here he adds the population so we can have a

sense of how rich the countries per capita are.

And what Colin Clark was able to show here was

something that travellers have had argued about.

Perhaps something that people were anecdotically aware of but they

don't have a statistical underpinning which is how wretchedly poor

and unequal the world was, right?

How could it be that the United States had.

Uh, an income per capita that was almost 7 times

that of countries in Eastern Europe.

This came as a as a surprise for his contemporaries

how wretched the poor the world is, right?

And this is not just between within regions but also

between regions, right?

How wretched the poor in particular Africa and Asia were

if compared to their counterparts in Europe and the Americas.

So this stimulated a whole new attempt to actually develop

standards and measurements to gain a better understanding of how

differences in growth between different countries uh how big this

difference in growth between countries were and uh the incorporation

of national income accounting uh in this process.

So this brings me to uh Felice Dean uh who

was uh hired by uh Maid and stone to conduct

an experiment using national income accounting techniques uh in Nigeria.

And Jamaica.

And in a first stage, Philistine.

The first, the 2nd woman economist to have a professor

share in the University of Cambridge.

Used this secondhand way of observing this reality, right?

And she argued that.

National income accounting provided a tool to observe, reason and

act on these developing economies.

It provided a tool for observing, a tool for measurement

in the sense that it was possible to build a

numerical account of the economy by bringing all measured bits

of the economy together and bounding them according to accounting

principles, right?

So here we have the classical tripartite.

Uh, way of measuring uh national uh income output and

expenditures, right?

Not that this brought different bits and pieces of economic

theory together.

Here we have the classical concepts in uh a political

economy rents, profit interest, which tells us something about the

distribution of income in a particular economy.

Notice here how we can also approach.

And economy through the lens of what it produces by

each sector, right?

This is the type of data for example used in

Soviet planning as we as we discussed in the courses.

But at the same time we can approach the economy

as a whole through the lens that Keynes had provided,

right?

We can consider this aggregate demand, uh, for what it's

produced and what's earned in this particular economy and think

about not net national expenditures as as being characterised by

uh the sum of consumption and investment, right?

Not that the government and uh is is not included

here.

So we can observe national economies and the interrelation between

their parts, but we can also use national income accounting

to reason about these economies, right?

So accounts reflect the relationships between different categories.

This can be manipulated.

Each column also can be broken down to investigate the

relations between them, right?

So one can think of a specific policy recipe, right?

What happens if we want to increase the level of

education in a particular economy?

Well, in that case we probably need to increase net

investments, right?

And this will also affect the net output of services.

And at the same time will require raising the salaries,

right, the wages of uh the teachers who are providing

these services, right?

So we can reason about what happens with the economy

and its parts so that the balance between these three

accounts is preserved to achieve this specific policy.

We can think with national accounting, right?

So this is not just a.

Picture of the economy this is actually a tool that

we can use to think about these economies and about

also ways to act on them OK they offer a

rationale uh for policy action with means of control and

uh intervention.

All right.

But Philli Dean conducted this first study uh er from

the United Kingdom based on the statistics that they managed

to collect for the colonial administration and she provided sort

of an overview of uh the characteristics of these economies

of Nigeria and Jamaica.

But later on, She decided to travel to the ground

to observe these realities firsthand and then.

Some Problems began to emerge with the use of these

standardised categories.

Which revealed the limitations of using national income measurements.

Uh, she, for example, Began to question the idea that

we should take the household as the basic unit of

measurement.

Um, Is it a stable unit of measurement in all

economies, right?

She noted the following, right?

The principal difficulty in solving what was the sleeping household,

the eating household, the income household, and the producing household

and the spending household all represented different combinations and permutations

within one white family group, right?

So what was meant by the household in let's say

the UK economy was.

Radically different from what the social roles that the house

will perform in the case of Nigeria.

Right, there were activities, productive activities in some cases that

were conducted within the household that was not would not

be registered by national income accounting if we did not

look at what happened in between uh this uh space.

And what about the following facts?

He, she realised that poor economies in Africa were not

necessarily monetized economies but also relied on subsistence activities which

are not captured by national income accounting.

She estimated that the GDP of Nigeria was underestimated by

an 85%.

By not considering uh the importance of subsistence economies, right,

and she put it in this way she says it

is doubtful whether it would be ever possible to define

incomes so that it meant the same to the African

villager and the European town dweller or to the African

in his subsistence habitat and the same African in temporary

urban employment, OK.

So what Philistine observed uh while coming to the ground

resembles the experience I mentioned about Albert Hirschman.

Right, these economists came with standardised tools to observe these

realities and what they once they got there they just

realised how different these economies were from the ones they

were they were they were used to observe and to

measure using uh standard techniques, right?

Uh this uh will sort of.

Anticipate their critiques made not just to the use of

these accounts for example by feminist economists, right, considering that

we we need to take into account the role of

women in the household into national income accounting.

But more broadly this idea also that uh there is

such a thing as a construct that we can call

the underdeveloped economy right that all economies in the global

South, uh in across Africa, Asia and Latin America actually

we actually resemble to each other, OK.

All right, so we've seen how development economics was crossed

by these two ways of observing.

That led economists like Hirschman like Felice Dean to question

that economic theories could be applied to every circumstance or

that the same type of technical tools can be applied

to approach statistically to observe these different realities.

And This led to the understandings to try to to

find an understanding to the reasons for the disparities in

national income between economies right to provide an explanation of

how can we understand that some parts of the world

are so rich, whereas others are so wretched the poor.

And this is what gave emergence in a way to

a new body of knowledge, a new field in economics

that we call neoclassical er sorry, developed economics.

Development economics now developed in parallel to neoclassical theories of

growth.

These are the same years uh in which the Harro

Domer model or the solo new classical model were developed,

but they follow different roads, right?

And we'll focus today on trying to understand this eclecticism

in the approaches, uh, to, uh, underdevelopment and uh developing

theory.

By looking uh into uh different approaches and focusing on

the contributions of ECLA because we will discuss the uh

ideas of uh these economists working in Santiago de Chile

in South America uh in our classes next week all

right.

So we can think about the uh History of development

economics as a history of bitter debates.

Around the main causes of underdevelopment.

But also the uh best ways to deal with these

causes and one of its main debates was that between

those who sustained that underdeveloped economies should follow follow a

a a strategy oriented towards balanced growth versus those who

sustained that underdevelopment could be addressed uh through unbalanced growth

uh strategies and mechanisms.

So a seminal paper, uh, defending the balanced growth approach

is that written during the Second World War by this

guy over here, Paul Rosten Roland, originally from Krakow, today

Poland, then the Russian Empire, problems of industrialization of Eastern

and Southern Europe, and the idea of Poroseran in this

paper was very simple.

He was thinking that he was, he was arguing that

for a for a sustained peace after the Second World

War.

The underdevelopment of Regions in southern and Eastern Europe needs

to be addressed uh if this piece uh is to

be preserved.

Uh, he, uh.

Argued from a Keynesian point of view that the problem

in these economies lied in the fact that there was

insufficient effective demand coupled with uncertainty.

That meant that high rates of the population were under

what under what he called disguised unemployment.

Large percentages of the working force were either self-employed.

They were employed in activities that did not allow them

to exploit all their productivity capacity or that some.

Uh, capacities of the economies were underused.

Precisely because of the insufficiency of effective demand and the

existence of uncertainties.

Now, similarly to what Keynes argued, he sustained that the

market solution in this circumstance will not work.

The problem being that industrial producers will not assume the

risk to make investments to bring new goods to the

markets.

Think about free encapsulating phenomenon, right?

If uh investors anticipate that their goods will not be

sold due to insufficient effective demand.

Then they Will restrain from making these investments.

But if one producer is doing that.

We can assume that other investors are actually doing the

same.

So the consequence of this is that this is a

self-perpetuating cycle, right, of this guy's unemployment, low investment, low

rates of growth.

So the only way to deal with this is to

Exploit the complementarities between industrial production.

Through a large and coordinated investment across different industries at

the same time.

These economies need what Paul Rose Rodin called a big

push that will stage a process of self-sustained growth.

And to make sure that different sectors do not grow

at different rates and hence choking the growth capacity of

others.

This big push needed to be complemented through comprehensive planning,

right?

So Paul Ross centralised ideas in a sense will inform

much of development policy advice in the in the post

period, right?

Think about not only the Marshall Plan, but also the

large amount of foreign aid flowing from multilateral institutions and

bilateral lenders to the underdeveloped world.

The main idea was that these economies required a big

push, but like in the Marshall Plan.

This aid always came with the prescription that it was

essential to set up planning offices.

The economy must be planned in order to avoid uh

this uh unbalanced growth between different sectors uh that allowed

these economies to exploit the complementarities of demand between different

industries, OK.

So this was the argument of balanced growth theorists.

Like Paul Ross and Rodin, Ragnarns, uh, writing, uh, in

the 1950s, uh, will argue, uh, in a similar line.

But not everyone agrees, so this guy over here, which

I have already introduced, Albert Tschmann.

Actually, from his Colombian experience realised that economic planning and

foreign aid was not leading to the results that uh

people like Paul Ross and Rodin had suggested.

And he believed this was related to a misunderstanding of

what the development problem was uh in the first case.

His argument was the following, he said that unused resources,

this idea of disguised unemployment were not the cause of

the problem but rather the consequence of the difficulties that

business people, entrepreneurs have to identify and to take uh

investment opportunities.

And this is because in this contexts.

The price system is not working as people like Hayek

had suggested, as the signalling mechanism of beneficial opportunities.

So Hirschman would argue that the scarce resources in these

economies are not.

Capacities is not productively employed labour but rather is actual

decision making by those entrepreneurs by those investors who are

not taking business opportunities because the price system is not

communicating the right signals uh to them.

This is why he argued.

And balanced growth sequences, that is to say sequences in

which one sector grows faster than others.

Provide this alternative to the price mechanism.

To communicate business opportunities, right, if let's say the consumer

in the consumer manufacturing industries are growing faster, this will

suggest to the producers of inputs, for instance, that there

is a business opportunity, right?

Uh, for them, that was not available before.

Hence Even if this sector grows faster in the beginning,

the other sector will then catch up.

Uh, by, uh, providing the necessary inputs, Hirschman developed a

whole set of techniques and instruments, uh, to operationalize this

idea.

Some of you may be familiar with the notion of

backward and forward linkages, right?

How, uh, um.

Uh, again, uh, the development of consumer industries, uh, will

trigger the development of a middle, uh, range, uh, and

manufacturing industries, um, and his main contribution was to suggest

that the strategy to for development should focus on identifying

this endorsement to invest mechanisms.

Investors need some push.

In order to take the investment decisions that will bring

the economy into a path of self-sustained growth.

All right, so against Paul Rose Rodin, he would argue

and unbalanced growth patterns are from a more a dynamic

perspective, much more efficient than balanced growth patterns because they

communicate the information, the price system, uh, does not, OK.

All right, So this is, this was one seminal debate

in developing theory, but the second one could be thought

in terms of where to place the nature of the

problem, right?

So far we've been discussing that the nature of the

problem lies in the specific characteristics of domestic economies and

see Arthur Lewis, uh, writing here from the LSC.

First from the University of Manchester, studying here at the

LSC and then moving to the University of Manchester, sorry,

uh, would develop what would would become the seminar interpretation

uh of uh how to explain this problem of uh

under uh under employment of resources in developing economies.

For him, the problem lie lay in the following aspect

underdeveloped economies are dual economies.

Right, they are characterised by having at the same time

a traditional sector typically found in agriculture or in the

formal urban sector.

Which is characterised by low productivity, low income, and an

unlimited supply of labour.

This means that in this sector, the classical postulates of

neoclassical economics do not hold.

Real wages here in this diagram exemplified by C by

this flat line.

Will not represent the marginal productivity of labour.

Instead, they will be flat.

No matter how much labour you employ in this economy,

these wages will be pushed down and near to subsistence

levels.

Now, underdeveloped economies.

Together with the traditional sector had modern sectors under which

the classical postulates do hold these modern sectors typically found

in the manufacturing industries or the commercial farming industries will

be characterised by high productivity.

And here the main driver for production is profit as

we should expect by a class of capitalists and entrepreneurs

and this is a context in which the classical postulates

hold the wage of labourers will be determined by their

marginal productivity.

And Arthur Louis' contribution to the discussion of underdevelopment is

to show that actually the dynamism of an economy is

determined by the expansion of modern sectors that capture workers

capture employment uh from the traditional sectors.

And uh this dynamism then is determined by the extent

to which the demand for for labour represented here by

the corps ABDEFG.

Shift the production possibility frontier upwards.

Right, us.

The entrepreneurs in the modern sectors reinvest the surplus in

this higher productivity activities, OK?

So What Arthur Lewis is telling us is that the

existence of this traditional sector and the persistence of this

traditional sector.

The focus on let's say primary export production for example

uh is the main obstacle to development in these economies,

right?

The dynamism is actually introduced by these modern sectors, but

the problem is that these modern sectors will not develop

on their own.

What is needed is To conduct planning.

To transfer labour from the traditional sectors to the modern

sectors.

And this could be done both by protecting local industries,

import substitution policies are justified in this sense we need

to protect local industries because these are the only ones

we introduce dynamism in an economy.

But we also need Someone to take these investment opportunities

when the private sector is not doing it.

This actor is the state.

The state can act as this big entrepreneur who will

channel resources from the traditional sector to the modern sector.

So that the economy enters a path of higher levels

of growth.

All right, so this is uh Louis dual model again

for Luis the problem had to do with the specific

characteristics of underdeveloped economies.

The problem lies in the national economy itself, and this

will contrast with the contributions of the economists working in

the UN Commission for Latin America.

In Santiago de Chile.

So, uh, the main idea.

Or the main Critique of the ECLA school would be

to shift the attention away from identifying obstacles in national

economies to actually point to the international division of labour.

For ECLA, underdevelopment was just the necessary outcome.

Of technical advances at a global scale.

And the main argument sustained that it is the unequal

integration of the centre, those countries uh enrich economies producing

manufacturers and peripheral economies, those countries who are producing natural

resources, mainly agricultural resources uh to the world economy and

the unequal distributions of the gains of trade between both

parties.

This was initially sustained by an empirical observation, so simultaneously

this man over here, Raul Previ, uh working at ECA

in Santiago and Hans Singer uh working in the UN

headquarters in New York, found that uh there is.

A secular decline in terms of trade, uh, against those

countries who are exporters of a primary products.

What this means is that if we look at the

long run relationship between the prices of Export products, primary

export products in international markets and the prices of manufacturing

commodities in international markets, there will be a secular decline

in this proportion which they will interpret as an unequal

distribution of the gains of trade from technical advances.

Notice that this is a stark critique to the fundamental

assumption that had will held uh neoclassical and classical theories

uh that sustain that free trade would benefit all trading

partners.

ELA is arguing here that that is not the case

that actually there are some winners and losers uh in

international trade, in particular those countries who export manufacturers.

Are gaining are extracting gains of trade uh from uh

those who are exporting a primary products so the question

was why, why do the classical Ricardian tenants in international

trade do not hold?

How can we explain the secular decline in the terms

of trade which is affecting those countries uh in the

peripheries.

And ECLA will attempt will provide at least two explanations

in the course of the 1950s.

The first one will uh bring uh some elements similar

to that to those provided by Arthur Lewis.

The problem lies in what they call the structural heterogeneity

of peripheral economies.

These economies are characterised by low productivity and high productivity

sectors, but also within specific sectors, right?

There are low productivity and and high productivity activities.

Think about the industrial sector, right?

We have high productivity activities in the production of a

technologically intensive manufacturers.

But this coexists with the persistence of artisanship, right, and

low technologically intensive activities within this particular sector.

And this is structural heterogeneity following similar mechanisms to to

to those described by Louis will.

Together with the weakness of labour unions, push wages.

Below those that are equal to the marginal productivity of

labourers, right?

So for these reasons, uh, some of the gains of

trade are introduced even in the modern sectors will be

channelled through the process of international trade uh to uh

the centres uh who are exporting manufacturers, right?

To put it otherwise, given this structural heterogeneity.

Advances in the technologies of production do not translate themselves

to higher income in these economies, right?

because wages will not grow at the same pace as

uh we should have expected in a situation of free

competition.

That's the first argument they provide.

The second argument will focus uh to the demand side

and will place the answer in a major structural difference

in, uh, the income elasticity of demand for imports, uh,

in centres and peripheries and in particular.

The demand for imports coming from the peripheries in the

centres will prove to be very elastic.

Uh, this is related to Engel's law as these economies

grow richer as their income improves, well, their demand for

imports, their appetite for the imports of the goods produced

in peripheral countries, notably agriculture and raw material exports, uh,

will diminish, right?

Because they will uh began to focus their consumption habits

uh in manufactured goods and services which these economies do

not produce at the same time, the appetite for imports

of manufactured goods uh in peripheral countries will increase as

these economies get richer, right?

as they develop their industrial economies, as they industrialise well

they require.

Uh Imports of machinery, for example, right, they, they need

to they need to deepen industrialization, they require imports of

this uh er.

Goods produced by uh the central the central economies to

an extent that uh makes uh this this income elasticity

of demand for those imports rather inelastic.

So it is this structurally different.

Uh, a characteristic of the income elasticity of demand which

helps us explain ICA would argue in the late 1950s

the secular decline in the terms of trade and why

some of the gains, uh, of technological advancement are channelled

through the means of international trade from the peripheries, uh,

to the centres.

Now, ECLA modified their Uh, policy prescriptions uh throughout the

1950s and their theories despite some of the criticisms made,

uh, to, uh, the school that you will read in

Albert Human's, uh, work on ideologies of of of development

in Latin America.

At first the main policy recipe would be we need

to industrialise, right?

import substitution industrialization we need we can set tariffs uh

to the imports of manufactured goods to develop our own

uh manufactured industries.

In the late 1950s, given concerns with the sustainability of

this economic planning was suggested following the lines of balanced

growth theorists like Paul Ross Rodin.

But then they realised, well, the size of the market

of these economies might pose some limits, right?

Think of Adam Smith to the growth of these economies

so regional integration such as what's happening in Europe uh

was suggested as as the main uh policy recipe.

But later on, a class position and the position of

the economists writing within this school radicalised.

And By the late 1960s and the early 1970s it

was clear to some of them.

That the state, through economic policy, would not be enough

to deal with the circumstances.

That the reasons for the underdevelopment of these economies require

changing altogether the system of international trade.

And this will be exemplified in a series of international

conferences uh on uh hosted by the United Nations in

which they will propose a revamping of the international order,

right?

This gave birth to what is known as dependency theory

in a sense this idea that this situation of uh

uh inequality in.

Economic terms internationally was coupled by a situation of political

dependence on the decisions made uh in the centre, right?

So revamping the economic international economic order came to be

by the 70s, the key solution to this.

So development economies declined uh in the 1960s 1970s for

many reasons.

The nearly utopian hopes placed on the idea that we

could use economics to transform the realities of poor economies

gave way to a generalised frustration with this policy recipes.

These countries do not not industrialise or if they did,

this did not translate into raising living standards for the

people living in these economies.

By the late 1960s, think about Philli Dean, there was

a much better appreciation about the stark differences between different

developing economies.

That is to say, the construct of the underdeveloped economy,

this idea that one same.

Theory could be applied for multiple economies, even in the

underdeveloped world.

Lecture 18:

OK, guys, we can start now.

So, uh, we're almost getting to the end of this

course.

I know it's sad, but we still have a couple

of sessions to discuss perhaps some more recent developments in

economics for us historians talking about the 1950s, 1960s is

in a way recent history.

So we, uh, discussed in the classes last week how

Hirschman talked about this idea that ideology.

Uh, plays a particular role in trying to understand uh

how.

Economists approach a different set of problems.

We talked about this in the context of development economics

and this was a particularly fruitful ground to discuss how

the economic and political context in which economists are writing

really shape the theories they develop, uh, but we'll discuss

today also how a specific economic and political context, in

particular the Cold War.

It helps us understand both the technical turn in economics,

how economics became much more mathematical, much more tool based,

but also this shift in the United States in particular

and.

Globally later on from the pluralism, this coexistence between different

schools of thought, different traditions in the interwar period to

the dominance of the new classical framework, uh, after the

1950s and 1960s, OK, so that's gonna be the subject

of today's uh lecture.

Uh, first, please do not forget to answer uh the

story for this course.

Any feedback you may have, it's essential for us to

make improvements for, for, for next year.

So, uh, let's sort of.

Think about this idea of technocratic economics in the 20th

century by looking at some of the long run developments

we've studied so far, right?

So what has changed since Adam Smith, not just in

the ideas that economists put forward but also in the

way in which they develop.

We can notice and should be able to identify by

now this transition from a mainly literary way of discussing

about economics to the gradual adoption and the generalisation of

technical tool based modes of reasoning.

We talked about mathematics of course we discussed that with

Valraz in a sense with Jeons this is already present

uh in uh the marginalist thinking, but in the past

few weeks we've also talked about other types of technical

devices.

Think about measurements we discussed business cycle research or the

use of national accounting both in uh macroeconomics and development

economics.

We've seen also that economists think about the world by

using diagrams.

And these are particularly important pedagogical functions.

Think about Marshall and uh the his famous Marshall and

Cross, but economists most and foremost.

Began to in the course of the 20th century to

see the world through the lens of models we've studied

one of those models early on the Table Economic, but

uh we'll discuss today, we'll come back today to for

example how the ISLM model allowed economists to reason about

the causes of economic stagnation but also to inform policy

debates on what should uh the best course of action

be.

So economists work with mathematics, work with a whole.

Toolbox, if you may, of technical devices.

So one could ask ourselves why are these changes happening,

right?

What are perhaps also the external drivers for the adoption

of technical tools in economics we see that by the

mid 20th century, for example, economics has professionalised.

Both in academia and in non-academic settings, right, we do

no long we do no longer see uh this uh

perhaps a public intellectuals who are working outside academic circles

working on economics we discussed about the professionalisation of economics

here in the United Kingdom in the walking tour when

we went to the UCL uh we also talked about

the Cambridge School and this.

Became much more clear in the context of the United

States with the development of economics degrees in the major

centres of economic production, right?

So the professionalisation of economics, people who are entirely devoted

to researching and teaching uh on the discipline, but not

only in academia think about people like John Tinrigan, right?

Uh, the idea that economics could be.

could be done and could develop uh in statistical offices,

for example, in planning offices and that economic expertise was

needed to inform the decisions of governments also helped this

technical turn in the.

And this is related to the second aspect over here

which is that.

The technical turn in economics also was a response to

external demands of objective, uh, factually based knowledge about economies

to respond to a whole new series of challenges.

We saw that with Keynes and Fri, right?

How to deal with the economic depression, how to deal

with the problems of uh regulating the business cycle.

The economics of war, how to plan economic efforts was

also a main impulse for the adoption of this type

of economics and as we discussed in previous weeks, the

problems of reconstruction and development pose their own challenges, right?

So in the long run of the 20th century we

see in this transition from are you mainly using words?

2, using a whole set of mathematical, technical tool-based devices.

In connection to the professionalisation of the discipline but also

to external demands to deal with real world problems.

OK, so we're gonna talk about today some of these

external demands in the context of mid 20th century United

States and in particular think about the difficulties of running

the war economy.

In the US the war economy was run by this

uh military industrial complex, uh, connecting big businesses uh with

governments and this required some sort of planning even in

a country that uh was perhaps quite sceptical about the

uses of planning altogether.

And similarly to what happened in other uh uh sciences,

most of you might have seen uh Oppenheimer and how

physicists and uh uh chemical scientists were recruited by the

government uh to develop new technologies economists were also recruited

to do things such as uh the designing of bombing

rates, right?

How do you make sure that uh bombs uh are

uh.

You are detonated with the amount of precision you need

in a context in which uh there are scarce resources,

right?

And uh techniques such as uh linear programming and operations

research helped to design uh these interventions so you can

think about uh this economists working and coordinating uh all

all of these military decisions.

Someone needed to bring the expertise.

to do this right, the military, they don't necessarily have

uh the tools to do so and economists were recruited,

uh, for these purposes, right?

So we, we have here the economy we uh uh

uh we come back in a sense to something we

have seen already with Pevlen, the economist.

Adopting this role of the engineer, right, coordinating, uh not

just production but the whole organisation of the economy uh

sitting uh in uh behind these screens, right?

It was not just that which economists did, uh, economists

also used for example input output models.

Leon TF, uh, models were developed during the war to

allocate labour uh for the war efforts.

National income accounting as we've seen was used uh for

a post for planning during the war uh and then

uh in the post-war period.

And I've mentioned also the use of operations research and

linear programming, basically what you do when you derive your

models uh in uh deciding the most efficient allocation as

well of a transport routes.

So, uh, in this context in which economists like physicists

like other scientists were incorporated into the wartime efforts.

Uh, we see that, uh, in the in as we

move to the Cold War context, there is a domestic

necessity as well, uh, for, uh, the development of a

tool-based discipline, uh, in the United States.

Uh, this was interrelated to two phenomenons, one which will

become very clear in the paper you read, uh, with

Kenneth Arrow, the idea that the state becomes the main

sponsor of social scientific research through organisations such as the

RAND Corporation.

So the post-military, uh, post-war military funding of social science

research.

Allowed for the development of this very elaborate sophisticated techniques

of economic analysis like operations research, decision theory, game theory,

experimental economic simulation techniques among others, right?

So this cooperation between the state and uh economic research

allowed for the development of all of these techniques.

But there was also an issue about scientific objectivity and

politics during these years so as many of you might

know, uh the post-war period in the United States, uh.

Was crossed by this bitter reaction to those economists who

had been involved uh in the new deal and in

the wartime efforts, uh, the accusations that these economists.

Uh, where associated with communist ideas became pretty prevalent in

uh.

Very conservative circles and this made uh the.

defence of economic ideas quite a politically contest contested subject,

uh, in the area there the era of what is

known as the Marist purges, right?

So economists have to make decisions.

How to present their theories, their observations, their policy recommendations

in a language in a way that conveyed that this

was the result of objective scientific knowledge and not just

of a particular type of ideology.

So these pressures.

In democratist years made in a sense tool-based research safer

than other alternatives.

The use of technical tools became to be seen as

a way to produce objective scientific knowledge that uh was.

Neutral in terms of its politics and in terms of

its ideology, so domestic elements are here, but of course

the Cold War was itself a ideological war.

In the Sputnik era as we see here, uh, the

arms race had a parallel ideological race between two economic

systems, right?

So it was not just about who gets first to

the moon and who developed the technology to do so,

but also what is the best economic system, uh, to.

Achieve desirable social aims.

People like Kenneth Arrow will ask himself this question, right?

Uh are free markets is a society organised around free

markets?

Able to provide the necessary stimulus for technology and innovation.

Or is there any sort of advantage in a centrally

planned economy so we come back to some of the

debates that we had discussed, uh, between the Austrians and

the planners right around the socialist calculation debate.

So this we have here the split between the Soviet

bloc in which planning was used for fairness but also

to bring people to the moon, Sputnik.

And we have on the other on the other side

a system that was based on the idea that free

markets are the ones that lead to more most efficient

outcomes, right?

And some economic knowledge was needed to really put forward

this idea.

To justify why a capitalist system, a system based of

free markets was better than uh this centrally planned alternative,

right?

And this was, I mean to to arises, it's a

little bit difficult to understand, right, looking at it from

the perspective of the 21st century after the collapse of

the Soviet Union, but in the 1950s it was really

an open question.

Right, which system is better to achieve socially desirable ends

which system will prevail among the other?

And economic ideas and knowledge and particularly technically uh oriented

economic knowledge was used to justify precisely this.

Now we've seen also um that there were mixed cases

and this is also important to uh to consider we

discussed uh in the previous week development economics and how

planning was sort of used together with markets in the

constitution of mixed economies and also think about the social

democratic and welfare state models uh in the United States.

All of these used economic theory and economic knowledge in

one way or another.

So What is the relationship between this political context of

the Cold War and the uh dominance of the neoclassical

framework in the post-war period.

The argument I have in this lecture is that it

allows us this technical tool allows us to understand this

transition from the interval pluralism to the postwar dominance of

a tool-based neoclassical economics.

The technical turn in a sense helped sediment the core

of new classical economics.

Remember the three legs of the stool.

But also to incorporate some critiques and to inform outward

developments, so the tools of decision theory.

We'll come to this later on in this lecture in

a sense allowed economists to present competitive equilibrium and the

cons and the context of maximum maximising uh utility behaviours

as a normative reference as the norm it's an ideal

world, but it's the norm against which the deviations must

be compared and this might might might come familiar to

the way in which you all think today, right?

You begin with this ideal scenario.

And then you incorporate some deviations, some imperfections, and you

compare what are the, for example, efficiency.

Outcomes of this scenario of deviations versus the normative norm

and uh this became possible uh due to the incorporation

of the technical tools that I will discuss uh in

this lecture.

So we'll, I'll talk about at least 2 developments in

neoclassical economics.

That uh help us understand the significance of this technical

term during the Cold War.

Uh the first one is the neoclassical synthesis in a

sense this attempt uh to reconcile Keyician ideas, theories of

income determination uh with uh neoclassical microeconomics.

And in the micro and if sorry if in the

macro perhaps a Marshallian approach to markets was more dominant,

particularly in theory, in the micro, uh, we'll see how

general equilibrium theory served not just to justify that a.

System organised around uh free markets uh leads to efficient

outcomes but also to assess uh welfare implications of the

sort that were required uh during this time.

So we'll discuss the general equilibrium theory and the two

theorems of welfare economics in much more detail, OK.

So this is the plan I have for us today.

So we'll start discussing the technical turn in a sense

it is a matter of summing up some of the

stuff we'll, we've talked about in the course, and then

we'll jump into these two examples of cold war New

classical economics, the new classical synthesis and welfare economics.

OK.

So we see different ways in which economics changed with

this technical term.

And the first one is related to uh the use

of measurements.

And the development of measurement tools uh from the late

19th century to uh the interre period, data collection, uh,

increased and widened in scope as we've discussed this was

not just unique to economics, right?

The growth of states and states statistical offices provided in

the in some sense the data that economies required uh

to observe and act on the economy.

We have also different forms of measurements uh uh performing

different er er.

Activities, uh we have uh measurements that combine different pieces

of information or measurements that aggregate them or that reduce

them, um, all to operationalize if you may the economic

concepts that have been developed in the discipline.

So you may think about for example the use of

index numbers uh to monitor economic activity inflation, the CPI

for example in the 1920s and 1930s.

Discussed how economic measurements about the business cycles were developed

in uh the business cycle research institutes uh in the

twenties, new measurements of unemployment uh using household surveys, national

accounts, right, is aggregate views of the economy as a

whole.

And increasingly as governments took responsibility uh from economists and

commercial interests, these numbers were used also to inform policy.

But it was not just about uh the creation of

these measurement instruments but also about the development of statistical

methods to both reason with these measurements and to test

theories on the ground, so we've discussed the development of

the econometrics programme.

But there were also other developments you may wish to

have into account, laugh and field experiments uh of the

sort that have become much more dominant, uh, today in

uh your econometrics, uh, studies.

OK, so economists use numbers to approach the economic reality

and this is in a in a sense a 20th

century phenomenon.

Now something that is interesting is that this drive for

measurement was orthogonal uh to different schools of thought.

So we see the marginalists collecting numbers, the institutionalists like

communist Vevlen, uh, Mitchell collecting numbers, of course the historical,

the the German historical school, and the new classical, right?

So this was not just something that was unique to

the new classical framework but was happening across the board.

OK.

Second, changing in quality in how economics was done in

the 20th century change in what we may call the

modes of expression, right?

So the modes of expression and reasoning and economics.

In the course of the 20th century began to be

exposed in more technical terms, uh, and we will discuss

some examples of we have discussed some examples of this

in the course uh already right think about diagrams and

diagrammatic reasoning, the Marshallan cross.

We'll talk today about the use of the edge word

box uh in reasoning and thinking about welfare economics.

The incorporation of mathematics and mathematical reasoning.

We've had many examples, uh, er think about expected utility

theory, game theory, and decision theory.

And, uh, particularly in the 1950s and the 1970s this

was the high point of axiomatic thinking uh in in

economics by the incorporation of formalistic mathematical theory and this

will become particularly important in the general equilibrium theory framework.

But also modelling, right, both in terms of mathematical modelling

in economic theorising, again, the general equilibrium theory or think

about the ISLM model.

Which has both a mathematical and a diagrammatic expression, but

also in terms of applied statistical work, right, we discussed

uh Timbergen's Dutch model or Fritoch model as well, right?

And in this sense, even though many schools of thought

or traditions were collecting measurements and numbers, these new modes

of expression became much more prevalently used and fully focused

uh in neoclassical economics.

OK.

Third, change in quality.

Economics incorporating both technical modes of reasoning and measurements became

a tool-based science.

This is connected to what I've I've mentioned before, the

idea that objectivity in the production of social scientific knowledge

became associated uh with the way in which technical tools

were incorporated.

They were attached to the use of tools and affected

the ways in which economists began to see and perceive

and act on the world and this was true both

in science and in art, both in the production of

theory and uh in uh policy making.

With this we can associate a downgrading of the ambitions

in economics if compared to the 19th century.

So remember for people like Smith, Marx, Ricardo, the objective

of economics was to this.

Entangle to observe to describe to report on general laws

of nature, right, whereas with the use of these technical

modes of expression economics becomes much more about the production

and the use of useful models, right?

synthetic useful models to represent the economic reality and to

reason about theories and to inform policy with them.

And models in the course of the 20th century became

more tools for both investigating theories and conducted applied work,

so we see also this distinction between uh applied and

uh theoretical uh developments.

This will become very clear in the history of macro,

right?

We'll discuss about how the developments in macroeconomics uh in

a theoretical fashion perhaps did not run in the same

direction as those in applied work.

Whereas macro theory relied much more on martial and understanding

of markets, uh, the applied work, uh, relied perhaps more

on, uh, the macroeconometric models based on Russian understandings of

markets, right?

So two different strands and two different ways in which

economic theory could be developed.

Uh, and the gradual ascendancy of new classical economics in

theorising became much more associated with mathematization, right?

And this points to this change in how the objectivity

of economic ideas was predicated not on.

This notion of evenhandedness on the sense that we trust

economists because they are disinterested social scientists who are studying.

Natural general laws, but rather we trust them because of

the tools they use because of how they reach this

conclusions uh using mathematical and hard tools of economic science,

right?

So some historians of economics have related this to what

we may call a physics envy, the idea of resembling

the natural sciences, uh, to appear more objective, right?

Uh, in the context of this course will associate this

rather with the demands and the particular politically contentious context

of the Cold War period which made this a safer

way to produce science and to make economics useful as

well uh to inform policy debates.

All right, so how So far this is sort of

a sum up of what we've studied in the course

and this technical term seems a little bit theoretical a

little bit abstract.

So let's see some illustrations of uh how this uh

both had incidences in the way in which macroeconomics uh

proceeded and in which in in big developments in microeconomic

theory, particularly related uh to uh welfare economics.

So let's start with uh the macro.

So Remember, From when we studied games, the general theory

and you suffered this in your own.

Uh, Hans, uh, Keynes's work was rather complicated, right?

Sam Wilson, as we discussed in the lecture, would say

about this work that it was badly written, it was

poorly organised.

No it was mainly written in prose, right?

So we discussed how the circulation of economic ideas was

facilitated by the translation of Keynes.

General arguments into the more tractable language of neoclassical economics,

right?

Uh we'll talk about two examples in which this was

done.

This again relates to some of the readings that you've

done before, but we, we didn't have enough space to

elaborate on in the lecture, right?

So we'll focus on the history of the ISSL and

ISLM model.

And how this way of thinking about Keynesian concepts, using

diagrams helped.

Economists to debate among themselves about the diagnosis of the

economic depression but also about the best policy recommendations, so

we'll discuss the ILM model as interpreted by Hicks and

by Molligliani who we will see reached very different conclusions.

So the model as a space in which economists can

debate about theories.

And then we'll just move very quickly uh in our

discussion of how uh Hansen and Samuelson uh incorporated national

income reasoning uh and a sequential and develop the sequential

model to examine the effects of fiscal policies uh on

uh the economies, OK.

So let's start with the ISLM model.

So remember the, the core idea of Hicks was that

Keynes's general theory was not as general as he had

argued.

Keynes and the classics in a sense could be reconciled

in a much more general theory of markets and this

could be done by just using this very simple Marshallian

models.

As you all know, the ISLM model represents the relationship

between the equilibrium in the markets of goods as represented

by the IS core and uh the markets uh for

money, the money markets, uh, in Higgs jargon, the LL

curve.

I think Hicks generality was to suggest that actually the

LL cor and its shape depends on the two different

motives that the classics and Keynes had identified in terms

of why individuals demand money, right?

So the shape of the LL curve, to put it

in other words, is what distinguishes Kin Kane's, uh, world,

the world of Keynes from the world of the classics.

So we are in King's world in a context in

which The portion of the LL curve is flat.

In this context, the speculative motive dominates, right?

This is a context in which the liquidity, a liquidity

trap prevails.

The context of depressions, no matter how much you increase

monetary supply, no matter how much you try to bring

the interest rate down, people will not use this money.

Uh, to transact with each other, they will not use

it, uh, in commercial transactions, but, uh, rather, uh, they

will hoard it and speculate with it, right, invest in

uh stock markets.

So Keynes was right in the context in which the

speculative motive prevails and this can be represented in this

very simple model as a flat portion uh in the

NL core.

But the classics are right if the economy, if the

demand for money is in the vertical point, right, in

that point in which the NL curve has a positive

scope in this context there is a uh an an

uh uh a tradeoff between uh saving your money and

uh using it to.

Uh, a, a, a as.

Uh, as a means of exchange, right, and, uh, an

increase of monetary supply might, uh, lead to an increase

in mon in economic activity, right?

So if the transactions motive prevails, we are in the

classical world.

If the speculative motive prevails, we are in the world

of Keynes in the world of depression, right?

So we can reconcile using this beautiful, very simple diagram

what Keynes believed was an insurmountable gap.

Mr.

Keynes, your theory is not as general as you believed.

That's the core argument of Mr.

Keynes and the classic the text you read.

Now this has nothing to do in his theory with

wage stickiness, which is what we would typically associate today

uh with the Keynesian world.

uh Higgs assumes that the wages were sticky in both

cases.

And The reason for which economies.

are in the Keynesian world for Keynes is that they

have fallen in a liquidity trap, no matter how much

money you print, no matter how much you increase monetary

supply, this will not lead to increases in income.

And in this sense monetary policy will not do, right?

This was in the context of the 1930s, the classical

solution, the solution uh provided by uh people uh who

uh were operating under the rationale of the quantity theory

of money hence to reactivate from economic depression only fiscal

policy, uh, will help economies lift this liquidity trap.

Now what's interesting is the way in which this very

same model was reinterpreted by Franco Modigliani, and this points

to something that is characteristics of models in themselves, right?

So models are used both to represent the world.

Economic world in this case, the equilibrium between the monies,

the money and the goods market, but models are also

a world in themselves.

A world that could be explored through theories, right?

So they are not the picture of the world, they

are a world that allows for reinterpretation and recasting and

hence they provide a platform for economists to debate among

themselves.

And this is particularly clear in the way in which

Modigliani interpreted.

This particular set of relations.

So for Modigliani, the classical world is that which is

characterised by a flexible wages.

We're coming now to the understanding of Keynes that we

have now, whereas nominal rigidity.

Is the only explanation for the lack of full employment

in the short run.

And this is this introduces the difference between nominal wages

and the supply of money, right?

If increased monetary supply nominal wages will take some luck,

some time to adjust.

In this context, Modigliani will tell us.

It is sticky wages, particularly downward sticky wages, sticky wages

in the downward turn of the cycle, which explains the

economics of depression.

But more importantly, the only way to deal with this,

given the stickiness of wages is by increasing the monetary

supply is through monetary policy.

So in other words, as the historian of economics, uh,

Michel Dere puts it.

What to Hicks was classical policy, right, monetary approach to

the problem of depression in Modigliani's hands became Keynesian policy.

And this will be this will become a contested field

in macroeconomics throughout the 1940s and the 1950s, right?

Was he right?

Is he in his interpretation of games or was Modigliani

right?

Uh, leading to also applied, uh, studies to try to

assess what is, uh, the main cause of the depression

and what then are the main policy recommendations, uh, to

live, uh, to uh implement a countercyclical policies.

OK, so first example, right, the translation of Keynes's general

ideas by using diagrams by using models.

Helped The development of the science, the development of macroeconomics

by providing a platform for posing these debates, right, not

just about theory, but also about policy.

Isn't this fantastic, right?

How can a model be used in this particular way?

All right.

Second example The use of national income accounting in Clinician

macro so Keyne's ideas were difficult to bring into practise,

and it was the parallel development of national income accounts

as we saw when we discussed economic planning which served

to personalise uh Key's ideas.

And uh this uh was facilitated by these very simple

sequential models which again introduce a time dimension uh into

Keynes' theory.

We uh we, we saw that when we read the,

the, the text by Hansen and by Samuelson.

And in this particular example, uh, this could be used

and uh to evaluate the effects of government expenditures on

business cycles, right?

to test Key's idea about uh the multiplier effect, right?

Uh, to what extent an additional 1 pound spent in

public works will lead to higher income, employment and income,

uh, in the next period.

And what Paul Samuelson did uh with this model uh

by aggregating what he called the acceleration effect effect this

will have also on private investment was to suggest that

the answer was not straightforward, right?

It actually depended on the parametric characteristics of the of

each particular economy.

What is the value of the multiplier and uh the

accelerator will determine whether this will lead to a smooth.

Pattern of increase in uh uh income or will or

the extent to which uh public investments fiscal policy, active

fiscal policy could actually make things worse, could actually worsen

the cycle and introduce more macroeconomics instability.

So a different way of using mathematics and models in

economics, right?

In this case it's not just to reflect about theories

or about the interpretation of the depression but rather to

use simulations to estimate a possible effects of a specific

uh fiscal policies.

Now, this type of reasoning uh in macroeconomics uh was

not only used in uh the uh discussions on uh

on economic reactivation.

Uh, we also see, and you've also seen how this

became particularly dominant, uh, in the literature, uh, on a

long run economic growth.

Just think of the Harrower model and later on in

the new classical model.

They all incorporate this way of thinking about income determination

in terms of sequential analysis.

Second example of how.

Technical economics transformed Keynes's ideas, right, and allowed to uh

simulate uh a specific policy interventions.

Technical uses of economics, OK.

So what is, what is the new classical synthesis?

So Samuelson coined the term, uh, in the 1950s alluding

to this idea of a consensus in the economics profession

after the Second World War about the complementarity between neoclassical

micro and theories of income determination, right?

Keynesian theories of income determination.

So while Keynes had attempted to break with the classical

tradition, Sam Wilson.

was very confident, writing in the mid 1950s actually saying

most economists agree that both theories can be reconciled, right?

Most economists will both adopt all their economies.

Micro neoclassical economics and modern theories of income uh determination

with the exception perhaps of 5% strength left wing or

right wing writers, right?

And Samuelson had an agenda here.

He was pushing the idea that Keynes theory could be

interpreted in these terms and in a sense the new

classical synthesis was in no small way uh a product

of Sam Samuelson's own doing.

So I think that the.

I, I prefer this uh reading by a, a.

Solo, uh this uh new classical the growth theorist.

Who refers to the neoclassical synthesis in this way he

would say my own preferred stance in macroeconomics is to

be a sort of eclectic clinician in the short run

and a sort of a classic eclectic neoclassical economist in

the long run.

So we see here two elements of the neoclassical synthesis

one that.

Uh, the classics were right if we are concerned with

how economies develop in the long run, right, with, uh,

when, when prices and wages are flexible.

And that perhaps Keynesian ideas are uh true in the

short run, but I would like to point you to

this reflection about the collectiveness of the tools uh used

uh in uh this context, right?

So we can interpret the new classical synthesis in a

sense instead of providing a unified model of the economy

as a toolbox of eclectic church run kinician or long

run neoclassical models, right?

And macroeconomists use both depending on the specific problem they

had at hand, right?

So if you're using the tube, you use the tube

map, right, but if you're travelling to an unknown country

you will use a different sort of map and this

is sort of how macro.

Economics proceeded in the second half of the 20th century,

right, instead of a dominant view as some some uh

supposed an eclectic set of basically Keyishian uh models to

study the economies in the short and in the long

run.

All right, so very quickly.

We'll discuss this in the classes, but the mature synthesis,

as Blanchard called it in the 1960s, precisely reconciled Keynesian

arguments of income determination with some uh neoclassical tools.

So we discussed, for example, how Keynes in describing the

functional relations that characterise consumption, uh, referred to this psychological

law, the, the propensity to consume, uh, economists like Modigliani

and Frischman.

Uh, will attempt to explain how these are the result

of microeconomic uh uh behaviours, right?

Um.

This Was what came to be known in the literature

as the debate between the permanent income and the life

cycle hypothesis.

All the developments were visible in terms of the investment

theories, the liquidity preference, the incorporation of expectations in the

work of James Tobin.

We'll come back to this point, uh, when, uh, in,

in the next lecture and of course.

The determination of wages and prices uh through uh an

ados Philip court right the empirical estimation of this inverse

relationship between wages and prices, right, which was erroneously interpreted

by the monetarists in their critique as a trade-off between

inflation and unemployment.

OK, this was an empirical uh approach.

So it seems that in a sense Mr.

Samuelson was, was partially right.

It could be that neoclassical tools could be used uh

to uh reinterpret Keynes's ideas, right?

There was some, some sort of synthesis here.

Uh, in the remit of applied macro, we see uh

the opposite, not the use of uh.

Marshallion Approaches to markets but rather the use of large

scale macroeconometric models which with the use of computation in

the 1960s allowed the extension of Frei and Trigan's early

models uh into models that more more adequately represented uh

economic activity and these, these were used also to evaluate

different policies.

These are some of the most well known.

OK, so we'll come back to some of these issues

next week when we discuss the neoclassical.

The critiques of the new classics uh to uh clinicianism

and the new classical synthesis because I would like to

devote the next 5 to 10 minutes to talk about.

And welfare economics.

So if in the macro technical tools, models, diagrams were

used to transform Keynesian ideas and to make them tractable,

uh, using neoclassical tools, uh, in microeconomics, the use of

formal analysis and diagrammatic thinking also helped to address what

Kenneth Arrow considered one of the fundamental questions in economics,

the Adam Smith question that I referred to multiple times.

And in a sense the Cold War heightened the importance

to provide a satisfactory answer to this question, right?

How can economic coordination be achieved by a free enterprise

economy, right?

There was a real life example across.

The Iron Curtain in the Soviet Union.

Under which economic coordination was achieved through planning but also

that was able to produce technological innovations that seemed unparalleled

in the free world, right?

So to what extent this is possible was a fundamental

theoretical and ideological question uh during these years.

And if it is possible.

Does this form of social organisation lead to desirable outcomes?

And Aro de Bre and Han rekindled the general equilibrium

theory programme VAS and Lausanne and Pareto and the School

of Lausanne and worked out as we've discussed before, not

just the proof of the existence and the stability for

the general market equilibrium, right?

So yes, it is possible to think theoretically about economic

coordination in a decentralised system.

But also provided a question to these normative implications of

the system, right?

And they proved the two fundamental theorems of welfare economics

to which I will come uh in a minute.

However, Uh, this, uh, desirable outcomes that are associated with,

uh, the welfare theorems only operate under very specific certain

conditions, and this is important to take into account.

So the 1950s and 1970s was the high point of

axiomatic mathematical theory in economics and building on a biration

system of equations plus diagrammatic reasoning, uh.

And incorporating new advancement in pure mathematics, particularly Bourbaki's formalism

and Kakutani's fixed point theorem, Arro de Breon Han managed

to provide an answer and a framework, uh, to, uh,

think about, uh, economic activity in terms of a general

market equilibrium theory, right, to think about this normative referent

against which we should compare the deviations we observe, uh,

in real economies.

You don't need to care too much about this, but

it's worth having it here.

OK, so let's focus on diagrammatic thinking.

Because Welfare thinking is building on a long tradition of

using diagrams, right, to think about efficiency, matters of efficiency

and distribution that go back to this guy over here

Isidro Edgeworth.

To whom we owe the label of the H word

box.

But the history of this books also reveals how diagrammatic

thinking also limits what economists can do with this, right,

and what they can think about and in particular distributional

elements uh seemed very difficult to incorporate into this particular

form of economic representation.

So interestingly, uh, Edward, Edgeworth did not provide a box.

Uh, this is a representation of Edgewood, uh, a contract,

uh, a line, uh, line of contracting, right, between the

two parties.

Not that it is not a closed box, but it's

rather an open box.

We have previous, uh, developments before, uh, in Jevons, right,

and this is a margin in which is representing now

the exchanges between two bodies.

Think aboutge's trading model.

So building on this representation, Edgeworth provided uh a first

diagrammatic representation of contracting, right, the contracting curve, this curve

at which uh two economic agents uh will exchange with

each other and uh at which.

It will be impossible to improve the situation of one

without deteriorating the situation of the other.

Again, it's not a closed box.

The box was finally closed almost 30 years after Edgeworth

proposed it by Boley, so this is what you would

typically associate with.

At the edge word box.

Now, let's think for a minute about what it implies

to close a box.

It implies that we are fixing the the endowments in

an economy, right, that we are asking ourselves about deficiency

and welfare considerations in an economy with fixed endowments, right?

And as, as, as we know, uh, it is possible

to think about uh the exchanges between this between two

parties and a a line of contracting in a context

of fixed endowments, right?

uh.

Which uh it comes very, very clear in uh in

this modern uh diagram of what we mean by par

optimality, right?

The possibility of improvements and optimality, right, the possibility of

improving, uh, one party's condition without affecting the other.

So How can we incorporate growing?

Uh, resources or matters of distribution.

Well, we can think it's just a matter of expanding

the box, making it bigger.

But Sitovsky tried to do that in the 1950s and

he realised it's not just about expanding the box, then

it becomes a matter also of thinking in three dimensions

of climbing the Pareto hill if you may.

Leon TF asked himself, OK, what happens not just if

we change endowments but also if we incorporate the dyna

dynamics into the system and look how complicated it was,

right?

This was a common way of thinking about welfare economics

uh into the 19 into the 1940s.

So in a sense incorporated well incorporating welfare considerations, particularly

we are concerned with matters not just of efficiency but

also of distribution became particularly difficult using geometry and two

diagrams and this.

Allowed in a sense uh Arrow the hand to make

a real contribution to economic science by approaching these questions

through formal analysis, right?

So this leads us to the two fundamental theorems of

welfare economics.

The first theorem says that every competitive equilibrium, as you

know, is efficient.

Notice it says nothing about fairness.

Uh, it is in a context of given endowments, no

matter how unequal a society is, a free market society,

uh, can be efficient while being very unequal.

But this was compensated in a sense by the second

fundamental theory, right, in which an economy with a convex

technology preferences.

Uh, a Pareto efficient allocation can be sustained.

That is to say you can keep the dimensions of

efficiency in a competitive equilibrium with appropriate prices by redistribution,

redistriting ownership fares, uh, uh, that is to say initial

endowments, right.

So you can Incorporate dimensions of redistribution under certain circumstances,

uh, and still guarantee that these markets are efficient.

Now these two theorems hold under very restrictive assumptions, right?

We are assuming that uh markets are that.

Uh, indivisibilities are not present, that there are no externalities,

right, and that agents have perfect information.

And we'll come back to those circumstances in which these

Assumptions do not hold, particularly uh in the in the

allocation of resources for innovation and medical care when we

discuss Kenneth Arrow's work next week.

OK, so just to sum up, in the Cold War

context, the use of technical tools became associated with scientific

objectivity tool-based research in this context as I argued was

safer than alternatives approaches.

Lecture 19:

Right I'll go.

OK OK.

work Is there?

Oh OK.

Um.

stop Yes.

OK, guys, I think we can start now.

Uh, so it's very, it's very sad day because it's

the last.

Set of lectures uh in this course, but it's also

I hope a good uh setting uh to start zooming

out and uh looking back at all that we've learned

together in the course of the last year and we'll

close uh today uh with a first lecture in the

first hour on recent developments in economics and then uh

we'll move on to a broad overview of the contents

of the course and I'll say a few things about.

The final exam, uh, given that we have a lot

of things to digest today, uh, we'll make a short

break of 5 to 10 minutes, uh, in between, uh,

so that you can breathe and I can also, uh,

have a sip of water and move on with, uh,

the next lecture.

So let me begin with some recent developments in economics

by perhaps.

Coming back to what we've been discussing in the past

few weeks, right?

So we've seen how modern economics, uh, went through what

historians of the discipline called a technical turn in the

20th century.

So we read Adam Smith, we read Karl Marx, and

we know that the way in which they were doing

economics was very different from what a 20th century economists

do, right?

They were, they were arguing with.

Words building arguments sometimes using diagrams, but this did not

become part and parcel of the ways the lens in

which with which economists approach the world, right?

We now know that modern economists see see, think, discuss

and act on economies using technical devices such as measurements,

diagrams, and especially models, right?

In the last week.

Uh, and in this week's classes we've, uh, exemplified in

a sense illustrated how this technical turn in economics transformed

the discipline by studying, for example, the genetic theory and

welfare economics agenda of the post-war period by reading Arrow,

right?

so.

Uh, in the context of microeconomics, uh, we have here

in the 1950s and 1960s the years of high theoretical

formally, uh, mathematical, uh, economics, uh, in a way, uh,

strengthening the core assumptions of the discipline in the context

of macro we also saw how these techniques allowed a

translation of Kynesian ideas.

Into the apparatus of new classical economics and by the

1950s and 1960s that the emergence of what came to

be known the new classical and synthesis right came in

the macro and Pician macro could be reconciled with the

uh main assumptions of uh the classics.

So both, uh, this process of becoming technical in a

sense.

Had as a product as a result the making of

a mainstream in economics, right?

So the main critiques in the first part of the

20th century, think about games were incorporated into the discipline,

uh, by, uh, these years, and this was as we've

discussed.

Of the result of this internal developments in the discipline

increasing mathematization and use of technical tools but also responding

to some external demands and constraints, right?

We talked a little bit about how the Cold War

pose some exigencies uh on social scientists, um.

But also made it urgent uh to respond uh questions

such as how can we think of the benefits of

a free market society in a context of competing ideologies

with the Soviet Union, right?

So the making of a mainstream has been the subject

of the past uh few weeks now, uh, in this

context in which there seemed to be no alternative to

new classical economics or better in which the alternatives could

be very easily accommodated into uh the mainstream of the

discipline.

By using modern techniques and mathematics, how can we study

recent developments in economics?

That's a challenging question for historians of the discipline.

One approach, uh, in particular, this one followed by Degra

and the Clabo, uh, two Canadian economists is, OK, let's

look at what economists write about, right?

Let's use, uh, modern visualisation techniques.

Uh, to try and identify which are the main things,

the main, you know, in a way keywords, uh, in

the discipline.

So, uh, based on, uh, uh, the GEL publications and,

uh, quotes in the first in the first five journals,

uh, in the discipline, the top 5 journals they use

geometri approaches to say something about what is it that

economists write about.

So here you have a clusters that are based on

citations of different uh between different papers according to the

web of science so they systematised over 415,000 documents, and

each node represents uh here the relative share of documents

contained that contain this specific keyword, right?

Now this provides a broad overview of the development of

the discipline in the past 3 decades so we can

see some general trends that are relevant for today's lecture

and for your own understanding of how the economics became

to be what you study today.

Right, the first one we see how from these years

in which the word theory or theories were central, think

about general equilibrium theory, uh, arrow debre and hand and

its implications on welfare economics, for example, we see a

shift towards what historians have called an applied science.

Economics has become much more applied.

The applied turn in economics happening between the 60s and

the 80s, leading to a point in which the central

topic in the discipline is evidence or testing, right?

And this is parallel with a second development, uh, which

uh helps us to understand what it means to say

that economics has become applied.

We've studied in this course the origins of econometrics, right?

And econometrics until the 1950s and 1960s was in a

sense a very specialised stock field within the discipline.

But as you all know, econometrics has become part and

parcel of what all economists do, right?

So you have uh micro and macroeconomists who, uh, in

a way, uh, are not just developing theories but rather

building on the core theoretical developments of the 1950s and

1960s to apply the theories uh to a real micro

and macroeconomic problems, right?

So first.

Thing to have into account economics become much more applied,

hence all the emphasis on metrics that uh your degrees

uh all have.

Now, a second, uh, development that I want to uh

reveal is what's happening to specifics of fields.

Uh, for example, we see that uh economics becomes much

more specialised.

So from, uh, for example, discussions on development during the

1950s and 1960s, we see a a a bigger emphasis

on trying.

To understand matters of growth and endogenous growth again incorporating

new classical techniques uh to approach questions in the underdeveloped

world did not seem to be quite different from uh

what could be applied for, uh, the advanced economies, right?

So a restriction in the scope of the discipline.

Uh, in a sense that, uh, economics became to be

much more identified by the type of methods that are

used than by the objects and the questions that are

analysed.

All right.

So from this broad overview.

Um, The key conclusion is the making of a mainstream

that solidifying during this period of the three legs of

the stool of neoclassical economics, rationality, equilibrium, and perfect competition.

We can think of two legs being a little bit

weaker uh during these years.

Think about the critiques uh to the equilibrium framework, right?

Um, and, uh, to the perfect competition we've seen some

of these critiques, uh, in the course, for instance, think

about the Austrians criticising neoclassical economics for being unable to

account for change in a context in which economists are

always changing these, uh, notions of equilibrium did uh do

not capture what is central uh in economic systems.

We've also seen some critiques uh to the notion, the

assumption of perfect competition, uh, we discussed very briefly we

talked about Marshall early on and then, uh, on the

institutionalists.

This tendency towards monopoly, right, monopolistic competitions or the rationals

in redco's were about the growth of the firm, right.

So these were two weak legs in a sense that

New classical economics was able to accommodate very easily with

the introduction of notions such as market failures that we

discussed in the class last week, OK.

But there was a leg if you may that remained

very strongly until at least the late 20th century in

the discipline, which is this notion of rationality, right, the

rationality of the economic man who knows what he wants

and who knows what the consequence of his actions are

and uh is uh perfectly capable of uh.

Exerting that of making that decision of optimising decisions, right,

uh, to achieve, uh, what they want, the rationality assumption

of the economic.

And here uh we see uh this notion of rationality

extending in the 1950s, for example, with the development of

expected utility theory.

Uh, we.

With Gra night for example we had seen how these

notions of rationality sat a little bit weirdly when agents

had to operate under circumstances of uncertainty and what when

Morgenin uh and Nash and others, uh, did with the

development of game theory was to incorporate notions of, uh.

Um, rationality, uh, into thinking about strategic behaviours, uh, er,

looking ahead into the future.

We saw in in some sense that Keynesian economists questioned

uh traditional uh rational behaviours.

For example, we saw that uh the propensity to consume

uh relied on psychological laws.

Keyne's understanding of investment and importance he gave to uh

expectations also pointed to some, uh, irrationality in economic behaviours.

And what I want to discuss about today is an

irony in this reversal between micronomic microeconomics and macroeconomics, right,

whereas microeconomics relies on a very strong assumption on individuals

from finality in these years of high theory of the

1950s and 1960s.

This notion came under under attack by the late 20th

century.

Incorporating some earlier critiques by both organisational theorists and psychologists

against the poor realism of these assumptions on rationality.

And by the late 20th century these critiques, these behavioralist

critiques which were in the fringes of the discipline, became

more mainstream leading to the recognition of the fact that

we need to take seriously these cognitive biases that individuals

have in making decisions and people like Kaneman Taversky and

Vernon Smith.

Earlier proponents of the limitations to the rational economic agents

will win the Nobel Prize of Economics, uh, in the

2000s, making this a recognition by the mainstream in the

discipline of the importance of taking these cognitive limitations in

place.

So if we see this movement in microeconomics to incorporate

the limitations, the cognitive problems of this assumption of rational

economic agents, we see the opposite trend happening in macroeconomics.

And we'll study that today with what was the new

classics critique.

That we associate with people like Robert Lucas to this

perhaps very clumsy, uh uh microeconomic foundations of Keynesian economics

based on these supposedly psychological laws of human nature.

OK, so macroeconomics becoming.

Much more microfounded uh in strong and very strong notions

of rationality.

OK, so this is the agenda I have for us

today.

We'll start talking about.

Rational expectations in neoclassical macroeconomics, the question of the micro

foundation of the macro.

And uh we'll come back then to the critiques of

notions of rationality in microeconomics uh by talking about both

the work of behavioural economists and evolutionary economics which are

I think two growing fields, uh, in economics uh today

which question precisely the rationality of the economic man as

we've studied in this course, OK.

So this is the agenda for us guys.

Let's start with uh the notion of rational expectations.

And uh what was the road uh to uh the

type of economics macroeconomics that you studied today?

So by the 1950s and the 1960s, macroeconomics in a

sense.

Relied on a macro on on Marchaian frame, right?

We, we saw that with uh Keynes with the translation

of Keynesian ideas, um, uh, into the for example the

ISLM model, but this was also true about the other.

Alternative monetarism, uh, which we associate to uh this man

over here, Milton Friedman, which was not only an economist

but a public intellectual was very influential in shaping public

discourse, uh, in particular in his critique, uh, to King

Nian ideas and Milton Friedman wrote in 1952, what is

1953, sorry, what is perhaps one of the most influential

methodological.

Texts in economics, uh, the methodology of positive economics and

I'm sure all of you have heard about this distinction

between positive and normative economics and the methodological assumptions underlying

this distinction are what we know as instrumentalism, right?

And Milton Friedman will defend it in this way.

It is a bad critique to say that models that

economic theories are unrealistic.

Because all that we need to assume.

Is that agents behave as if they were rational.

No one is claiming that they are rational as we

assume in our our economic theories.

This is the this relates to this notion of instrumentalism,

right?

The as if type of models that economists often do.

And the key.

Test between two competing theories is not the realism, the

extent to which they represent the world they're trying to

understand, but rather the extent to which these assumptions allow

economists to predict.

More phenomenon and to predict them better, right?

So he will give an example, for example, uh if

we are thinking about the behaviours of firms.

Uh, all we need to assume is that these firies

behave as if they were profit maximizers or cost minimizers.

This is the type of assumption, the type of theory

that allow us to predict the consequences of firms actions

in real economies much better.

We economists, we do not care about.

The colour of the eyes of the entrepreneurs or how

they look right or their specific personal characteristics we need

to make abstraction of all of this, uh, to focus

on those elements of uh individual in this case very

behaviour that matter for the problems we are dealing with,

right?

We, we've seen this idea before with with John Stuart

Mill in his definition of what economics is before, right?

Um, so economics as an abstract science makes abstraction of

those other elements which are irrelevant, right, and focus on

those assumptions that help us predict, uh, phenomenon and, uh,

do it better than others, OK.

So building on this idea of the instrumentalist use of

assumptions and models.

Milton Friedman makes a distinction between what he calls the

positive aspects of economics, economics as a science, which is

again about not just describing the world but making predictions

about the world and economics as an art, right?

The the idea that we can build on the science

to make policy recommendations, right?

So under this understanding, instrumentalist understanding of the role of

assumptions and in particular the rationality assumption, uh, the work,

the theoretical work of the economists and the testing of

his theories come hand by hand, right?

All we can say about two theories, uh, is how

well they predict phenomenon, and we can only do this

by testing these theories and.

And on these grounds, uh, Milton Friedman and the monetarists

more broadly criticised Keynesian economics for being a bad theory,

right?

It's not a bad theory because it has broad assumptions.

It is a bad theory because it doesn't allow us

to understand those problems that it is supposedly designed to

uh explore and explain, right?

So monetarist Freedman will rekindle rehabilitate the quantitative theory of

money to show empirically they, they argue that uh this

classical theory uh yielded better predictions about the business cycle

fluctuations than clinicianism did.

So in what uh became a classical study on US

monetary history and monetary policy, uh, Milo Richman and Anna

Schwartz, his woman co-author, uh, uh explored empirically the data,

uh, on the Great Depression, and they argue that the

problem of the Great Depression, uh, had to do with

the actions of the Fed.

The Fed had, uh.

Caused the problem, uh, because it did not understand the

relationship between increases in money and increasing prices in particular,

if the Fed had acted before increasing monetary supply, right,

uh, to the level required by transactions, the Great Depression

would have been, right?

Not that this is the opposite explanation.

Uh, too bad even by Keynes, right?

for Keynes, monetary policy could not work to deal with

the depression for Friedman and the monetarists, the problem was

flawed monetary policy based on a flawed understanding of the

relationship between money and prices.

But the Most clear flow of Tunisian economics, according to

Friedman and the other monetarists, was precisely to think that

there was such a thing that as a trade-off between

unemployment and inflation.

Remember I mentioned last week this uh assumption not perhaps

in Keynes but in Keynesian economics that there was something

uh called the Phillips curve, right, uh, which the monetarists

interpreted like uh a negative relationship between prices and employment,

right?

And under this assumption it was impossible then to think

within a Keynesian framework a setting a context in which

you did not observe growth and that is growth in

employment.

And you observed inflation at the same time, right?

So the notion of calculation that was common, uh, across

particularly advanced economies in the 1970s could not be reconciled

or explained, uh, with a Keynesian ideas, right?

So Keynes and Keynesianism had failed to predict thetalation of

the 1970s and hence under this.

Instrumentalist approach to economic science, uh, they had failed as

a positive science, right, and yielded bad normative recommendations on

how to act on economies.

So what was uh the proposal, the alternative by uh

the monetarists?

Well, uh, instead of active fiscal policy or monetary policy.

Money creation should be guided by a monetary rule that

disciplines.

The authorities right that baptise the hands of the authorities.

And this monetary rule should follow the principles of the

quantity theory of money, that is to say the rate

of increase of monetary supply, uh, should be equivalent or

proportional to the rate of increase uh in real transactions

uh to avoid, uh, problems of inflation or deflation.

And this should be uh.

Protected by a constitutional rule, right, so we've seen these

arguments before when we talked about the debates between the

bullionists and the untibullionists, and this was in a sense

a return to these ideas that uh we should uh

restrict authorities uh in making monetary policy.

We should tie their hands and and with the discretion,

the discretion of monetary authorities.

However, with the monetarists, we are still in a very

similar world in terms of economic theory and assumptions to

that of the missions.

The monetarists like Martin Friedman will still be thinking in

terms of marshallian models of the economy as a whole.

And more importantly, the monetarists allowed something that will be

the target of by the new classes.

They considered that there were these long run relations between

the increasing monetary supply and increasing prices.

But they recognise that in the short run there could

be some lacks in adjustment, right?

And in doing this assumption, Um, or in doing this

or in proposing this claim, the assumption was that there

was some degree of irrationality by some, uh, economic actors,

in particular, uh, income earners, labourers.

Who will fall prey at least in the short run

of monetary illusion when these changes in monetary in money

supply are unanticipated that is to say they will confuse

uh the nominal income with the purchasing power that uh

their particular income they receive their wages uh will allow.

So that means that monetary policy in the short run

can be in some cases an efficient way, particularly when

it is anticipated uh to uh steer the economy and

manage the business side.

Robert Lucas and The new classics will critique both the

approach of Keynesian economists and uh monetarists like Milton Friedman.

And in a sense what Lucas is proposing here is

a return to the classics, to the classical assumptions that

Keynes are so much criticised, right?

He says after freeing himself to the straitjacket of or

discipline imposed by the classical postulates, Keynes described a model

in which rules of thumb, such as the consumption function,

the liquidity preference schedule, investment function, uh, all of these

functional relationships that we've studied in the course, took place

of the decision functions that a classical economist would insist

should be derived by the theory of choice.

So for people like Robert Lucas, the assumption of rationality

has nothing to do with a descriptive.

Realism Of how economic agents behave.

It has nothing to do with an instrumental assumption to

make better predictions.

But rather, it is.

An assumption that allows the modeller.

To discipline himself.

The optimising behaviour assumption works like a straitjacket that disciplines

the modeller in the following way.

Keynes and by extension the neoclassical synthesis by providing this

eclectic collection of models had assumed that the principal, the

modeller, the economist had better knowledge than the agents that

uh he is modelling, right?

Think about the propensity to consume with the liquidity preference

schedule, right?

All of these relied on assumptions of the irrationality of

the economic agents and the problem for building a science.

Here is that it assumed that the moderator himself, the

economist, did not have this flows, right?

The economist had more information than uh the agents uh

in the economy about how the economies the economy works.

This faith on the rationality, the legitimacy of the economist

as experts is very much present in the way in

which the rationality assumption has been abandoned by Keynesianism and

Keynesian theory.

So in order to restore order in macroeconomic theory we

need to come back to the classics, right?

and base our macroeconomic theories uh on the theory of

choice that is to say on a microeconomics uh and

uh based on rational economic behaviours.

So this helps us understand what is known in the

macro literature as the rational expectations revolution, right?

So in a seminar article published in 19 1972, and

Lucas argued that macroeconomic models should assume that agents have

rational.

Expectations and by rational here he's opposing it to adaptive

expectations so under the clinicianism as you've studied in your

courses, the whole idea was that perhaps for investors, consumers

make decisions about the future based on uh the status

quo of of of the current state of affairs or

what what's happened in previous years, right?

Whereas, uh, under a rational expectation model, the assumption is

that agents get these prices right on average, right?

Agents get the predictions on investments, uh, on prices, uh,

on consumption, right, uh, on average, right that expected.

Value of these variables is correct in in terms of

of how we model them, right?

This means that agents' expectations with respect to any given

variable must be consistent with the predictions of the theoretical

model.

This is a break uh with the Marshallian traditions, uh,

uh, in the sense that it it broke with this

distinction between the short and the long run, remember in

Keynesian economics and in Marshallian economics more broadly, uh, in

the long run, uh, prices are flexible and agents are

right, but in the short run there are some lacks

in the adjustments.

If we incorporate into our models this idea of rational

expectations, that distinction loses any meaning, right?

The agents are always right.

There is no reason to believe that the economic, the

economic model, the economic, uh, sorry, the economic modeller has

more information than the agents, uh, themselves.

In this context, rationality, Lucas argues, must be seen as

a property of the agents in the model.

That disciplines the economists monitor as I've argued before, not

of the economic actors are in the real world, right?

So we are coming back with him to, uh, or

better we are incorporating with Lucas, uh, by ration understanding

of how markets work, right?

Macroeconomic models are these ideal settings in which economists experiment

about their fears.

This is also a break with the instrumentalism of Milton

Friedman.

We don't need to test our theories in the world.

We can use our borders to test our theories based

on these microeconomic assumptions about the behaviour of economic actors.

So what are the implications of all of this uh

for modern macroeconomics, right?

Uh, we've seen that macroeconomic models uh adopted neoclassical microeconomic

foundations, uh, in the case of Keynesian economics and monetarism,

these were Marshallan with the critique of the new classics,

uh, the critique of Lucas, uh, we, uh, see, uh,

the incorporation of by Russian general equilibrium theory frameworks, uh,

in the, uh.

models of macroeconomics.

Lucas, uh, and the new classics critique extended not just

to the way in which macro theory was built, but

also to the application of these theories, in particular with

the uses of macroeconometric models.

And the famous Lucas critique of macro, which we would

not have time to elaborate on this, but some of

you might be interested, suggests that macro econometric models such

as those proposed by Timberg and Fri are flawed, uh,

in the sense that they do not allow modellers to

test and compare the effects of different policies according to

some previously specified, uh, assumptions and parameters.

And the reason for this is that the structural parameters

of the economy.

If we incorporate the rational expectations assumption will change once

uh that policy is implemented.

There's no way that the policy makers can, uh, Trump

can, uh, surprise, uh, the agents.

The agents will incorporate will anticipate the effects of this

policy and making, uh, this specific policy intervention, uh, or,

uh.

Redundant uh in uh the economy.

So the effects of this policy will be neutralised by

the reactions of economic agents.

This had a very important implication in terms of macroeconomic

policy.

Any attempt to actively intervene in the business cycle will

be futile, right?

Effective demand management will be completely uh ineffective if agents

uh are assumed to be rational and uh to uh

react, uh, in a perfect way to policy changes.

There's no way we can surprise them.

This is the key, the key, the key, the key

message.

So with the critiques of the new classics we see

a radical shift in macro to supply side economics.

Some of you, uh, particularly those of you who are

interested in macro might have studied and seen, uh, real

business cycle theory, right?

The business cycle is explained not by a shocks in

effective demand but rather by real shocks in an economy.

Uh, with, within this birational understanding of the macroeconomy.

Uh, it's also possible to, uh, develop a dynamic stochastic

general equilibrium models to test different theories, and this would

be used both by, uh, the new classics and by

the new clinicians which will attempt to incorporate some of

the lags in adjustments in the short run but still

within this new microeconomic based uh frame, OK.

So this gives us a picture of how modern macroeconomics

looks like, right?

Uh, it is not the same, and it could not

go back to Keynes after the Lucas critique.

Every macroeconomist right now builds structural models which are based

to some degree or another on rational assumptions, uh, of,

of individuals, the, the, the assumption of rational expectations, uh,

and, uh, this is true both of the new classics

and of the new key nations, uh, who, uh, work

with dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, OK.

So we've seen then how in the context of macro.

The notion of rationality became very stringent agents, economic agents

are always right.

We need to assume that not because this describes perfectly

the world, but because this provides some discipline to the

mother, right?

There's a a sense of epistemic humility in doing so.

There's no reason to believe that we as economists have

more information about the economy and about the outcomes of

our of our actions than uh economic agents themselves, right?

But whereas this was the case uh in macroeconomics, there

were some organisational and psychological critiques uh in the 1950s

and 1960s.

About this idea that the rationality of economic ages was

actually quite bounded.

Economic agents do not behave as Uh, economic models are

seem to predict and these ideas in the fringes I

will discuss today have become a little bit more mainstream,

uh, towards the late 20th century, particularly in behavioural experimental

and evolutionary economies.

So this is what uh we'll discuss in the last

part of our lecture.

OK.

So behavioural economists generally speaking reject the validity of freedoms

as these arguments, right?

And they do so on both empirical and theoretical grounds.

We cannot just assume that agents behave as if they

were rational and think that we're doing good.

This is not true empirically.

Psychological studies and organ and studies of organisations demonstrate that

uh agents do not behave in a rational way, right?

Agents do not always make choices among a given fixed

set of alternatives, right?

Sometimes they have just a limited, uh, sense of alternatives

to consider.

Agents rarely know the probability distributions of the outcomes of

of their of possible choices.

And more importantly, agents do not always make decisions that

are maximising decisions right?

Particularly in the context of fears, we'll discuss uh the

notion of satisfying.

Uh, firms and organisations.

Do not have the computational capacities to maximise and they

are satisfied uh with attaining specific targets and specific goals

even though these are not necessarily maximising behaviours, right?

So empirically speaking, uh, these assumptions are flawed, but these

are also theoretical implications.

For example, uh, a microeconomic theory built on strong ideas

of rationality will not be able to explain some paradoxes,

and here, uh, Maurice Alet, a French economist, provided a

very famous paradox, right?

Uh, which underlies, uh, expected utility theory, the idea that

different lotteries are independent from each other, right?

And he showed that, uh, agents would prefer or would.

Uh, would make different decisions between lotteries and that lead

to uh similar expected outcomes depending on the extent to

which uh these are framed in terms of losses or

gains or they are all on the level of risk

that they receive uh between these lotteries, right?

So strong notions of rationality do not allow agents to.

Account for these biases, hence making this theory unsatisfactory as

the ground uh for economic reasoning.

So Uh, what the economists that we study, uh, right

now, uh, suggested is that we, we need to take

into account those aspects in which the rationality of agents

is bounded.

We need to incorporate psychological evidence about what they call

the cognitive limitations of agents, right?

Human beings make decisions based on the specific biases they

do so uh depending on what the framing of the

problem is, what their view of the status quo is

as well, um, or the specific set of routines that

perhaps organisations have developed across time.

And the purpose of economics is to explain how these

cognitive limitations impact the decisions of economic agents uh in

a way that diverges from the outcomes predicted by models

uh that are predicated on strong rationalist assumptions.

So let's study some of these critiques.

Let's first begin with Herbert Simon, this fantastic organisational theorists,

uh, writing in the 1950s, um.

Who was again concerned with the study of organisational behaviour

examining how real working firms operate right in a way

he was similar to Ronald Cos uh in his approach

let's observe real firms and let's try and make sense

of how they make decisions.

So, uh, he would make a distinction between this operation

of satis satisfying as opposed to the optimising behaviours assumed

by neoclassical economics, he would say a decision maker who

chooses the best available alternative according to some criterion is

set to optimise right?

the underlying assumption about behind the max you economics.

One who chooses an alternative that meets or exceeds specified

criteria.

But that is not guaranteed to be either unique or

in any sense the best is set to satisfy organisations

are always making decisions based on second best.

Right?

And this is the case because they have a limited

computational capacity, time and ability and resources uh to uh

be making decisions based on optimisations.

So instead of maximising what organisations do is that they

search for a satisfactory outcomes based on a certain aspiration

levels.

If if it turns out that it is very easy

to find alternatives uh given uh some criteria.

Uh, and as a certain target or aspiration, then the

standards are gradually raised, right?

And in a sense organisations uh move up up the

ladder, uh, in terms of what they want to achieve,

uh.

In this particular way they are uh moving they're sort

of groping, right?

They are not optimising but rather testing, trying out different

options and alternatives uh trying to uh improve and obtain

these aspired results.

So we don't need to assume.

That agents are optimizers that notion of rationality, which is

so strong, uh, to describe reality is also in a

sense a limitation, uh, to really understand how organisations operate

in an ever changing environment.

All right.

So, uh, this, uh, was, uh, the critique by Herbert

Simon, um based on the work of organisations.

Um, uh, a few decades later, some economists or better

psychologists, uh, will critique the irrational assumption from a very

different perspective or something, right?

They would suggest that uh if we take into account

that individuals make decisions, make choices in a context of

uncertainty.

Then We need to take into account those uh psychological

biases, those cognitive limitations that limit the capacities of individuals

to make optimising decisions, to maximise uh utility.

One of those uh cognitive limitations has to do with

the importance of framing.

Individuals make decisions based on a specific.

Uh, or the way in which individuals make decisions is

contingent to the way in which the problem is framed.

Uh, they would say for example that the the psychological

careers of piling in what they coined prospect theory.

Are the gains and losses of a specific action relative

always to a very specific reference point, which is often

the status quo.

That is to say, individuals when making decisions under uncertainty

are not comparing every alternative to each other but are

rather comparing different alternatives to the present state of affairs

to their own status quo.

Right?

And if they are doing so then that means that

the way in which the problem they're dealing with is

framed uh will lead them to make decisions that divert

from optimising behaviours.

So framing matters, but cognitive biases of other sorts also

matter, right?

When agents are risk or loss of theirs, they will

pick up lotteries, they will take courses of action, assume

some risks that uh they will not do otherwise for

example, if uh that particular lottery uh is presented in

terms of what they will gain and not what they

will lose, right?

So, uh, the decisions of individuals uh are different depending

on their preferences for loss or gains or on the

degree to which they are risk averse.

Uh, even though the expected outcome of different luxuries are

the same, right, so, uh, this connects back to the

point I made before about the, uh, LA paradox, the

paradox posed by Moalle, right?

Uh, cognitive biases are essential to understand uh why individuals

do not always make rational decisions.

And more importantly, they are essential to uh get a

sense of how individuals.

Act uh in the world, right?

Most of you probably are familiar with Kaliman's, uh, and

Teversky's distinction between thinking fast and thinking slow in some

problems, agents, uh, think slow, that is to say agents

behave as optimising, maximising agents, but on a daily basis,

making real.

Ordinary daily uh decisions about their economic actions, they are

using their slow brain.

They are based on specific juristic rules of thumb which

optimise in a sense their own decisions.

They are operating within a satisfying a framework and not

an optimising framework.

This was particularly clear uh in the context uh of

uh COVID, for example, and, uh, this, uh, uh, idea

of prospect theory, um.

Has influenced modern views in behavioural economics about the ways

in which small notches by uh using different framings can

actually exert uh actions on the economy, uh, by exploiting

individuals cognitive biases.

Think about the response to the pandemic here uh in

the UK, OK, um.

Now The last group of economists I want to talk

about today, and you will read them for next week,

uh are uh uh Richard Nelson and and Sydney Winter

who are.

In a sense coming back to this Simonian ideas that

we need to rethink how organisations behave.

And they proposed that uh in order to get a

better sense of how economies change over the long run

and the role that organisations and particularly uh organisations in

the context of innovation act, we need to come back

to a mode of reasoning, a mode of thinking that

had been abandoned in economics in the late 19th century.

They proposed that we need to reinstate evolutionary modes of

reasoning uh into economics to address the problem of economic

change across time.

And in doing so we need to consider both the

critiques made by Herbert Simon and by uh behavioural economists,

particularly applied to the question of how firms organisations behave.

And firms are not rational as Milton Friedman assumed organisations

follow different objectives.

And this is particularly important between uh entrants and incumbents.

They have limited organisational and computer computational capacities.

And they are satisfactors, they are not optimizers, they follow

satisfactory outcomes according to specified criteria.

Now the, the, the contribution of Sydney, uh, uh, Winter

and Richard Nelson to this discussion is that the knowledge

that firms have does not circulate freely across economies like

the Austrians had assumed, but it's rather encapsulated into collective

operational routines within organisations.

These routines both drive organisational responses to new information.

But also explain why some firms, particularly established firms have

persisted in organisational behaviours, right?

Why, uh, when perhaps a new innovation is introduced, a

new combination in terms is introduced into an economy.

Established firms are unable to react and to imitate this

technology, right?

Making irreversible mistakes uh in a situation of radical uncertainty.

So this has uh a huge implication in understanding the

problem of economic change across time and the effects of

innovation on economic development and on economic growth.

And it implies a modifying Shoe Peter's framework in a

sense.

Innovations are not as easily transferable as Shop Peter had

assumed, right?

Remember the second act, uh, of Sho Peter's process of

creative destruction after the first mover introduces an innovation, he

assumed that, uh, in a free competitive market.

Uh, this innovate information will flow, uh, and, uh, be

adapted by new competitors, uh, who, uh, imitate this, uh,

uh, fear, uh, to obtain benefits and to be competitive

to get to to to close the competitive edge, but

if organisations have routines that are established that are embedded

that are persistent then.

These firms will not be able to adapt quickly uh

uh to uh this uh innovation.

This means that due to innovation and To this persistence

of organisational existing routines, the economy is always in this

equilibrium.

Imitation is always costly and will not always work, right?

So we need to reinstate evolutionary thinkings of economics.

Remember when we talked about Ben, right?

There are some habits of thought which which stick.

There are some practises that are so embedded uh in

the way in which individuals organisations operate that they will

remain even though the technological uh setting which they are

operating is changed, right?

We need to think in evolutionary terms again and incorporate

the critiques to rationality assumptions that we've studied uh so

far, OK.

So, uh, again, organisations in constantly changing economic systems typically

as I described it idiosyncratic objectives, limited operational capacities, and

bounded rationality, and it, uh, also shown how, uh, this,

uh, connects back to new institutional economies but also to

Sch Peter and the Austrians.

All right.

So what are the key takeaways, uh, of this lecture

about recent development in economics?

Economics became during the 20th century a highly technical and

specialised discipline, as we've seen in the previous classes, but

from this focus on theory development in the post-war period

we've seen in the past five decades a turn towards

more applied work, a centrality of econometrics across the field.

And while in the context of microeconomics, or macroeconomics, sorry,

the rationality assumption became strengthened and incorporated uh into microfounded

macroeconomic models and theories uh with the rational expectations revolution

in the context of microeconomics.

The strong rationality assumptions have come under the attack by

both organisational and behavioural economists, uh, in a sense rehabilitating,

reincorporating some behaviour and evolutionary modes of recently that has

been abandoned in the in the course of the of

the 20th century, right.

So this is all we have for now.

Uh, we'll, uh, come back now in 10 minutes so

you can have some air, breathe a little bit, digest

what I described to, uh, the second part of today's

lecture on the review of, uh, broad overview of the

course and some general recommendations for the final exam.

Yeah it's it's you.

It's the Yeah.

OK.

Oh.

It's not like a.

Uh.

Right Uh You did Yes.

Oh, I know.

So Thanks for your I thank you.

Wait, what was you.

It looks like.

Yeah.

I think so yeah.

Oh, just normal.

smallest.

I guess there would have been.

It's too much that's a lot.

Mhm.

Show shows why.

Oh.

for Oh How's the term?

How's the end of term, yes, we have graduation goals.

Well, I mean it's the only point weather to be

right.

situation to be able to make it.

You're talking about the exciting stuff frustration.

Oh yeah, it's like I, I understand.

And that when you have a busy rate of you

write interpretation, you as well.

And how, how, how does it work in your department,

um, a draught your history, yeah, you're not.

Uh, that one.

I suppose it's been very useful for that because it

gives you have such a good.

OK Well, that's great.

That's great.

What are you working on?

But I feel like this is quite chill compared to

this workers in the US in the 20th century.

but I'm certain you're going to first form.

Um, I mean, it's super pertinent, yeah, problem now but

like I got a 60 labour relations, I thought that

was very interesting.

What, what are you working?

I didn't.

I was the first I got the first the first

one, but I.

other stuff.

Very interesting.

How do you feel how do these programmes start to

get used to.

I.

I don't like because I realised one between this and

that which is basically what I see it's quite different.

Yeah, yeah, so of course it's just paying attention to

the story.

No, we both have fantastic projects and you, you still

have plenty time, uh, I don't know why and also

of your friends, um.

When you speak.

but um I think Julian Julian are doing so we'll

still be in touch, but I will not.

I OK, uh, it's almost time to start the civil

one.

4.

I think that's.

a little bit more.

Oh yeah.

It's.

Mhm Of course.

it's actually.

My.

Yeah.

Yeah Oh.

I All your module, well, I mean.

Thanks for telling me a we test.

Of course.

I tell you I fulfil my promises.

You know just like I.

Yeah that's that's yeah, if I didn't get like 14.

It'll be fine.

I'm not thinking it might revived so swerevived.

Hey guys, I think, I think we can start now

to make the best use possible of the time.

All right, so, um, this second lecture, uh, will provide

you a a course overview, uh, and the reason for

this is that I think that the best way for

you to prepare for the final exam, as I will

try to convince you today, uh, is, uh, to zoom

out.

And to think about the growth arch, the wide arch

of the evolution of the history of the discipline that

we've studied uh in this course we've attempted to do

that in the classes, uh, but this lecture hopefully will

give you some tools, uh, to think of how this

could be done and how you can use uh this

zooming out.

Uh, techniques, uh, to, uh, compare different economies to put

their work into the wider perspective of the history of

economics but also, uh, of in, uh, to understand why

they are proposing what they do, how the theories change

across time, uh, in their own time and place.

So what do I mean by zooming out here?

And what are the instruments that we've perhaps use in

this course to think about this question of how theories

change, right?

The main question that we shouldn't forget is guiding our

course.

So theories change because the problems that economists are trying

to understand have changed across time, right?

So we've seen how in the words of physiocrats, mercantilists

and Adam Smith, the focus was on understanding what makes

a nation wealthy and powerful.

How this question shifted in the 19th century classical political

economy to one focusing perhaps much more uh on understanding

the laws of production and distribution.

With the marginal revolution and neoclassical economics, just to give

another example, the question shifted again, uh, to that of

understanding the market, uh, behaviours and in particular questions related

to equilibrium and the allocation of resources.

But all the questions popped up in the in the

20th century.

What is the role of knowledge in the economy, in

economic activities?

Think about hiring.

Uh, what is the role of government and when should

governments intervene?

So the questions that economists have been called to address

or have decided to address have changed across time.

We've also seen how the unit of analysis, that object

of analysis has also been an evolving thing, right?

We saw how.

In classical political economy from Smith to Marx.

The basic unit of analysis was social classes and the

relationships between them.

We could not understand concepts such as the natural price

without referring to social classes.

And with the marginal revolution we saw uh this.

Unit of analysis changed to focus on the specific decisions

taken by individuals that economic man that we've been discussing

in today's lecture as well.

But there were other alternatives, the institutionalists focused on perhaps

most of reasoning, habits of thought.

The law and and and and the law.

Uh, we've seen, uh, for example, how the German historical

school focused instead on on the national economy.

And how this was perhaps also influential for development economists

in the 20th century.

Or what about focusing on aggregates the economy as a

whole, whole agenda of macroeconomics, particularly Keyishian macroeconomics.

So the unit of analysis has also changed, and this

is something that uh will allow you to compare and

contrast the work of different economists studying the course.

Now what about the mode of reasoning we've discussed uh

in this lecture that we've just finished how evolutionary economists

and behavioural economists attempted to reinstate, reincorporate, uh, behavioural and

evolutionary modes of reasoning that were perhaps abandoned in the

late 19th century.

Remember with the marginalists, the whole idea, uh particularly with

Germans was that economics should be.

Resemble a psychological science should be based on proper psychological

foundations for institutions like Blen.

Economic systems behave like uh natural creatures, right?

They evolve and grow and decay across time and we

need to understand this based on perhaps some, uh, learnings

from the biological sciences.

In the 19th century as we studied uh in uh

before the perhaps the reference of the for the more

reasoning of economics was physics.

Economics was all about studying economic laws, natural laws.

So the mode of reasoning in economics is changing.

Think about the engineering mode of reasoning of the technocrats,

of the planners of the teams and fridge that we

study, right?

Economics not now like as a science that studies natural

laws, but rather as a science that produces practical knowledge

for action, right, using technical tools, economics as an engineering

science.

What about the positionality of the economists?

Right?

The economist as an individual has been.

Uh, Occupying very different social roles across the the past

400 years for the mercantilists, the economist was the counsellor

of the prince that.

Guy who is talking to the ear of the prince

telling them what to do, what not to do, same

uh uh same with the merchants, right, writing lists of

things of what they should be following according to economic

principles.

For Adam Smith, for example, economist is a moral philosopher.

Economists is just a branch, uh, an outro, political economy,

an outgrowth of moral philosophy, and, uh, should be based,

uh, on, uh, broader system, uh, that puts together, uh,

institutions, justice and economic behaviour.

Think about the role of cases, a public intellectual, the

economist as that which is informing the public enlightening the

public, uh, about, uh, how to deal with the problems

of the day.

Or what about the economist as technocrats, right?

John Timbergan who is sitting in the statistical offices informed

me what to do, uh, in an economy in a

particular, uh, situation or today the economist, as an academic

and economists as a professionalised discipline and field.

The role of the economist has also changed across time.

And as It should be clear to you all.

Based on what we we discussed in the classes but

also based on your responses to the last formative assignment.

All of these things have changed also because the world

in which economists are living is.

An evolving world has changed as well and the demands

for economic knowledge have differed from years to years, right?

So we've studied how the work of Adam Smith or

of Karl Marx cannot be understood without paying attention to

the context of the 1st and the 2nd industrial revolutions.

We're seeing how this story to focus on the demand

side of the story with the marginalists was also related

with the expansion of mass production and particularly expansion of

mass consumption and the emergence of homogeneous commodities exchange in

the market.

How the writings of Mil and Marx cannot be disentangled

with the social question and the demand for social reform.

And how the work of Fri and Tinbergen in particular

and I'm sorry, Keynes in particular were closely tied with

the predicaments of the Great Depression.

War economies postwar planning and the Cold War all affected

the ways in which economists do theory and in that

sense how economic theories evolve.

And this is as true about variation across time as

it is about variation across space.

Think about the German historical school.

And this idea that a different type of economics was

needed if it had to do with national economies at

the peripheries of Europe, and we saw this problem again

emerging in the context of development economies, right?

One size fits all economics will not work for the

vast majority of the population living in poor uh countries.

OK, so.

At least these 5 ways of thinking should help you

identify some transversal questions that have been running across the

across the course which help us understand the ways in

which economic theories change and what the main drivers of

economic change are uh in uh theories.

So this is just a tentative table guys.

I mean you are smart, creative people and you can

conceive and come with different columns that allow you to

compare economists, right?

But this is the type of reasoning that we are

expecting you to to do and to put into paper

when uh you are responding the answers, right?

So we are hoping that you of course provide a

very good understanding of the concepts and the arguments of

individual economists that's taken for granted.

But we want you also to zoom out and think

and reflect about the guiding question of this course how

economic theories change, what are the main drivers, and how

can we understand these changes based on analytical categories like

this, which is not again an exhaustive list, right?

Come up with your own categories uh to compare economists,

but again zoom out, look at the big picture.

So Talking about looking at the big picture, I will

attempt to provide in the next 20 minutes a short

overview of a full year of classes, so bear with

me.

I do not need to get into the details because

you know all of this, you've studied it with me,

but I think I mean looking listening uh to the.

General art of what we've studied in the course is

useful as a way to close what uh has been,

I think, a wonderful journey together.

So This course is started by discussing this road to

classical political economy, right, the precursors, if you may, of

modern economics in the mercantile and the agricultural systems with

the Americanantilists and the officials, right?

So we began talking about these questions in the context

of the 17th and the 18th century.

Remember this was a context of wars and the importance

uh of commerce, right?

All political military wars and the wars uh for the

seas, the wars to change, uh, with the East Indies

between Britain and the Dutch, for example, and the context

in France in the 19th century of the of Enlightenment,

this idea that economics could could be used as a

as a as a as a tool of reform.

Uh, in this changing agricultural agrarian societies, right, as represented

in Tdero and Davis, um, diagram design of, uh, agriculture

and leverage, right.

So with with with the mercantilists we saw how in

this context of the competition for the seas and uh

for the power of of Europe, the key question was

that about the link between economic and national power uh

for the Commonwealth.

And we saw how the response to this question had

to do uh with uh the circulation of goods across

different countries, right?

The emphasis that what makes a country powerful.

And might and wealthy is not the amount of gold

or bullion they accumulate but rather the fact extent to

which they can have over a long period of time

they can sustain a positive balance of trade, right?

The assumption behind this of course was that the economic

system was a zero-sum game in which the benefits accrued

by one powerful nation, uh, were a loss uh for

another.

With the physiocrats we moved to a very different world,

that of mid 18th century France in which the problem

was also quite different.

It was not how to increase the power of the

king.

The king was so powerful.

We are in the context of an absolute monarchy, but

rather how to guarantee the subsistence of society.

What can the king do to guarantee the subsistence of

his population?

And this was particularly paradoxical for the physiocrats because they

observed how the incorporation of modern technology.

Was not necessarily leading to the adequate distribution of what

they call the net revenue uh produced uh with the

uses of modern technology in agriculture, right?

So for the theocrats.

The whole idea is only nature is able to produce

value, right?

Not trade, but nature.

But the issue is how The king should be constrained

by understanding the natural order in the circulation of this

net revenue across different uh social classes.

So we have with the physiocrats a first model, the

Tableau Economic.

A first sense that we I should focus on uh

the distribution of a surplus across different social classes as

a key problem in economics but also a first example

of the idea of the economists.

As an enlightened individual who can inform policy, right?

And in this case the policy implication, the normative implication

is that we need to increase the power of government,

the power of the state, but rather to restricted according

to the natural principles uh of the agricultural system of

the natural system, OK.

So from this precursor of political economy, we moved to

the origins if you may, of uh the systematic body

of knowledge of such a thing that we can call

an economic system, right?

And the point of departure was of course huge optimism.

Smith work should be understood as expressing an optimism about

the possibility uh of societies to reach happiness.

Uh, if, uh, they are allowed to follow a system

of perfect liberty, right?

If each individual is allowed to do what is best

for them, right?

So commercial societies have an immense capacity to produce wealth

and to distribute this wealth across uh different populations, right?

And Smith explains the origins of the cause of wealth

as we all know in terms of the workings of

the division of labour political economy deals with understanding that

right, understanding how division of labour operates not only within

the film factory but also across society distributing wealth and

happiness.

So the the result, the outcome of this way of

thinking about commercial societies in connection to economic progress was

that there was a harmony of interest between social classes,

right?

If everyone is allowed to do what is best for

them, everyone will benefit.

There's no reason to think that one class will undermine

uh the other, right?

Think about this argument Smith puts forward about the natural

progress of wealth, right?

How the town.

And the country benefits from exchanging with each other and

how different social classes are interconnected, interdependent, uh, within a

nation and how different nations as well are interdependent between

themselves, right?

So a huge break with Americanist thinking.

Economic systems are not zero sum games.

Everyone can win if a system of perfect liberty is

respected.

But notice how quickly classical political economy moved from a

world of optimism, the world of Adam Smith, to a

rather grim and pessimistic outlook of the possibility of economies

uh to progress, right?

And we studied that with, uh, Malthus and Ricardo, right?

The problem here was not just was not anymore.

How can we explain the wealth of nations and the

difference of wealth between nations.

What makes a country wealthy, but rather is to explain

the problem of poverty amidst plenty.

The context here is also relevant.

It's the context of the early industrial revolution in which

the introduction of machinery and the social dislocation uh of

uh this uh is uh creating uh a conflict between

different social classes, right?

And the problem for economics in this context was how

can we understand those natural checks to progress, right?

OK, we take for granted Adam Smith's work and we

assume that there are some natural checks that, so there

are some natural forces that go in the way of

progress, but there are also some natural checks the political

economy need to take into account.

We discussed two of them with Malchus, right, the population

principle and the general of the lot of commodities.

With Ricardo we discussed uh the law of the diminishing

return of land which is pitting the interests of the

greedy landowners against uh the workers and the capitalists and

he is doing so because a corollary of this diminishing

return to uh uh the use of land as.

Societies accumulate capital is a secular decline in uh the

rates and the return of capital, right?

So.

The there were a lot of reasons for pessimism in

classical political economy known in the 19th century as a

dismal science precisely because of the work of Malthus and

Ricardo, but there were reasons for hope, right?

Um, Foreign trade and the introduction of machinery in particular

in the work of Ricardo could allow the societies to

mitigate these effects to counter these effects.

But they brought to the centre the questions of distribution

right?

the conflicts of interest between lenders, capitalists and labourers.

This was particularly clear in the work on the machinery,

right?

Introducing machinery.

Might under certain circumstances uh affect the labourers but making

them redundant and in that sense pushing their wages at

two subsistence levels and uh creating misery among the proletar.

We discussed how the question of money was not entirely

absent in classical political economy, right?

Remember the context of the Restriction Act of 1797 and

the Napoleonic Wars, the end of convertibility, and the problem

here resembles what we've discussed before, uh, in today's lecture,

right?

To what extent monetary authorities, the Bank of England should

be disgraced should have discretion are discretion, uh, in the

mission of bank notes, to what extent should we return

to strict convertibility.

Uh, the unionist position that argued that strict convertibility should

be restored, provided the economic foundation for the gold standard

which together with with free trade, the recommendation of Ricardo

provided the grounds for the pasts Britannica, right, that period

of prosperity, uh, in Britain and in the world, uh,

in the 19th century.

So we see an instance here of economic ideas having

an influence in shaping the policy decisions, right, and in

shaping the economic context uh of uh the, the late

19th century.

But we saw that even though this uh combination of

factors of free trade gold standards and uh monetary stability

that results from that led to prosperity, what about the

question of distribution?

What about the.

Circulation of the surplus across uh the different social classes.

This brings us to the mid-19th century.

In which the specific economic and political context made the

social question a question that economists had to grapple with,

had to deal with, right?

Uh, for meal economics.

Becomes the science that studies production and distribution.

Insofar as they are concerned with the forces of wealth.

Right, remember economics is a psychological science, uh.

And based on this understanding of the sciences, we can

distinguish between the problem of production and distribution, right?

The laws of production are natural.

The checks identified by Mars and Ricardo.

Are things that we cannot change.

But there is some hope for capitalism.

The laws of distribution are socially determined are determined by

the ruling portions of the population, right?

And in that sense.

We can think of a reform capitalism that both.

In a way, uh, incorporate its merits as identified by

Smith but allows us to tackle its deficiencies, right?

So with me we see also a transformation that will

be essential in the discussion between the in the debate

between governments and markets, right?

Because we'll be moving from a context in which the

key.

Normative implication of political economy was that governments should not

intervene in.

Economic systems.

Smith's system of natural liberty to one in which the

question of liberal economics, liberal political economy becomes that of.

Identifying the areas of legitimate government intervention.

Capitalism can be reformed.

Mr.

Mike, of course, was not.

In agreement with John Stuart Mi.

For him, classical political economy from Smith to Marx was

an ideological outgrow of existing relations of production.

And he attempted to provide a critique to political economy

building on a different way of reasoning, right?

uh based on historical materialism, understanding how uh societies evolve

across time following.

Not social no sorry not natural laws but rather socially

determined historical laws, uh, that, uh, in a sense structure

both modes of production and the relations of production that

prevailed in each particular economy.

So Mr.

Mil was wrong for Marx.

Lows of production and distribution cannot be separated.

They are intertwined.

And the key characteristic of a capitalist society is the

production of commodities.

Through the extraction of surplus from labourers by those who

possess the means of production, the capitalists.

So if we understand this truth about the capitalist system,

then this is a system that cannot be reformed.

There's no extent of government intervention that can make the

system work.

The only way out is a proletarian revolution so we

see how political economy with Marx had.

In a way led to an explosive political argument, right?

The question of distribution that was at the centre from

Ricardo toil.

Led to the belief that uh the only way in

which this society can change or reform was to rule

revolution.

The ideas of political economy used against the the capitalist

system it was attempting to explain uh in the first

place.

So in this context we uh see the emergence of

a very different way of thinking about economics which will

in a sense.

Uh, deprive this discipline for its political connotations that is

the transition from political economy to simply economics with the

work, uh, of the marginalists.

The context here is that of the late 19th century

and early 20th century.

With the 2nd industrial revolution and the mass production and

consumption it made possible.

These predictions of early classical political economists that there were

natural checks to progress or that the question of distribution

could not be tackled right with rising real wages also

for workers.

It seemed that the arguments of classical political economy lost

savings, right?

Other questions began to occupy the attention of economists, for

example, in the context of the US, this tendency towards

monopoly, monopoly concentration, right, particularly in the commanding heights of

the economy, steelworks, banking, uh, sales.

And this external changes impacted not just the work of

the classical economics but also these other alternatives that are

emerging what was a very pluralist type for economic thinking

right the con the context for example uh of the

North American institutions.

There were also some internal developments, uh, that occurred during

these years.

The inclusion of mathematics, uh, with Jevons and Baraz, the

use of diagrams.

I think of, of the diagrams that Jevons used in

his lectures at the UCL.

For those of you who came to, uh, the, the,

the walking through with us, um, uh, that, that was,

uh, that was the place in which, uh, Jenss wrote

and published his, uh, principles of economics.

Um, but also, uh, the incorporation of, of models, right?

So in this context economics attempted to resemble.

Uh The uh model of science represented in physics, right?

Notions of equilibrium are imported from the natural sciences, for

example, and have, uh, see their introduction into the discipline

during these years, right?

So moving on quickly, the marginal revolution, some simultaneous developments

by different economists that we've studied in this course such

as Jevons Meyer, uh, Barra and John Bates Clark in

the US.

These have some commonalities, for example, they all move beyond

this idea that uh the theory of value should be

based on uh labour right labour theories of value as

objective theories of value proposing is that subjective theories of

value focusing on individuals as units of analysis.

Second commonality, the principle of marginality, right, as represented in

two in these two beautiful diagrams that we discussed in

the class that you should all know by heart right

now but also essential differences between the marginalists and these

differences are essential for the purpose of this course because

they will open different paths for the growth of uh

economic theories in the 20th century.

So some history of economics has have used the analogy

of a tree, right?

So the marginalists provided the trunk, right, the core elements,

but the differences between the the marginalists.

In a sense, opened up different fields of research that

we can resemble two branches of a tree, right?

We saw how uh geons and varas would provide different

foundations to.

Neoclassical economics Marshall will build on a boons and understanding

uh of markets, whereas Balraz and others after him like

Aro and Dere will focus instead on the problem of

exchanging commodities with each other, right.

So one key difference, second key difference, not all marginalists

agreed about the use of mathematics in economics, right?

Germans use mathematics, mathematics.

The Austrians are considered that, uh.

It it was not useful to incorporate mathematics uh into

economic theory um and instead economics should behave as an

abstract science uh based on psychological foundations.

Whereas Jes maximizer.

Assumes that individuals have perfect knowledge about what they want

and how to achieve it.

And hence could be modelled in such a way.

For man's economising man.

The knowledge he has is limited, right?

He's operating under a circumstance of uncertainty.

And uh only knows what is relevant for his own

surroundings and uh in his own neighbourhood, right?

and idea that we have a long history in Austrian

thinking as we saw when we started Hayek.

The only marginalist economist lastly to provide theory of exchange

was Balras.

We do not find theories of exchange in generals and

uh in a manger.

So building from these foundations we discussed the two pillars

of neoclassical economics, the Marshallan pillars, right?

With a crude sense of economic realism, uh, Marshall uh

provided an argument to understand a very different problem to

that of classical political economy, right?

The problem of the determination of equilibrium and efficient allocation

of resources across the economy.

And to do so we need an assumption, right?

Not every single phenomenon is essential to understand how markets

operate, right?

We can understand what happens in one market at a

time, the sectoral assumption, and this allows us to construe

these models, simplified models of supply and demand that we

are so used to studying.

This assumption also provides a method for comparing different scenarios,

comparative studies which provided the foundations for a particular approach

to welfare economics, uh.

Which will be concerned, for example, uh, with understanding how

uh market failures lead to inefficiencies think about externalities, but

also how specific policy fixes can also uh lead uh

to uh better solutions or even uh more inefficient solutions.

Think about Peian taxes and the people fixes that we

studied, uh, when we discussed the discussion with Royal causes.

But Marshallian economics was not the only game in town

in neoclassical thinking.

We also studied the work of Leon Barras, right, with

a different understanding of markets.

Providing uh uh uh uh the foundations for general market

equilibrium theory, the rejection of the centurist Pao's assumption, and

this idea that this is an image of the economy,

right, an economy operating under under perfect competition.

We in a in a sense, take some distance from

the realism that we see in March and lead to

this point uh proposed by narrow the Han later on.

That actually we can model economies as fictional economies that

do not need to represent how economies actually work.

They serve as a normative reference as an ideal world

against which we can compare uh different scenarios in the

real world, uh, uh, as deviations from this idea, OK?

We saw how the Russian markets also provided for a

second approach to welfare economics, uh, with Pareto.

And we discussed that with Kenneth Arrow last week, right,

uh, in the context of the economies for innovation and

healthcare.

But the classical economics was not the only game in

town, right?

We saw how, uh, the Germans, the German circles were

proposed, uh, that a new and different type of economics

on the national economy based on the national economy as

a unit of analysis uh should uh be developed for

countries in the peripheries.

They also proposed a different method in economics, different mode

of reasoning, historicism, right?

Uh, we should pay attention to different stages of development,

uh, to think about what the appropriate economics for each

context is.

We also discussed the Austrians which will oppose the the

German historical school in terms of their method, right?

Economics is not a historical science but a deductive a

theoretical science.

Placing emphasis on the limitations that agents and economic actors

have.

We saw all the alternatives in the US with all

institutionalism.

Again, it's not individuals it's not the national economy but

rather institutions organisations what should be the basic unit of

analysis.

And notice also changing the mode of reasoning, right, instead

of looking at physics as a reference instead of attempting

to explain those.

Economics I should explain should look at biology and understand

how economic systems evolve, right?

What are the main drivers for economic change, institutional change,

and what are the main drivers uh for the persistence,

uh, of a previous backward bar barbaric institutions, right?

And in this sense we studied with Berlin how habits

of thought adapt to changing theological environments, but some of

them persist.

Think about our discussions on the leisure class and conspicuous

consumption and the machine process uh just to give some

examples.

The normative implication of institutionalist thinking is.

The economic system has a natural tendency towards Instability towards

monopoly concentration and in that sense uh it must be

regulated, OK.

This will in a sense.

Provide us an an an introduction to the ideas we

discussed on macroeconomics and macroeconometrics.

Now very quickly, uh, macroeconometrics should be seen as responding

to external demands for new economic knowledge.

Think about the problem of the Great Depression which was

behind the, the, uh, the underlying problem, uh, motivating the

works of Frisch and Keynes.

Think about the context of the two World Wars and

reconstruction informing the work of Jan Trigan.

And here we see uh both a new approach in

this debate between states and markets right government intervention is

needed, laissez faire will not work.

And a new role of the economist, the economists working

both as counsellor of the Prince as that policy advisor.

Rekindling some mercantilist ideas in that sense or the economist

is working as a technocrat as an engineer that's trying

to engineer change and economic systems to change economic systems

altogether, OK, so with Keynes we attempted to explain why

economies are not in full employment, right?

That is to say why markets fail to adjust and

under which circumstances they do.

And how in his response to that question Keynes proposed

a new approach to economics that bases on the understanding

uh of the relationship between aggregate categories, right?

The economy as an object of analysis and of intervention

that's a new thing, right guys that we hadn't seen

in the 19th century.

We also saw in the past few weeks how initianism

and the neoclassical synthesis incorporated technical modes of reasoning, uh,

to translate Keynes's ideas, uh, into the language of modern

microeconomics.

But we discussed that this whole ideas were not just

floating in theatre, right?

uh, they referred to a very concrete practical application and

attempt to manage and plan the economy, right?

And here the context in a sense shapes the type

of economic theories and their implementation, right?

The problem of uh the transition to socialism uh in

uh.

A post first World War Russia or the problem of

reconstruction, uh, in the Netherlands all exhibited forms of economic

engineering right using economic statistics, uh, for example, to, uh,

both represent the economy and act on it.

Alright, in the last section of the course, uh, we

discussed some of the alternatives to the neoclassical framework.

Uh, we began by talking about the Austrians, right, this

long running tradition in economic thinking.

Um, Hayek in particular argued against this habits of thinking

markets in terms of equilibrium, right, which he referred to

scientism and he attempted to displace the problem of economics

from one of allocating resources efficiently to one of using

economic information in the best way possible, right, the uses

of knowledge in society.

We also discussed how the Austrians will emphasise that economies

are always in this equilibrium.

They're always changing, and we talked about uh the role

of innovators and entrepreneurs in introducing these new combinations with

Peter that allow us to understand how economies evolve over

time, right?

How processes of economic development.

This question was relevant as well for the new institutionalists,

right?

But they will build on a different critique of the

assumptions of neoclassical economics, in particular, the use of markets

is costly.

Right?

The idea of transaction costs and the excesses of transaction

costs is precisely what allow us to understand the role

of institutions, the economic role of institutions such as firms,

such as the legal system in setting, for example, property

rights.

With North we we're back to a question that had

been abandoned uh in the 19th century, right?

The question of explaining the causes of wealth and poverty,

right, but of doing so across time and North uses

an institutionalist uh argument to uh showcase how it is,

uh, the existence of well defined property rights which is

the main cause of economic divergence over time.

All right, this question of explaining the difference in growth

is also visible in developing economics.

Why are some countries so poor, whereas others are so

rich?

We explore the use of quantitative modes of reasoning, but

also the emergence of a new theory, uh, to, uh,

account for underdevelopment and we study that uh with the

work of ECLA and the critique to this classical ideas

in Ricardo about the benefits of international trade.

A new role of the economist, economist as foreign expert,

the economist as missionary was also visible in these cases.

All right, lastly we've seen some recent developments, right?

Economics becoming much more technical, particularly important in the context,

uh, of the Cold War in the competition between two,

systems, and lately, uh, a shift in economics from being

more theoretical to becoming much more applied right.

So as you've seen in this slightly longer than 20

minutes summary of this course, uh, there are also some

long running themes that allow you to connect the ideas

of different economists, right?

So it's not just about those categories that allow us

to trace the evolution of theories but also about these

continuities.

Among change, uh, in the right, many economists have asked

about the cost of wealth and poverty from Smith, uh,

to Malthus, uh, to Schumpeter or to revolutionary economics.

Uh, the question of the debate between markets and government

has been pervasive.

Think about mill or canes.

Or uh arrow and cos.

The rationality of the economic man from Mil to Smith,

uh, to, uh, behavioural economics, the importance of information, knowledge

and learning, or how to account for economic change and

the impact in economic theories.

The list can continue, guys, right?

So this is the second key message I want to

convey today, right?

Think about those dimensions across which you can compare different

economists but also about those long running themes, uh, in

the history of the discipline that allow you to.

In a sense, think about the continuities uh in the

evolution of economic theory right.

So let me finish by saying something about the the

final exam, and I'll give you some time for questions.

So the exam will follow the same format that it

has in the previous 4 years.

It will have 3 sections.

Section A, uh, will resemble somehow the questions in formative

A.

You will have to answer 3 out of 6 questions

which require to present short responses whereas sections B and

C are essay-based type responses, um.

In a sense, uh, section section B will focus on

the first part of the course on the 19th century

classical political economy stuff and before Section C will deal

with the second part of the course.

So of course guys you you are 3 year students

there are there are advantages in specialising.

But don't over specialise uh in a specific uh part

or portion of the course.

We would like you to get a better sense of

uh both periods uh that we covered uh in in

the course.

You've got the information about the date of release and

the date of submission, uh, so I'll just move on

quickly here.

So what are we looking, uh, in, uh, in, in,

in this essays and in this response.

Uh, basically the criteria would be the same as, uh,

we've emphasise informative assignments.

Respond effectively and address the question, right?

Don't divert from the specific question at hand.

A clear and precise use of key concepts.

Now you have all the tools to identify when you

are probably using concepts and achronicity, right?

Remember in the essay on Smith, I emphasised the idea

of how uh anachronistic the use of concepts like equilibrium

or efficiency where now you know why, right?

Now you know that these concepts were developed at a

farther period addressing very different sets of questions, right?

So very use.

Clear and precise use of concepts.

A coherent and exhaustive explanation of economist's main arguments, we

want you to reconstruct and provide evidence to support your

views about economist arguments, but we also want to, as

I've emphasised today to zoom out, right?

And you can zoom out at least in two ways,

right?

By providing a critical comparative analysis by using a broad

knowledge that you have other economists in the course to

reveal the distinctiveness of the economies that you're discussing, right,

the distinctive contributions of each particular economist by comparing it

to others and also showing how their ideas are the

outgrowth their response.

Are shaped by the specific situational context in which they

are writing, right?

We are also of course expecting some well written and

logically structured responses.

Now, uh, just a few words about good atendic practises

we do want you to include textual evidence from the

primary texts.

You can include secondary literature, but you're not by any

means forced to do that.

It will not necessarily improve your grade if you do.

If you want to use secondary literature, you have to

reference it, of course, and added some additional, uh, recommendations

and models that you can sort of build on.

Uh, and one word about the use of AI, uh,

it's allowed, uh, in the course as you know, but

we want you to make a reflective use of generative

AAI if you decide to use it, right?

Just remember the following, right?

The algorithmic thinking of machines can never replace your own

judgement as smart thinking attentive in, right?

It's very easy for us to identify when it is

not you who are providing.

Response.

So, uh, it's, I encourage you to be very clear

about your use of AI by feeding, uh, the AI

disclosure form in the assessment cover sheet.

It is also compulsory uh for you to do so,

OK.

Uh, just a few words about contact hours.

There will be a revision, uh, session in the first

week of the spring term.

We'll send some information about this, and there will not

be regular office hours during the break, but you can

send an email to Julian and to myself, and we

can coordinate to arrange some adult sessions, OK?

Uh, all right, so we'll close it here.

Is there any question about the exam or about the

tools that I've given you to approach the revision session?

Everything clear?

Fantastic.

So thank you guys for being such an amazing group.

I really enjoyed uh teaching you this year.

You've been very patient and you've been very uh participative

and an amazing group, so thank you for all of

this.

all the best in your exams and in your future

careers.

Lecture 20:

Lecture 21:

Lecture 22: