Lecture 1:

You are concerned that.

You.

Are.

Just.

A.

I.

Okay.

Welcome.

So this is easy 41 the MSC International economics option

course.

Um I'm on I'm going to be teaching the autumn

term material.

So this course is split into two parts.

Um, this term with me, we are going to be

studying international trade.

And then uh, next term is Dimitri Malkin is going

to be the international Macroeconomics part of the course.

But I think that's a pretty you know, it's pretty

clear what the distinction between the two parts are in

terms of the content.

Obviously we're thinking about kind of trade issues and also

that we're thinking about foreign direct investment this term.

Uh, next term we are thinking more about investment in

terms of financial capital that will bring the exchange rate

into it.

It will bring a dynamics into it in a much

more meaningful sense than we're doing.

Uh, this term, there is also something of a methodological

split between the two parts of the course in terms

of the types of models we will be studying.

Um, in trade, the focus is mainly going to be

a kind of static general equilibrium models, where the variables

of interest are typically real variables, which is another way

of saying that we're doing, uh, we're not doing dynamics

this term, and we're also not doing anything arbitrary.

Whereas in this part of the course.

You know, they're going to be dynamic.

It's going to be more about monetary.

It's going to be much more, I think, as a

business cycle fluctuations, rather than trying to understand the longer

term, uh, cross section, um, the organisation of the course

is very standard.

We're going to have a lecture each week.

There will be an accompanying problem set, which will be

material based on that week's lecture, which will be studied

in the class, uh, the following week.

So this week's lecture material will be the first problem

set of what you do in the class that happens,

uh, next week.

Um, there is a reading list for the course, as

you might expect.

So this is a look at the reading list.

All the material as usual will be on on Moodle.

Um, in terms of the trade part of the course.

The syllabus is essentially what's on the lecture notes.

So the main content, in terms of what you need

to study and what you need to understand is what

we cover in lectures.

And then the readings are there, uh, to provide kind

of alternative presentations of the same material and also to

give you the option to go into some of the

topics in more depth, if that's what you'd like to

do.

Okay.

So we're not we're not teaching from a textbook per

se.

Um, the textbook that is most relevant from much of

the material we're talking about in this course is this

one by, uh, uh, Feenstra, which is a graduate level,

uh, trade textbook and various of the chapters from that

textbook on reading this the different week.

So there's that, you know, if you want one textbook

to refer to your course, which would be trade model,

of course, that that seems to attack.

But and then the reading is like the lectures are

broken into ten parts.

So there's kind of suggested reading each week.

Um, the star readings are the more important ones, and

then the non star readings are there for additional, uh,

kind of additional, more in-depth reading.

Assessment wise.

There's an exam in the spring.

That's half the marks.

The other half is the extended essay, which, since this

is the option for you to do the extended essay,

I'm sure you have probably heard about this already.

Word essay is good.

It's not a dissertation.

It's much shorter than a, uh, a dissertation and a

more kind of, uh, targeted, focussed piece of work that

you would do in a dissertation.

Uh, for this course, we offer a structured research assignment

option, which is to say, if you like, you can

pick whatever topic you want one related to international economics,

international economics and work on that.

But we will also provide two prompts for you to

work with.

I will provide one prompt, even though we will provide

only one trade prompt, there will be one macro prompt

which will give you sort of a question and a

framing to start working from.

If you want to do that option for the for

the essay and the essay, then is the other, the

other half of the marks for the course.

Um, so that's the basic logistical organisational setup.

Does anyone have any questions about any of that before

we actually get into substance?

No.

Inevitably, questions will come up during the term.

Feel free to come to any point with any questions

you may have.

Um, also, you know, I sort of talk briefly about

yesterday, but we will talk in much more detail about

what's expected for the essay later this term.

And we'll, we'll do Just a session to, uh, talking

through kind of what you and I are looking for

in the essay and how we recommend you go about,

um, approaching it.

And then we'll also tell you what the, uh, the

problems are, uh, for the issue.

So we are getting a lot of questions about.

Yes.

And it can be one of the more, uh, parts

of the MSC because it's the most straight.

But I'm going to talk a lot more about that,

um, later this term.

Right.

Okay.

So substance what are we going to try and do

in the trade part of the course?

In very broad terms, we're going to it's going to

be structured around trying to kind of provide answers to

three questions.

These three questions a little sloppy here.

So what do we actually see in the data about

the patterns of international trade.

So that's sort of starting off with some areas.

What do we what do we know about what happens

is very beautiful.

And then given this is what pattern of trade.

What can we say about why countries trade.

What are the reasons?

What are the incentives to create these international cross-border exchanges

that show ability, uh, trade data and then building on

those those previous two questions, what are the actual consequences

of trade?

Right.

And you can't answer this question without thinking about the

first two.

But probably the third question that fundamentally is more portable.

Why do we potentially care about international trade?

It's because it affects what the economic economic outcomes we

actually realise, whether this be in terms of of welfare

or in terms of the pattern of production, in terms

of employment, in terms of distribution of incomes, there are

many different outcomes we could potentially think about what could

be of interest in different contexts, and all of them

are going to be in some way or another, potentially

environmentally affected international trade.

So I think that what we see why countries trade,

how is going to need to evolve to answer the

question of what are the consequences of trade?

The cost is going to be a, you know, hopefully

a well-balanced mix of of theory interacts.

It's going to be structured around kind of learning about

some of the most important models of international trade that

have been developed.

And then thinking about, you know, for each model we

look at, if we take the key predictions of that

model to the data, what do we know and in

what ways is that model successful?

You know, where does it help us to better understand

the world?

But is where does the model, you know, fall down?

In what ways does it fail to match the data?

Okay.

And we're kind of as we go through the course,

what we're going to try and do is kind of

in some ways track the historical progression of ideas about

trade, which is, you know, as we will as we

work through the course, we're going to go from kind

of older to newer models.

And part of the motivation that we're going to kind

of start by saying, you know, we learn something from

the older models, but they also fail in some in

some ways.

And that helped motivate the next generation model.

So hopefully we're going to understand this feedback between theory

and imperatives, a constructive narrative that's going to help push

us forward and helps to move us closer towards at

least some understanding of these questions.

What I want to do in today's lecture is two

things.

So I'm going to start off kind of the first

half of the lecture, just talking about essentially some kind

of basic stylised facts, some key observations that actually come

out of the trade data.

So the idea here is to kind of make you

aware of what we think are some of the most

important patterns in the trade data, which are going to

help shape our thinking and how we approach modelling international

trade for the rest of the term.

So part of the first half of that is going

to be about looking at a kind of different set

of different facts, different ways of cutting the data.

Um, and then the second half of today's lecture, uh,

we're going to come to one of the the key

questions in international trade, which is are they going to

trade, which is to say our country is better off,

uh, from trading more versus shutting itself off from the

rest of the world?

Okay.

For today, we're not going to take a theoretical perspective

on that.

We're just going to look at some empirical work that

tries to answer that, uh, that question.

So later in the course, we will look at various

different theories, which might explain why we might or might

not see gains from trade.

But for today, kind of a setup, I just want

to I want to show you kind of some of

the empirical, the work that's been done, trying to answer

this question, both to get a sense of why this

is a difficult question to answer, kind of what are

the identification Education colleges and trying to launch this and

how we can try to to solve them and to

give a sense of kind of what the consensus in

the literature actually is in terms of the actual empirical

findings.

Um, I will take a break kind of halfway through

the, uh, the lecture should also say, please feel free

to interrupt me, you know, at any point with questions,

comments, anything you want to say.

I think the lecture works better when it's kind of

a bit of a dialogue between us going on.

But I do encourage you both to ask questions.

And also if you have thoughts or anything you want

to share, please do as we go through.

So that said, let's start to think about what we

can learn from the, uh, training data.

And I want to kind of structure the initial, uh,

facts we're going to look at around kind of a

couple of, of questions that we can start to get

answers to, which is, you know, Who participates in international

trade and what is traded.

So you can think about these kind of questions which

help us think about how we.

Suppose I give you a data set of trade flows

across countries.

Right.

How might you want to kind of cut this data

in a way that is actually informative and help us

understand what's going on?

Well, what I do like to think about who participates

in international trade.

And you can start by thinking about answering that question

at the country level.

Do some countries trade more than others?

As you can anticipate, the answer is going to be

yes.

But what kind of countries trade more than others?

What are the kind of variables that predict why?

We see variation in how much different countries are participating

in trade, right?

Additionally, we're not going to just care about how much

countries betray you care about who they're trading with.

Right.

Does everyone trade with the same set of trading partners,

or how does you know what is the bilateral Dimension

of trade.

Is a trade different for different types of trading partners?

What grows out and then, you know, as we start

to think more deeply about data and this is going

to be a progression we're going to make in the

course.

Right.

We're going to start off the first few weeks.

We will mainly be thinking about kind of things happening

at the country level, and kind of the country will

be our fundamental unit of analysis.

But as we dig deeper in the second half of

the course, we're going to care more about, well, okay,

what if we start looking within countries and we think

about distributional effects within countries, who is actually participating in

national trade within countries?

So we can start to ask.

You know, which firms are participating in trade.

If we see an industry where there's a lot of

trade going on?

Does that mean that all the firms in that industry

are trading system selection into which firms participate in trade?

Likewise, know at the local level which workers are more

or less exposed to international track.

Right.

Another thing that is kind of question is going to

be crucial when we want to think about, you know,

what does this affect inequality or who who does trade

create opportunities for versus uh, being more of a kind

of competition shop natively so we can have this kind

of food trade question.

And then briefly, what is trade?

You can think about trade at an aggregate level.

How much does the UK export on aggregate.

That's one question of interest.

But another might be what does the UK trade.

Is it good.

Is it services within good.

Is it manufacturing.

Is it agriculture.

If it's manufacturing what type of of manufacturing.

So we can kind of cut the data.

Also in terms of the sort of industry or product

level dimension.

One of the nice things about a study in international

trade is that because countries typically impose taxes on goods

when they cross borders, there is an incentive for countries

to record cross-border transactions because it's a tax source of

tax revenue from them.

So, you know, going back quite for quite a long

period, we have fairly detailed data on flows of trade,

not just between, you know, a country level, but also

at the very disaggregated product model, trade data, records, flows

of trade between pairs of country for about 10,000 different

products.

So this gives us a very rich picture of what's

being traded, which we can kind of use as another

way to test our our models.

What they predict about what type of products are going

to be traded and how they shift, how that differs

across industries.

So let's have a look from the data.

So this chart is a good starting point that summarises

what's been happening to international trade at the global level

over time.

So on the x axis, we've got the last 50

years starting in 1970.

And what we're plotting on the y axis is the

ratio of world trade over world GDP.

It's a couple of things to note.

This is the you know it's the global global level.

So we're not separating out across countries at all here.

And the second thing is that we normalise trade by

GDP.

If you just look at the value or the volume

of trade that, you know, tends to trend upwards over

time in the values case, partly just because of inflation,

but in the volume case, also because the world economy

is growing bigger.

What is more interesting is how is trade growing relative

to other measures of economic activity.

And the one we picked here is GDP.

So what you see on this chart is that clearly

the trade GDP ratio for most of this period is

trending quite sharply, rose from just below 15% in 1970.

Double doubles around 30% by about 2008.

So this is most of this period of rising globalisation

when people talk about trends towards increasing globalisation, this kind

of factor in having the trade is becoming a more

important part of the of the world economy in the

sense that we're seeing more trade relative to GDP.

Um, but then interestingly, what we also see there for

the last ten years or so in this picture is

it flattens off.

And in addition to the global financial crisis, this is

the this topic.

That's the global financial crisis which is associated with a

sharp contraction in trade, uh, trade in manufacturing, a quick

contraction technically.

But what's interesting is that it didn't kind of bounce

back to it the previous year.

It bounced back and flattened off.

So the other thing you will often hear people talking

about economies in quotation is have we gone from here

in a rising globalisation to a period of, you know,

where globalisation is reversing, we are decolonising, right?

And I get this thing that they have in mind

when people start talking about globalisation.

And, you know, it's not necessarily showing you the kind

of the trade GDP ratio has gone down, but it's

definitely flattened off.

Something that's happened in the last ten years that is

different to, uh, to to what came before.

And that's going to prompt this debate about why have

we seen this, this flattening off in this in this

graph.

Yeah, it's a subset of Covid.

Uh it does.

Yes.

I you probably updated it.

Okay.

So when Covid happens, what happens is like the financial

crisis, there's a huge drop in Covid.

It's a very obvious reasons.

But again, it bounces back very quickly and in fact

linger in the kind of year or two post-Covid there's

very strong trade growth.

Uh, if you remember all the kind of supply chain

disruptions that.

Were happening.

In Meaning following Covid.

Part of that due to such strong group that the

transportation network and cope.

So you see sharp drop bags back that they kind

of laughing off.

Okay.

So Covid was a sort of disruption of this pattern,

but it doesn't seem to have fundamentally shifted the longer

term trend.

So obviously we're still relatively soon post-Covid.

It might be a bit too soon to include that.

Thank you.

Any other questions on this moment?

Yeah.

How is Wall Street measured?

Is it the number of like really important exports?

Yeah.

Good question.

Sorry I should have said that.

Yes, exactly.

Is.

Um, given how this is done, I suspect this is

exports plus imports over two.

And at the world level, but also the level of

import.

So it's one for individual countries.

That's not the case, but at the world level.

Um, so kind of typically if you see this kind

of data with no qualifications, this is going to be

a value based measure.

There might be times we want to kind of deflate

and get a volume based measure and see how that's

changed over time, but the sort of default will be

kind of values unless otherwise specified.

Okay.

So now previously we're back in 1970.

Now let's expand the window and go back to 1819.

So again we're looking at ratios of trade to GDP.

Um now rather than at the world level.

We come across a bunch of the kind of leading,

you know, one another leading industrialised economy.

And we're looking at how that trade to GDP ratio,

merchandise traded goods or other services, how that has changed

over time.

And the thing I can really want to flag by

expanding the window here.

Is the.

Pre.

In the previous section we were looking at this bit

of the graph on the right hand side where we

see these kind of upward trends.

For most countries here we stop earlier.

So we're missing the fact that.

But you see the kind of upward trend that's happening

at the end here.

It might be natural to expect if we're back in

time, that means we're going to see the trend continuing,

right?

That's clearly not the case.

Once you open the window up further, we're actually seeing

more kind of like a V-shape, uh, graph where most

of these countries openness is kind of high in the

late 19th century.

It declines through the first half of the 20th century

before growing again in the post-World War Two period.

So though it is true that post-World War Two we

have tended to be in an era of rising globalisation,

historically, globalisation has kind of come more in waves than

being a single, uh, tract.

The late 19th century was a period when the world

economy generally was very open, and we're seeing that trade.

But it's also true.

If you look at the same measures of immigration across

countries in Europe, there's a lot of immigration going on

now.

There was also a lot of immigration going on in

the 19th century, not so much in the middle of

the 20th century.

Why?

You know, why might that be?

Well, clearly, the two world wars are going to play

a role in that.

But also during the interwar period, you had the Great

Depression, right?

You wanted to see the financial crisis had a strong

negative effect on trade.

The great impact of the Great Depression was much, much

bigger and more sustained.

It also led many countries to adopt protectionist trade policies.

So clearly trade policy is likely to matter how much

trade we see, if we are in an era of

rising protectionism that is likely to slow down trade growth.

And that happened in the 1930s.

Arguably, it is also happening today.

If we come back to the flat section of our

graph here, one thing that has changed in the past

ten years is we have events like Brexit and the

US-China trade war.

We have seen countries erect new barriers to trade which

have slowed trade growth.

So that's kind of like one of the public meetings,

not the only.

One of the contributing factor to these trends.

We heard quite often.

That we developed countries like merchandise economies to serve the

economy.

Is that also visible?

Some of that.

Is that even more or.

Yeah.

So that's.

So that's true.

Like, you know, over time services tend to become a

more important part of the economy.

And because services tend to be less traded and goods

that will drag down the trade to GDP ratio.

Um, it tends to be that that happens on a

time scale so that it's not immediately visible in these

kind of graphs.

Um, it's also something that's kind of not just a

recent phenomenon and have been going on throughout this period,

which is to say, were it not for that, for

the fact that service is becoming more important, we expect

to see more trade but imposed on trade, the trends

we've seen here, because just the timing isn't right to

explain the change in the trends.

Okay.

And then here's another set of the graph.

So now zooming in on individual countries again we come

back to the post-war period.

And we're looking at kind of the four largest economies

in the world the US, Japan, China and Germany, and

plotting trade relative to GDP for each of these countries.

So if you stare at these graphs for a little

bit, what do you think are the most notable patterns

that you see in these pictures?

What would you, if I ask you, what are the

key takeaways from these graphs?

What would your suggestions be?

Any ideas?

Yeah.

Aids crisis is a global crisis.

Yes.

The one thing you see very clearly.

Right.

These graphs.

And just after the financial crisis.

So you see the financial crisis hits everywhere.

One thing we see here.

What else seems to be increasing.

Not just in some countries, but in most countries, or

at least the countries we see here.

Yeah.

So so kind of all these countries we can sort

of debate Japan, but generally we've seen this kind of

an upward trend and not just in 1 or 2

countries, but in, you know, at least 3 or 4

countries.

And it's also true if you, you know, expand this

graph, other countries, you would tend to see an upward

trend for almost all, all countries.

So there is this general upward trend, at least until

the financial crisis hits.

Yeah.

The vertical axis are deceiving because, um, for Germany it

was 2.6, which is the economy makes up trade versus

the rest of the, um, the US.

And so, uh, you know, it's actually a lot faster

than it, uh, Germany's going in terms of trade contribution

to GDP since the war.

Yeah.

Good spot.

Right.

The vertical axis differs across countries, which is to say

that levels of openness vary quite dramatically across these countries.

Right.

If we look at the sample, it's about 13% in

the US, similarly 15% in Japan, 30% in China, about

50% in Germany.

So though we see similar trends, the levels are very

different.

Some countries are more open than others.

Why do we think that might be?

What a potential reasons why openness may vary across countries.

And the scale of government is beginning to change.

With Europe or China, there's enough so they have more

trade in China.

Yeah, right.

So probably the most important, you know, the variable which

has the strongest correlation with these measures of openness is

country size.

Major economies tend to be able to satisfy more of

their needs domestically, both in the sense that consumers can

purchase more of the what they want from domestic producers,

and firms can sell more of what they produce to

domestic suppliers.

So the bigger countries tend to be less so.

Right.

You see that particularly Haiti.

You know, the US has a much lower level of

openness than Germany.

Germany to a big economy is not nearly the size

of the US.

And if we say had Belgium in this picture, Belgium

would have a much higher level of openness in Germany,

over 100% for, uh, for Belgium.

So country size is strongly correlated with openness.

What other factors like that?

Yeah.

We'll go and then we'll go back.

Okay.

How diversify the economy is.

If you're reliant on one one commodity such as oil,

you will have to exploit that.

And you will have to import almost everything else.

Versus if you don't have any oil, you will have

to import oil.

Um, you will have to export whatever as you can't

to pay for that.

Yeah.

Like what goods you specialise in and how tradable they

are.

And like, the oil like oil based economy is a

good example of economies that, you know, kind of rely

on that single export industry?

Maybe.

Geography.

So Germany is surrounded close to other countries in Europe.

Um, whereas the US, you would have to like pay

for shipping holiday with other countries.

Yeah, absolutely.

This is another really important factor.

But how much trade is going to depend in, at

least in some way, on the costs of trade and

costs of trade are going to be much lower for

countries that are kind of centrally located like Germany, than

they are for more amazing countries that you know.

Give us an example here.

But you can take an even more extreme example like

New Zealand.

New Zealand wants to trade is always going to be

kind of difficult.

Whereas if you're Germany or you're going to see that

Central Europe trade cost is going to be low, the

geography matters in that sense, and we're going to come

back to that point in a second half of today's

lecture.

It's kind of one of the factors that we haven't

touched upon yet, but I think it's important.

For anybody.

To.

Yeah.

So I so that's true I would love that under

sort of general geography, uh, you know, part of that

as being part of your writing.

Yeah.

Um, you.

Know, the kind of places I currently going.

Uh, I go to countries which trade a lot, for

example.

Mhm.

So maybe you want to take the time to explore.

Okay.

Let's focus in on China here because China is kind

of an interesting example.

Um because it has this very rapid growth in openness

from, you know, close to 5% in 1983 to about

30% in 2009.

So a question you could ask yourself, why do we

see such rapid growth in China?

And what are the factors, as you just said, it's

going to be?

We know that this is the period when the Chinese

economy grew massively starting around 1980.

All right.

China introduced various market based reforms which kickstarted Chinese economic

growth.

So the food industry in China is, depending how you

measure it, the biggest or the second biggest economy in

the world.

So that's going to be a quantum attributed to China,

um, trading more in absolute terms.

But in order to try to trade and it's also

trading more relative to, to GDP.

So what are the kind of other factors that have

contributed to China's trade growth?

Yeah.

I mean, there are other barriers to trade or lack

thereof other than just geography.

Yeah.

Trade policy would be the main thing in China.

But then you also have things like if you speak

a language, you can see the institutions etc..

Yeah.

So this I mean, this particularly this trade policy point

is the other thing I was really looking for, right?

Trade policy is going to affect the cost of, of

trade, you know, in a related way, how does it

kind of become a more liberal trade policy in the

future, and particularly in the case of China.

Right.

That was a very conscious decision by Chinese policy makers,

starting around 1980, to open up to the to the

world and to try and integrate, to try and make

China, uh, not only do not just trade more, but

to make China an export hub.

And then, you know, this very rapid growth we see

here in the 2000s.

This follows China's entry to the World Trade Organisation in

2001, which further reduced the trade areas faced by China.

Was there a point yet.

Not to mention the 2001?

Okay.

Yeah, exactly.

So that's a good point.

So it's, you know, worth keeping in mind that the

country trade is going to be geography and size.

It's going to be trade policy is going to be

key factors.

So we looked at what we've just been looking at

kind of three different graphs, which kind of provide us

with different perspectives on how much trade is going on

in the world economy and how that stage over time.

Now, if we think a little bit more about who

participate in trade and a more disaggregated level.

So one might say most firms don't trade even in

very open countries and even in industries that are in

those countries that are kind of export or import oriented,

you still see that most firms don't participate in trade.

So, for example, for the US, we've got figures from

1986 here, only 15% of US firms were exporters.

So to the point, really high up here is that

participation in trade at the firm level is a somewhat

rare event.

Okay.

And it's also the case that those firms that do

participate in trade and a lot of random isolated, they

tend to be selected on various measures of firm performance.

So it tends to be bigger, better performing for us

participating in international trade.

Right.

So that's kind of an interesting observation about you know

there's something that's Driving selection into trade.

And in the second half of the course, we're going

to do a, uh, kind of at least one week,

maybe two, which is really going to be focusing on

understand why it is that sometimes trade and other stuff.

So and what that tells us about our understanding of

international trade and the other variables of international relations, is

that the role of multinational firms interact.

So when I say national firm, I mean a firm

that has production operations that it owns and controls in

more than one country, right.

Think about a country like, uh, some company like Toyota,

the Japanese car producer.

Toyota doesn't just produce cars in Japan.

It produces them in many countries around around the world,

which is a good example of a multinational fact.

So many of the most famous firms, the kind of

brand names that we all know are multinational, firm, multinational,

also tend to be bigger, more successful firms.

What's relevant trends.

They also tend to play a very large role in

international trade.

So, you know, multinationals have about one quarter of total

world output, even though there are relatively few of them.

Uh, in addition, about one third of global trade occurs

within the boundaries of multinational firms, which is to say

it's like Toyota in Japan.

Same thing exporting to Toyota in the UK as an

example.

So this trade within the boundaries of multinational firms is

a really important component of global trade.

So kind of what this means is that, you know,

if you want to understand what's going on with trade,

one of the questions we're going to want to ask

is what motivates firms to become multinationals, and how do

multinational firms organise themselves and make decisions.

And that's kind of another topic that we will come

back to later, later in the course.

Now, what about what gets traded is, um, broadly speaking,

you know, if you want to start Disaggregating total trade,

the first is the first kind of classification you have

is goods versus services.

So goods is anything that has kind of physical, tangible

presence services.

Is there anything that's intangible?

Uh, historically the vast majority of the trade has been

in goods.

Uh, today we got to make them about 80% of

trade services, about 20%.

But the importance of services in trade is growing over

time.

So services trade is growing faster than good trade.

Right.

And that's partly because the overall services are, uh, you

know, as we see the presence of structural transformation as

economies grow, services make up a bigger part of the

economy.

But it also relates to the fact that recent technological

changes have tended to disproportionately reduce the cost of services.

Trade.

Right.

Think in particular about Of it in its various forms.

If I'm a bank in London or a consultancy company

in London, the ability to email my reports to clients

around the world, that's a massive reduction in the cost

of services trade.

Whereas if I'm Toyota and I'm exporting cars, I still

have to put them on a ship.

I can't do it by email.

So proportion of the trade growing at a time.

It's about one fifth of the world as a whole.

But there are also some economies which is much more

important than good example, which is the UK.

So over half of UK exports are in services because

the UK's comparative advantage lies in the City of London.

Finance, business services, legal services.

So for the UK, the UK is kind of an

example of an economy where services trade is really important.

Yes, of world trade.

I'm assuming that excluding.

History.

Yeah.

Excluded.

That excludes it.

I should know the answer to that question in terms

of the top of my head.

Sorry, I should check.

Um, yeah, it's a good question.

I should know the answer.

I'm not sure if that can improve services trade or

not.

Well, yes.

Here.

It is often the case that when you see trade

data, services are excluded because, as I was saying earlier,

when goods cross borders, it's kind of easy to measure

that happening.

So we have quite rich detailed data on goods, trade

services, trade.

Trade data is much, uh, less well measured and sparser

because if I do just email my consultancy report to

someone, then no one is going to directly measure that

unless the government kind of someway, somehow find a way

to measure the that that services, export services, trade data

is not nearly as high quality.

It's going to take data.

All right.

And then if you want to break down goods, you

can break it into three basic categories manufacturing, agriculture and

minerals.

So manufacturing is the biggest category about 50% of total

trade.

And then you know fewer of the mineral products under

the commodity basket 15% and mariculture around, um, 7%.

So a lot of the time when we think about

trade, we do tend to focus on manufacturing because it

is the, uh, the largest single, uh, component.

But, you know, that does differ a lot across countries,

and particularly because, as has already been alluded to, the

process of growth and structural transformation is associated with changes

in the composition of a countries.

Particularly its export basket tends to be the poorer countries

start off specialising in agriculture and maybe other raw materials

if they have natural endowments of fuel and minerals.

And then as countries develop, what we tend to see

is that they transition first to specialising in manufacturing and

then to some of the more advanced economies have now

moved away from manufacturing and towards services.

So here's an example of that for the US.

So this is looking at commodities composition of US trade.

And this is us to illustrate.

And how it changed between 1890 and 1992 would be

considered a percentage of the agricultural materials and manufactures.

And if we look at exports first on the export

side back in 1890, the US is primarily an In

agricultural economy, 42% of exports agricultural and then meeting another

40% for materials, and the remaining fifth is manufactured right

through the course of the 20th century, as the US

country became the world's leading industrial power, agricultural raw materials

became expensive and the US became dominated by, um, by

manufacturing.

And we see this happening, you know, especially on the

medical side, but also, uh, to a lesser extent on

the on the import side.

And this table is showing what happened to us.

This pattern is representative of what other countries have seen

as they have, uh, industrialised most recently, kind of if

you look at the, uh, sort of East Asian economies

that have grown very quickly since the Second World War

going, you know, countries like Korea, Taiwan have gone through

this same process of transformation.

And China is only going through this process as well.

Any questions at this point?

Yes.

We do expect even some of us, not to be

exact, through the whole system.

It's not in the exporting industry.

There are also just there are other GDPs also industry

conditions.

Yes.

So that's right.

The structural transformation is not purely happening on the trade

side.

It's also happening in terms of the composition of GDP,

where there are going to be some differences between those

two things is that, you know what you're looking at.

Services are going to make up a bigger share of

GDP than a trade because there are some services, financial

services, consulting, you know, education for many of you here

today are tradeable.

There's also a lot of services think restaurants, haircuts, etc.

they're just not going to be tradable.

So you tend to see what we do see lower

shares of service in trade and in GDP.

But this certainly would happen with transition away from agricultural

or food manufacturing.

That is a very common part of the growth process.

Other questions at the moment.

Okay, so we've looked at kind of, you know, kind

of a bunch of facts that give us some sense

of how much trade is going on, who trades, what

gets traded.

Okay.

If you recall the second question I said we were

going to think about is why the country's trade?

We've looked a little bit about what really happens now.

What about why I'm not going to try and answer

that question right now, but I do want to flag

the different approaches we're going to take to answering that

question for the rest of the course.

Um, so we're getting kind of two classes of explanations.

The first part of the course is going to be

mainly about comparative advantage phase training, which are going to

be train models where we think about why the fact

that countries are different, how that gives them a comparative

advantage in different industries, and how that shapes patterns of

attack.

And we're going to focus on two types of comparative

violence based rails the Ricardian model, where the differences are

due to differences in technologies across country, and the actual

model where the differences come from factoring down on differences,

um, across countries.

So starting next week, we're going to think about the,

um, starting of the, uh, Ricardian model.

And really the first kind of five weeks this is

going to be, uh, focuses on understanding the comparative advantage

based trade theories and what they tell us about why

countries trade.

Then in the second half of the course, we're going

to switch to kind of a different way of thinking

about trade, which builds on the work Paul Krugman initially

did in the late 1970s, where we're going to think

about not reasons why countries that are very different trade,

but why we might see trade between countries that are

very similar.

Right.

And that's going to give us a series of kind

of comparative knowledge across industry, but about why we see

trade within the same industry.

Right.

So think about the car industry as an example.

Um, in comparative advantage based trade models, the model will

predict something like a country exports cars and imports textiles.

Crude and starting models will be about, okay, why don't

we see, uh, the US sending cars to Japan and

sending cars back to the US at the same time?

We're going to have theories about regional scale economies and,

and other products.

So we don't really need to go into the details

of that.

For now, it's to flag us where we're going.

That's where we're going to kind of go on modelling

front.

So, you know, when we do the series, what kind

of theories about why trade happens?

They're going to tell us, you know, here are incentives

for trade.

Perhaps an equally important part of the course is going

to also be about understanding why trade doesn't happen or

put differently, why we don't see more trade than we

do, which is say we just stressed the importance of

barriers to trade and the factors that create trade costs

and prevent the global economy from being more closely integrated

than it actually is.

Right?

You can imagine as a thought experiment, a world where

you removed all the barriers to trade and other cross-border

exchanges, and in that case, you have a single unified

global economy where national borders no longer an act.

Now, that's clearly not the world where geography matters.

If I want to send a car from the US

to Japan, there is a cost involved in doing that.

If I want to open a bank account.

Right.

Here in London, I can open a bank account with

UK banks.

I can't open a bank account with a bank based

in Paris.

I just don't have the right to to do that.

There are barriers that prevent that from happening.

So the trade we see and the international interactions we

see are going to be heavily influenced by the costs

and the frictions that a factor and these major technological

frictions.

We don't have a teleporter, but there might also be

policy frictions.

There could be tariffs, which is a tax on imports

or other restrictions that are preventing trade.

So particularly in the kind of second half of the

course, again, we're going to think about how how we

can include these trade policies in our models and how

that shapes patterns of of international trade matters and the

impact of Covid.

That said, continue with this strategy and thinking about barriers

to trade.

It's also useful to kind of now, you know, sort

of finish this section of the sort of intro to

circle back and say, well, the first graph we saw

showed this increasing globalisation trend kind of going from World

War II to about 2008.

What do we know about why that happened?

But we observed on that first graph that there was

this upward trend.

As you might expect, a lot of people have kind

of done research on okay, so why has trade for

GDP increased over this time period.

What do we learn from that?

Well, broadly, they conclude that there are two factors that

are there that are important, both of which played an

important contribution.

One is technological changes and changes in transportation technology over

this period and have reduced trade costs.

And in particular people point to two, uh, two big

changes.

One is changes in, uh, freight technologies.

So both the containerisation of shipping technologies, which is to

say that now everything gets shipped around the world, the

big metal boxes that are standardised and that there are

very efficient systems of ports for moving these boxes on

and off.

Right.

That change may seem suboptimal when it was introduced in

the from the kind of 60s to the 80s that

massively reduced global shipping costs, which boosted trade.

Likewise, we're going to come back later to air freight,

right?

For some of those that are not too heavy, they

can be relatively easy moved by by air.

But that didn't happen until there was sort of widespread

range aviation.

So from the 60s onward, the introduction of airfreight also

reduced transportation costs.

Then more recently, the IoT revolution has been very important

for reducing the cost of doing international business.

I already mentioned the white matter of the services trade,

right?

But even regardless of your trading, if you need to

communicate with people in other countries or in different time

zones, being able to do that electronically is clearly going

to reduce trade costs and make it easier to do

business internationally.

So that's another technological factor that has been important, particularly

for multinational firms, where if you're, you know, managing a

plant abroad, you need to be able to connect.

You need to have sort of intense and rapid communication

with that plant to be able to manage it.

That's much easier now than it would have been 30

years ago.

So technologies matter, but also policy matters.

Um, we will come.

At the end of the course, we will have a

lecture dedicated to trade policy and to understanding recent trade

policy changes.

But it's fair to say that certainly, you know, after

the global financial crisis, what happens in World War two

is that there were various policy initiatives to reduce barriers

to the trade.

And this happened multilaterally at the WTO at 100% and

negotiated production.

But it also came we have a region which with

things like the EU or NAFTA or bilateral free trade

agreements, EU has a free trade agreement with Korea, the

US has a free trade agreement with Chile.

All these agreements in some way reduce barriers to trade

which have contributed to to high travel.

And then our third question, I thought it was interesting.

One of the effects of trade.

I'm not going to say anything about that now, but

at different points in the course We will take pride

in the welfare effects of trade inequality, effective trade output

effects, trade with a much better organisation in this course.

There is another factor you could think about.

Any questions at the moment.

Okay so.

For the rest of today's lecture I'm going to be

talking about the dangers of trade.

And what we know empirically about whether there are gains

from trade.

So clearly this is an important question.

If your basic policy decision is should I open up

to trade or should I close off from the rest

of the world?

At least part of the answer to that question is

going to be based on understanding.

Is the country better off in terms of higher output

of trade?

So let's think about kind of the following somewhat naive

argument.

But it's a useful argument.

Example of how we might reason about this.

So, absent gunboat diplomacy and kind of coercion coming from

other countries, countries are always free to choose their trade

policy.

They can choose autarky, which is a policy of cutting

themselves off from the rest of the world.

Or they can choose to open to trade, or they

can choose something in between.

Okay, now let's appeal to everybody.

All right.

So what's the principle of preference for this circumstance, which

you can say if we do see that countries choose

to trade right.

It must be a preferred trade to autarky, since in

practice we do see that essentially all countries do indeed

open themselves up to to trade in that sort of

contract.

So that's a very sort of short argument in favour

of their existing gains in trade.

What problems like initially with this logic, does that convince

you all kind of one of the weaknesses of this

whole.

You know, kind of game theory.

F1 chooses that, chooses the option to trade the country

as opposed to trade and otherwise.

And so they choose.

And does.

Everyone else loses.

Maybe it's not the best option.

Okay.

So you're saying it could be essentially a coordination role.

Maybe everyone should have to trade.

That would be better for everyone but conditional on other

people's decisions.

Maybe it's better for trade.

Theoretically unlikely to be true in practice, but sure, that

seems like a theoretical possibility we might want to consider.

What other.

Thoughts?

Yeah, a hypothetical counterargument.

Yeah, you don't actually have the choice whether to trade

or not because there's always things like smuggling and more.

You know, having the border guarded like North Korea, Yeah.

You can't actually stop trade, so it's better to have

it legalised and regulated than by smuggling.

Okay, so yeah, I.

Want to make that point.

I also think the the kind of coercive power of

governments when they choose to, uh, try and enforce a

policy is fairly strong.

And though you might be right, they can't stop all

trade.

They can do a pretty good job of stopping most

of it.

And that certainly doesn't seem to be what they're aiming

for.

And so what?

Fair point.

But what else might be relevant for thinking about him?

And his argument.

I mean, there might be cases where you don't want

to trade.

If you're protecting some industry, you want it.

You want it to be competitive because it creates employment.

It creates output.

Yeah.

Um, but suppose that if you open trade immediately, it

will straight away collapse perhaps until this industry.

Then you want action up until it reaches the point

of capacity.

Okay, so you've got that.

But so I thought this is a blog we are

going to we'll talk you into your argument again.

Wasn't in the law but in practice again that's not

what we're seeing countries do.

Right.

So if the article was about a very important meeting,

you would expect to see more protection than you actually

do.

So and we can do that, but we don't see

that.

Maybe there is a reason, cause if you take your

trade policy, then your economy and industry to coordinate a

lot and change a lot, and it has a lot

of cost.

Yeah, sure.

So like path dependency, you're saying essentially that maybe if

you start from free trade it's better to state then

that's another possibility.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Maybe the people with the most power in countries.

So it will make decisions.

They benefit the motion trade Well overall, and not everyone

benefits equally.

Yeah.

So I think this is another really important point.

And probably maybe the strongest argument against this line of

reasoning is that so implicit in my argument here is

the idea that there's some kind of benevolent dictator who's

choosing the best possible policy for a government.

That would be a kind of fairly naive view of

how politics works in practice.

Right?

We have to ask ourselves more deliberately who's actually making

these decisions and lose interest as they add to it.

So it could definitely be a case that maybe some

people gain from trade and others don't.

And if it's those people who gain and who have

to hold of the power, maybe they will choose to

trade even to make this.

The country are worse off as a whole.

Okay.

And.

For the rest of today, we're going to kind of

look at empirical evidence and Something that you can say,

well, you can kind of carry on and trade a

few weeks time where we will see that there are,

you know, you can make better theoretical arguments for why

on aggregate of games and trade.

But at the same time there are strong distributional effects

of, of trade.

Right?

Um, under the most circumstances we would expect it to

aggregate.

But distribution effects such that some people win, some groups

win and others lose.

And and then understanding the political economy of trade is

going to be really important to understand who are the

winners and the losers.

So that will be important when it comes to thinking

about the distributional consequences.

Okay.

So let's take a break there.

And um, then we will kind of come back and

look at some empirical evidence in the game.

Right.

So we'll take like a five minute.

Hi.

Yes.

I'll be auditing the class.

Okay.

If you don't mind.

I mean, I see that there's a couple of seats

that they're in.

Yeah, yeah.

No, that's absolutely fine.

I don't know.

Okay.

We've got.

A small open economy that was great in the late

19th century.

And try to see the effects of innovation.

And you have competition.

So I think.

Anyway, so it's the topic that overlaps with perhaps other.

Yeah.

Okay.

Hi.

Hi.

I know.

I know.

Um, I was wondering.

About.

That.

Uh, yeah.

Um.

Of course.

But at the end, I felt like I already had

all this.

In fact, I would like to switch to this next

month.

Uh, but then you have to find a way for

me.

I'm happy to do so.

I think the.

Answer is.

Yes.

We all.

We are working together.

Of course.

But it is a very interesting essay.

It will be.

Fun.

Okay.

Yeah.

Are you choosing the toilet?

Uh, I.

Have a lot of data.

I'm interested in.

Internet.

Research.

So.

I'm kind of.

Curious.

But you.

Know.

I'm on it.

And my brother.

Does, um, astrology from time, so.

I want to.

Wait and see.

This.

And.

Then he.

Goes.

Um.

Um.

Um, I feel, um.

I only have.

It's very important.

That I.

Have a picture.

Yeah.

Um.

I also have.

An email that.

I went to that.

Um, the lecture is really good, and he's he's pretty

much about it.

But, um, my teacher.

I don't think it is too late.

I don't know if that weighs out any more.

I don't know.

What exactly?

It's hard to.

Make a decision from the first lecture.

This is really hard.

It's a great.

Idea.

Are you trying?

Yeah.

Hey.

So there was one data point that you put on.

One third of all three is intra.

Yeah.

What is the source for?

Well.

By the way.

I was working at an organisation.

I mean, I tell you the law of the land.

And we've always been trying to see.

How do we determine how much is that?

You know, I thought it was more indecisive.

So we figured out, like, so what is the aggregate

data to see the aggregate?

I would like.

To kind of find out exactly how.

I know.

So like.

When they.

When they record trade, there's a field of related art

which is saying like, I've.

Got it kind.

Of built for.

You.

And I think some of you have asked what, I

don't know, kind of like that.

How.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Correct.

Because we were trying to see with the Ministry of

Defence and they were interested, which are the goods that

go from them.

So we were thankful to get the reverse and see

what is traded by them.

And that's all there is.

To it.

And even the services won.

Um, I remember we struggled a lot because they're all

basically used to, um, and the only good ones, at

least I know back in India that you get are

when they're in like secret sauce because then you're mandated

to record but otherwise.

So like, you can.

Basically trade them.

Um.

So I think it's like an option.

So then we try to do like imputations from GSP

data or some other data, but there is no good,

no good way of doing that.

Um, there are some problems because I could be a

freelancer.

Measuring training centres.

But the good one is very interesting because you can

go for the six digit, eight digit adjusted level and

then like play around with it.

So what we used to do is like.

I think.

Even within a sector, so within car we see okay,

who's using components, who's doing the final girls.

And then.

Yeah okay.

Yeah yeah.

Yeah okay.

Okay.

Let's get started again.

Right.

Okay.

So what I want to talk about for the second

part of the lecture is estimating distance.

Right.

So the question is how do we estimate the aggregate

effect of trading wall.

Right.

And for today's purposes we're only interested in the aggregate

effect.

So as I've already mentioned, distributional effects are important.

Then we'll come back to them.

But for now we're just interested in the aggregate effect.

Does trade war increase countries income per capita on or

not?

So how might you go about answering that question?

Well, here's one sort of very simple approach you could

take.

Let's collect data for a cross-section of countries and let's

regress.

So why is country why is he coming to campus.

So we're actually loading up on a measure of trade

of this country imports exports over over GDPs.

We've seen that estimate this coefficient are alpha.

What's the problem.

What would be the problems with just running this regression

and say great.

We've estimated whether there are gains from trade.

Maybe for people with higher Harry and Tom.

They need to consume more stronger inventories.

Mhm.

So to put that in the language of econometrics, what

kind of bias are you worried about here.

Good.

You're all well right.

You know in particular I think what you were talking

about there was reversals.

Let's say you're worried that y y fatigue, which is

a very reasonable concern.

It could be that as countries get richer, they also

become more open for various reasons.

It could be the structure of what you were talking

about.

Um, it could also be that as you get richer,

more money to invest in transportation infrastructure, so you have

airports and that reduces freight costs.

So you train more.

So we're worrying about reality.

Uh, I also heard people worrying about omitted variable y.

Why might you be worried about omitted variable bias here?

Lots of factors can affect both income per capita as

well as trade.

For example geography, trade policy, etc..

Yeah.

That's fundamentally it.

All right.

So, you know, this kind of naive OLS regression is

not going to answer the question.

You know, you do if you do want this to

be correlated.

That's probably not a surprise.

But if we want to actually kind of understand this,

we're going to need to do, uh, better.

So how might we do better?

Well, you know, one obvious approach we might try is

can we construct an instrument, right.

And try and solve the endogeneity problem.

So we're going to look now at a couple of

papers to try and do exactly that by trying to

find an instrument for, uh, trade openness and then to

kind of do an estimation of how trade openness affects

GDP.

So we're going to start by looking at the people

who use geography as an instrument.

We'll be much more explicit about it in a minute.

And then we're going to use uh, this paper of

fire.

Hu Hu instead look to changes in transportation technology.

What's up with the Franklin River paper?

But it's background to that.

And to kind of understand what Franklin and Romo are

going to do, I want to now introduce you to

the gravity equation.

So the gravity equation is an equation for predicting the

level of trade between any pair of countries.

So it's about how much does a pair of countries,

uh trade.

And there are two key inputs into the gravity equation

source and geography.

So the basic idea is that size matters for trade.

It matters for trade.

All right.

You are likely to see more trade between our larger

economies.

So on the export side you think about that large

Larger economies produce more and more stuff for export.

On the import side, larger economies demand more, so they're

likely to import more.

So the size matters is the idea, and geography matters

in the sense that, as we have already talked about,

one of the factors that affects the cost of trade

is how close you are to other countries that might

be close in terms of physical distance.

New Zealand is just really far away from everywhere, but

it could also be close in terms of social and

cultural distance.

So for example, countries that speak the same language tend

to trade more than you would otherwise expect.

Because clearly speaking, the same language makes it easier for

businesses to communicate, and that tends to end up boosting

trade.

So the idea, you know, simple formulation of the gravity

equation like we've got here for the value of trade

between country and country, J is going to be equal

to some constant a times.

This is the GDP of country.

I apparently want the GDP of country J is the

party of two, and then it is going to be

inversely proportional to some measure of the distance between those

countries.

And the reason this is called the gravity equation is

the analogy with gravity in in physics.

So in physics, gravitational force is proportional to the product

of the mass of objects and is inversely proportional to

the square of the distance between them.

Right.

So here we've got GDP playing the role of mass.

And you've got some measure of distance in the uh

denominator.

Now so far I've just sort of motivated this gravity

equation by essentially waving my hands around and doing a

kind of verbal modelling and done anything formal here.

Uh, when this idea was originally introduced into economics by

Tim Burton.

Essentially what he did and said, I think this would

be a good way of modelling, uh, the amount of

trade between pairs of countries.

And I'm going to show you that in the data.

It does indeed quite well.

So the region is kind of an empirical and empirically

based idea.

Uh, more modern trained models now also provide us with

kind of a theory, you know, fully micro standard theory.

Why the gravity equation, uh, might hold.

We're going to kind of put that theory on hold

for now, and we're going to come back to it,

uh, in week 6 or 7.

Um, and we will see how movement style trade models

can relate to the gravity equation.

But for now, the key point is just a, you

know, this very simple relationship turns out to be incredibly

successful in predicting, uh, bilateral trade flows.

Right?

It is something like referred to as a kind of

most robust, uh, empirical finding in international economics is that

cross-border exchanges follow a gravity equation.

And that's true of trade.

But it's also true of other cross-border flows like FDI

or migration or knowledge flows.

The gravity equation is a good way of, you know,

at least to a first approximation, modelling all these things.

So we've got this, you know, simple gravity equation that

we're hypothesising here.

If we just take the log of either side of

that, you know, what we're going to get is.

This equation here.

Right.

And you can see that why I'm doing this is

because once we take the log, we now have a

very nice log linear equation.

That is going to be pretty straightforward to uh, estimate.

Right.

In particular, the important thing is that all the stuff

in this equation is easily observable.

So we can regress Bilateral trade on measures of GDP

and measures of distance.

And we can estimate these coefficients theta one, theta two

and theta three.

And if we do that, we are typically going to

find that all these three coefficients are somewhere in the

region of one.

Okay.

So the trade is kind of portion of the product

of the GDP and inversely proportional to distance.

And in addition, you know, it's not just kind of

we find these estimates, but the r squared of this

kind of uh, regression tends to be, you know, pretty

high given how few variables that are in there and

the almost often around sort of 70 or 80% of

the variation will be explained by these variables.

So that's the setting, which is kind of quite a

successful model for explaining my opinion.

Okay.

Yes.

I think we should have a negative.

Yes, you.

Are.

Entirely correct.

Thank you.

We definitely have more trade increasing indications.

Thank you.

Okay, so gravity is really empirically successful in explaining bilateral

trade.

How is that going to be useful for us in

estimating the gains from trade.

Okay.

So Franklin they wrote this paper in the late 90s.

They're interested in this question.

Are they going to trade and worry about bias and

just doing their best estimate.

So they're trying to come up with an instrument.

Their idea is to use gravity as the instrument for

trade openness.

You can kind of see where that coming from here.

We want to know how much country trade.

I'm telling you this gravity equation is a really good

predictor of bilateral trade.

So they say okay let's use gravity.

To.

Okay.

So.

Now we need to be a little careful here because

obviously the GDP terms on the right hand side of

this equation are clearly not exogenous to anything.

So when we say they're going to use gravity as

their instrument, we don't mean they're going to use the

Y and the Y.

Yeah.

What they want to use is the component of gravity

that's purely based on a country's, uh, geographic location.

So it's kind of the distance term that they really

want to, uh, to work off.

More specifically, the, uh, geographic variables.

They've been used to try and predict how far it

is from other countries, whether it's landlocked.

Right.

This matters because, uh, trade by overland is much more

expensive to the trade by sea.

So landlocked countries have trade costs.

And when you share a common border, because if you're

really close to another country, it's kind of very, uh,

relatively cheap to.

Trade.

So their idea is going to be, you know, estimating

equation to predict train levels using this potentially exogenous variation.

You use the estimates from that gravity equation to construct

your instrument and then do a two stage B squares

estimation where in the second stage, we're using prediction openness

from these estimates to predict how open the country is.

So when we start to see this kind of empirical

method introduced, obviously what we should immediately be thinking is

okay, do I by instrumentation strategy, do I think this

is a credible way to identify the effect of trading

on income of a factor?

So let's think through.

You know what the conditions are that we would need

for this to be about right.

In particular 1 or 2 most important ones what is

relevant and exogenous and So relevant.

Do you have a, uh, significant a powerful first stage,

right.

We'll see some some details on this in a minute.

But you know, here the relevance is going to be

satisfied because gravity is a strong predictor of trade.

So they've got a good idea when it comes to

relevance, the kind of as always in more challenging, uh,

condition to assess is do they indeed have a gorgeous

variation.

So in particular, you know, what we're looking for here

is that the geographical variation they are using isn't endogenous

to income per capita.

There's no reverse quality.

And in addition it only affects income per capita through

trade.

Right.

Which is to say the exclusion restriction holds.

So there isn't there aren't any omitted variables that are

themselves, uh, Talent or affected by geography, and which in

turn affect income per capita.

So when we're assessing kind of the instrumentation strategy here,

we really want to be thinking through this kind of

condition calls.

I'm going to hold off or we're going to hold

off discussing whether that is the case for now.

We'll look at what they do in more detail, and

then we'll come back to this question of do we

do we buy what we do?

But any kind of questions about the big picture of

what we're trying to do here before we get into

the details?

All right.

So here's the equation.

It's a slight variation of what I showed you before.

Uh, we're going to come back to an openness, a

country population and a country's area.

So they've added this ni population and I area, uh,

they're an instrument of trade.

And they're going to do this is a cross-section from

1985.

So that's why I think they've added a population and

an area here.

They have a very specific rationale for doing that.

What why do you think that might be.

Interesting about this.

And this is coming back to the exogenous condition and

the exclusion restriction that we talked about a moment ago.

Countries might be geographically closer to other countries, but they

might also have higher income per capita, because if you

are larger you might have access to more resources or

so.

So that could be one way that geo geography is

correlated with an amount of variability you control for that

amount of time.

Exactly.

I worry that not controlling for these effects would violate

the exclusion restriction.

So they are controlling Uh, for that as a way

to avoid that being a sort of omission.

Right.

The concern there is that, um, geographic characteristics, remember, the

geographic characteristics that are being used or the distance.

Are you landlocked?

Do you share a common border that these geographic characteristics

are in general, going to be correlated with things like

the area, the country, and what's the population?

And, uh, these internal lines affecting the country character.

So that's my rationale for including in a second stage.

Yeah.

Then to logically encompass what is the logic behind the

population as the United in terms.

Yeah.

So the concern would be, um, if larger countries tend

to have higher income per capita for whatever reason.

So imagine there is a scale effect in productivity so

that larger countries are more productive.

Why might that be?

Well, if you've studied like endogenous growth theory, a basic

kind of Romer or AG on how it was modelled

will have that implication.

The larger countries end up being more productive.

So if we think that that might be possible, we're

worried about kind of controlling for that effect.

So we're not saying it's definitely true, but it's a

possibility.

So they think, well let's just be conservative and control

for it.

Okay.

So that's the second stage then how do we construct

the instrument.

Right.

So here's where they're going to make a gravity equation.

Or a gravity.

Equation.

So I'm going to start off by estimating this regression.

So on the left hand side there you've got the

value of a trade between country and day relative to

the GDP of country.

So it's kind of a measure of how open country

is to trade within a two day.

And then you're Addressing that on, you know, the distance

between the countries.

You've got the, uh, you obviously got the an eye

in the eye in there because they're in the second

stage.

So we need to have them in the first stage

too.

And you've got that big country icon and then you've

got other countries involved.

Do they share a border?

Um, and then we've also got the interaction of the

border term with all the other variables.

So it's just kind of allowing for heterogeneity in the

effect of the variable conditional on whether or not you

share.

Or so you know, in this equation here, other than

the population in aggregate terms, all we've got are the

variables that we are claiming are the sources of exogenous

variation, which is to say the distance to the landlocked

under the border.

So you're going to estimate this equation that they will

use.

To Estimated.

Coefficients equations to predict levels of change.

And they will use those predicted trade levels to construct

the instrument for greater trade openness.

And it makes sense kind of following what to do

here.

So here is a graphical representation of the first stage.

So what we're seeing here is kind of actual trade

in this on the y axis.

Again predicted trade openness based on the previous regression on

the x axis.

Note the gap is very important.

You predict this value for each country j each trading

point.

And then you sum up across all the trading partners

to get your your aggregate measure.

And then what we do here is the plotting and

aggregating measures against actual trade openness.

And the basic point to make is that there is

a very strong positive relationship.

So this is the first day I show any kind

of duty of relevance in the first stage.

Um, so that was the actual version.

Here's a regression version of the same thing where we're

resting on our instrument, which is the constructed tracer.

Um, and then doing the other way of all without

population, er included.

And the basic point to make is if you're getting

a strong significant effect here in the first stage.

So we're kind of passing the relevance here.

Now what happens when we actually end up estimating the

second stage.

So that's what we're seeing here.

Okay.

So we're now regressing income perhaps on trade openness.

And in the different columns here you've got version and

you've got the ID version and you've worked it out.

So first off if we look at the old version

you're seeing that there is a positive association Associations.

We already suspected rich countries tend to be more open

to trade, but then the result will be interesting is

what happens in the second column when we do the,

uh, the instrumentation.

What we're seeing here is we are getting a positive

effect.

In 1.97.

You can see the t statistic is going to be

very close to.

So it's going to be kind of borderline significant at

the 5% level.

We are getting a very large standard error here, which

is something of a concern.

But you know, that aside they are finding a positive

relationship between trade openness and growth in using the instrumentation

procedure.

And that's that's true both they have two different samples

which differ depending on whether they include commodity dependent countries,

but they get fairly similar results in in both cases.

So that's what we find right now.

Let's think about what we take away from this.

So simply in terms of magnitude, what these results are

saying is that a one percentage point increase in openness

raises incumbent capital by 2 to 3%.

So now that's not just positive, but it's also very

large.

That's a, uh, to increase to get that big gain.

Income per capita were 1 to 20 billion.

And there are very large gains from trade.

So the question that we have to ask ourselves, do

we trust you?

How credible do we find them?

So what concerns might we have?

You kind of by okay we're done.

There are big positive gains from trade.

Or how might you critique the methods?

Any thoughts?

Maybe think about this in terms of, you know.

when we have that exceptionality condition and we talked about

the exclusion restriction satisfied.

Are there any reasons why that might fail?

Or why that might be problematic in the school?

Yeah, maybe it's done across different countries.

So each country may have different endogeneity concerns that affect

the independence.

Yeah.

So I think that's a reasonable point to make.

And then the kind of next step is to, you

know, I think what those concerns might be in a

particular case, can we get you know, I think if

we are, if we are worried that the.

What is it?

We're worried that.

We won't be able to give you examples of why

that might be so kind of the game here is

thinking up, you know, why might it be that we

don't have a.

Case?

Yeah.

So for instance, you could think of your card with

like say if a country has oil.

Mhm.

Um, and it might be the case that because of

that it makes them rich rather than just potentially via

trade.

Yeah.

Okay.

Good.

So this is the line of reasoning I think you

want to be taking the variation here from geography.

So what other factors are there that could be, you

know, correlated or determined by geography that might also affect

income.

Right.

Do you suggest oil?

What oil is concentrated in particular areas of the world

and therefore will tend to be correlated with how remote

countries are.

Now.

If they were faced with that particular critique, I think

what they would respond is a very reasonable.

But what we do in column four is we draw

all the countries that produce oil, and we're still finding

that effect.

So I think that's the kind of the right thing

to be worrying about.

I think we argue that's not what's driving the results,

but can we kind of come up with more suggestions

along those lines.

Could.

Affect.

Market.

Conditions, which.

In turn determine agricultural output.

The idea.

Is up to capital.

Countries.

Yeah.

So this could be another possibility right?

I don't think there's anything in what they directly do

to the rules that are that possibility.

And I think once you start to think like this,

you can start to think of other potential factors that

it could be kind.

Of.

Geography and also income per capita.

And the problem here is that potentially there's a lot

of stuff that's, um, dependent on or at least correlated

with geography.

Right.

And if you have if you're kind of familiar, if

you're taking a growth course and you're familiar with the

literature on cross-country growth regressions, right.

Kind of what that literature shows is that you can

throw in a bunch of different variables, and they will

be correlated with income per capita.

And they're also likely to thrive with lots of other

characteristics of the of the country.

So it is very hard to rule out the possibility

that geography might be, you know, correlated with or driving

some other factor that could also be affecting factor one.

That is, I think potentially a major concern here would

be kind of measure of institutions.

Right?

So if you think about the work people like Johnson

and Robinson have done on how institutional development affecting income

tax capital.

That channel is fairly, uh, kind of well established at

the same time.

Institutional demand might also be correlated with geography, uh, partly

because, you know, what areas were colonised by different European

powers is clearly geographically determined.

And that has affected institutional development.

So when people have, you know, this was a whole

paper now in 1999, it's been around for a while.

And at the time it was written, it was kind

of, you know, a very novel way of thinking about

this issue.

But it's been critiqued in many ways over the years.

And in particular, there's been kind of two strands of,

of criticism that I think have been particularly important and

which are great issues about which one has been.

It turns out that these are not super robust.

If you start playing around with the sample exactly how

you do the estimation, You can kill the significance quite

easily.

So this isn't the most robust set of results we've

ever seen.

But probably the more interesting kind of line of reasoning

is, you know, various reasons why the exclusion restriction and

there might be, uh, exogenous bias due to that in

time varying country factors that are correlated with both geography

and income per capita.

And I think institutions are a particularly strong candidate there.

So here are the problems.

How might we think about addressing them if this is

the kind of critique that this this method is susceptible

to, can you come up with ideas for how we

might improve on, uh, what they're doing and come up

with kind of a more credible identification strategy?

So when thinking about this in particular, kind of know

that the flavour is amended by precedent and the flavour

is the mixture of them is often some country characteristic

that is correlated with both geography and income per capita

and many of these country characteristics.

If it's something like, you know, institutions for am I

an oil exporter?

Right.

That's kind of how institutions do vary over time, but

they vary so slowly for the kind of personal interest

in here that you need much time about.

Um, so what would be nice and what would solve

this problem is if we could include countries face to

face to capture all this time invariant stuff.

Yes.

Logical improvement, uh, of a will have a lower cost

effective than that.

Great.

So this is the route we want to go, right?

Because if the the problem here is that we can't

control the country, why can't we include the countries which

Face to face.

It is because all of the variation we're using here

is cross-sectional variation.

These geography variables, this land of water, vary over time,

so they only provide us with cross-sectional variation and therefore

they don't allow us to use time series variation if

include country fixed effects.

So an improvement not necessarily a complete solution, but an

improvement would be to find some time series variation that

allows us to handle estimation and include fixed effects.

Okay.

So that's where we go.

And in particular, that's where we're going to just paint

by fire.

Who proposes using changes in transportation technology over time to

construct an instrument for changes in freight and trade.

And in particular kind of fires.

Idea is there was this big change in how many

goods are traded starting in the 1960s due to the

introduction of air freight.

So as air freight was introduced, We see more transport

by air and less by sea.

And this has differential effects on trade for different countries

depending on how kind of well suited those countries are

for our trade.

And in particular, uh, five is an idea you're going

to get if you measure the distance between two countries.

And you do that by air.

That's kind of a great circle distance over the surface

of the globe.

That's one way of measuring distance.

And another way of measuring distance is if you actually

have to ship the goods, the distance is kind of

what's the best shipping route between two countries.

And those are different measures of distance.

So what is going to argue is that as you

introduce airfreight, the way you measure distance between countries, changes

from being the shipping distance to the edges.

And for countries that are much closer to the rest

of the world by air than by sea, that is

going to disproportionately boost those countries trade.

So he wants to construct the instrument of the changes

in the trade openness Companies over time went into.

The variation that goes into the instrument is from the

interaction of international airfreight at the time, variation with the

cross country variation coming together.

Are you a country that is going to tend to

be close to my advice?

Right?

What kind of country would that be?

Well, an obvious example would be landlocked countries.

Suppose your country like land, right?

You're stuck in the middle of Africa.

You do not have any good access to ports.

It is relatively difficult for Rwanda to get any of

its output by sea.

But you can fire a plane from Rwanda to London

overnight, right?

That's the basis of the fire industry in any kind

of Central African countries.

It wouldn't work if you had to ship it by

sea, but you can do it by by air.

So countries that are landlocked or in other ways have

poor access to port or the shipping routes are going

to disproportionately benefit from is any.

Questions on that so far.

The kind of big picture idea here.

And then we'll go into details.

Okay.

So let's look at you know I kind of claim

that this is the case.

Let's look at some actual data to see if whether

this is in fact true in practice.

So here's data on the share of airfreight in US

trade value for imports.

The solid line exports to the dashed line.

And you can see if we do see this kind

of big increase in the share of trade value that's

going by air from close to 10% in the mid

60s.

To.

More up to 4,050% by the year 2000.

So having established that, here's how I was going to

construct this instrument.

In some ways, the the approach is similar to what

Franklin Graham did.

He's going to make a sort of zero stage regression

where he uses, uh, kind of geographic variation for Detroit,

and it's going to aggregate across countries to get a

predictive trade atlas, which you'll use as an instrument for

a two stage squares regression.

The difference is that in the zero state regression, well,

uh, Franklin Romer used time invariant measures.

He's using time variation.

So in particular he is going to estimate it's going

to regress the trade between countries in period T.

So time is narrow.

We want to do variation.

We're going to have import export and time estimates.

And then we're going to include both the C distance

and the er distance between the countries interacting with time

varying coefficients.

So the idea is to estimate what is the trade

distance and distance.

And how does that change over time.

And what we would expect to see is that as

airfreight becomes more important.

Trade becomes more sensitive to, uh, taxes.

Specifically, as this is just a great circle distance between

countries.

You know, those are the routes you fly when you're

on the aeroplane.

See distance.

He actually calculates kind of what are the days needed

to try to travel between the main ports in each

country, taking account of where shipping lanes are, where the

Suez Canal is, where the Panama Canal and stuff like

like that.

So when he runs that regression, these are the coefficients

he's going to end up estimating.

So the red triangle version of green with the rectangles

is the point version.

And the little whiskers on either side showing the 95%

confidence intervals.

You get a sense where they're significant.

Um, and he has to make one of these corrections

every five years from 1953 to 95.

Uh, and the rectangles are the furthest effectively distance.

So our distance and the little diamonds are the effective

clusters.

So for example, in 1950, you can see there's no

significant effect of our distance on trade, whereas the coefficient

on c distance is around negative one.

So this is consistent with the fact that there's not

really a trade going on at the cytosol.

So it doesn't matter.

But then you can see during this period where we

know that there's more of our free trade becomes more

sensitive than distance, and it also becomes less sensitive to

see distance.

So this is kind of establishing that the the time

series and the importance of these different distances kind of

does indeed show up in how we see kind of

actual trade flows evolving over time.

Questions on questions on that.

So.

Given that he then constructs his instrument, he does this

in three different ways.

Um, each of these different approaches uses the same fundamental

variation, which is fundamentally all about the time varying effect

of distance and air distance.

But it's not obvious exactly how you want to weight

these different effects, in particular how you want to kind

of weight different countries when you're you're aggregating.

So you kind of does a bunch of different ways

to check whether it's robust, different, you know, the details

of the approach.

So what are the different ways.

So option one, he simply takes the um gravity estimates

that he gets he predicts trait based on the estimated

CNN coefficients.

So that will give him a predicted level of trade

or predicted trade between the country and each of its

partners.

J.

And he aggregates across the pond.

So this is the way that's kind of most similar

to what Franklin Roman did, at least how it does

in the aggregation.

Um, then there's a second approach where the code does

the same thing would be weights by heart, country, uh,

population.

So here he's trying to kind of give more weight

to the bigger markets because we know you see more,

uh, training data markets.

But know that when he weights by populations, he uses

the kind of star to sample population.

And the idea here is to avoid using any time

series variation in population that could have solved the endogenous

um.

And then the third option is simply to take away,

uh, the difference between the weighted average of a country's

see distance from all its trade partners and the distance

from all his trading partners, where you can weight Using

either the country's population or its total land area at

the start of the, uh, the start of the cycle.

This third option gives you an instrument that only marries,

uh, in the, uh, cross section.

So it doesn't kind of every, every five years the

other two instruments do.

So it's kind of designed to be used in a

long different specification rather than in a kind of ideally.

Okay.

Any questions on what he's doing here.

Right.

So having done that he's been kind of ready to

make the second stage.

So his second stage again is essentially very similar setup

to what we saw in our kind of naive and

in our Franklin Roman setup.

But now we're going to be doing differences.

Right.

And so because we're taking differences we're kind of implicitly

controlling for country fixed effects.

So the result we give an account of the changes

in the income per capita between 1960 and 1995.

So we're looking at the long difference version, and we're

going to address that on trade, the changes in trade

openness.

And then we're going to instrument the changes in trade

openness.

So here's what he finds.

Okay.

Um so we've got all of that.

And then we've got various different ID results showing up

here.

Um, the top panel is showing the second stage of

results.

The middle panel is the first stage results.

And then the bottom panel is the reduced form for

the different instruments.

So when he does it you know, we're getting there's

kind of a positive association between increasing trade openness and

increasing income per capita.

Again that's not surprising but it's clearly not causal.

So we don't own a huge amount from that.

And then, you know, we have different instruments based on

either that kind of gravity approach or a simple instrument

with different weights.

And you can see consistently across these different approaches.

He is finding a a positive effect.

He's finding elasticity somewhere between 25.75.

You know, pretty highly significant here.

We're getting t statistics a little 345 range.

So again we're finding positive effects of trade openness on

income per capita.

They aren't as large as in the world.

But they are consistently positive.

And if you look at other panels of this table

you can see again, we've got kind of a pretty

strong, uh, further stage for most of the instruments.

And you can see similar results showing up in the

reduced form.

Okay.

So let's kind of circle back here and think about

what we've learned from this.

And then again kind of ask the question how credible

do we find, uh, this estimation that followers do.

So first of all, what estimates are.

Well, we find that a 1% increase in trade income

by 0.5 0.75%.

So again, it's positive.

It's not quite frankly, but it's still kind of a

quite a reasonably large, uh, positive effect.

And then the question is, you know, how credible do

you find these estimates.

So what concerns might we have with uh, is estimation.

So I mean, it's a pretty obviously an improvement over

what Franklin and Roman are doing.

But there's always going to be room for criticism.

So how might we what concerns we have over what

he's doing here.

Some of them are on this slide here.

So again, kind of when you're faced with this question,

you want to be thinking, okay, he's constructed an instrument.

He's demonstrated relevance in the first stage.

We've kind of done that.

So how you know what concerns might we have over

exaggerated.

So what variation is he using.

Let's back up and remind us of that.

He's using this variation that comes from the introduction of

airfreight.

So his claim is the introduction of A3 boosts trade

openness.

The countries that tend to be kind of close by

air relative to by Sea world countries.

And these countries therefore become richer.

So again, think about how the exclusion restriction might fail.

Are there other factors that could affect income per capita

that could also be affected by these kind of transportation

technologies?

So one point that comes up in this context and

kind of, you know, has been raised as a criticism

of these results.

But, you know, to be fair, as fully acknowledged in

the paper as an issue here is we have focussed

on thinking about this introduction of airfreight affecting trade, right,

and boosting trade.

But what happens when you kind of establish air connections

between countries, right.

It might reduce the cost of trade, but it also

reduces the cost of other forms of move.

It makes it cheaper to fly people.

So you might see an increase in tourism.

You might see increased migration.

Right.

It also reduces the cost of doing business in terms

of if you set up a production plant in a

foreign country.

If you're doing FDI, you might also see this kind

of rise of airfreight increases foreign investment into countries that

are closer by air than I see.

So this kind of raises the question of whether is

what we're identifying here, changes in the effect of changes

in trade, or is it some broader globalisation effect associated

with increased air transport.

Right.

And the method he's using here really doesn't allow him

to separate out those, those two things.

So one question you can definitely write is, you know,

this elasticity is 0.5%.

Is that a trade elasticity or is it some kind

of a broader but not very well defined globalisation.

Does one.

Certainly.

You know, one concern that we might have, are there

other kind of issues you would immediately kind of think

about when you, uh, when you see what he's done

here.

So, I mean, another thing you might want to think

about is what type of goods tend to get transported

by air.

It's certainly not the case that once we start doing

more air freight, it's just random which goods are transported

by sea versus air.

Goods that are more likely to be transported by air

are going to typically be high value, low white goods,

right?

Diamonds would be a classic example, but it's also going

to be things like electronics.

It's also things that are perishable.

So cut flowers uh fresh meat, those kind of, uh,

goods.

So, you know, this doesn't really come into his estimation

strategy directly at all.

But another factor.

Clearly what's going to happen is that airfreight encourages specialisation

in certain types of goods.

And I've already given the example of the flour industry

in Kenya for example.

Right.

That industry exists in Kenya because of the existence of

airfreight.

Right.

On the one hand, that is increased trade, but it's

trade in particular type of goods.

So we can kind of ask an external validity type

question about, you know, is this a society telling us

about the general effect of increasing trade openness on income

factor, or is it about, you know, if we specialise

in the type of goods that are easy to transport

by air, how does that affect income per capita?

And so that's not necessarily to say that the results

are invalid, but it's about kind of thinking through the

details of how we interpret this kind of empirical work.

Before we can finish up one other point.

There's another paper by fire, which is relevant for this

debate, which the basic idea is similar in that he

uses changes in transport costs over time to construct a

time bearing instrument for trade openness.

But there, instead of using airfreight, he uses the closure

of the Suez Canal from 1967 and 75.

Right.

So this the closure of the Suez Canal greatly increases

trade costs for countries that are connected, for which the,

uh, the quickest route is reduced Canal countries.

So again, the change in trade costs that differentially affects

different trade of countries.

And you can use that to construct an alternative instrument

for change in the trade.

When he does that and he kind of estimates the

same 16 points below uh 0.25 rather than 0.5.

Why do we think he might find a lower elasticity

using that approach than he did in the asteroid data.

Only certain countries are globally affected by this.

This kind of flows from those countries.

So.

So concerned that.

There are some countries in the world affected, um, not

simply through changing trade that might be affected.

This is following the Six-Day War that this had.

So it could there could be a direct impact.

I think that's true.

I think that would be biasing in the other direction,

because what it would mean is that countries, the countries

that would be directly affected by this, if you mean

also the those that rely heavily on it for trade.

So those countries would see a negative shock both through

trade and through other factors, and that would tend to

lead to a larger transition.

So I think it's a valid inquiry, but I don't

really explain the difference between the two labels.

Any suggestions for kind of what potentially could.

Come in relation to this point we made here about

how we interpret the estimate from the.

Two different types of words in different studies.

One or maybe the first paper would be excluding those

words which are transported likely by ash.

Yeah that is the second paper would probably be different

sets of words which are exported by water.

Yeah.

So I mean it's fine if it's two more weeks

because it doesn't matter because I'm not going to say

yes.

This is this is one good possibility to point out.

It could be the type of goods whose trade is

being affected by these two shocks could be very different

and could have very different applications for, you know, aggregate

income per capita.

So that's kind of saying that essentially you're estimating different

elasticities in these two cases.

The other point I just wanted to make this, you

know, if we think about sort of globalisation more broadly

because, you know, air travel is good for encouraging FDI

and technology transfer migration, that's not true.

In the same way that the closure of the Suez

Canal, because you didn't have businessmen travelling on ships through

the Suez Canal to see that wasn't enough, it was

still going by.

And so in some sense, the Suez Canal closure is

more of a pure trade shock.

So one interpretation would be that the elasticity is lower

because this is more capturing the effects of just trade,

whereas the other is kind of free trade plus FDI

plus immigration plus other globalisation stuff, which, you know, those

other channels will have a positive effect of increased demand.

Now to be clear, I'm speculating.

We don't know.

That was definitely the case, but it's kind of a

consistent interpretation of the findings.

All right.

So we're going to wrap up there for uh today.

You know I think the takeaways from this second part

of the lecture isn't this kind of gamesmanship question is

important.

It's awfully difficult because of the difficulty of finding kind

of a genetic variation.

But people are trying to come up with reasonably clever

ways to do it, and no perfect way.

But the balance of the evidence certainly points in the

direction that there are these against three different strategies and

each kind of different numbers that have been there.

Any questions before we start?

All right.

Great.

Thanks everyone.

Oh yeah.

Sorry question.

Yeah.

Why do we actually, um, analyse a global with analysis

on a country Salesman realises trade will be good for

the UK, if not more.

Yeah.

Uh, we definitely have a question.

Partly interested in the type of pages I click expose

on there and taking the cross country perspective.

The challenge is if I just focus on the UK,

would be disentangling the differential from all the other shocks

to the same.

If you just focus on one country, you can produce

a sample from 200 countries to one country.

So in that sense, you've lost power, so you're going

to need to do something else to increase your power.

So the question you want to know.

Which is not anything like that.

Yeah that's a trade off.

All right.

Good.

See you next.

Week.

Oh, sorry.

One more thing.

Problem sets.

The problem sets are on Moodle.

Um.

Please attempt problem sets before you come to class.

Lecture 2:

I'm not allowed to talk about it.

Yeah.

I.

I haven't thought about that.

Also, no, Angelou says.

Yeah.

I think.

Leave us.

Alone.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah.

Oh my God.

There he goes.

Very, very nice.

Oh, really?

Yeah.

They told me like, this is going to be another.

If I may say, I won.

The contest to capture for the latter.

Yeah.

For sure.

Absolutely.

All.

Right.

No.

How?

Are you?

How are you doing?

Good.

What?

The truth.

Exactly.

And it was like some show, like.

Hey.

It was good, but there was only one.

Place.

Yeah.

Oh.

All right.

That's my thought.

So.

Today's lecture is going to be, um, starting to think

about trade theory, some modelling today.

And we're going to think about two particular ideas, or

we're going to talk about one idea and then one

model which captures that idea.

So the idea we're going to think about is the

idea of comparative advantage, which is an idea that historically

has really lied lain at the heart of trade theory.

So we're going to talk a little bit about what

comparative advantage means and what we can understand using the

concept of comparative advantage.

Um, and then we are in the second part of

that, I'm going to work through the first theory in

this course, Tools, which will be a kind of basic

Ricardian model of international trade.

And we'll see what the recording model has to say

about why countries trade and what the consequences of trade

are.

So that's the agenda for today.

Any questions before we get started?

All right.

Comparative advantage.

So I think the concept of comparative advantage is one

that many of you are likely to already be familiar

with, because it is a term that comes up a

lot whenever we talk about international trade.

Um, it is also the term which is often used

quite loosely.

So I think there can sometimes be some confusion about

what exactly is meant by comparative advantage.

Or more specifically, I think it can often be the

case that different people use it to mean, uh, different

things.

So what I want to do, You know, we're going

to talk about comparative on different points in the course.

But one of the things we want to do today

is be precise about exactly what we mean, what we

will mean by, uh, during this course.

And then once we've got a precise definition of comparative

advantage, that's going to allow us to think about what

are the implications of saying what country has a comparative

advantage in a particular good.

So comparative advantage is probably the extent of the oldest

idea that still lies at the heart of trade theory.

It dates originally and famously to work to David Ricardo,

writing about 200 years ago.

And for the question Ricardo was interested in is why

do we see countries, you know, some countries export some

goods and imports other goods.

Other countries have kind of different patterns of trade.

So it was getting this question, what is it that

determines, the pattern of trade, and in broad terms, the

idea of comparative advantage is his answer to this question.

So the the goal of this idea is to provide

a rationale for what explains the, uh, what happened to

trade.

We're talking kind of in a moment about how we

how we do that.

Um, but it's worth just flagging some of the history

of this idea has been a very influential idea historically.

You know, since I came up with about 200 years

ago, you know, for about 150, 160 years.

It really was the idea that was at the centre

of all thinking about international trade.

So prior to a wave of work that started in

the late 1970s and which will study in the second

half of this course, when people talk about international trade,

what they really talk about, why the countries have a

comparative advantage in different goods, and what the implications of

those patterns of comparative advantage were.

So the main model in the main two models we're

going to study in the first half of the course

are both going to be models where the reason we

get international trade is because of differences and comparative advantage.

So today we're going to study the Ricardian model, in

which comparative advantage comes from technological differences from countries and

in a couple of weeks time, also a factor in

model where comparative advantage comes from factoring down differences.

So these are both models which you know fundamentally about

why different countries have comparative different comparative advantages, but they

have different rationales for where comparative advantage comes from.

And because of that, along some dimension scales have different

predictions about what the effects of a trade are going

to be.

But what we'll start doing today is just by talking

about general terms, and then later on we'll specialise to

this Ricardian, uh, way of modelling comparative advantage.

And we'll come back to the lecture this time.

All right.

Um.

And here's kind of what I'm going to mean.

More precisely, what I'm going to mean when I talk

about comparative advantage in this course.

So this.

I'm going to introduce this idea of the principle of

comparative advantage, which is Ricardo wouldn't have put it in

exactly these terms, but it's a sort of modern distillation

of the idea.

I mean, the idea is the principle of only states

that when two countries engage in trade, each country will

tend to export those goods in which at a lower

relative price in all the time.

So it's a little wordy statement, right?

It takes a little bit of thinking about it to

understand exactly what it's saying, but broadly speaking it has

two parts, right.

So part one is it's about the pattern of trade,

right?

It's about which goods each country will tend to to

export.

So that's Fundamentally, what we're after is the pattern of

trade look like, and we're after it in kind of

inter industry sets.

And then it's kind of saying we're exporting some goods

and the, you know, implicitly unspoken rule that we're also

importing other goods.

But then the concern is, okay, well what good will

it be?

And it's those in which the country has a lower

relative price in autarky.

So this is the more sort of fundamental bit of

the idea is that if in autarky, when the country

isn't trading at all, it has a lower relative price

of goods, then it will tend to export those goods

when it opens up to to trade.

Another way to do that is if we're happy to

assume that the relative prices reflect relative marginal cost of

production, which certainly would be the case in a competitive

economy.

Then how do we know the relative in the same

category as a low relative marginal cost to the production

in wartime.

I don't know why.

Pretty nice.

It has a lower opportunity cost of production.

So you can think about this principle of comparative advantage

in terms of, um, relative autarky prices.

But that is going to be equivalent under relatively weak

assumptions.

To think about it in terms of lower opportunity costs

of of production.

Now here I'm just stating that.

So obviously, you know, there's a natural question of okay,

well what is that true?

What can you prove?

This is kind of like a theory.

And then can we can we prove that is indeed

the case and we're going to come to that.

But before we do, just think a little bit more

about what this is.

Ah, what this is saying.

So first off it's a mapping from what happens in

autarky to what happens in under the trident.

All right.

So it's kind of interesting in that sense in that

it's telling us if I know something about what an

economy looks like when it's not trading, you can take

that information and use it to make predictions about what

the pattern of trade will be.

Right.

So another weapon that the kind of information that you're

getting from observing one equilibrium, the autarky equilibrium is informative

about what the trade equilibrium will be.

We'll see why that is in a moment.

The other thing is that everything in here is always

about relative comparison.

It's never about anything.

It's always about relative.

Right.

That's true in two distinct sentences, both of which are

important.

Firstly, it's about your relative prices and production across goods.

Right.

So if there are a, you know, simplified case where

there are just two goods, right.

It's not about the absolute price for any of those

goods, but the relative price of those goods in the

country.

But then comparing those relative prices to goods within one

country, the relative prices in the other country.

So it's a sort of double comparison, right.

So imagine the two goods, the cars and food we're

going to look at is the price of cars relative

to food or in autarky in my home country.

How does that compare to the price of food in

autarky in the following country?

I think the statement here is that for the relative

price of cars relative to in the home country, in

a country is lower than the same relative price in

the foreign country talking.

Then when we open up trade, the home country will

export the good which has the lower relative price, which

you can't import food.

The most common mistake people make when they kind of

first come across this principle is to you think in

absolute terms, either by not comparing prices across goods within

a country, or by not comparing relative prices across countries,

and the fact that it is a relative comparison is

super important because it means each country will always have

a comparative advantage in some good, right?

If what we were saying here is, you know, each

country will have a comparative and the good in which

it has the absolute best price.

Well, it could be that one country has absolutely lower

prices in all goods, and then one country would get

a comparative advantage in everything, but then you wouldn't have

a bunch in anything.

And then it would be like, well, how does that

generate trade?

Crucial to the idea of comparative bondage is that because

you're doing these relative comparisons, if my relative price of

cars is more, then it's kind of logically must be

the case.

Your relative price food is lower, right?

Matter to trade.

I'm going to say if the home country has a

comparative advantage, because then it has to be the case

that the same thing as saying that the foreign country

has a comparative advantage in in food and where it

is kind of avoids conceptual confusion often when it comes

to the question, if we think about trade between developed

and developing countries, one critique of international trade is, well,

we shouldn't allow developed countries to trade with developing countries

because because developed countries have better technologies across the board,

developing countries simply won't be able to compete.

Right.

Which is another way of saying that they have a

comparative advantage.

And to the extent that this idea actually captures an

important, uh, aspect of the world work, it's saying, well,

that's not the right way to think about this is

what that is is not kind of the absolute differences,

the relative differences.

And when you think of these relative terms, if developed

countries have a comparative 1 to 1 industry, then to

developing countries, you're going to have a comparative advantage in

another industry.

And that's always going to generate an incentive for trade

between these countries.

Um, and as we will see more next week, I

will also generate from the rationale for going.

Yeah.

Uh, does this mean that.

Uh, you know, transaction costs because then you can, uh,

compare the reduction in other to international trade?

So the short answer is no.

Um, because the kind of the point is here, it's

kind of sometimes kind of regardless of exactly how you

open up the trade, you know, these price differences in

mortality, it's going to tell you something about what these

trade patterns are going to be.

The more numerous pathways, if there are trade costs, the

exact amount to trade and exactly which to the trade

will depend on those trade costs, but not in a

way that overturns this basic idea.

And we'll look at some kind of versions of that

a little bit more as we go, as we go

through, certainly, trade costs often do kind of complicate some

of these ideas, which don't overturn the basic intuition.

Okay, because I'm just thinking because it's pretty hard to

compare to all of this if there's a really good

infrastructure, for example, and they're pretty protected walls or lower,

um, like large amount of country relatively, then you could

have.

Yeah.

I mean, if you if you want to get into

that level of detail, you're going to need to distinguish

between are we talking about kind of infrastructure that reduces

the cost for international trade, which will kind of matter

for the amount of international What are you doing?

Are you talking about, say, you know, road infrastructure within

the country, which might affect production costs if it's the

latter.

That's definitely something that feeds into your pattern of comparative

advantage.

But it doesn't in any way.

The fact that the divisions that are coming after this.

Yeah.

If I were to countries and one had lower absolute

prices and everything.

But have like a comparative advantage in food, um, and

then country B had like a comparative budget in cars,

why would, would country be able to sell cars at

the same price like same road price that country A

would.

Yeah.

So we'll we'll see that more later.

But effectively what will happen though is when you open

up the tray, the prices are going to change in

the two countries in such a way that it creates

the incentive for trade.

So even if they in autarky, it were the case

that the prices were lower in absolute terms in one

country than another.

Once you open up to trade, the prices will adjust

so that that is no longer the case and that

will generate the incentives for a trader interested in.

Anyone else in mind?

Okay, so having stated that right now and a little

bit of analysis to try and convince ourselves that this

is actually, you know, a sensible way to think about

the world in the sense that we can actually kind

of formalise this idea and see how it works in

an actual functioning economy.

So we're going to introduce the notation and then we'll

uh, and then we'll kind of do a little bit

of modelling of this idea.

So the notation which we'll use now and we'll also

kind of come back, we'll use a similar notation throughout

the course.

We're going to use an A capital A.

We're talking we're going to use a capital T for

a free trade.

Typically when we use that capital T we'll be thinking

about going to trade with no trade costs.

Right.

And then you could also think about an intermediate case

between a talking about where there are restrictions, but a

lot of the time to understand the key ideas, we'll

just compare the autarky, the free trade equilibrium.

This is the first part.

Um, when we have a two country world, which we're

going to do for now, a whole country b h

the foreign country will be f uh, and then we're

going to have our goods, so we're going to be

prices.

The important thing to remember is that there's many goods.

So P is a vector is an individual vector.

Likewise C is an individual subject matter.

Y is the output vector.

And in some cases we will write y so that

it can have negative entries to individuals.

So there are going to be, you know, sometimes where

it's more convenient to write the whole, you know, vector

of production with positive numbers of outputs and negative numbers

for inputs.

Right.

So that could be intermediate inputs.

It could also be things like labour acting as a

uh input to produce output, which is what we sometimes.

I think the output is negative, and then the difference

between consumption and output will be important stuff.

Just sort of what the definition of what imports is

going to be.

And reminder when we write p times c and p

and q vectors, uh, what we mean here is the

dot product of b and c.

So it's the sum over all the individual elements of

the product of pi times CI.

So just we will be writing a lot of these

vector products.

It's the it's the dot product that we're talking about

there.

And the notation.

Good.

Okay.

And there's a lot of principles that we're going to

rely on.

Um, kind of what we're doing here is we're trying

to work.

We try to see what is the kind of weakest

set of assumptions Under which we can show that this

principle of this principle of comparative advantage holds.

So rather than specifying the full structure of the economy,

we're going to provide some kind of a restricted set

of assumptions such that if any economy that satisfies this

assumptions will also deliver the principle of comparative advantage.

And so, in particular, what we're really going to need

to appeal to is that there's some optimisation going on,

and we're going to think about sustaining a competitive economy.

Um, and again, of that is a restriction in practice

that there are going to be many markets where there

is imperfect competition for the first half of the course.

We're going to ignore that and just focus on competitive

economies and try and understand trade models and competitive economies.

Then starting in week six, we're going to give a

starring role to imperfect competition.

So for now though, we're just going to think about

an active economy and many of these ideas, we're going

to formulate the principal component in a competitive economy.

The basic idea will carry over to most imperfectly competitive

economies.

So it's not it's not an idea that really hinges

on the fact that it can be a competition.

Um, so produce in order to become a master economy,

in our case, it's a fusion.

Consumers are going to be maximising, taking prices in particular,

so the particular consumers will maximise utility subject to their

budget constraint.

Right now the topic that we had a previous slide,

some of the PCI, that's the cost of the consumers

consumption bundle.

And one thing we want to know is that if

the consumer is choosing their consumption optimally, and we'll use

this little star to know something is optimally chosen, then

the cost of that consumption bundle has to be greater

than or equal to the cost of any other feasible

consumption bundle.

So any feasible bundle.

Which consumer.

Report has to be sensitive.

So why is that?

Where am I sort of pulling that inequality from?

You cannot consume more than this.

Well, I mean so okay so we've got a starting

point there.

You cannot consume more than your income.

So you've got a budget constraint.

So there's a there's a budget constraint.

And any feasible consumption is going to be a consumption

model such as the prevailing prices at the equilibrium prices.

The cost of that consumption at the peak has to

be less than or equal to your income, which is

certainly your budget constraint.

Right.

Okay, so kind of implicitly he was saying that the

PC has to be he has to be less income.

And we're kind of saying in saying that PC style

is equal to the income, how do we know that

the the optimal bundle has to be such that PC

star is equal to your budget?

Yeah, right.

If it wasn't, if PC star was less than your

income and you had some money unspent, right?

And if we're happy to assume that consumers have non

satiated preferences, then you can always just buy a little

bit more on it and you make it even better

off.

So under sort of standard regularity assumptions on utility it's

always going to be optimal if you spend your entire

budget, meaning that all the things you could afford have

to be cheaper than the thing you have to buy.

And it's really cute, right?

Um, so let's add another one, because we're going to

use that again in a minute.

And then on the producer side, producers are maximise profits

subject to technological constraint.

Right.

So that choosing the output y to maximise p y

and then the technological constraint is just that.

There's some set of output bundles for the planning principle

to be produced.

So now I'm gonna kind of formally state a theorem

that we want to prove.

And then we're going to go through and prove it.

So this theorem is called the weak law of comparative

advantage.

And it says the difference between home and parking prices

is positively correlated with home net imports.

So remember these are these effects here.

So the the difference between the home prices and the

fire price interacted with home net import bundle is weakly

positive.

So the first question you kind of want to think

about is okay, how does that map to the principle

of comparative advantage we were talking about previously.

The principle of comparative advantage.

I will tend to export those goods for which I

have a lower relative price.

This is just sort of political and said I will

tend to import earnings to which I have higher authority

prices.

If this thing is going to be positive on average

has to be for goods with positive import, which is

good, and the positive also is greater than, uh uh,

greater than PFF.

No, no.

That's only kind of an average thing.

It's not telling us anything about this pattern of trade

in any particular industry.

It is just saying that when we compute this across

all aggregate, we had any goods.

On average, the pattern of imports must be set with

this restriction, or so this week.

Law of comparative value doesn't tell you you know I

will export cars and import food?

It says on average I import those goods for which

I have a higher autarky price here.

Now, as we'll see, if there's only two goods in

the world, then you can conclude here in which I

have more than two.

But it's not about the exact pattern of trade.

It's about this sort of average pattern of trade.

Essentially you're computing the correlation.

So let's prove this result and see kind of why

it holds.

And we're going to do this under the assumption that

economy is competitive.

And also under the assumption that there are going to

trade.

Now this this is not an innocuous assumption.

We spent all of the last week thinking about, you

know, empirically, do we see the trade?

And next week we'll do a lecture with more theoretically

on the gains from the trade.

What we will see in that lecture next week is,

you know, under the set of assumptions we are imposing

here, the model will predict there are games to try.

All right.

So I'm just sort of borrowing for now and borrowing

that from what we'll do next.

I'm saying let's set the domain straight and let's think

about what that means for a pattern of comparative advantage.

So to prove this result and rely on both consumer

optimisation and producer optimisation, and these are going to give

us restrictions that will eventually allow us to back out

this condition.

So let's start consumer optimisation.

And I'm going to claim that consumer optimisation immediately tells

us that if we take the cost of the autarky

consumption bundle at autarky prices, that has to be less

than the cost of the free trade consumption bundle at

all prices.

Why is that?

Suppose this restriction didn't hold.

So suppose packed with less than right then that's telling

me that we could afford the free trade consumption model.

So KT is the consumption among we choose on the

free trade that we could afford it at all prices.

But since there are gains from trade, KT has to

deliver at least weakly higher utilities and KR.

But if it delivers high efficiency and affordable auto prices,

we would have chosen it.

So the fact that we didn't chose it, we choose

some other bundle.

K is telling us that it must be at least

weekly, more expensive.

Everyone happy with that?

There's a lot of sort of inequalities going on here,

but it's basically a real preference argument Since they're engaged

in trade, CMC delivers high utility, the CIA.

But we didn't choose the eternal party.

Therefore, it must be that CT was not affordable under

autopsy.

So we've got this relationship now.

Produce a maximisation.

Produce maximisation.

Gives us the value of the value produced.

Obtained from producing the auto production model at auto prices

must be weakly higher than the value we get from

producing the free trade production value at all prices.

And again here it's a similar argument since white T

is the production bundle under free trade, we know it's

feasible.

It's technologically feasible for us to produce this production bundle.

If we assume here that when we go to free

trade technologies don't check technology first.

So anything we could produce under autarky, we could also

produce under free trade.

So why he belongs to that feasible set of production

bundles that producers couldn't produce.

Therefore, it can't be the case that you made higher

profits.

The payout is higher than payments.

Otherwise producers would have chosen the bundle of white under

autarky.

So again here we're leaning on the producer optimisation material.

Producers are choosing Y from the feasible set to maximise

their profits.

Right.

And the way we've written Y with negative inputs means

that he was giving us a measure of the profits.

So the fact that they don't choose Y.

He tells us that PA must be bigger than PA

yj.

Everyone happy with that?

Okay, so how do we go from these two conditions

to our legal comparative advantage?

We sort of start one from the other is the

first thing we do.

So we do c t minus t t.

And we know that that has to be mutually agreed.

Okay.

Well we know that pact is greater than Paca and

PA, which is smaller than the PR.

So when you do the subtraction you've got to look

at the.

Net.

So you observe that in autarky you can only consume

what you produce.

Right.

So we have these two different bundles.

We've been talking about CA and Ja.

But in order to keep they the same thing okay.

Because we're not training the rest of the world.

So what we consume is what we produce.

So in order.

To.

Cake was one egg, and therefore the right hand side

here is equal to zero.

So what we've got now the PA times c t

minus y t is going to be positive right.

But now we can rewrite this as pa times CT

minus y z.

And what CT minus y t is just our imports

under free trade.

So what we're going to do is the PA times

NT is weakly positive.

Okay.

Now so far we haven't talked about this at all.

But you know nothing specific to the home country.

So we can just replace h subscripts and s subscripts

which will give us the PA may also be positive.

And if you think about these two expressions or uh,

intuitively, what they're saying is that the, the net import

vector under trade is unaffordable at all time prices because

it has a positive cost.

Right?

Which is why you don't choose your way.

The human doesn't try to choose to buy it under

under the autarky prices.

Then the final step is just to apply the balanced

trade.

So the trade is balance.

What the whole country imports is the same foreign country

exports, which is to say that MF equals minus MH.

So now what we can do is we paint minus

pa m minus.

So pa MT minus pa NFT, replace MFT with Nht.

And what we've got a pa pa is positive, which

if we flip back to the statement, is the, uh,

claim result.

So there we have our Proof of the weak law

of comparative advantage?

No.

What do we assume in order to prove this?

We assume that it's a competitive economy where consumers maximise

utility and producers maximise profits.

Taking prices.

Given we assume irrigation trade and we assume that the

trade balance.

With that set of assumptions, we were able to repay

this disregard.

Any questions on that.

Okay.

So then let's just think a bit about kind of

applying that to a particular case.

And let's think about applying it to the two case

to see what it tells us in the two case.

And we're doing this fundamentally because this is useful.

It's also just like telling us about a correlation.

If something is what.

Happens on.

Average.

And sort of understand the content that I was used

to.

Like what happens when there's only two goods.

But the point here is that once there are only

two goods, this kind of weak law becomes a strong

law.

So sometimes we call the two good case, the strong

law, where the pattern of comparative advantage exactly pins down

the pattern of trade.

Right.

So there's only two goods.

Um, let's make good one.

Medium rare.

So we'll assume that the alternative one is one both

the home and the, uh, foreign country.

In any economic model, the real economical prices are indeterminate.

So we're always free to choose a numeraire here or

choosing good one as the numeraire.

This also means that, you know, the price of good

two is now effectively the relative price of good to

remember.

It's important because we say that comparative advantage is all

about relative prices.

And sometimes when you look at the weak or comparative

advantage of people, it actually looks like a threat in

terms of absolute crisis.

The reason that you know, isn't the case is because

it's, you know, you're free to pick this numeraire and

then you're more likely to think that there's a relative

crisis.

So once you do that.

For the good one is differences.

So the returns a good one from out here.

And all we are left with is that the home

prices are two minus two times two are positive.

Which is to say if home has a higher price

is a good two.

And since we have a numerator relative to that, home

must be an importer of, uh, good two.

Right.

So now we come down the path of trade entirely.

The whole country is going to import the goods for

which it has the higher relative price.

And if home country is importing good to, then the

foreign country is importing.

sorry.

Yeah.

And the foreign countries are reporting good ones.

So in this particular case, we actually pinned down what

the person is afraid.

It is based on this law of comparative advantage.

Note that to generate this prediction, we don't need to

say anything about why this water crisis is across countries.

We're kind of taking these we're talking price differences that

are primitive and that we're reasoning, okay, if these autarky

price differences exist, what would that imply about the pattern

of trade?

But that was the basic question.

Okay.

Well why do all types of prices differ across countries,

which is something we're going to get on to later

during today's lecture.

But it doesn't matter for this.

I don't know if there are of these properties, the

price increases and therefore that generates.

Another set, you get this exact pattern or two with

three or more goods.

Is there any kind of hold on average.

But you can't determine for each for any individual good.

The information that we call comparative advantage is insufficient to

tell whether the country import or export standard.

All right.

That's what I wanted to say about comparative advantage.

But how does anyone have any questions about comparative advantage

before we move on?

Okay, good.

So now let's move on to the Ricardian model.

So.

This builds nicely on the idea of comparative advantage, because

the Ricardian model is going to be a model where

what generates the incentive for trade in the model is

comparative advantage.

Um, but it's going to go it's going to, you

know, providing us with more information than we simply got

in that combined advantage.

Because the required model is not only going to be

about what is the pattern, it's going to tell us

why we get that pattern of trade, which is going

to say it's going to tell us why you see

these differences in all talking prices.

So it's going to be a first kind of a

fully specified trade model.

And of course, um.

We are going to look at the variations from general

trade models during the, during the course.

And kind of one of the skills I hope we

will develop as we go through is how to solve

these models in a general equilibrium.

So we will work through the recovery model kind of

relatively slowly to just so we can see how the

different parts of it fit together to give us a

model, which is kind of not just predicting the pattern

of trade, but it's telling us in equilibrium what are

the wage levels, what is the utility, what is being

optimal structure of the individual, uh, countries.

And we'll see how the different ingredients in the model

fit together to give us those predictions.

And because of this, we're going to be able to

use France and a bunch of different questions and not

just, you know, what are the patterns of trade, which

is when we come back, we want to focus on

this second question, what are the patterns of trade?

But, you know, why does this pattern access?

We say why you see this pattern to revitalise the

economy model, you know, have a rationale for that.

And then probably most importantly, once we've characterised the equilibrium,

if we compare the autarky movement, then, uh, the trade

equilibrium, we can ask, how does trade affect, uh, wages

and welfare and other outcomes.

We're interested.

So we will be able to start thinking about these

questions that are kind of related to the to the

game contract.

Okay.

Casey.

Um, set up at the mall.

Um.

There are many.

You know, there are many versions of the recording.

There wasn't a single Ricardian model when Ricardo was originally

writing.

He kind of.

His example was he was singing about trade between England

and Portugal in cloth and wine.

So he had in mind a two good two country

world.

Um, and that's often the, you know, version.

We start teaching.

I'm going to do a slightly more involved version today

in that, um, although we're still going to have two

countries, so we'll have our own country engineer.

We're going to have a continuum of goods.

So we're going to go beyond two goods.

And once you go beyond two goods, um, it's just

as easy to do kind of a continuum of goods

as it is to do three goods.

So we're going to do this whole, uh, continuum of

goods, and we're going to think of about the pattern

of trade in each of those days.

Um, so there will be a mass, one of goods

on the unit interval, and we will use that to

index.

Uh, we use that to indexes goods.

Um, and this is, you know, on the reading is

the version of Ricardo model they look at looking at

due to what we developed by August Samuelson in the,

in the 1970s.

Um, and it was the sort of they were the

first people to sort of formulate the model in a

way that maintains sort of the tractability of two Ricardo

model while going beyond aqua continuum.

Um, the out of the kind of okay, well, we

have two countries and we go beyond two countries and

have many countries.

Uh, that is also to be very difficult.

So there's a kind of more recent paper by Eamon

Corton, which is also on the reading list, which shows

how to take the framework or vertical framework we're looking

at today and extend it to many countries, but that

tends to turn out to be, you know, require a

lot of mathematical work for not necessarily that much more

economic integration than we get from from this model.

So we're going to focus on the version with just

two countries for today.

It's going to be one factor, which is a label

with the own factor of production.

And each country will have a fit of maybe down

l j workers are going to be immobile across country,

but the cost is going to be no international migration

in this model.

Uh, but there will be free movement of workers across

industries within the country.

And, you know, that's already alluded to.

It is going to be a competitive model where output

markets and factor markets are competitive and where they I

produced consumers at all prices of given when making their

decisions.

So you can see it is a fairly simple basic

structure we are working with.

We're not introducing too many complications here, and what we're

hoping is that keeping most of the models simple, that

will allow us to kind of characterise what it is

that drives the pattern of trade in this set.

And then in particular, the really important part of the

model and what's going to end up driving me to

pattern the trade is what we issue about technologies.

And in particular how technologies differ across cultures.

So the most important assumptions in this model is about

technological differences.

So here's the technology assumptions we have.

We're going to add J of Z be the unit

labelling requirements produce one word of warning if it's any

kind of.

So it's like if you want to produce one good

Z cartridge.

I need a Jay Z workers.

And another way of saying that is that the output

of country J and the Z is its label used

in this industry relative to the average.

So to know this is a constant returns to scale

economy.

All right.

This is a constant returns to production functions as linear

in labour and the j.

The unit labour required is an inverse measure of labour

productivity.

So when we think about how technologically advanced the country

is in different good, it's the inverse measure of the

uh, of the giving us the level of technological advance.

The country is very production goods.

They will have a very low level of Z.

And then the key thing is how do those technologies

differ across countries.

So we're going to put a little bit of structure

on this which will be useful when we come to

solving.

So we're going to assume that goods are order such

that if we define a z to be the asset

of H.

So its foreign labour requirement relative to the home labour

requirement that that Arab Z is declining in that.

Now kind of know where we are and where we

are kind of making restrictive assumptions here.

The fact that it is declining in Z is basically

just about how we order the goods.

So we've labelled these goods by Z.

But if you kind of labelled all the goods from

0 to 1, and then the area wasn't So if

you could just relabel them in such a way that

it was at least weakly declining.

Where we are in Austria, where it is in both

differential and strictly decreasing.

So as we increase that, that area is decreasing, which

is to say that for the higher end goods, foreign

is relatively more productive because there's an agent supplying foreign

labelling requirements falling, which is free to foreign countries becoming

relatively more productive.

So this this function is capturing the technological differences across

countries.

And it's doing so in such a way that we've

kind of labelled the the goods in which home is

more technologically advanced as the low end goods.

So it's useful to graph this function because we're going

to come back to this later.

Right.

So if we have on the x axis is z

going.

From.

0 to 1.

Because remember we said that there's a matter of goods,

right.

And that is declining.

So as there is some of this that's what that

A is a function that looks like.

This so far good.

And then.

So we just talked about kind of technology.

So we've done the supply side of the economy.

Then the only other thing kind of where we need

to impose some assumptions is on the demand side.

Right.

So what are we assuming about demand in this economy.

Each country has the representative agent.

Right.

So there's no we're not going to allow for any

heterogeneity in preferences within the country.

In addition preferences are identical across countries.

So the only thing that differs across countries in this

setup is the um the technologies of captured by the

a and it's also their labour endowments, the countries maybe

of different sizes.

But that's not important for what we're doing.

The important differences are in the technology whereas preferences are

going to be identical.

You can think of these models with these differences in

the preferences.

But again it's not our it's not our focus.

So we're just simplifying.

And then what is the direction they're trying to maximise

to maximise this expression here.

So their algorithm consumption is just the exponential of the

integral of a mass goods from 0 to 1, that

of the log of the consumption of each individual.

Good.

So this may look a little bit complicated when you

first see it, because you know a utility function essentially

that involves an integral which is a bit, uh, sort

of more technically involved.

You know, the reason for that is we've now got

this continuum of good between 0 and 1.

So we can't just sum up that we need to

integrate across it.

But if you stare at the second line, I think

you'll see it's actually a very familiar form of utility.

Does anyone can recognise what this is?

What you know, what type of utility function essentially we

have here?

It would kind of look much more familiar if we

were in the discrete.

Good case.

So this.

Is.

This way of writing preferences is kind of the continuum

equivalent of a Douglas utility function.

And in fact more than that, actually symmetric Douglas uh,

utility function.

We're just trying to convince you that that is the

case.

So.

Imagine your utility function.

Imagine we were in a two good case, and you

had your utility function defined over consumption of the two

goods, which was just.

C1 to the half, uh, C2 to the half.

We can write this as e to the half log

C1.

Uh, plus c two.

We should get that right.

That's just another C1 is E to the log C1

and C2 is E to log C2.

Once we've got everything in the exponential we can the

multiplication turns into a summation.

So now now you've got kind of a similar structure

here.

You're each of the you're doing the exponential of the

log of the consumption of each of the goods, and

you're adding them up.

And when you've got the two goods there, you're kind

of dividing by two, because there two of them here

we got the math one.

So the constant is kind of disappearing.

And you're just adding up the log of the consumption

of each of the goods.

So this is just a way of generalising a symmetric

utility function to have a continuum of goods.

And what this is going to imply.

Right.

What do we know about expenditure in this world.

The exponent here, the half right is telling you that

you're going to spend half your income on each of

these goods.

And if it was alpha and beta, you'd spend a

fraction alpha on one word and the fraction beta on

a on another.

Side.

This is going to apply here.

Since this is symmetric.

You're going to expend spend a constant fraction of your

income on each of the individual groups.

And I'm going to make you show this on.

The problem is that what you're showing the problem is

given these preferences, if you sold the consumers, uh, utility

maximisation problem and you do it by minimisation, you'll get

this is the price index.

So the price index is just this integral over the,

uh, price of the individual goods and uh, the total

expenditure.

So this is p, p and p and Q is

my expenditure on goods integrated over the information on Z2

will just be total.

This is my total expenditure.

The price is the total amount of consume times the

length of the interval, which again is the continuum way

of saying that we are spending the same amount on

each of these individual, uh, goods.

I wasn't happy with that.

Good.

Now, having sort of thought about that a little look

at the.

The structure of the references is not the crucial part

of this model, so don't fixate on this too much.

But occasionally it's useful to be aware when you see

this could come up.

And this is a continuous function just generalised to a

continuum.

And therefore it also useful to know how to solve

a consumer's, uh, utility maximisation problem.

Why don't we do it on the, uh, on the

problem set.

And fundamentally you do it in the same way as

you do for the 49 goods case.

It's just it's a little bit more involved.

That anybody have any questions about that.

All right.

So we've matched set up the, uh, record of the

economy.

All right.

We've set the competitive as a single factor.

We have these technology differences.

These are our practices.

The next step is going to be to solve the

equilibrium.

And we'll do that first in autarky and characterise the

characterise the autarky.

And then we'll do it under free trade.

And that will give us the pattern of trade.

And then we'll compare the two to understand what the

effects of trade are.

Right.

But it now would be a good time to take

a break and then we'll come back and actually solve

them.

So let's take a five minute break.

And you.

And Frank.

Yes, I.

Know.

But also I can't.

So I went through.

It all.

People.

You don't even.

Know.

We're just discussing here, you know.

A lot of it is great.

Right.

He's like.

Really?

Taking this.

You know, because it is so.

Good.

Yeah, I know.

So.

I think I, I.

I don't know, I.

Just.

I.

stand.

Before you dealing with.

My life.

And this is going to hurt.

So here's what I did.

I was like.

I don't want to continue.

Like.

This.

So that's the.

Dissertation.

But I think I like it.

I think it's really nice.

And it's something I don't really know because apart from

that I have.

Never seen it, so I think.

Yeah.

Hi.

Yeah.

Um.

In other news.

Yeah, I don't have a choice.

Okay.

Um.

But otherwise.

Yeah, you certainly were looking toward it.

That's what I just figured out.

I think you said it interests me.

Yeah.

Um.

And that's all for.

Today, for the next meeting with the public.

And when you have it, two days after that.

So that's what's wrong, if you want to know.

Yeah, but I can get it.

Okay.

Hey, I mean, I don't know exactly what kind of

gets reflected in that.

Which is my stuff.

That's the assumption that I'm stuck on.

So I was like.

Okay.

Thank you so much.

Yeah.

I think it is very much.

I don't know.

All right.

I can't wait.

Um.

Yeah, exactly.

Let me give you the option.

Of course.

I think.

I just spent a lot of time today.

Um.

I'm not going into detail.

I want you to know, at least in the beginning,

you're not asking about it.

You definitely want to be by the end.

So I think that could be useful.

Okay.

Yeah.

Okay.

I'm just like, this is awesome.

How cool is that?

Yeah.

sometimes in the recent past.

And they are quite controversial.

Right?

Yes.

Are you aware.

That you.

Didn't want time to.

Develop.

All.

Of that.

It's very heavily on the record and.

I don't want to know exactly what.

That is.

Yeah.

I mean, I think.

There's.

Some of that.

I mean, I can't tell you what.

I would have.

But it would be.

Interesting to see Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

Then we have another game.

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

Okay.

All right.

Should.

Be fun.

All right.

Okay.

Um, so before the break.

We would just, uh, we have set up the model.

And so obviously, now our goal is to solve the

problem.

So I want to kind of walk through how we

solve, uh, solve this model where the kind of various

equilibrium conditions come in, broadly speaking.

So when we're solving these kind of general equilibrium models

that we see at various points in the course, there

are three steps in the solution which is solved the

supply side.

So you solve producer optimisation to get supply curves of

some time.

You solve consumer optimisation to get demand curves of some

type at step two and then step three as you

combine them through market clearing conditions.

Right.

I find this this is a relatively straightforward model.

And I think, you know, once we've gone through it,

most of you will find it pretty.

You kind of understand how to solve it once we

get to say like picture of it in a couple

of weeks time, which is a little bit more complicated.

I often find it kind of when you don't ask

people to go away and kind of solve a version

of that model, they don't really know where to start.

So I would suggest that this kind of idea here

think, how am I going to do the producer optimisation?

How am I going to do consumer optimisation?

Then how do I combine the two through market theory

conditions?

And if you follow logically through those steps, or most

of the time, that will be on me.

So in this particular economy, let's start with the supply

side of producer optimisation.

Right.

And it all starts with that.

Very simple.

Because we just had this linear production technology and it's

a competitive economy.

So recall that the R output function was just labour

divided by the input output.

Right.

Now since it's linear here obviously there's no concept of

producer scale that's going to be relevant.

You just hire, you know, the amount of labour we

need to produce a given quantity of output.

But what we will then get from the producer side

is an equation for the equilibrium price.

Right.

And in particular, since this is a competitive economy, price

has to be equal to marginal cost.

So the key equilibrium condition on the future side is

the price is equal to marginal cost, which is this

equation here because what is marginal cost is the wage

rate WJ times the unit labour requirement, he said.

So this immediately gives us an equation for the price

of each year in terms of the technology parameter a

and the wages uh w.

Now, given the price equations.

Right.

And given what we were saying earlier about comparative advantage,

we can then immediately think, okay, well how do relative

autarky prices differ across countries.

So this is going to give us the automatic price

in country J.

So then we do the autarky at home country for

goods z z prime the wage drop out.

And it just depends on the technology parameters.

Uh Age of seven.

There are a lot of ways you can do the

same in a foreign country, and you get the following.

This is an over I try.

All right.

And then I'm going to claim that it is greater

than the set of prime it must be to a

set of prime is greater than I have instead of

satisfying.

How do I know that?

Where is that coming from?

Who is it?

Yeah, exactly.

Remember?

This is something that A is downward sloping.

So if Z is greater than z prime then a

to z over rh of z um is going to

be smaller than a to z prime over a to

z prime.

If we rearrange this, uh, condition here.

Right.

Why is that useful?

Well, it's now allowing us to compare the home relative

to identify the foreign relative.

Or, if I remember exactly the input.

We had to move it to a comparative advantage.

And in particular, it's telling us that whenever we look

at a higher index, good.

So whenever we look at a z rate instead of

crawling, then home has a higher relative reward type price

for good z to z value of z economy than

the foreign country does.

And that should seem very intuitive, because the highest that

good is the good for which A of Z is

lower, which is to say foreign is more technologically advanced.

So this is just another way of saying that the

goods where foreign is more technologically advanced, it has a

lower relative or token price than the whole country.

So now you start to see how in this Ricardian

model, we're not only able to compare relative autarky prices,

but we understand why relative autarky prices differ, and they

differ purely because of these technological differences.

So this is the sense in which in the recording

technology differences I get, I wind up driving the voltage.

I wasn't happy with that.

Okay.

I mean, that's the supply side.

Um, and then, you know, we said that on the

problem that you do the demand side for me and

you show that this is how much I spend on

each set of goods.

And then final days are kind of market clearing conditions.

And there's two markets that need to clear here the

labour market and the good market.

So letting the market clearing is just going to say

that my total labour environment has to be equal to

the integral over the interval of goods of the year

to produce each condition here.

And then good market clearing is just the output is

equal to the sum.

Again we saw this condition earlier.

In autarky you consume what you produce.

Okay.

So that's all I want to say about the autarky.

equilibrium.

And now we'll move on to free trial.

But does anyone have any questions before we do?

All right.

So as you move on to the free trial.

I was just thinking about how you know, why there

are incentives for trade in your time.

And we're going to kind of intuitively think about what

the path of the trade is going to be like,

and then we will formally solve it.

And when thinking about incentives for trade.

The key point to note is that it's these labour

productivity differences that create your target program, which is to

create the incentive for trade.

And specifically, I want you to think through the following

thought experiment.

Suppose the home economy decides to produce one unit less

of goods.

And so I take that that one unit of goods

that the economy is producing that required A to Z

work to produce it.

So I take those A8, said workers.

And I reallocate them to producing some good Z prime.

And we're going to assume that is greater than Z.

So when we allocate the goods at Prime, I can

now produce, I said, over 85 units of goods that

Prime A Z is going to work as I have.

And then if you remember our production technology divided by

80%.

So what I have done now is I've taken one

unit of goods, Z, and I turned it into a

h of z over h of z prime units as

good as that prime.

Now suppose I take those units of goods z crime,

and I sell them to the foreign country at foreign

autarky prices.

Right.

If I sell them to foreign country foreign prices.

Just go back to the target prices.

All right.

Foreign price was just a five times, uh.

All right.

So I'm going to get 80%, over 80%, 9.5 times

on us from selling them.

And then I use that money to buy a good,

bad back from the foreign country.

Right in that price.

Good segue is Andrew said every time you asked.

So when I complete that transaction, the number of units

of goods that I end up with all this expression

here, right?

Just double expression.

Right.

And then have a call from the properties of A

of Z.

And we wrote down here.

Right.

Because I said no.

But the problem is, is that this number here is

based on the war.

Now, why have I gone through that kind of rather

convoluted chain of logic?

Right.

Remember what I started by saying was, let's produce one

fewer unit of goods there.

And what we've shown is that if we produce one

for a unit of goods air and instead reallocate labour

to goods, then prime and then trade with the foreign

country to buy back units of the type of goods

that you end up with more than one unit could

set.

So what this is establishing is that the whole country

has its incentive to trade.

If I want to consume goods in a home country.

The efficient way to do that is not to produce

it domestically.

It's to produce goods that provide domestically and then buy

goods from the foreign country.

Likewise, in a foreign country, you can reverse the argument

and that a foreign country will have an incentive to

produce goods Z instead of instead of putting in a

trade in so.

This is demonstrating how the differences in oil prices generates

an incentive for trade.

Now, we're still not quite done that, because all of

this has been premised on the idea that I can

trade with the foreign country at its autarky prices.

Well, what's going to happen if we start to trade?

Yeah, the prices are going to adjust, right?

You can't just start trading in the foreign country and

hold prices.

So we create incentives for trade.

But if we actually want to know what's going to

happen under the free trade equilibrium, we need to take

kind of a bring up the trade prices themselves will

change.

So that's our next task of kind of to actually

understand how that will work out.

So the first step in doing that is to know

if there are no trade costs, which is the assumption

we maintain for now.

If there are no trade costs, then equilibrium in the

free trade agreement.

Prices have to be equal across countries.

Why is that?

Is that.

Why the prices people across countries in the free trade?

Yeah.

I mean, I think you're getting on the right line.

Because.

If not, it's better to be at autarky than trading.

It's not necessarily it's better to be an auto trader,

but instead if there is a if there is a

difference in the price across countries, then there's the prospect

of opportunity.

Whichever country, uh, the good is more expensive and you

import from the other country and sell it, and you're

just going to keep making profits by doing that.

And so there's an arbitrage opportunity.

Um, and the way that arbitrage opportunity disappears is by

the price of equalising.

If you think about it, the prices are higher domestically

than abroad.

Than I import from abroad.

And so the message in effect, that is to drive

up the price abroad and drive it down domestically until

the price I see right now actually get at this

equilibrium conditions, the price is going to be the same

across uh, across countries.

Uh, and this applies at the level of individual goods.

The rationale I just gave you was why the price

of each individual will be the same in both countries,

but then the overall price index is just an integral

over all the individual goods.

Then that's also going to be same across countries.

So we'll get it.

There's a single common price index.

And another way of saying that is to the degree

of the exchange rate, the ratio of the other price,

the following criteria is going to be equal to to

unity.

And the lower one price is going to be satisfied.

Now the more important part here is what is the

allocation of production across countries look like in the, um,

in the free trade equilibria.

Okay.

Um, when we talk about incentives for trade, we said

that the whole country has an incentive to reallocate labour

from higher Z to lower Z goods.

Right.

And the intended reallocate favouring opposite direction.

So we kind of generally already expect that foreign is

probably going to tend to produce good with a higher

net, and home is going to produce good for the

low z index, which is consistent with home having a

a higher productivity.

All right.

For the low set goods.

Um, and if they were just to goods, we kind

of almost be done already now because we could be

like okay, well how long will produce the good the

H relatively bad around for just a good day to

try to do better.

But here things are a little bit more complex.

We have a continuum of goods, so we kind of

want to know, you know, the what about what's going

to happen to these goods in the middle.

So that's what we're going to kind of reading through

Communities.

So if we want to produce to a certain country

J the cost of the United Way j times the

labour requirement, he said.

And then I'm going to claim that if the relative

wage was smaller than whatever we produced at home, and

if it's higher than the goods that we produced in

the foreign country, why is that?

Why is that claim correct?

Uh, uh.

It's, uh it's.

Uh, it.

Also has to be at home country because, uh, the

A is a.

Uh, over and above a.

They put us in this one house?

Yeah, right.

Yes.

This is the right argument.

Let me just write this down on the board so

everyone can see it, to make sure we're all on

the same page here.

Um.

The cost of producing goods in the home country is

h of z times w h.

The cost of producing goods in a foreign country is

f z times w f.

Unless these two things are equal, we will only produce

goods in whichever country produces it more cheaply.

So if h is less than auf, then the goods

will only be produced at home.

And that's equivalent to saying that a h of z

over a half of Z is less than us over

w h.

Right.

Or if we can flip that around again, that's again

the same as w w f is greater than a

f of z over a h of z, which is

our A of z.

Okay.

So when the sorry sign is the wrong way around,

when the whole wage relative to the foreign wage is

lower than the range of technologies I have said.

It's saying that the good can be produced more cheaply

in a home country than the foreign country, right?

Whereas if you flip that is really cheap in the

foreign country and those goods will be produced abroad.

And then if there's a good such that this thing

is equal, then where it can be produced at the

same cost in either country, and we're kind of indifferent

over where that good is produced.

So let us define that good.

Well, if the two things are indeed equal.

So we can define a good z bar such w

w, f is equal to and.

Then what we immediately know is that home country is

going to produce zero up to that of R, because

Cincinnati is decreasing except for any good below that are

said to be greater than zero.

So that's a good opportunity to produce a home.

And likewise the goods above that are is going to

be produced in the in the foreign country.

Yes.

If the relative wages are equal to the relative productivity,

I mean, there's no trade in that way.

Yes.

Or there's no way.

So yes is the easy answer.

The slightly more subtle answer is there's no incentive to

trade that good.

But because there's free trade, if countries want to ship

that good back and forth between themselves as many times

as they want, there's technically no cost to that in

this model.

So I think the sort of fundamentally there's no trade

in that good.

Mathematically, you can't rule it out.

In this case.

We'll adjust it.

Yeah.

So the way yeah the wage here is an endogenous

variable.

Yeah.

If not always.

So yeah it's the wages were fixed.

You wouldn't have any guarantee that there was any good

such that this is true.

It could be the age.

That is great.

If this result was incredibly low, it could be the

answer that's always reached in whatever way, in which case

all the goods would be produced at home.

Right?

But in practice, since the wage dodgers, if all the

goodies were produced, it dries up in a way.

So we have the wage is going to adjust.

So there is some good that this Um, what we're

going to need to do is say what to do,

right?

So we've just posited that there's some things that are

supposed to be solved, and we need some more conditions

between them to say that that is.

Okay.

Any other questions on that right now?

Should I say it's only remember I said it's mostly

demand side market clearing.

What we've just done here is the supply side.

And what the supply side has given us is this

equation.

This is the equation that comes out on the supply

side.

I know that there is some goods that are such

that this equation holds, but we're not done because this

what we've got here are two variables.

We've got the Z.

We've got the relative way.

So we've got one equation to one.

So that's not enough.

We need another equation in the same unknown.

So our next step is to get that second equation

right.

We know from back here that this is the demand

function we get in this economy.

So we're now going to combine that with the market

conditions to get a second equation linking Z.

That's where we're going to go ahead.

Okay.

So what does the market clearing condition look like in

a.

Couple of different ways of of writing this.

What is the total expenditure.

So total expenditure by the whole world is whole consumption

plus or minus consumption.

Remember these aggregate consumption indices of integrated across all the

good times the price index.

Remember we've got a single price index if we consider

the price is the same in both markets.

So this is the total expenditure in the whole world

that has to be equal to the total income in

the all.

The world, which is home with its wage and labour

endowment and its wage from our demand equation.

It must also be the case that each country's income

is equal to the expenditure on good produced in that

country.

Right?

So homes income is WHL h.

What's the expenditure on homes output?

Well, it's totally expenditure P times zero plus k times

the fraction of goods produced at home which is then

baa.

And if there's any ambiguity about where that's coming from

it's just an application of this equation here.

So the expenditure on goods between 0 and 1 -0

says there are times total expenditure, which for the world

is p times CF.

Well happy with that.

Okay.

So these two equations here right.

We've got two equations which involve the wages and the

z bar which is kind of what we want.

But they also involve the p in the space, the

age and the feature which we kind of don't want

because there are endogenous variables.

But what you can see is if you take the

ratio of these two equations, the PC plus the X

is going to drop out.

And that will just give us another expression linking the

relative wage to z r.

So if we take the ratio of these two equations

and then rearrange a little bit, we're going to get

the times from the goods market.

Clearing away equals z bar over one minus z bar

over which we can write the function to be it

said r.

And this is what we want because this is another

equation linking z on wf over w h, where the

only other thing in the equation is labour endowments, Which

are ecologists.

All right.

So we've now got.

Two equations, two unknowns.

And this is going to allow us to solve them

all.

Okay.

So in particular we're going to do that graphically.

So we are going to come back to our graph

that we started earlier.

I'm looking at a few more details to this.

So previously had z on the x axis and we

drew a of z.

Now we're going to stick w h over w on

the y axis.

So equation one which we got from the supply side

was just w w z.

So that's this term here.

And then our second curve is this one here.

So we now want to draw this curve W of

W B is what is this B curve going to

look like if I want to draw an.

How do I draw on this graph?

Okay.

Yeah.

Why is it up?

Because the derivative.

Of B with.

Respect to z is positive.

Okay.

So yes, mathematically that's why I was like we are

now economically wise upward sloping.

Can you see the issue.

Like why?

Why does it make sense that this curve should be

upward sloping given what it represents.

So when we have a higher set I think.

Yeah I run with this.

You're going the right direction.

So keep pulling it out all through.

Because.

In the.

Military.

Yeah.

That's that's almost.

I mean, I'm just really excited for showing up.

We're producing more goods domestically, right?

That's the interval from zero to thereby what we produce

domestically.

So if that buys increasingly we're producing more domestically.

And if we're producing more domestically that expands on those

doing.

It's going to be higher.

And that drives up the wage.

Right.

Because what this equation is saying is total total expenditure

on food goods equals total home income.

If you produce more legitimately, our income is going up.

And the way that happens is the way you work.

So instead of increases the whole wage relative to the

point wage.

And that gives us this upward sloping V curve which

is going to look something like this.

Let it be said and laugh over al H.

Okay.

And so you know where this is where they intersect.

This on the x axis is just the equilibrium value

of z bar.

And on the y axis gives us the equilibrium value

of the the wages.

That will happen with that.

So in this graph on the slide having characterised the

equilibrium in this way, there's not a two sets of

things we can do.

One is we can ask okay well what does this

you know, what does the pattern of trade look like

in this equilibrium.

And the second is we can ask okay, well how

might we shock this equilibrium.

So let's do the first thing.

Uh, initially.

So what about the pattern of trade.

Oh, the pattern trade here is very simple because with

the possible exception of the Z bar, which could be

produced in either country, we know all these goods here

are produced at home.

So all the goods up to Z are only produced

at home.

And all the goods above so far are only produced

in the foreign country.

So since both countries consume both goods, we've set up

a utility function which is essentially consumption.

This is going to be positive demand.

Be good.

It must be at home exports of goods up to

that bar and imports the goods above.

And the reverse is true for the foreign country.

How can we relate that positive trade to what we

said about comparative advantage earlier?

Okay.

Well, it's up here on the slide.

What we showed earlier is that the rebels can produce

if there is, um, left and Z are, then the

relative prices of goods that at home in automotive level,

in the relative prices would set off.

So there's kind of this reference goods that are such

that all good information home has a lower relative autarky

price than goods said part.

Those will be the goods in which your exports and

all the other goods where it has a higher relative

price of goods.

There are those will be the goods between imports.

So, you know, this is actually a model where those

differences in relative autarky prices predicts the pattern of trade,

even though there are more than two goods.

Remember when we talked about the weaker comparative to the

two goods?

It predicts exactly what you would get involved in activity.

But in general, with more than two goods, that's not

the case.

So in general, that's true.

But because the particular structure of this model.

Right.

No.

Meaning the pattern of.

No pattern rather is pinning down exactly what the pattern

of trade is.

We know exactly what we're told and of course.

And what does it influence?

Any questions on that?

Note also, once you've got the pattern of trade, you

know the price of each individual word because the price

of the goods at home producers are just A to

Z times w h and the prices are just the

following producers are a F of their own.

So that's the equilibrium right.

So we've what we've shown is how the technology differences

across countries as captured in the A drive.

The pattern of comparative advantage and pattern of trade.

And then what we can go on and do and

you'll do on the problem set is to then ask,

okay, well how the shocks to the different economies affect

the equilibrium.

So so far we were just prepared for talking and

trade which is a price stock.

But we might also, you know, now want to ask

questions like okay if there's productivity growth abroad, how about

the factory or the foreign economy become larger.

How would that affect the equilibrium.

So let's just think a little bit about how we

might do that in these two cases.

So first off suppose is an increase in the foreign

countries relative labour income.

So there's a positive shock to life.

How is that going to affect our equilibrium that we

draw on this graph here.

Sorry for lunch.

Well, walk me through.

Why?

That is what you want to like.

I've got these two curves on the graph.

Right.

The equilibrium is going to change those curves.

We're going to have to move around.

So how are those curves going to move around.

Upwards.

Shift upwards.

Yes.

And just to check that that is indeed the case,

go back to the equation of the upward sloping curve

right here.

So you can see that the the B function is

increasing in the left over.

So if we increase in life the B function shift

up with something like this.

That's the effect of an increase in our graph.

What about the function.

Does that shift?

No.

Right.

Because that's just about the technologies.

That's not affected by the alignment.

So the function doesn't change.

And so our equilibrium shifts upwards to this point here.

Which is to say that the the wage increases and

the z bar decreases.

So as the foreign company gets bigger let's think for

intuitively what's happening here.

The foreign economy is getting bigger.

So for any given amount of production right.

Foreign demand is increasing.

Foreign model increasing needs to the foreign country is going

to be trying to import more goods from the home

country, and that will tend to create a trade imbalance.

But here we're assuming trade is balanced.

So to restore trade balance.

It must be that more goods are produced in the

foreign country.

Some of the goods that were initially produced domestically, the

production of those goods shifts to the foreign country.

And as that happens that we have avoided by decreasing.

And what kind of drives that increase in their price?

The home wage goes up.

And you can think of this as kind of one

simple way about kind of thinking, you know, suppose, uh,

we see think about trade between the US and China

and think about population growth in China and how it

affects the US.

Right.

What this is saying is the effect on the US.

The population growth in China will be an increase in

the US relative wage, but the increase in the US

relative wage will be accompanied by kind of deindustrialisation in

America, as some goods that were previously Be produced in

the US are now, uh, now produced in China, says

the passenger compartment on a ship in a way that

more a larger fraction of the goods are produced in

China.

And so this kind of disposed this example illustrates both

how we can use this model for thinking about how

stocks of the global economy affect different countries.

It also cautions us that if we have a tendency

to think that kind of this sort of deindustrialisation effect

means the country is getting worse off, right in equilibrium,

that is not the case, because the reason that the

industrialisation is happening is that the US wage is going

up relative to the, uh, to the Chinese wage.

So are we saying that.

Um, so went home.

So now that some goods at home doesn't produce domestically

now.

Yeah.

Are we saying that the comparative advantage in those states

is higher and now foreign compared to home.

The technologies for those goods hasn't shifted and therefore the

the relative autarky prices for those goods hasn't changed.

But what has changed if we just go here?

Right.

You said that the passage of the trade is going

to depend on kind of eligible type of prices relative

to the threshold.

So it is that threshold good changes is like good,

which determines how low the autarky price has to be

for you to produce.

It is changing.

So even without the technologies in the relative autarky process

is changing the pattern of trade partnership.

Okay.

Any other questions on that example?

Okay.

So let's think about the other example.

Right.

So we did uh employment.

What are we?

Productivity?

Let's assume that home technology is unaffected stays the same.

But there's rapid productivity growth in the foreign country such

that across the board, forest productivity and producing all the

different goods increases.

How is that going to affect.

Watch.

Which curve is that going to shift around.

Yeah the shift is.

Going to be higher equilibrium and are going to be

higher equilibrium relative.

To shift downwards.

So what was the.

Technology.

Improves the farm.

So we're going improve the foreign countries technology.

Oh no that's all right.

Sorry.

It's there.

Yes.

Sit down.

Yeah.

Let's just let's just, uh.

So this is great news, right, because you kind of

have to bear in mind what the ANZ is as

head of age, that if someone's productivity is increasing and

falling.

Right.

So it's the fact that a a is our investment

activity.

So asset is declining.

So the fact that managers are shifting back and I

want to make sure I was making getting more myself.

Uh right.

So we are here right.

So the effect of this thing is going to shift

that.

So this curve here shifts down.

That's the effect of foreign productivity increasing leading to our

data going down.

So you can see as the curve shifts down our

new equilibrium is here right.

So again we're seeing that more goods are produced and

the foreign country aspiring to become more productive.

It is now gaining a comparative advantage in more goods.

But here the foreign wage is increasing relative to the

home wage.

So there's a pattern in terms of shifts in production

is the same as when there was an increase in

the past in terms of shifts in wages.

Is B is the opposite.

Right.

So we're just kind of highlighting here how the correlation

between shifts in production and shifts in the wage is

going to depend on what the underlying source of the

shocks are.

It's going to differ depending on whether it's an endowment

shop or productivity shot.

So do you think what's going on in China is

that is not population growth, but it's rapid productivity growth.

Then again, you would see goods that used to be

produced in the US and are being produced in China.

But this would be accompanied by China's wage growing relative

to the US wage final.

Thinks about it.

What does this mean for welfare?

And the thing to be careful here is that the

relative wage is not a sufficient statistical welfare.

If you want to start thinking about welfare, you need

to think about the individual countries wages relative to prices

and your ability to go through that on the problem

set.

But the fact that say, in this example here changes

wages for us does not mean that the US is

getting worse off.

In fact, you will see that the US can be

better off in that condition in Africa.

So we need to be careful about potentially competing changes

in relative wages or what's happened to us.

Any kind of final questions on the model?

Right.

So last part of the lecture, I want to come

back to data just briefly and say something about, okay,

we presented this model.

Is it actually successful in America.

So I want to just talk a little bit about

my work trying to test the Ricardian model and in

particular kind of test this prediction that it is these

the differences in productivity that shape patterns in trade.

So the first thing to say is, given how simple

a model this is, it turns out to be incredibly

difficult to credibly test the the model.

Right.

And there's kind of a couple little problems or.

Yeah, a couple of problems that really are at the

root of why it's so hard to empirically test the

model.

So one is that, you know, fundamentally, this is a

set of predictions about how differences in productivity affect, uh,

trade patterns.

Now that mediated through differences in autarky prices.

So one way you might think about okay.

Well we might even if we don't observe productivity, uh,

maybe we can observe walking prices and then seeing whether

the difference in auto pricing predict trade.

So the problem now is obviously we typically don't observe

countries in autarky, so water prices are a useful conceptual

idea.

They're not particularly not generally something we observe in the

data, with few exceptions.

And we will actually next we will study one exception

where we do have some data on authority prices.

And we'll use that to get back on track.

But for the moment we're going to try to do

so all we want to observe in productivity.

But productivity itself is obviously hard to measure, particularly given

in the Ricardian model.

You need to know relative productivity in all sectors, but

what the model predicts is the kind of home produces

one set of goods and foreign produce another set of

goods.

And if home is only producing goods up to Z

bar, then you don't have any way of observing productivity

in the other goods.

So a fundamental problem with the data is we don't

deserve productivity in sectors where you're not producing.

Yeah, this is a model where the prediction is all

about kind of specialise in different goods.

So it has proven historically rather challenging to test this

model.

Um, but I just want to show you one recent

examples of what people have done trying to overcome this

challenge in a somewhat creative way, which is very costly

and very short.

So the reason is we're taking a look at, um,

where they say, okay, in general, if a sector doesn't

operate, we don't know if productivity, but there is an

exception to that for agriculture, because in agriculture, you know,

agronomists, agricultural scientists have very good models saying, if this

is your soil type and this is the climate, this

is your kind of productivity in producing different crops on

this plot of land.

So we can use these agronomic models to predict for

any given plot of land, how productive it would be

at growing different crops.

So the fundamental idea in this paper is, okay, let's

do that, and let's do that on the global scale

and predict how productive every part of the world is,

the growing crops.

And then let's ask is the pattern of specialisation we

actually see consistent with the differences in productivity as seen

through the recovery model.

Okay.

So they can find in this way test whether the

Ricardian model, you know, a Ricardian model prediction for patterns

of agricultural production matches what we actually see are in

in practice two different problems.

So the data set and more specifically how to implement

that.

They're going to focus on 17 different crops, which is

sort of the main, you know, crops that are grown

around the world.

These things like wheat and rice and sorghum and barley.

Uh, you I have data for the 17 crops across

55 countries.

They're using data from 1989.

Um, and they're going to use data from the Food

and Agricultural Organisation, which will tell them the output and

the producer price of each crop in each country.

Okay.

This is kind of telling you what where these crops

are actually grown.

And then sort of the more interesting thing is that

they use this.

This is where the science data comes into it.

What has been done is that they've kind of broken

the world down into 80km squares.

So obviously this isn't country level.

This is much smaller than a country.

It's relatively, relatively small plots of land across the entire

globe.

And this data kind of has predicted crop yields for

these different 17 costs for each of these cells, where

the input to the predicted yields is essentially soil characteristics.

Do you have, you know, irrigation available?

What's the climate and what's the topography of it?

If you're on a hill, it's flat.

Um, now, I'm not going to claim to really understand

how these models work.

It's not my area, but, you know, the agricultural context.

They can do a reasonably good job of map modelling,

predictive productivity, uh, based on these characteristics.

So from this model, you get each 80 kilometre squared

cell everywhere in the world at each crop a prediction

of average productivity.

Right.

So if we think about the crops as being the

Zs in our model and the cells being the J's,

you've got a kind of matrix of AJS for all

over the world for these 17 crops.

And then if we think that Ricardian model is the

right model of what's going on in agricultural production, it's

going to tell us that each cell should produce the

a crop for which productivity times the price is higher.

So this is the same argument we were making, uh,

before.

You know, from the producers point of view, you produce

the output that yields the highest revenue and your revenue

is your price.

So they're going to compute for each of these cells

which crop they should produce based on this particular theory.

And then they'll compare with which crops are actually produced.

And that'll give kind of a measure of how successful

the models.

That makes sense.

Any questions on kind of what they're trying to do

here.

This is this is just an example of that.

Some of my data.

This is a rather low resolution map.

But what we're looking at here is the two other

crops they consider which is wheat and sugarcane.

What is the ratio of wheat to sugarcane productivity in

each of these 80km.

Head south, so the darker areas are where we do

the production, the lighter areas of where she became more

productive.

And you can see there's kind of marked off, which

why are I here that sugarcane tends to be grown

in the tropics more and more and more temperate, uh,

sort of across the northern US, hand-in-hand across, you know,

sort of breadbasket of that area.

Where is it?

Very high temperature, high humidity areas and more suitable for,

uh, sugarcane.

I said we were just focusing on these two models.

In this case, we should see a lot of wheat

production here, here, here, around the edge of Australia, a

little bit down here.

And.

Uh, I'm going to see, you know.

You're going to want to be careful about that, but

you're going to see kind of a lighter area to

some of the West Africa and some of the Caribbean

excess.

And they want to see this is a particularly one

that holds more program.

So they run some regressions.

Um, and what they do is they run regressions of

actual output as observed on the, uh, predicted output.

So that's what we see in this table.

Um, firstly, without any fixed effect in the approximately 600

level feature tracks, and they would restrict some to just

like picking 100 or bigger crops.

Right.

But what you see across these different specifications is in

general they are finding a positive, um, relationship.

So that's good because that's consistent with the model is

in the case of on average where out of the

Predict to be higher it is higher.

So that's a success for the model.

What you also know though is if you kind of

take a look at the R-squared before they add any

of the other variables in the 60% here.

So, you know, it's a model of what you'd expect

in practice.

Obviously, that's not going to be the case, but 6%

in particular.

So that kind of raises the question of okay, if

you're only explaining 6% of the variation, how do we

interpret that?

Is that a failure of the model or is there

something else going on here that would explain why you're

getting this low, asking what do we think?

Yeah.

So I was uh, like, it's only my question.

So since we are only observing, uh, we are only

focusing on one sector of the data, how would we

check that trade is like.

Or is this not super essential here?

Yes.

So so you're right.

There's no balance trade condition being applied here.

But it's not it's it's not relevant for thinking about

what they're doing because rather than kind of try to,

um, test the kind of full structure of the model,

they just focus on this particular prediction that each cell

should be used to call crop, for which productivity price

is highest.

So what that means is when they do the calculations

and the price is given and given the crisis, does

the pattern of production match what the model is now

in the full model price itself and it through that

price inflation rate operates.

So by changing prices and everything we're not going to

worry about the quantity.

We're just testing one component model.

And we will see as we look at empirical different

theories as we go through, we will see frequently the

case that you will have a particular component holding some

of these.

And this is what they're, you know.

Yeah.

Uh, maybe not the only, uh, technology or factor in

this model.

So maybe there are other technologies, um, to adapt to.

Yeah.

So what do you have to take on?

Uh, for example, manufacturing?

Yeah.

Yeah.

So this is definitely one point right here that I

predicting agricultural productivity purely based on, uh, climate and soil

and water, uh, waste, whether you have access to kind

of, you know, the latest farm machinery is clearly very

important.

Agriculture is actually a reasonably capital intensive industry, because modern

agricultural techniques are essentially designed around, uh, building machines that

will do all the work that was previously done by

human labour.

So, you know, one reason we want to get into

that kind of thing for for that.

That's definitely one possibility.

What else?

Some countries also just massively subsidise certain crops, which means

that you will get inputs.

You will get all support that you need for it.

So farmer may choose to grow a certain crop simply

because it's cheapest for them to produce.

But that doesn't mean that overall the cost is cheaper.

Yeah.

Great, right?

The kind of assumption here is that the there is

sort of profit maximisation without any kind of subsidies.

We know that agriculture is probably the area where there

is the biggest amount of government intervention.

Almost every economy intervenes in the agricultural sector in some

way, and that is inevitably going to distort our production

choices.

So that's another factor why the model might fail.

What else?

Most of the management of parks refers to as in

terms of international activity.

Uh, yeah.

Uh, right.

And, uh, for some.

Country and all that and, uh, without these, uh, you

have to.

Yeah, it's kind of another version of the argument that

there are other factors that affect land productivity.

So we know things like land reform, which changes the

ownership rules around land, can have a big effect on

agricultural productivity.

If you look at kind of the East Asian countries,

they tend to be like, oh, um, uh, before it's

going to be industrialisation, uh, after the Second World War,

that was succeeded by land reforms, uh, which increased, uh,

ownership rights over land, which massively boosted agricultural productivity.

So that can be another factor that we just haven't

talked about at all in the in the model.

Yeah, maybe a cemetery.

A lot of marbles.

Don't know.

What's the best, uh, prediction they can have?

Yeah.

Absolutely.

Right.

Development economists love running experiments where they incentivise farmers to

use different types of seeds or different types of creation

methods.

And one of the things that comes out of that

experiment is very rarely the case that farmers were originally

using the optimal production, uh, methods.

So you can see that kind of a number of

different reasons why the model may not be catching all

the factors that affect, uh, the kind of allocation of

agriculture across these different plots.

Nevertheless, it's kind of at least somewhat reassuring that we

see some positive relationship between what the model is and

what we've learned in practice.

We focus here on the kind of agriculture.

There's also kind of by the same authors.

Looking more broadly to what extent and Ricardian technology differences

explain trade patterns.

If it comes to, in some ways kind of a

similar conclusion that there is, certainly it plays a role.

On average, countries tend to export more goods where they

are more productive, but also there's a lot of kind

of residual variation that isn't explained by these kind of

actors and writers.

And so clearly, this sets us up for what might

be the other factors that explain differences in trade policies.

We'll look at another explanation in a couple of weeks,

based on uh, other courses of, uh, comparative advantage based

on, uh, factor in that.

I think we saw that today.

Final question.

All right.

I mean.

Maybe the question of how is this really a boon

for modal verbs?

So at the end, we prove that there's correlation between

the output and.

Lecture 3:

Yeah.

So move.

Right.

Um, so today we're going to return to the theme

of the ancient tree trial.

We have some empirical evidence on gains from trade in

the first century.

Today, we're going to come back at the end of

the topic from a more theoretical perspective, looking at some

different ways of, um, Conceptualising trade and what they have

to say about trade.

And then towards the end of the lecture, we will

also look at, uh, another kind of set of empirical

work which tries to study whether that trade does it

through kind of a very different, as you said, a

very different approach to the one and the strength of

the Roman Empire I used in the papers we looked

at, uh, in week one.

Before we jump into today's material.

Does anyone have any questions from last week or anything

they want to discuss?

Okay.

So.

We'll start off by talking on the theories of ancient

trade.

And then we're going to look for, uh, some tests

that test both the kind of data.

Is there an evidence based trade and also speaks to

the kind of, uh, theory of comparative advantage in this

idea of comparative advantage to predicting trade patterns that we

looked at a last week, so we're going to look

at some evidence from a particular historical evidence experiment in

Japan.

The historical episode in Japan, which is kind of nicely

set up to speak to these two questions.

So we'll use that to sort of reflect empirically on

what we're making here today.

But let's jump into thinking about the the games of

trade.

Um, a preview of where we're going.

Is that kind of throughout this course, the set of

trade models we are going to study will all have

in common that they predict on aggregate.

Opening up to trade makes countries better off.

Specifically, the prediction there is that if you compare autarky

to, uh, to free trade, it will make countries is

better off in the sense of having higher aggregate, um,

output into a holding population.

Consider that also kind of higher aggregate income, uh, per

capita.

A sort of caveat before we kind of get into

detail how we're going to make this, this argument, you

know, as I've said, the models we will look at

are going to focus.

They're going to share from very different perspective this common

prediction that there are gains from trade.

This doesn't mean that it's not possible to construct models

in which you lose from opening up to to the

trade.

Such models do exist.

Um, but you have to in some ways.

You often have to work quite hard to put into

a model the kind of assumptions that will end up

generating losses from trade.

So I think something kind of mainstream.

You people think about these issues is that it is

unlikely that on aggregate you would get, uh, losses from

trade.

If you do want to strike an example where it

happens, the kind of way you can do it is

to develop a model that has some form of market

imperfection.

So there's some form of imperfect competition, you know, monopoly

power.

So there are inefficiencies in the decentralised equilibrium.

And then what you want is for opening up to

trade to in some sense exacerbate or magnify those inefficiencies.

So if you can construct an environment where, say, there

are inefficiencies coming from monopoly power and opening up to

trade strengthens that monopoly power in some way.

Or, you know, if it's an oligopoly opening up to

try and make an oligopoly monopoly that can generate any

kind of a cost of opening up to trade, which

under certain circumstances could outweigh consumption gains.

Was the model, uh, highlight?

Um, so I kind of wanted to make that point

just to say, you know, if you if we are

thinking about the financial losses, there is a path we

can go down, but we're mainly going to focus on

a sort of more mainstream perspective, or at least in

a static environment.

I do tend to be going through the trade in

most models.

Dynamic models are a little bit less clear on this

question, simply because models do tend to feature more of

these inefficiencies.

And in particular, if you're thinking about growth models where

there are lots of externalities going on, if, for example,

trade, uh, causes a country to specialise in low growth

sectors, that doesn't necessarily mean it's going to make the

country worse off, but it is certainly possible and come

it in terms of mapping it to the data, it

seems kind of more empirically feasible.

He might not be for trade in that environment than

in the static model.

So, um, so that was a bit of a long,

long preamble, but I just want you to bear that

in mind as we kind of go through.

But now let's look at the model where the where

that is not the case when you have case and

try.

And before we look at any technical details, the Broadway

I want you to be thinking about the the gains

from trade here is simply in terms of what's happening

to a country's feasible consumption set when it opens up

to trade.

So I want you to be thinking about environments where

welfare, you know, the utility is defined over consumption and

where if you expand the feasible consumption set, that is,

you expand the set of consumption models that that the

representative consumer can choose between.

Right?

In a market economy, that would mean they could the

I could afford that's going to at least weakly increase

their, uh, utility because you're giving them more choices in

that in this framework, giving them more choices is going

to, uh, make them at all.

So the kind of the kind of argument that we're

going to focus on when we make these arguments about

why you might expect us to trade is essentially the

kind of three steps you're going to have welfare.

You need to fire consumption training, expanding the fuel consumption.

So and therefore, since we've expanded.

Higher welfare.

More locally, that's going to be the kind of theme.

And then what we're going to want to do as

we go through in more detail is try and understand

exactly what are the assumptions we need to make to

be able to kind of prefer for these three steps

to be on hold.

And in particular, you can see the, the the key

one, the one that is probably least obvious is going

to be step two.

So the the questions are going to be what under

what conditions does trade indeed expand the country's spatial functions?

So here's the notation that we're going to be using.

Certainly in the first half of this lecture we saw

some of this a little bit last week.

But just to remind ourselves we're going to want capital

letters are going to be set.

So C will be the feasible consumption set.

We're being sort of quite general here about how many

goods or exactly what the consumer is consuming.

So it's just, you know, some set of consumption models

that it is feasible for them to consume.

We're going to try and be sort of as vague

as possible about how that's how they're pinned down.

In the interest of trying to keep our arguments general.

I likewise, y won't be confused with the production set.

So that's essentially the technological possibilities of the of the

country in many settings.

It's the kind of idea of the production possibility frontier

is defining this feasible future.

And is a feasible net import set.

So these are going to be the trading possibilities of

the country.

And what's going to constrain the feasible net imports.

That will typically be a balance trade condition.

And if we didn't impose a balance trade condition countries

could just import as much as they they want it.

Right.

But it's going to have to be somebody in the

background saying, you've got to pay for your imports and

exports.

So we're thinking of environments here where the trade is

balanced.

Um, if you're doing more kind of macro modelling, you

might think, well, okay, here's a trade deficit, in which

case you might have trade imbalance subject to the to

the trade deficit.

It's not quite a proof of what we're doing here.

Um, so capital letters are the set and then the

lowercase letters c, m are the actual elements that belong

to this set.

And think of them all as being notional, uh, vectors.

Um, sometimes when we are talking about output and the

output vector y, we will think about that vector including

both the outputs as well as the inputs that are

used for production, where the inputs simply exhibit a negative

sign.

Okay.

So you can make positive elements of the output vector.

Those are a good way of producing and uh, negative

elements are inputs we are using in production, which could

be labour or capital, or it could be also various

types of intermediate inputs.

Again, you need to specify that producers are paying attention

to prices.

Um, we're going to write vector products in this form

whereby the vector product will mean the dot product.

So it's the sum over all the elements of the

product of the individual, uh, elements.

So just don't get confused when you see the right

direction.

That's what we mean.

And then we'll have a.

A is going to be all time interest free trading.

So here's a.

Very simple argument for the gains from trade, which in

a way is slightly too simple because it steps over

some, um, some points that we might want to kind

of go back over.

But let's start here.

Okay.

So immortality, as we have said previously, in the course

you can only consume what you produce.

So in autarky, the feasible production set is exactly equal

to the feasible consumption set stuff.

Right.

Now let's suppose we traded on the trade.

The feasible consumption set is the combination of what can

I produce.

Plus what can I trade it for.

Right.

So it's the set of y plus.

And where y is the longest feasible production set to

the feasible net import set.

Therefore, the feasible consumption at all time has to be

a strict or at least weakly contained within the feasible

consumption set of the track.

Okay, because you could definitely consume under trade what you

consume under autarky, because then it's just an equal to

zero, you have to say feasible consumption side.

So we immediately got to the feasible consumption set being

expanded as we move to automatic trade.

Therefore it follows that trade cannot reduce ah welfare.

Now I think it is very general.

You haven't said anything about the production technology has said

anything about preferences.

We haven't said anything about market structures or we would

be able to is, um, the ability to to trade.

We have assumed that a feasible set of the autonomy

is a subset of the feasible production set under the

trade.

What's the kind of content of that assumption?

You know, in sort of more a more intuitive terms.

What is that assumption?

Um, telling us.

Everything that can be produced under autarky can also be

produced in free trade, but it may be some goods

with all which can be produced in future that can't

be produced not working.

Yeah.

It's telling us that in terms of technologies, we haven't

regressed in any way from going from autarky to to

trade.

Right.

If you if you thought that as you opened up

to trade, you learn lost some technological knowledge, that would

be a potential reason why these assumptions would be violated.

Yeah.

I think about it.

An example like we have intermediate goods that we can

trade and like by email to trace, um, uh, like

we would ship this intermediate production a domestically and then

we might stop producing some of the inputs.

And then for example, if we have a technology that

indicates that this is.

Potentially, I think you would need to spell it out

in more detail exactly what was happening and whether you

could source those intermediate inputs abroad rather than, uh, domestically.

But that kind of argument, you can certainly sort of

construct the possibility that maybe this assumption doesn't hold right

here.

This I think this.

This argument was very.

Natural in some sense.

And it's quite general.

But this assumption why it's not completely innocuous.

And is also natural.

So these are the bad guys.

I mean, I think we haven't provided enough structure here

to know whether that is the case.

Right.

If you imagine the production that it was, just imagine

the two goods and the production is just how much

of each of it I can potentially produce.

That's kind of a technological constraint.

It won't be affected by arm, by price.

But if you start, I mean, it is possible that

if you start to think that production also uses intermediate

inputs and trains as intermediate inputs, then maybe the price

of those intermediate inputs of export you can produce domestically.

So you can kind of make it more complicated, but

at a very simple level I think not necessarily so.

So I mean that one, you know, if this is

something else, that's one way this argument could fail.

There's one other kind of important way in which it

might fail.

We want to be aware of.

I mean, we'll see what that might be.

Yeah.

I'm not sure that maybe the US would also have

covered that.

I don't know how to specify the path.

I'm after you and may not be I like to

pass on that.

Um, you mean if this assumption doesn't hold that, then

that way.

Yeah.

So so I think that's I think that's potentially true.

But again, sort of what we're building there is kind

of what might happen if this fails.

What I'm asking is suppose this holds is there a

novel way.

And the kind of thing I want you to know

is that sort of implicit here is that, you know,

if we expand this feasible consumption set in this particular

sense, the way consumption is actually chosen will end up

delivering a liability, which is, you know, you need reasonably

weak assumptions to generate that.

If you think of that being a social data and

that social planning benevolent and simply choosing the consumption bundle

from the feasible consumption set that maximises welfare.

Then that's going to hold.

But you might also worry that in a, uh, decentralised

economy, if there's some inefficiencies there, then potentially that doesn't

happen.

And potentially for some reason, the consumption model ends up

being chosen isn't necessarily the kind of socially optimal one.

Is this the kind of distributional argument that we're talking

about?

Now you have one representative agent that maximises global utility,

as you said, the social welfare pattern.

It's yeah, it's not quite the same.

We're going to come back to that distributional argument a

bit more.

But this is in some sense that's what we're saying.

Even if you assume all the consumers are alike.

Right.

There's still the question of how is the consumption bundle

actually chosen.

Right.

And the assumption that the bundle that's chosen is the

one that maximises welfare, though very natural, or we make

most of the time in economics isn't completely automatic.

There is structure that goes into that.

Uh.

I don't think.

I mean, we will throughout this course assume preferences have

that structure.

Um, but I think that's kind of crucial for what

we're thinking about here.

What do you think?

It's like an externality is like one person, you know,

import a good has negative externalities on other people.

So I might individually want to import that either.

Mhm.

But in the end the total utility across society has

gone down because everyone is exerting a negative externality that

didn't exist.

Yeah.

That's the kind of argument we could think of if

the trade, you know, was in some way associated with

environmental pollution and there's a public good or a spill-over

nature to that, then maybe the choices that we make

individually, even if we're all making the same choices, don't

lead to the an optimal solution.

Right.

So I mean, the point here is just to flag

kind of just really just to get us kind of

thinking about if we look at a kind of argument,

that is where, where what, what are the implicit assumptions

that are going into it, and to kind of be

aware of where what is something that is likely to

always hold and what is kind of in some way

reliant on what our mental model of the world is.

Where is this issue?

So, so just very general.

Now we're going to start getting a bit more specific.

And in fact, we're going to start out by getting

very specific and consider a very simplified example.

So we can understand we're getting some very simplified example.

And then we will want to gain generalise and see

how far we can generalise or general case.

So here's our simple example.

So we're now going to be thinking of a small

economy.

Do you remember what we said a small economy means.

It means we take world prices as So it's a

small.

It's small relative to the rest of the world.

And the world prices have given.

And in particular here we're just going to think about

two goods.

I'm going to assume there are two output goods.

And domestic prices will just be equal to whatever the

world prices.

Are.

It's going to be highly competitive.

Producers will be profit maximising.

Uh, consumers will be, uh, utility maximising.

Everyone takes adequate prices and factor prices as given all

three trade and all the agents are identical.

So we're just going to have a representative, uh consume.

And then kind of we want to look at why

there would be gains and trade in this Cali.

So the easiest way to do that is graphically.

So here is a simple graphical depiction of the autarky

equilibrium of this economy.

So what do we draw here on the x that

we're going to pull out to goods food and clothes.

So y is output of food.

What you see is adequate clothes.

Right.

And what we started by drawing here, this curve here

is the production cost for the frontier.

So it is out.

It is a curve that is describing the boundary of

the physical production.

And when we talk about that feasible production set while

earlier.

Right.

It's everything that is interior to the production possibility.

Right.

So that's our feasible production set.

Which is how we represent technologies on this graph.

And then we represent demand and preferences through the consumer's

indifference indifference curve.

So these dashed lines are the consumer indifference curves.

Remember how they're defined.

Right.

It's possessive consumption models that generate a particular amount of

utility.

So every point along this curve generates the same utility

level.

Why is the curve downward sloping.

Just to make sure we're all clear what's going on

here.

Why does that curve have to be downward sloping.

Because it is a trade off between producing food and.

Yes.

Consuming.

Not producing.

Yes.

Okay.

Yeah.

Um, so as you, you know, as you move down,

you consume more food.

And now here is where it is relevant that we

have locally non satiated preferences.

So as I'm consuming more food that's increasing my utility.

But I want you to consider that we should consume

less if we can get this downward sloping indifference curve.

The exact shape of it will depend on the particular

functional form being potentially utility, which we're not really saying

anything about here.

Um, I've drawn two different curves.

Notes that, of course, the one that is further than

the origin of generating high utility.

So as you move away the origin, you're consuming more

of both goods.

And so that's generating higher utility.

So this is a competitive economy.

So sort of micro 101 what is the equilibrium right

here, right.

Consumers and producers are going to choose the point on

the production possibility frontier that maximises their profits.

Consumers will choose the point of their indifference curve that

maximises utility.

And the equilibrium has to be where the indifference curve

is tangent to the PPF.

And we draw that point here for you.

A so this is the point of tangency between the

indifference, this indifference curve and the PPF.

Um, and then we draw this line through the tax

point of tangency.

Right.

So this is the line that has the same gradient

as the the two curves of the tangent.

What what does that look, the gradient of that line.

Tell us what is the kind of content of that

line in economic terms.

Yeah.

Which is going to mean if we think about this

being a market economy, what's that going to be reflected

in prices.

Yeah, exactly.

It's going to be the relative prices.

So this the gradient of this line is going to

be the price of, uh, food or allergies to clothing.

Negative of the price of food relative to, uh, to

the clothing.

Um, which from the, you know, from the producers point

of view, that's telling you kind of what your income

is.

And from the consumer's point of view, is your budget

constraint, right?

How much money do you have to spend?

And obviously, because we're all talking, we consume what we

produce.

So we both produce and consume the same point.

And so that's all talking.

Now let's open up the trade.

So we're going to go from autarky to the trade.

So we want to think about as we go through

or talk to trade what changes on this graph.

The gradient of the relative first line.

Right.

Exactly.

That's going to be the first thing that, uh, changes.

And I suppose the home country has a comparative advantage

in cloth production.

Which way is that pricing?

For the models and, uh, developers, for developers.

So that I mean, that's going to be true.

That's why we're going to get to.

Right.

That's what we kind of did last year.

The principal component was, if you have the comparative advantage

globally, you're going to end up being the kind of

exporter of clothing.

Right.

But how are we going to get to that in

terms of we said this, this budget constraint here is

going to move what way?

How am I going to shift it if I have

a comparative advantage in clothes and I open up to

track.

You want to do you want to get flatter or

steeper.

Than that.

Let's think it through.

It's confusing.

I always get confused about it, so I'm hoping I'm

going to get it right now.

Um, so what we're saying is, uh, price of clothing

relative to food in the home economy, if home is

to find a comparative advantage in clothing, then it's going

to have clothing has to be cheaper at home than

it is in the world.

So if we use w superscript to denote the world

price okay.

We're saying that this is true.

Okay.

That's uh, that's just a you think back to last

week.

That's a statement of what it means for the home

country to have a comparative advantage in clothing has a

relatively lower price of clothing.

Let's just do a superscript summation.

That's the autarky price.

The relative price of clothing in autarky in our home

country is lower than the world price.

So when we open up to trade, The whole country

to get to the world price.

Right?

Because it's small.

So as we ever have tried to trade, the relative

price of clothing in the home country increases.

Um, and we said that this budget on the gradient

of the budget line is negative.

It's the price of food relative to the price of

clothing.

So PC over here is going up and PC is

going down.

It's becoming flat.

So what's going to happen?

This is going to get flatter as it gets flatter.

But the point to which is tangent to the PPF

is going to shift in this direction.

Right.

That's the direction in which this PPF is getting flatter.

So we're going to move the point at which we

produce on the PPF from point A somewhere up into

the left to a point we'll call Y2, which is

going to be the point at which we produce under

free trade.

Okay, I want to do that.

Right.

And then the question is okay, so you know, producers

are choosing this production point to maximise their profits, which

is going to be their revenue in this setting under

free trade.

So that choosing this point to produce that.

And then where do we consume it?

Since we're no longer in autarky, we no longer have

this constraint that we have to consume where we produce,

so where our consumers can consume.

Well, from the consumer's point of view, this this dashed

line is their budget constraint.

So they're going to consume a lot at the point

along this budget constraint.

And that maximises their utility.

Where will that point be?

It will be where the budget constraint is tangent to

the consumer's indifference curve.

I draw them out here with this point c t.

So we will now consume at this point.

two.

So one thing to note about the pattern of trade,

right?

This is where the comparative advantage treats the trade in

the way you say we're producing here and we're consumed

here.

So we are exporting loading.

And we are importing food.

Right.

We're consuming more food than we produce and vice versa.

So that is the pattern of trade.

Well, what we were really interested in in this example

is the gains from trade.

How do we know that there are gains from trade

now.

On a higher indifference curve.

Yeah.

Exactly right.

So you can see the this is the this one

here is the indifference curve of the original autarky.

And now we're on this indifference curve which is outside

the original indifference curve.

And of course the indifference curves can never cross.

It could be that it wouldn't make any sense on

the kind of assumptions on performance, so that we can

show that it's always satisfying.

So we move to a higher distance curve.

So that's given us gains contract.

Now another way of seeing that is in autarky the

feasible consumption is the feasible production.

Which is to say the feasible consumption is just everything

within the PPF.

But what trading allows us to do by disconnecting production

and consumption is we produce on the PPF, but we

consuming outside.

So it's this ability to consume outside the PPF, which

originally was the kind of technological constraint on what we

can purchase that is going to generate the gains in

trade.

Okay.

So that links back to the OG.

We've been making the start of the lecture that where

the gains and trade are coming from is the expansion

of the feasible consumption set.

And you can see here it's been expanded from just

what is under the PPE to equity under the budget

constraints like.

Any questions on that.

Okay.

So let's try a slight variation of that.

Suppose you when you open it or suppose at all

times in the case where in autarky the country's relative

rate at all time is equal to the world relative

price, would you get gains from trade?

What happens then?

Yeah.

The consumption model would be the same under free trade.

You know, the same indifference curve.

Yeah.

Everything all the action here comes to the shift, reducing

the shift in the gradient of the budget constraint.

If the price is don't shift the budget constraint And

you will end up at the same point, so nothing

changes so you don't get it.

I don't know.

The point to make here is that in these comparative

advantage based trade models, the source of the gains in

trade is the differences between domestic and foreign prices, which

allow you to specialise according to your comparative advantage.

And that generates efficiency gains which manifest themselves in higher

consumption and gains in trade.

So in all in, in in the comparative advantage based

trade models that we have looked at last week in

terms of Ricardo, we'll look at next week in terms

of showing in gains the existence of gains and trade,

conditional on the difference between there being a difference between

domestic and foreign uh, prices in in autarky.

One other point to make about this to avoid potential

confusion.

What we have, what we're showing here is for this

economy, there are gains in trade in the sense of

free trade being better than autarky.

Now, a more nuanced question is, okay, well, you can

compare people talking free trade, but in practice we think,

you know, with some way in between there's some trade

offs.

So the kind of more empirically relevant question might be

not let's compare.

We're talking free trade.

Let's compare autarky to some kind of restricted trade equilibrium

where you can trade but you trade subject to trade

costs.

What do you find then?

Right.

And then you close that off by going from all

types of restricted trade.

And also is free trade better than our restricted track,

which you can see if you start to think about

tariff policy.

And do you want to impose tariffs on on imports.

Right.

The comparison between there is no know, free trade questions

all the time.

It's, you know, free trade versus some levels of tariffs

or one level tariffs is another.

So we're going to we're going to think about that

a little bit more formally in uh in okay.

Uh, and a look also on this week's uh problem

set, which is uh, I put this week from Saturday,

one of the formative assessments for the course.

So for those of you that are taking the course

credit Handout in the, uh, in the class next week.

Uh, but one of the questions on the the problem

set for this week, what we'll show is that for

a competitive small economy like the one we're thinking about

at the moment, free trade is indeed the optimal policy.

So it's not just that free trade in wealth and

autarky generates higher wealth than any kind of restricted, uh,

trade equilibrium.

We'll look on the problem set and exactly why that

is.

All right.

Any questions on this sort of simple graphical economy before

we move on and sort of generalise things a little

bit again?

That.

Also didn't work in this case.

Yeah.

Good question.

I mean so in.

In this economy we haven't really we don't really have

a concept of how well off the producer is in

the sense that it's only the consumers who have a

utility function.

So what you want to be thinking about is, you

know, fundamentally the consumers own the firms.

So whatever happens in the firms just feeds back to

the consumer's income.

And you could think about that.

And even if there were profits, but there's kind of

a stronger thing here, which is because we.

If we have a competitive economy, consumer returns to scale,

there's going to be no profits at all.

So, you know, to the extent there is zero profit,

producers just don't care one way or another.

Um, it's actually, you know, for the for this kind

of structure we have, the PDF could be consisting of

the way to having or not having profits, but either

way, you know, the profits go back to consumers and

they enter their budget and you can't spend that money.

Any other questions?

Yeah.

So unlike the recording model we discussed this morning where

when the relative world price is higher than before, he

goes into specialisation.

Are we saying that in this model that's not necessarily

complete specialisation?

Yeah.

Good question.

So yes you can see you know certainly the way

we've drawn it, the whole country is producing a bit

of good.

So it's not completely specialised.

If we, if the the gradient continues to get flatter,

we'd eventually end up at this point here where you

are um specialised.

The what is different here from the Ricardian model is

going to be that.

The Ricardian model essentially implies a particular PPF.

So let's draw up again.

And let's assume now we're in a Ricardian move.

So in a Ricardian model, such as the one we

were looking at in class this morning, we looked at

last week, what does anyone know what the PPF is

going to look like?

It would be just.

A straight line.

Yeah, it's just a straight.

It's just linear like that, right?

Rather than having the curvature we see here.

And because it's linear like this, if we now think

about, you know, where is the budget constraint that will

be tangent to the PPF.

There's only one value of the relative prices at which

you have tangency.

And that's why in the recording model, there's only one

relative price level in which you produce both goods.

If you go above that or below the price level

in your immediate specialise.

Okay.

So we've done that kind of graphically, Which is a

good start.

It helps me.

Intuition.

But now we want to kind of develop a little

bit more of a formal model to allow us to

do a kind of a wider range of, uh, analyses.

In particular, we want to work towards is being able

to think about, well, what if we have a partial

trade liberalisation where we have some trade offs involved, or

what happens if we have a true genius agent?

So now we're going to set up a model that

can incorporate both these, uh, features and see what it

has to say about, uh, the gains in trade.

Okay.

We're going to state how we competitive economy here.

Uh, for now, we're going to stick to having a

representative agent that we will relax that fairly shortly.

Um, and as when we there's going to be some

similarity in the kind of argument we make here to

the arguments we were making when we were talking about

comparative advantage last week.

And we're going to rely on this practice idea.

So I'll come down in a second.

But.

Uh, this is.

About the, uh, slide.

Yeah.

So we have a representative agent.

So which are the ethical?

The drills.

I've had to change the agents.

Yeah.

So sorry.

This is confusing.

I'm going to start with a representative agent, and then

I'm going to come back and reintroduce originality.

So, yeah, the accuracy of your new settlement confuses me

for now.

No heterogeneity, but we're going to set it up in

a way that is very easy to introduce.

And we'll do that in a few slides time okay.

All right.

So real fast.

So actually we're going to we're going to lean on

a variety of techniques.

And that's what we're going to kind of uh use

repeatedly.

So okay we've got P as a prospect uh of

consumption value is the utility function.

Um, and we're going to use stars to denote kind

of the consumption vector that is chosen at a particular

fighter.

So C star is the optimal consumption bundle chosen by

the consumer at prices p star.

And then what the real preference gives us is that

if p star C star is rating star CPI, then

you see star has to be great for your problem.

Why is that?

Well this first inequality here tells us that consumption by

the sea prime is affordable at prices P star because

C prime historically the cost of consumption policy price.

Remember that the dot product of the two factors assuming

this the cost of that bundle.

And since it's less, that cost is less than the

cost of the bundle that was chosen.

Right.

That means the cost is less than the consumer's budget.

So it could have been chosen.

Right.

So it's a feasible consumption model, but it's not chosen

right.

Then it must be the case that Ewok primes less

than two years of system.

So note here we are again I'm sliding back in

this assumption that consumers are going to act optimally in

the sense that they will choose the bundle of maximises

their their utility.

Right.

We talked a little bit about earlier in the lecture,

what are possible circumstances under which that may not happen.

Right here.

We are relying on that assumption.

Okay.

So that's kind of one pathway I'm going to make.

And then we're going to see how we're going to

kind of realise reveal a preference argument to argue for

for for game strains competitive equilibrium.

So perfect competition representative agent consumers maximise utility subject to

their budget constraint.

Producers maximise profits subject to their technology constraint.

Right.

So this is just again saying what we saw graphically

on that in particular.

Two good.

Uh two good case.

And you know, when we talk about consumers, producers maximising

profits here, the way to measure profits in this economy

is just the dot product these times.

Why?

Right.

And the reason that the measure of profits are the

revenues and the setups, because as we said, the y

the output vector has got negative signs for things that

we're using as an input.

So that's just a sort of notational convenience here.

We talked about this a little the previous slide.

So we know that if he does see Star Trek

pitch dark product UFC star is great to UFC prime

right now.

Let's rock star in terms of production plus net imports

this season is going to be Y star plus M

star where Y star is the production bundle and X

star is their import bundle.

So we can rearrange this inequality as p star times

y star minus y prime plus p m Almost every

problem is greater than zero.

That's just a rearrange.

We set up.

To start with c y c equals y plus m

prime.

And then we've subtracted the right hand side on the

left hand side and brought together the two output and

the two input import terms.

So that's the first equality.

Now know what this is telling us.

It's telling us that if this inequality holds.

Then bundle C star generates at least weakly higher utility

than bundle C prime.

So let's label to start the star bundle free trade

model and the prime model the orbital model.

What that means is the sufficient condition carrying trade.

This condition intimidation.

All right.

All we do here is we replace stars with a

piece of free trade and kind of a small talk.

So this is simply following the flow of available fractions.

If this holds, we have a basic strategy.

So then the question is does that hold.

Okay.

First turn.

All right watch this first.

This is the producer profits under free trade minus produced

profits under free trade.

If you produce the autarky production run.

Well, if we produce the autarky production bundle at free

trade prices, we must make weakly lower profits.

And if we produce the free trade production model.

Because the way that free trade production, by the way,

is defined, it's the bundle of maximising the profits.

So produce maximisation immediately gives us that this first term

is greater than zero.

Everyone happy with that?

Now, one last second.

What's on airport authority?

Which is that?

Power to me is zero, right?

So what we're trying to empty, which is the net

cost of imports at retail prices.

And if we got balanced trade, that net cost has

to be equal to zero.

That's exactly what that means.

So without a trade we get the tlmt is equal

to to zero.

Right.

And therefore this condition is satisfied.

So now just simply by you know what what have

we used here.

We've used that we're in competitive equilibrium where consumers maximise

utility and firms maximise profits.

Given those Assumptions.

We immediately get that this condition is satisfied and therefore

that we have at least weakly gained control.

We haven't tried in week to extract any questions on

that.

Now, this isn't very particularly useful for us, because we'd

already kind of made the same argument graphically in a

two books rather than any case.

So we're not buying a lot of extra action by

just going to the test set.

And good case.

But what if we made this argument for kind of

pairing autarky and trade?

What's nice about it is that we can kind of

apply the same line of reasoning to more complicated comparisons.

So let's see how we can do that.

And now let's think about a case where instead of

autarky versus free trade, we're going to compare with what

we'll call restricted trade to autarky.

So how are you going to model that?

We're going to think about a setting where a country

imposes a set of trade policies, and you can think

of these as like taxes and subsidies on imports and

exports, such that the domestic price differs from the world

price by an additive factor attack.

So what this equation is giving to the relationship between

PR, which is the domestic price and the world price.

And depending on exactly what the policies are, how it

can be positive or negative, we're not specifying it at

at this point.

Right.

No.

We're also not even specifying where the country is small

or large.

So it's possible that p world itself depends on tab.

Uh, but you know, we're just saying this is kind

of in equilibrium.

This is what the relationship has.

And then we also there gains from trade.

So we can come back to our same sufficient condition.

We had.

Having sufficient condition against trade.

Is that PR almost like Mr. Ma is positive.

Um, all that's changed is what was previously teased is

now off.

That's the only, only difference.

So we're getting we finally got a reason about these

terms here.

Okay.

First her right again producer that we can have producer

maximisation in the production of on the water maximising profits

price to PR.

So if we chose some other bundle like a we

would make a no profit.

So this first term is greater than equal to zero.

So we're done on that.

Yeah.

That's correct.

Word effects or subsidies are estimated to be gained from

trades.

It's minus what you estimate.

So some substitution might just come.

Can you ask that question again just to make sure

exactly what we ask in.

So now with this um model we're estimating the gains

from trades.

But if we subsidised trade, that should be minus the

investments which are subsidies, right.

Okay.

So so so you're right in the sense that obviously

if we are have these government policies that are interfering

in the market in some way, we want to take

account of that when we're assessing welfare, right.

That said.

Right.

Note that here kind of weird.

And this is this point.

I made this on the lecture where we're defining welfare

over consumption.

So if we observe what you consume, it doesn't matter

how you get that consumption.

Right.

Because the consumption choice you're making in some way will

have taken account of any additional constraints imposed by the

fact that maybe the government imposed taxes to set the

value of of time.

So conditional on observing consumption, we don't need to know

that other information.

Right?

That other stuff will have effect in the consumption decision.

But what we're trying to do is sort of regions

based on observing consumption.

Yeah.

Right.

So what we're going to kind of come back over

here in a second.

We're going to talk about this table in more detail.

So just kind of a little prediction condition for getting

some trade.

So we said this first term positive by producing maximisation

just like we would compare trade on top and bottom.

Zero.

Same as before.

So that's zero.

So we just have this term right.

Now remember when we did free trade that was empty.

And we said that had to be zero by balanced

trade is premised on this trade.

This is the slightly tricky things.

About you advise.

Yeah exactly.

Let's think through this.

We want to make sure that this distinction we're kind

of clear on this distinction.

Right.

So p r times m r is p w plus

times p w times m r plus tau times.

The thing that has to be zero under balanced trade

is this term right.

Why is that.

Because you trade with the rest of the world that

the world price is not the domestic prices, right?

So if this thing is zero, it's saying that kind

of the value being pulled back to the domestic prices

here.

But that's not a balanced trade condition.

The balanced regulation is that when you value the import

of world prices, you get zero.

So that w times Mr. Term is going to drop

out.

That's going to be zero.

But that means we're still left with this Tao times

Mr. term.

Right.

And now this is where the Tao is going to

kind of show up and be something we have to

to think about, okay.

And so I'm kind of where it's showing up is

in, you know, the valuation.

All the employers are kind of accounting for the for

the price.

So we need to think about kind of intuitively what

is this tie near term tax.

Right.

Because if we know that how m r is greater

than zero that's the sufficient condition for getting some trade.

So one thing we can say here is that if

tariffs on them at all is greater than zero, we've

got a contract.

What do we need to be the case.

Fatality must be greater than zero.

Well we on average how is positive.

When am I right.

Which is to say that.

To you know is the difference between PRP.

So we want to increase the price of the goods

we import and decrease the price of the goods we

are x.

So Tao tends to be on average positive for imports

and negative for exports.

Um, then this thing will be, uh, greater than or

equal to zero.

And another way of putting that is that whatever regime

of tax and subsidies you have in place, it has

to generate, uh, some revenue, right.

In the sense of this Tao summer, that's the kind

of revenue we get from imposing this set of taxes

and stuff.

It's kind of one way to see that if if

you're importing a good and entirely positive, which is, then

the domestic prices are great in the world.

And what that implies is that you're taxing the import.

So essentially here you want to be, uh, taxing the

import, right?

Whereas exports you want the domestic price is lower than

the price.

And for that to occur your tax in the exports.

So it's essentially saying that to get these, uh, gains

from the restrictive trade versus autarky, what you want to

do if you're doing a tax and stuff or other

subsidising.

Yeah.

Because we also have the condition y r is greater

than y a.

Yeah, my profit oxidisation.

Uh, how times em are greater than equal to zero.

That would be a sufficient condition.

Right.

But not necessary condition.

Yes.

Exactly.

Right.

Because this, to the extent this top inequality holds weakly,

it could be that this is violated.

Do you still think it is sufficient?

Not necessary.

Any other questions on this at the moment?

On the problem set.

So we've done free trade versus restricted trade.

I still talk in the problem segment.

You should do restricted trade versus, uh, free trade.

But, I mean, this is a good moment to take

a break and then we'll come back and talk about

consumer heterogeneity.

Just because I remember the last week, um, I, I

assume and from trade and you.

Show that.

Yeah.

There is a reverse.

We haven't used the weak law of comparative advantage here.

Right.

So the the way you think about this is kind

of the first step to proving that we build comparative.

And we just kind of assumed the output of this

last week.

And improved.

And if we did.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Under some you know obviously under some conditions.

Right.

This is obviously, you know, we've imposed some structure.

We've said we've got a competitive economy, for example.

So it's not it's not completely general, but under some

assumptions, you can prove that.

Okay.

All right, let's take a break there.

Hey.

Hey, dude.

Yeah.

Hi.

Uh, I just wanted to let you know that my,

um, study advisor.

We're misunderstanding.

Uh, she thought that I could take both, uh, electives.

Yeah, so I didn't know.

Yeah.

At the end, it turned out that I can only

follow one.

Right?

That's true.

Yeah.

I thought it's more useful to have the quantitative aspects

more proof the content side.

Okay, so I'll take this course.

Okay.

That's absolutely fine.

Yeah.

And, um, yeah, I also have to write an essay

about for context economics.

Okay.

Go to read about distribution effects.

Uh, in of trade.

Okay.

In the garden market.

Right.

So to see a bit of Europe.

And that also supersedes national economics.

So I'm still looking for the overlap okay.

Just any question or advice for the essay.

And I would like to talk about later on.

Yeah.

At some point that kind of talk about it in

more detail.

Okay.

Sounds good.

Okay.

Also I'm going in half an hour to the airport.

Okay.

Go to the islands.

Just let me.

Just say.

Yes.

Gender.

Neutral.

Yes.

Sir.

Um.

All the.

Ingredients in.

The big three.

And of.

Course.

Since I was very much.

With them but I.

Also have some issues.

Of faith and.

You.

Have um the.

Importance of the.

Paper.

And so that also intersects with.

The export something.

And I'll have to start but.

Yeah.

So then my dissertation starts So I didn't have any

trouble with.

It.

Yeah.

Yeah, it's quite good.

Yeah, it's really.

Good.

Yeah.

But I think I.

Have to have fun doing this.

Rather than.

Just some.

And I'm actually wondering if I can choose not to

give up on yesterday.

Yeah.

So when you came.

So I would be quite logical, but that's possible.

Yeah.

Um, yeah.

I think it's.

Hard for me, too.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

No, it's actually some.

Hard.

Work.

And then they start taxing those imports that you're going

to import, and that's all, you know.

And then.

Some of you at the.

End, you remember.

From like some of the.

Value.

Difference.

On the income.

Because of all of this.

I was like, uh.

You remember?

Yeah.

Are you sure that the.

People that get to know all of.

You.

To make them better than anyone else in the.

Market?

I think so.

We're just at the top.

Okay, let's, um, let's go again.

So we're now going to have our first part, uh,

thinking about the implications of having some heterogeneity, uh, across

consumers in the economy, which is going to allow us

to start thinking about, uh, distributional consequences of trade, which

would be a question that kind of comes up again

at various points, uh, during the, uh, the course.

And so framing here is what we've been sharing.

Is there aggregate gains from trade.

But obviously aggregate gains don't imply to everyone okay.

So we kind of want to know if they're if

they're aggregated.

Does it suggest everyone gains in general be both uh,

winners and losers and winners and losers to the gains

outweigh the the losses with heterogeneous consumers.

So first question what I've been thinking about.

In the framework.

We've just been looking at, we go back to this

kind of framework that we've developed with a competitive economy

and utility functions.

Suppose I want consumers to be heterogeneous in this.

I want to introduce heterogeneous consumers into this framework.

We've just been talking about how might you do this?

Can we anticipate how we're going to introduce consumer heterogeneity

in this setup.

Different utility functions.

Okay.

So this is definitely one possibility.

Maybe preferences differ across consumers.

So we could allow this, you know utility function to

be consumer specific.

So that's one possibility.

What else.

Did you see.

Explain what you mean.

No.

Uh, I think it really is about that.

So based on that, what what do you want to

wait.

Uh.

Yeah.

Okay.

So I'm not.

Yeah.

I'm not quite falling down there, but maybe feel free

to come back on that, because there are other things

that might differ across consumers.

We'll put another way.

The consumers only differ in their preferences or they differ

in other ways.

I think they're going to come.

Yeah.

They might also differ in income.

This is the other obvious way in which they differ.

They might differ in their preferences.

They might also differ in their income.

And in particular, they kind of might differ in where

they're getting their income from.

Some consumers might be workers, some may be capitalists, some

may own land, and they may have kind of different

quantities of these of these things.

So we can also think about, you know, consumer habits.

You know, you're coming from on the income side.

So let's see how we're going to do this.

We're going to try and capture both these factors.

Right.

We're going to try to be quite general at all.

The consumer heterogeneity we allow.

So we're going to assume there are eight consumers.

And then number eight which will be indexed by the

wage.

Um and we're going to allow preferences to differ.

So each consumer is going to have their own uh

utility function.

U-h.

And now that each of the countries is going to

be defined over its consumption, so their consumption is going

to be c h, um, but also over their vector

of factor supplies.

So now we are explicitly splitting kind of outputs from

inputs.

And VH is going to be the vector of inputs

or factors that the consumer supplies to the market.

So the very simplest example of this would be how

much labour does the consumer supply to the, uh, to

the market.

But if you think the consumer also owns some land

or some capital, those things could also be in there,

uh, in there as well.

And we're going to allow for that.

That vector we're going to say is exponential.

So consumption is n dimensional of the endowment that is

uh h dimensional, sorry s dimensional.

And that's going to be sort of generally the genius

across consumers as well.

Um, and because consumers have different supply factors, they're also

going to have different incomes.

So that budget constraint here is going to be consumer

specific.

Um, and the budget constraint or at least this is

the orthodox version of it, is the expected consumer's expenditure

in autarky, on the left hand side, there has to

be less of an income in order to party, and

that income is the factor factor.

So this will be an s dimensional factor.

Price factor times the consumers a factor supply vector v.

Note that we're allowing the factors to show up both

in the budget constraint and in the utility function.

So the fact that it is showing in the utility

function is allowing us to potentially capture things like addition

utility of of labour consumers have a labour leisure uh

trade off.

And then the more labour supply potentially the lower their

uh utility is going to be.

We're allowing for that, that possibility again, we'll be sort

of trying to be as general as possible.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Give me happy with this.

Any questions on this.

So.

Okay.

So given that this new setup we got with the

heterogeneous consumers, we don't want to ask the same question.

Are they going to trade?

And if they are going to trade, how the different

consumers affected do they all go to some wins and

lose?

What can we say?

To do this is we're going to use the same

sort of preference argument we had before, but we're going

to have to do a little bit more work.

And we've now got these kind of explicit factor supplies.

So in particular we need to be clear kind of

what the market clearing conditions are.

So on the output side in autarky order type the

output must be equal to the sum of the consumption

rates across all consumers.

This is just saying that collectively, the total consumption of

all the consumers has to be equal to the output.

So there's the kind of heterogeneous consumers version of the

consumption equals production, autarky condition, and likewise the sum of

all the consumers factors supply equal to the aggregate factor.

Supply vector V are.

Now the producers of profit maximising precision are then the

kind of output bundle which is the output y in

fact, supplies B have to be feasible and optimal.

So they have to be feasible in the sense that

if, given whatever this economy's technology is, it has to

be possible to produce this positive output given by this

factor supplies.

Right.

And you see, if you specify a particular production technology

that will tell you what the physical set is.

And they have to be optimal in that producers have

to be, uh, maximising, uh, profits.

Now here we're going to impose one additional assumption that

we didn't have before.

Up to now, today, we've never said anything about economies.

This time when we were talking about all we had

our perfect PMS.

We didn't say anything about the underlying.

You know, whether they're a constant or increasing or decreasing

returns to scale.

Likewise, when we were comparing free trade to autarky using

the build preference, there weren't any assumptions about scale.

Um, now that we're going to impose a commercial scale

just to make my life a little bit easier.

So with constant returns to scale and perfect competition, what

do we know about profits?

Zero zero.

Right.

This is what we're getting out of this assumption.

So using automation this means that the value of output

equals the cost of the inputs.

So this is the constant.

Giving these two strings have to be equal.

So those are the autarky equilibrium conditions.

Now we're going to write down the free trade conditions.

And we're going to compare them and see what we

can say about gains and trade.

So under free trade, we're also going to bring the

government into it.

Right.

So we're going to assume that some government and the

power we're going to give the government, it can make

some transfers across agents.

So we're going to assume that r h is the

transfer that agent H receives from the government where RH

positive is receiving money.

RH negative is you're paying a tax.

This government is going to be subject to one constraint.

It has a budget constraint.

So the total sum of the transfers has to be

less than or equal to zero.

And if you know the government is running exactly, uh,

expenditure equals income that will be equal to to zero.

So what this means is that the budget constraint under

free trade is going to be my expenditure on free

trade on the left hand side here.

It has to be smaller than my income and free

trade at WTT plus the subsidy overseas income range.

So the effect of these government subsidies to shift around

different agents budget constraints.

Now let's posit a particular, uh, set of subsidies.

Let's assume the government chooses this particular transfer for each

agent H, H and H receives the difference between the

free trade and the target prices times their auto consumption

model, minus the difference between the free trade factor prices

times their factor supplies.

Why?

You know, this may seem a little bit odd.

Why don't we positing this particular, um, set of subsidies?

Well, take this value RH substituting into the consumer's budget

constraint.

Right?

And then what this budget constraint will then reduce to

is the authority budget constraint.

So this is a system of taxes and transfers for

each consumer such that if the government implements this system,

every consumer will be able to afford that autarky, uh,

consumption model.

Okay.

Why do you think we might want to consider that

particular system of subsidies?

And why is that going to be of interest to

us?

Can anyone kind of see where I'm heading with this?

Because distribution of effects.

We no agent to be worse off than it would

have been under all Turkey.

Right.

This is the goal.

So if if we know that each consumer can afford

their autarky consumption bundle, then they're definitely not worse off.

They're not better off necessarily.

But they are not not worse off.

So if we implement this system of transfers.

The effect of that is we can guarantee nobody's worse

off.

So nobody loses from trade.

But we're running a little bit ahead of ourselves.

So it's kind of you know, there's a condition there.

It's like if we can implement this system of transfers

because we haven't checked that this system of transfers substitutes

the government budget.

Right?

Right.

If the government gives everyone money.

Right, that would make everyone better off.

But it's not feasible because there's a budget constraint.

So we need to check the budget constraint.

So we need to sum this across all the consumers

All right, which is what we're doing here.

So the sum of the transfers across all the consumers,

this is the thing we need to be less than

zero.

So this is p two minus p times the sum

of consumers of k minus two minus one to some

consumers in VR.

Right.

Now remember market clearing conditions.

The sum of the cost regimes of K is just

y.

And the southernmost consumers of VA is the big VAT.

Okay.

So now we've got something a little bit simpler because

we've got rid of the consumer.

Um now DT minus pa times y.

Minus w t minus w VAT.

Remember that since we had a constant attention scale, we

know that PA wire is equal to W.

So the PA wire here cancels the waiver here.

And what we're left with is p t y Why

don't we?

And then I've decided that that is less than t

t minus w t v t y.

Is that this inequality here?

What's the rationale for that.

Okay.

So producer maximisation.

And the thing to note is you know this term

here that's producer profits on the free trade.

And the Labour is producing profits unnecessary at free trade

prices.

If we choose to autarky.

Uh, abundance produces a maximising and we know they choose

the free trade bundles, not the old bundles.

So there's free trade owners have to give them at

least weakly higher profits in the autarky markets.

So we have to get t two minus w dt

is greater than or equal to p t minus one.

So that's the producer maximisation giving us that.

And they finally get her appeal to consider getting to

know that this thing is going to be equal to

zero.

T t t is equal to w t t t.

So we end up with showing that indeed, this system

of taxes and transfers is feasible for the government in

the sense that it is portable.

So what have we shown here?

We've shown that the government can collect enough taxes in

the equilibrium to compensate all the consumers in such a

way that nobody loses from frame.

Moreover, if it were the case that this thing was

strictly necessary, then there's some money left over and the

government could give that money, spread that money around in

a way that would make everyone strictly better off.

So.

you know there are aggregates and trade.

Then it's also the case that the government can redistribute

money across consumers in a way that makes everyone, uh,

better off.

Right.

And you can see that kind of makes intuitive sense

on aggregate at all.

So there's more resources to go around.

So if the government can redistribute those resources, then it's

certainly possible to redistribute those resources in a way that

everyone gains.

So in this sense, if you allow the government these

powers, we can have more time to free trade.

You can just generally argue against.

But it's Pareto efficient in the sense that you can

make everyone better off, regardless of kind of what type

of consumer heterogeneity, um, there is.

So this is, you know, taking a face value.

This is quite a strong argument for why we don't

necessarily need to worry about distributional effects of trade, because

we can just compensate illusions.

What would you say is the weaknesses of this argument?

Does this mean we can finally say, okay, well, let's

not worry about distribution for the rest of the course,

because we know that as long as there are aggregate

areas, we can always compensate the losers in a way

that everyone potentially uses in a way that everyone is

better off, or is that you buy that argument or

whatever it might be.

One problem might be that we don't necessarily observe autarky

prices, so we don't really know how to, um, compensate

for payments.

Okay.

So one concern, let's go back to our, uh, system

of transfers.

Now, the system of transfers depended on quite a lot

of stuff, including what's going on in your talk.

And if we don't just observe what's happening in autarky

and free trade.

You can't calculate what this system of transfers is.

So this is a very high kind of information burden

or placing on the government to assume you can even

calculate what this system of transfers might be.

Right.

You need to know not just for the price is

in both autarky and free trade, but for every individual.

Consumer has to know that consumption in their life in

those two are in any autarky, including their consumption in

their.

And their families.

So it's.

There's going to be a question of whether these things

are indeed observable from the government's point of view.

So that's one potential barrier to actually implementing this kind

of policy.

What other concerns might we have?

We haven't incorporated typical distribution.

So finding everyone who's in charge is likely to outweigh

the cost of the benefits system.

Yeah.

This is another good point, right?

That we've just assumed that the government has this power

to cost to redistribute resources across ages.

In practice, that's clearly not the case in the sense

of both.

There is an administrative cost of imposing taxes, but also

in practice, the way taxes are levied in economy is

not these kind of lump sum transfers.

It's typically, you know, taxes on some of it's tax

on your income or, you know, it's some subsidy that's

conditional on something.

So it means that unlike lump sum transfers of taxes

and subsidies that are used in practice tend to actually

change the incentives to behave in a particular way, which

potentially.

Generates.

Efficiency, efficiency costs.

So that's another concern.

You know whether this technology for lump sum transfers actually

exists in practice.

What else.

So I think the third major concern would be, you

know, whether governments are actually willing to behave in this

way in practice.

If you're going to use this as a rationale for

just saying, okay, we don't need to worry about distribution

because governments are just compensated losers.

You kind of need to ask, what do governments just

compensate solutions to not deliver?

And when we emphasise a trade liberalisation, are not followed

by governments going out and trying to identify who lost

and compensate them?

Just the political economy, for whatever reason, such that that

doesn't happen in practice.

So we want to study, you know, how people are

actually affected by trade realisation practice, assuming that they receive

these kind of lump sum transfers is going to lead

us off a way to kind of design a direction

that doesn't have a lot of character.

So we've got these three concepts in front of the

information concern, the feasibility concern, and the kind of political

economy of whether governments actually do this.

One point is not just on the information concern.

Um, you couldn't.

Another way of for the government to intervene that has

the same effect in that it allows the consumer to

be each consumer to be able to afford that autarky

bundle.

But it's less information intensive is rather than using these,

um, some of those to use consumption taxes, in fact

for subsidies and in particular if you have consumption taxes

PA minus HT on producers.

No sorry consumers.

And so income taxes on the human.

Then from the consumer's point of view, moving to free

trade doesn't change anything.

These tax and subsidies are designed that even under the

free trade, the price the consumer faces will still be

paid for consumption, in fact.

So their behaviour won't change and their choices won't change,

meaning that they will always be able to choose their

autarky.

Uh, consumption and supply, uh, choices.

So this is a slightly easier policy for the government

to adopt because it doesn't require any consumer specific information,

but it does still require the government to know the

gap between autarky and, uh, free trade prices, which, again,

is potentially not going to be easy to, uh, to

be easy to have.

Any additional questions on on gains from trade on kind

of anything we've done so far today.

Okay.

So just to summarise.

Kind of what we've seen, we've seen that in general,

if we are um, in a competitive economy there are

going.

To be aggregate earnings.

From trade.

Um, but in general there will be losers as well

as winners.

And now, in principle, it's possible for the government to

compensate the losers.

In practice we don't think that happen.

So it kind of makes the question of who loses

and who wins it, rather than one that we're going

to want to think about, which we'll think about in

more detail, uh, next week.

Note also another very important caveat.

We've said earlier in trading we said nothing about the

magnitude of those gains in trade.

And clearly it matters for thinking about policy.

It's going to trade at 0.1% or 10% or 100%.

So another question we're going to want to think about

here, even if we think they're all going to trade.

How big are they.

Very small.

And they're probably not that important.

But they're huge.

And that's something that is going to be more a

more.

Fundamental.

Importance.

So with that said, let's switch to kind of the

empirical reality today.

I'll look at some a couple of empirical papers that

set out to test the kind of the principle of

comparative advantage that we talked about last week.

And to quantify the energy contract.

And we're going to see what this says.

Um, this is kind of an interesting historical experiment.

We're going to look at because as we've already touched

on often when it comes to mapping our theories to

the data, the problem is when you're thinking about kind

of comparative advantage, it's a prediction that's conditioned on autarky

prices, but we don't observe autarky prices.

What's really nice about this particular case is going to

be a sort of rare historical event, where we at

least think we have some information that allows us to

approximate autarky prices, and then to look at what actually

happens to those prices when we open up the, uh,

to what we're going to be able to observe some

stuff that we don't typically observe, and we're going to

use that to kind of test these comparative advantage gains

and train models we've been talking about for the last

couple of weeks.

So the historical case study is Japan in the sort

of 17th committed 19th century.

And the reason this is relevant for us is, um,

as you would argue, is a TV series about itself.

Isn't the show right?

It's about this period where Japan essentially cuts itself off

from the rest of the world.

So the the ruling clan, Tokugawa um, decide to cease

transacting with the rest of the world and the city

and the trade with the Dutch and the Chinese.

Uh, and uh, but other than that, Japan essentially adopts

a policy of autarky, right?

In 1859, a US gunboat turns up and forces Japan

open up to trade.

So we get this experience where Japan is very rapidly

from a policy of almost completely autarky to, uh, pretty

much free trade.

This is what the US forces Japan, uh, to do.

So the idea in these papers we're going to look

at is we can get data on Japan both before

and after 1859.

Potentially we can observe both what happened under autarky and

then what happened under free trade.

And we can ask, is that a change in outcomes

that we observe consistent with the kind of models we've

been looking at?

So that's what we're going to try to do.

Here's a little bit of the two papers.

And Hofmann and Brown that they published over 20 years

ago.

Now that we're going to look at and uh, the

real contribution of these papers was they kind of dug

into the Japanese archives and dug up all this data

on prices and trade in Japan and this period, which

is what makes the empirical work they're going to do

possible.

So just here some some data get us started.

Uh, so started in 1860, just when Japan opened up

and been going through most of them some 25 years

or so.

Uh, we're plotting the value of Japanese exports and imports.

Um, and the real I mean, the rationale they have

for sure is they kind of want to make a

point at the start of the period, there is very

little trade.

And then we saw this kind of very rapid increase

in trade.

So kind of what they want you to think about

starting the period with more and more time and time

quickly move towards something more like free trade.

And so I kind of compare comparing the two.

We're going to be able to do this sort of

free trade, um, comparison.

So more specifically, what data are they going to have

right for what anything can happen and talk about how

they should use it.

So they're going to have project data from 1851 to

1853.

Right.

I remember the the opening up comes in 1859.

So they want to think about this as the autarky

period.

They've got the free opening up price data, which is

going to give a measure of Japan at all times,

the prices.

And then they can have trade flow data for kind

of 10 to 15 years after they open up, which

is going to be the, the free trade.

Uh, the data on trade will open up.

And then usually they are going to do two things.

They have two pages, one doing each of them.

They're both on the reading list.

So one is to test the window of comparative advantage.

So remember the prediction we had in the week of

comparative advantage last week was that the if we had

the, you know, the autarky prices and we had the

three trade, uh, import vector, they would be correlated in

a particular way.

So they have the ideal data to test that.

So we'll test that.

Um, what they're also going to do is they just

show how they can use this data to at least

get a kind of an estimate of the size of

the gains from trade.

So they're also going to do we see positive gains

in traders we would expect.

But also how big how big of this question are.

Okay.

So we're going to have a little bit of kind

of theory to motivate what they do and to understand

the meaning of their, uh, their results.

And this is building very much on what we did

with the with comparative advantage last week.

And so it's a slight reformulation of the way we

express the weak law of comparative advantage last week.

So suppose we have a an economy that satisfies the

following assumptions.

Domestic markets are competitive.

And believe in producers maximising and consumers maximising, subject to

fixed prices in the domestic economy.

Um, suppose the producers of price prediction international markets.

So there's no the domestic economy doesn't have any market

power.

It just takes world prices.

Uh, there are no export subsidies and there's no trade

surplus.

So this is kind of a trade imbalance condition where

we set a set of assumptions.

Then we can write, we draw comparative advantage as as

follows.

This is just a version of what we saw last

week, that the auto price vector times the net export

vector.

Last week we had imports.

This week maybe it's reformulated as exports.

So p times T is going to be uh zero.

Just to remind us of the intuition here.

The intuition is we want to be exporting or what

we do is we export goods with low prices and

we imported with higher prices.

So the the autarky prices and the, uh, the net

export vector are negatively correlated.

That's what this is saying.

And so that's what we want to test.

So anyone any questions on this so far.

No.

Good.

So what to do then in the paper is the

first thing is we want to make the case that

these these assumptions actually are satisfied.

Is this a reasonable way to think about the Japanese

economy in the mid 19th century?

Right now, I know very little about the Japanese economy

in the 19th century beyond what is in this paper.

But there is a section of the paper that is

kind of devoted to trying to make the case that

these assumptions are, you know, they're never going to be

perfectly satisfied, but that they are at least approximately satisfied

in the, in the paper.

So in particular, probably the most important one is that

they make the case that by the mid-nineteenth century, the

types for the types of kind of commodities that Japan

was mainly producing and eventually and later trading, that at

least the market, these commodities were reasonably competitive.

So they want to characterise the Japanese economy as not

being subject to a lot of kind of monopoly distortions,

not being subject to our labour market frictions, but actually

having both output and factory markets being competitive.

And an important part of that argument is that the

type of goods that we should be thinking of here

are mainly kind of simple agricultural goods.

So it's mainly agricultural commodities, things like rice, silk, cotton,

which we typically think of as being, you know, you

have because that homogeneous you're more likely to have competitive

markets in those economies.

Um, and then, you know, those manufacturing goods that are

relevant are kind of relatively simple ones.

If, by contrast, you were kind of doing the same

thing for, say, the US today, right, the way you're

going to be focussed much more in kind of high

tech manufacturing, production, it's kind of harder to make the

case that the market for, say, an iPhone is competitive

because obviously you have the monopoly producer there, so you

try to leverage the fact that we're looking at trading

commodities.

Um, so that was a kind of competitiveness in terms

of what I was going to say.

So the price changes in international markets.

The argument here is basically that because they were culled

from trading and they just saw trading, you know, a

little bit to begin with that they're not trading enough

to influence world prices.

So they want to think about Japan here as being

a relatively small economy.

The textile prices given, um, they say that they want

export subsidies and the.

Um.

The kind of final condition that there's no trade surplus.

If we go back to our graph here, you can

see exports and imports aren't perfectly balanced, but they pretty

much move in tandem.

So it's a reasonable approximation to think of Japan's trade

to be, uh, you know, close to balance on average

during this period.

Um.

And I'll just mention this kind of additional point.

So that mentions that when they're forced to open up,

the US puts some conditions on how Japan trades with

the rest of the world.

And one of its conditions is that tariffs and import

duties are capped at very low rates.

So to that extent you want to think of Japan,

go from autarky to situation, imposing these kind of active

trade and trade policies.

So we kind of make this these kind of you

know, you can't prove that these assumptions are satisfied until

we formally empirically test or estimate, but it is more

of a kind of The reading of the historical literature,

suggesting a reasonable assumption tonight that a style of argumentation

demonstrated very much in economics.

But it's an interesting example where it is kind of

very relevant for the, uh, what they want to do

in this paper.

I mean, I look at it from the most of

the 5012 analysis.

Um, so we're going to call payoffs the observed price

data.

This is what we observed, the autarky price data pre

19 pre 1859 okay.

And the the difficulty they face is that if you

come back to what we want to test here, what

you want to test is that if you export virtually

all types of prices that would exist if Japan was

in autarky at the same time in exporting.

That's the definition negative.

So specifically if this export value is observed in the

1860s.

You want to observe the autonomy crisis in the 1860s

as well.

Because that's what the theory is about.

So let's call those authority voices in the 1860s pack.

Right.

And the challenge is we observe your target crisis in

the 1850s, but not in the 1860s.

Now, if those all types of crises hadn't changed over

time, Japan was a completely static economy, that wouldn't be

a problem.

We could just say, okay, what we observed ten years

earlier, but under the assumption those prices don't change over

time without the potential concern, there is something important happened

in that ten year period, which is Japan went from

autarky to free trade.

Right.

And that may have affected not just trade flows, it

may have affected other aspects of the economy that would

affect what your carbon price would be if we went

back to autarky in the 1860s.

So we need to take this difference between observed and

manufactured autarky prices more serious.

So let's write a difference between silence.

So silence is difference between the observed autarky prices and

the kind of actual autarky crisis.

So to note what we've been able to calculate, the

danger is that the correlation between the observed export back

in the 1860s and the observed mortality rates in the

1850s.

What we really want to know about, though, is the

pact.

So the thing we observed is going to be the

thing we want to know about, minus this assignment.

So then the question becomes what is this epsilon t.

Can we say anything about that.

In particular.

Note that if epsilon t is negative then observe that

pa omega t is negative, which is sufficient to conclude

that pac t is negative, which is what we want.

Right?

So this is a kind of saying a sufficient condition

to guarantee, if the observed observed correlation of the authentic

price in the actual market is negative, implying kind of

theoretically correct thing.

Would also be negative is to know that epsilon zero.

Now fundamentally we don't observe epsilon, but we can try

and reason about what it might be right now if

it will be positive for goods where Japan's auto prices

tend to increase between 50 and 60, and it will

be negative for goods where it tends to decrease.

And now what are we worried about?

We're kind of worried about as Japan opens up to

trade, it not only starts trading goods with the rest

of the world, but it also starts exchanging technology to

address to the world.

So you're worried about what might happen to open up

trade.

And we learn about technologies and this affects what our

counterparts in low carbon prices are.

So in particular, if it were the case that as

you open up to trade.

Your alternative prices tend to decline for those goods that

you are an exporter of.

That would be a problem here.

Right.

Another way of putting that right in this column here

is that for this sufficient condition to be satisfied, what

you want is Japan's growth in the 1850s and 1860s

is is not biased towards import sectors.

Right.

Which is the average price of the original prices.

Goods shouldn't have decreased.

I mean, it's a little bit difficult to get out

of what that might mean, but the argument in making

the paper is that.

Where they would have a problem would have been in

if Japan legally adopted a bunch of Western technologies for

its import sectors, such that its import sectors became more

productive and you drove down the price on those?

And they argue that that didn't happen until late.

So essentially, the argument comes down to any changes in

technologies as a result of opening up happened more slowly

than changes in trade.

And because of this, it's reasonable to think that this

long term indeed is either less than or equal to

zero.

No, this is very much this is an informal argument

that the argument is making to justify the fact that

they have increased prices from the 50s and 60s.

Any questions about that?

Okay.

So then without.

Preamble, is.

What they actually find.

So first off, here is just a, um, a kind

of description for the data.

Um, so on the x axis, we have Japan's net

exports in 1869 of each of the different goods and

each observation of different goods.

So you can see what kind of goods there are

in data.

We've got SIL, we've got kind of copper, cotton, tea,

fish, iron.

So cotton maybe basic kind of commodities as well.

And then on the y axis you've got the change

in prices.

Uh, but from 1851 to 1869.

And you can see, you know, broadly speaking here, you've

got an upward sloping relationship, which is saying that after

Japan opened up to trade, it tended to be that

there were price rises for those goods, which Japan is

a net exporter of.

And you can see this is this is going to

be consistent with the idea of comparative advantage.

Because what does comparative advantage tell you?

It tells you that you export the goods which have

a lower autarky price, which are also the goods that

when you open up to trade, the price of those

goods rises by more.

So this is you know, it's just the graph here,

but this graph is kind of broadly consistent with what

you do expect based on that weak law of comparative

advantage we looked at last week.

Um, and you know, when they actually calculate the correlation,

they do indeed find is it is negative when they

use trade as many years between 1968 and 1975.

So based on that, they conclude that the pattern of

Japan's trade off opens up is indeed consistent with this

comparative advantage, and specifically those who expect to have a

relatively higher price compared to the world of those goods

where it, uh, important ends up being, uh, that import.

Questions on questions about.

Fundamentals is a very simple empirical exercise because all they

end up doing is calculating the correlation between two vectors

and showing that it's negative.

Right.

Because the effort that went into that paper is collecting

the data.

And then trying to make the case that this is

indeed a way or not the right way to think

about the advantage.

So then to finish up today, let's look at the

the other thing that you do with this data, which

is trying to make a game contract.

So how are they going to actually measure the game

so far in surveys actually we've said there were gains

from trade, but we didn't make any attempt to actually

quantify.

So how might we quantify the measure they want to

use is the equivalent variation.

So let's remember what the equivalent variation is.

It's increasing income required to make a free trade consumption

by affordable prices.

So it's kind of saying if we start in free

trade, we go back to autarky.

How much extra income would I have to give you

such that you aren't worse off?

And that's a measure of the game of trade.

Now, if we're in a competitive economy, we can write

the equivalent of variation in this.

So this is the consumer's expenditure function.

So this is the cost of obtaining free trade utility

apple coffee prices.

And this is the cost to obtain or to get

all of the prices.

So the equivalent variation is just the difference between these

two things.

However I need to compensate for the changes in prices.

Okay.

So what is what's the cost of the free trade?

Consumption by the time is that has to be less

than or equal to PA times CT.

Why is it less than or equal to PA times

CT?

ET coming back to reveal a slight argument, but can

we just remember how we made this out?

Let's do this in two steps.

It's important that we understand this.

Focus first on this second and expenditure function here.

This emperor is equal to pi k.

Why is that?

It's kind of awesome.

Uh.

Yeah.

Yeah.

This is not a trick question, right?

It is.

This is the cost of the autonomy consumption by the

auto process, which is exactly just the expenditure required to

obtain the utility.

All right.

It's just sort of the little definition.

So that is equal right.

Now the difference is though these two things they're not

equal.

This the expenditure is less than or equal to.

So what I want to know is why is it

an inequality rather than equality there.

And you will see that.

So what is Pac pa times KT is the cost

of the free trade consumption model at autarky prices.

So if I buy that free trade consumption bundle at

autarky prices, what utility do I get?

UT right, I mean that by definition we use is

the utility I get from consumers.

Stacey.

So if I wanted to get utility use here, I

can definitely get it by buying bundle seating.

And the cost is packed.

But why?

Why do I have less than that?

Yes, I should have.

It equals here.

And I've got less money.

Why is it less than.

An hour?

Yeah.

Exactly.

Right.

So the bundle is not the choice we made for

all time prices.

So we don't know that we choose this at all.

Talking prices in order to get utility.

Uh, you two.

Right.

See, it is what we choose at three trade prices

to get utility duty.

So it could be that an autarky prices.

There's a cheaper way of getting to the utility.

And that's why it's less than or equal to and

then just equal to.

Right.

And again, the kind of thing you have to watch

out for here is exactly how these different models are

defined and it seems obvious until suddenly it's not right.

The key thing is that for this equality here CA

is the bundle we do in you choose it or

topic prices for CT is not necessarily what we choose

and that's why we have the inequality.

Okay.

So we go to the second line this inequality.

Right.

Then to get to the third line we just replace

CA with y again because um the autarky consumption equals

production.

So we just replace that.

Um, and then what we do is we add and

subtract pa y t.

So we've got pact minus pa, and then we add

a pa again here.

Right.

Um, and then the, uh, final step.

This thing here, KT y t is empty.

So this term here is PA comes empty, Longevity.

And this term here.

What do we know about that term that.

There are other creatures and so forth.

And it's not only that.

Yeah.

So PA it has to be less than or equal

to pay because.

Why are you here?

Where is the bundle?

We choose to maximise our profits.

If we choose some other bundle, we're not getting higher

profits.

Maybe we made same or maybe less so this last

term, which is negative.

So if we drop that we get another inequality here.

So you know we've done a little bit of work

here.

But we ended up showing this equivalent variation for this

competitive economy is less than or equal to PA entity.

So PA entity is an upper bound on the on

the gains of trade.

And you can kind of anticipate why we're writing it

this way.

Well, this to you, I guess, is what they have

in the Japanese data.

So in a moment ago, they were using PA times

the export vector to think about a comparative advantage.

What they're showing here is by calculating the the correlation

between and the product of the two.

You can also get an estimate of the magnitude of

gains from trade.

Okay.

Now they face the same problem they faced previously.

That again the author traces it from the 1950s and

the information from the late 1960s.

They're going to deal with that a slightly different way

in this case, um, which is that they are going

to try and deflate the 1860s import vector back to

what it would it been in the 1850s.

So the idea here is to use measure the GDP

growth Okay, time to deflate the back to back to

the 1850s and therefore use it in that way to

compute the the magnitude of the case you tried.

Um, this is not as straightforward as it would be

today because, you know, the Japanese nationalist petitioners were not

pumping out GDP data in the mid 19th century.

GDP is really a post-World War Two concept.

Um, but they do have a measure of a particular

prefecture.

And so you shoot 1840 of GDP and they have

an older Japan in the late 1870s.

Um, and they're going to kind of try and use

these to infer GDP growth over this period.

That would inevitably seem quite a rough way.

So this is what they ended up getting when they,

they do this.

Um, so what we're reporting is a table is their

estimate of the gauge trade as a percentage of GDP

for Japan.

So it's the, you know, this permit relative to Japanese

GDP, you've got a bunch of different measures depending on

whether we use a shochu We measure or we used

to measure 1870s measure.

And depending on what we assume about the GDP growth

in Japan during this period.

And so clearly there's some uncertainty here.

But you can see broadly the the range of measures

difference between 5% and 9%.

So they're finding positive gains in trade.

And when it comes to magnitudes it's in this sort

of 5 to 10% range.

And that's kind of interesting because it's the first time

we've seen a kind of in between the kind of

actual estimate of the magnitude against the trend.

So then just to kind of close, close out a

couple of additional observations on on that.

Right.

Firstly, you know there were inequalities here.

So this is an upper bound in the paper.

They argue that basically after the gains were close to

this upper bound, but I'm not sure they really have

much to uh, kind of supporting, much hard evidence to

support that That's very hard.

In addition, we kind of look at which of the

goods the games come from.

Um, and it mainly comes from imports of woollen and

muskets.

So two thirds of the games, according to their data,

is from the increased imports of woollen muskets, which are

essential goods Japan didn't produce before it started trading with

the world.

So the big gains here are coming through access to

goods that they didn't have access to previously.

And then just to finish off, it's sort of a

question that we want to ponder.

Thinking about what do we learn from this is, you

know, is 9% a big moment.

And this is going to depend on what your prior

was.

I don't really know what priors you had about the

magnitude of the gains, uh, location tracking.

But also, you know, what do we learn from this

about the magnitude gains between other countries and other time

periods, which say, what do we think about the external

validity of these estimates?

And I think we don't really have time now to

go over this, but it's kind of reasonable How much

did you learn from what was going on in mid

19th century Japan about demand should be gained from trade.

Today you can certainly think of reasons why the two

wouldn't necessarily be mapped out.

So you don't have any questions before we finish.

All right.

Thank you all.

See you next week.

After.

Lecture 4:

eah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Here we go.

Nice.

Oh.

Oh.

And then.

Yeah.

Okay.

I.

Feel like I'm.

Still here?

Yeah.

I'm sorry.

I should.

Okay.

Are.

You doing.

Good?

How are you?

Yeah.

Just waiting.

For this one.

Yes, sir.

This is more fun.

Yeah, exactly.

It wasn't.

It's crazy.

What is?

A student housing in their backyard and a.

Wow.

Yeah.

It's true.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Typical.

Do you get, like, a Cambridge vibe kind of thing?

Okay.

Should we give.

Should we get started?

Anyone have any questions before we.

Begin with today's lecture?

All right.

So, um, today we are going to study the kind

of second big comparative, advantage based trade model, uh, which

is the Xiaonan, uh, model.

Uh.

Uh.

Excellent.

Um.

Train model.

Um, so you want to think about this in kind

of context of the work we have previously did with

the Ricardian model.

Both the Ricardian model and the Hexa early model are

theories that are fundamentally about why different countries have comparative

advantage in different industries, and how that shapes the pattern

and consequences of trade.

But whereas in the Ricardian model, the fundamental source of

differences across countries where technological differences are in the European

model.

It's going to be about differences in relative factor, endowment,

the labour capital and potentially So like the Ricardian model,

it's going to be all about inter industry trade.

It's going to be models where if you had a

two good version of the model, one country will export

one good and import the other goods.

So we're kind of exchanging goods in different industries.

And where the fundamental rationale, the motivation for trade is

differences across countries.

And in particular here it will be constrained by the

differences.

So if you think about, say, trade between about an

abundant country and an abundant country, this might be a

model that useful model for understanding that.

Or if you think about trade that involves countries that

have very high natural resource endowments, it might be useful

for understanding, uh, those that type of trade as well.

Now.

So this is going to be the first time in

the course that we've really bought, you know, factors, different

factors of production into the picture.

We talked a little bit about heterogeneity and factor in

diamonds last week when we were talking about kind of

gains from trade with heterogeneity across ages.

But now that we are going to have a model

that's kind of formally going to have different, uh, different

factors, that's going to open up another set of questions

we can ask, which is how does trade affect the

returns to different factors?

If you think about these factors of being skilled labour

and unskilled labour.

Right.

Uh, then the model is going to have predictions for

wage inequality between skilled and unskilled labour.

And we can ask, what does the model have to

say about wage inequality?

Alternatively, if you think about the fact of production as

being capital and labour, then the model is going to

have something to say about the returns to capitalists versus

workers, and it will speak to those kind of classic

questions about what share of income is going to labour

versus, uh, versus capital.

Um, so this is one of the questions we're going

to try and address using this, uh, model.

In addition, on a kind of technical side, um, the

model is going to be a nice example of the

importance of thinking in general equilibrium when talking about international

trade and how sometimes when we think in general equilibrium,

we can get results, which kind of may seem surprising

based on a partial equilibrium intuition.

So we're going to kind of hopefully this model is

going to help us develop how we think about things

in general.

So what we'll do today, we will mainly focus on

what's called the two by two by two actually model.

So that's two goods, two factors, two countries.

And now as you can imagine that's going to be

kind of a simplified version of a more general model.

So we're going to develop our understanding of how this

model works in this two by two by two.

Uh case uh, and in particular kind of our goal

is what we're going to spend most of our time

on today.

Our goal is to kind of work through and characterise

the equilibrium properties of this model in terms of or

war for theorems that were studied.

Price equalisation introduced in India.

And each of these different theorems will tell us something

different about the equilibrium properties of the model, what the

equilibrium looks like, and what kind of consequences trade is

going to have in the model.

Then at the end of this lecture, we will talk

about how the work we've done in this two by

two by two model extends to a more general case

with many goods and many factors.

And as we'll see, some of the results we we

develop are going to be generalisable, but others will be

special and kind of specific to the two by two

by two case.

So we'll try to understand why some results generalise and

others don't.

And then finally for us finally for our kind of

work on the Higgs role model, we will come back

and say, okay, well, we're going to you know, there's

going to be a lot of theoretical work on this,

but we will come back at the end and say,

okay, so how does this actually map to what we

see in the in the data?

And what does the empirical evidence about direction of the

model have to say?

All right.

Any questions before we get going?

Okay.

So let's start by laying out the, um, assumptions of

the model.

Um, and it starts off fairly straightforward.

So we have two countries.

They're going to be indexed by J.

And they'll be home and foreign at home H or

an F.

Uh, there'll be two goods one and two and two

factors of production, which we will call here as we

go to account for labour.

But there's nothing in the model which kind of intrinsically

says this is capital and this is labour.

If we wanted to relabel them as skilled and unskilled

labour or labour and land or everything we kind of

are going to talk about today at least would be

exactly the same with that Relabelling.

Each of these production factors will be homogeneous, so we

are not going to be thinking about heterogeneity and types

or vintages of capital or different skill levels of workers

within the group of, of labour.

So within the factors of production, uh, everyone kind of

looks the same.

They're also in the last degree supply.

So we're not kind of thinking about a Labour leisure

trade up here.

We're not thinking about capacity utilisation between capital.

Demand, the demand side.

All this will be kind of the same as it

was in our Ricardian model.

We have identical preferences across countries.

Um, preferences, consumption preferences will become authentic, which is to

say that, uh, relative demand for the two goods will

only depend on their relative prices and not on income

levels.

So as you get richer, you simply scale up the

demand for the two goods in the same proportion.

You don't change a relative demand.

The import of that assumption is we are taking the

kind of income effects.

Out of out of demand, which, you know, essentially just

simplifies matters.

It's kind of like a constant returns, um, a constant

function.

Um, we are still in a perfectly competitive world, so

both product markets and factor markets are going to be

perfectly competitive.

Firms will maximise profits taking output and input prices given

uh, consumers will maximise utility.

Taking good prices is good.

And though we were talking this morning and last week

about kind of restrictive trade where we might be somewhere

between autarky and free trade.

To understand this model, we're going to focus on kind

of comparing the autarky equilibrium, uh, to the free trade

equilibrium.

So we're not going to have a direct role for

trade costs in anything we talked about today.

Now if Do you think?

Like a couple of weeks to the lectures we did

on the lecture we did on comparative advantage?

I tried to stress in that lecture, but when you're

thinking about what determines a country's comparative advantage, it's always

relative comparisons that matters.

Right.

When we talked about autarky prices, it was how do

I how did the relative price of my goods in

autarky compared to the relative prices abroad?

And when we talked about the Ricardian model, it was

how did my relative productivity in the two levels compared

to the relative productivity in the foreign country.

Right.

That honest way of understanding comparative advantage is going to

carry over to this model.

Again, it's all going to be about relative comparisons, and

in particular, the kind of key relative comparison that's going

to end up shaping.

The comparative advantage is relative to endowments in this model.

So we're going to assume that the home country is

the relatively capital of unknown country, which is to say

that the home country's endowment of capital relative to labour

is greater than the same ratio in the poorer countries?

No, of course, this is because this is a relative

ranking.

Said nothing about the relative size of the two countries.

Home may have more capital and labour, but more of

both capital labour and the foreign country or vice versa.

That doesn't matter for thinking about comparative advantage.

It's all about these relative endowments, right?

Actually, this is the key difference across countries that is

going to drive all the action in the model.

Um, and then we will also assume that factors are

freely mobile across sectors.

So there's no there's no factor migration.

So we're not going to allow factors to move across

countries.

It's actually a very simple expansion of this model to

that.

Um, it's a question that you will sometimes see crop

up on exam questions about the whole model, uh, because

it is a nice extension.

But for today, we're not going to have that.

But they are freely mobile across sectors.

So what's it going to imply in fact is a

freely mobile across sectors.

What's going to be the sort of relevance of that

assumption when we start to think about equilibrium.

Wages will be equal to this.

Yes.

Factors will each factor will earn the same return in

both sectors within a country.

So labour will earn the same wage in each sector,

and capital will have the same capital rental rate in

each sector.

Right.

But no, that's only a within country statement.

That doesn't imply anything about differences in fact.

Right.

So far we've said nothing about that.

Well within sectors I'm sorry.

It only within countries to be tied to price differences

across sectors.

Excuse me.

This kind of.

Build across sectors something very natural on demand.

And it's one kind of we've maintained up to now

in the course next week we're going to relax that

assumption.

So next week we're going to think about what happen

if we start to impose the frictions of data mobility

across sectors, which we're going to do primarily because there's

kind of empirical evidence to suggest that might be relevant

in some in some cases.

So we'll think about what happens when we do that

next week.

Is this.

Right.

We did our damage.

Okay.

What about production technologies.

So first thing, this is not a Ricardian.

There's no technology differences across countries.

But both countries have access to the same technologies.

Right.

We're not thinking about here about kind of innovation going

in the country, in another country, building a technological ladder

to them, having different technology.

Technology is going to be identical.

There was going to be constant returns to scale in

both countries.

Are they're going to be causing competitive just a regularity

condition on the, Uh, you know, there's going to be

no drug production.

There's going to be no free goods.

Uh, and crucially, these are all just sort of regularity

conditions, not important factors determining factor intensity.

So the key thing that difference across sectors is how

much they use in relative terms of the two factors.

So we will think about a second factor intensity as

what is the ratio of capital labour that is employed

in that sector at a relative factor prices.

So here W is the wage or is the rental

rate, K is how much capital is used in sector

allies, how much they are.

And we're going to assume that the uh is the

capital intensive.

Good.

Now what do we mean by the capital intensive good.

We mean for any given factor price.

Or more specifically, relative to price.

Um, we used to be more capital sector two than

we do is 8 to 1.

And note once again it's all about relative comparison to.

Now.

Terminology that often comes up in this model.

And you will see particularly in older textbooks on this

on this issue.

Um, assuming that this is holds for any factor price,

that means that there are no factor intensity reversals here,

which is to say a factor intensity reversal would occur

of factor two is more capital intensive at some kind

of prices, but not at others.

And we are ruling that out by assumption that that

kind of booting that out of some assumption is an

important technical assumption, because it's a it plays a key

role in giving us a unique equilibrium.

And then we will also focus on equilibrium where there

is diversified production, both countries producing both goods.

We will see the case that there is a factor

of factor intensity.

Uh, so it depends on the production to a good

detail of the production technology.

You assume so.

Up to now, I haven't said much about the functional

form.

But in technology, we've got kind of a thing to

be a general production technology is going to look something

like this.

Okay, I could I depends on some function f I

which is sector specific of how much capital and how

much labour we use in the sector.

Well, I've told you so far is essentially that there

are constant returns to scale in this function.

Okay, but I haven't told you anything else about the

function of the wall.

So one possibility could be this would be the simplest

possibility.

And it's one we will often kind of think about,

is that this could just be a Cobb Douglas production

technology that would be consistent with everything we've seen.

Another possibility could be it's a constant elasticity of substitution

with elasticity different from one.

So it could be.

Right around, right?

This sort of CSS form where rho is greater than

one.

Okay.

That would be an alternative question.

If you have this kind of CSW form with Rowe

greater than one in general you will have factor intensity

reversals okay.

So it is you don't need to go.

You don't need a particularly exotic production function to allow

for the possibility of factor intensity.

Sort of thing.

So it's kind of about as you know, it's about

how it's factor versus changes change your relative demand for

capital, uh, changes in a diagonal setup.

It's these exponents that end up determining your demand for

capital.

So because they don't change, you're always going to either

be the more capital intensive or more labour intensive later.

With got.

More kind of greater substitute ability here.

That additional substitute ability can lead to as you change

factor prices kind of one, uh, once it becomes kind

of starts to demand more capital more, more quickly.

Right.

I think the kind of most obvious way, if you

imagine this, right.

We need some differences across sectors in this technology.

So imagine this row is sector specific.

Right.

Then the sector which has the very high row, as

you increase the price of one factor, will substitute very

quickly away from that factor.

And that can lead to an environment where kind of

depending on the factor prices, uh, you get these factor

intensity reverses.

I can just add.

Yeah.

So in India, for instance, there are certain.

Sectors that are more heavily regulated for labourers.

So what that means is that that will make it

more expensive for you to hire labourers for that sector.

So the ratio there.

So sometimes then what companies do is they just move

towards more capital intensive because you can substitute.

So could that be an example of when there are

changes.

So I think.

Possibly but not not that because it would depend if

I'm you know, I may be misinterpreting what you're saying

if I'm interpreting incorrectly.

And what you're saying is that the labour market regulation

in India effectively shifts around the omega, the relative price

of labour to capital.

So as long as I mean, if it does operate

in a way that doesn't change this ranking, you're not

going to get factory intensity.

Um, but if it did that say in a way

that, you know, you now imagine this omega as being

sector specific because there's kind of a sector specific wage.

Then potentially then you've got different sectors based on different

it back to prices.

So this assumption then becomes kind of it's not telling

you anything in that point.

So that would that would overturn that assumption, but in

a slightly different way from the kind of classic way

we think of factor into two of us.

Yeah.

Interesting discussion.

Thanks for everything you're doing this course you're happy.

You're welcome to just assume there are no factory density

reversals, okay.

It's it's a sort of technical.

It's a it's an interesting possibility.

Uh, but the kind of we're mainly going to focus

on the case where they don't know where we are

in this course, just going to focus on the case

where they don't occur.

Um, all right.

And then the final assumption is a diversified production assumption.

Right.

In autarky.

That's kind of a really innocuous assumption because in autarky

you consume what you produce.

So if you want to consume both goods, you also

produce both goods.

Um, under free trade.

Free trade under trade is much less innocuous, as we

saw in the Ricardian model when we opened up to

trade, at least one of the countries was totally specialised

right now.

Partly that was happening because we had these linear production

possibility frontier.

So there was only a there was a unique price

ratio at which you produce both goods.

Now here, because of the kind of concavity that's going

to come through having two factors of production, the production

possibility frontier is going to be curved in the way

it was.

Uh, some of the stuff we did last week.

So do you think that's the Ricardian PPF?

That's the actual PPF is one which is kind of

a natural supply production.

But still there is content.

You know, this is a meaningful restriction under trade.

And towards the end of the lecture, we're going to

want to think a little bit more about actually, when

will that be satisfied.

All right.

It's our basic setup.

Do you have any more questions on on this.

So now let's solve for equilibrium Okay.

Um.

We're going to do.

This in a series of steps.

We're not going to try and solve for the entire

free trade equilibrium.

Uh, immediately we're going to start off by saying kind

of conditional on output prices, what is the production equilibrium

look like?

And we'll spend time sometime solving that.

Um, then we'll kind of think about, okay, well, what

does the demand side look like.

And when we put it all together we'll think about

the implications of, of trade.

Um, when we're solving for equilibrium, kind of as we

go through the model, this is a model where the

kind of most straightforward way to understand the equilibrium behaviour

is through a series of diagrams.

So basically what we're going to do over the next

few slides is look at a kind of different set

of diagrams that help us understand the equilibrium properties.

Of the model.

And the first diagram we're going to look at is

what's known as uh the learner diagram.

Okay.

And the learner diagram is going to be a way

of representing the production equilibrium, right?

Which is to say conditional on output prices.

Let's take output prices given what are the production decisions

firms make and what does that tell us about factor

prices?

Now remember we said this is a competitive economy.

So you want to think about firms as being profit

maximising right.

And it's also constant returns to scale.

So when they maximise profits in equilibrium there's going to

be zero profits.

But we can characterise that profit maximising behaviour to understand

um how they uh how they behave.

So let's look at the diagram, kind of understand what's

going on here.

So the first thing we draw on this diagram what

are called union values.

So this is a diagram in you know labour capital

space by noting what's on the axes.

On the axes is a is endowments of these two

factors.

Right.

So we're in l k Okay space.

And then what?

We're plotting.

We're drawing an ice pump.

This one here is the iced coffee sector one.

And this one here is the ice water sector two.

And what's the second?

Definition here.

And this is a set of two input bundles that

produce $1 of output.

Right.

So it's defined by the equation output equals one over

pi right.

Alternatively pi times yi equals one.

Now remember that my AI is in turn a function

of qi and li.

So what this gives us is a relationship between pi

ally and pi mediated through the production technology flow.

And that's what we've drawn here uh, for sector one

and here for sector 72.

All right.

So now some questions to kind of make sure we

understand what's going on here.

We've drawn these for like what is the what are

the capital labour bundles that produce $1 worth of output.

Why is it going to be sufficient that we can

just focus on kind of what happens if you want

to produce $1 worth of output and not worry about

the fact that in practice, obviously you're not going to

be producing $1 back, but you're gonna be producing some

other amount.

Why does the scale of production not matter for what

we're doing here?

Okay.

So this is the first one, right?

We assumed in our production technology that it was constant

returns to scale.

So what that means is if we solve the equilibrium

kind of looking at, you know, what would you do

to produce $1 work?

Well, if you want to produce more than $1.

You just shift the asset one out in proportion.

Right.

So as we change scale, all that happens is isoquant

shift out, uh, in and out proportionately from the origin

so we can focus.

That's why we're kind of focusing on the isoquant and

not some other scale of production.

All right.

So the question one second question.

Why are the icons downward sloping.

Diminishing marginal returns.

It's not even that complicated.

You've kind of gone a step too far.

Again, not that complicated.

The practice of production are, um, complementary, partly complementary.

So it's better to have an average of two factors

of production than an extreme value.

So you're telling me why it is convex?

I've got all of you have in different ways, answered

the question of why is it convex?

My question is why is it downward sloping?

Uh, increasing?

Yeah.

There's a positive marginal product of each factor.

Right.

So if I This is the set of bundles that

produce $1 worth of apples.

So as I come down here, I'm using more labour.

And if I use more labour and the labour as

opposed to a marginal product, then I need to use

less capital.

Right.

So that gives me uh y.

And then my next question is why was it convex?

And we had some good answers.

All right.

It's coming from the cohabiting assumption, which is saying the

kind of you'll produce more by having a convex combination

of the two than if you have, um.

Uh, did I just say that the wrong way around?

No.

You have a convex combination of the, uh, two inputs.

You produce more than if you have the average.

Yeah.

Okay.

Next question.

Suppose I increase P1.

Right.

So we're thinking about the output prices here as exogenous.

But now we're just taking them as given.

So I'm going to increase P1.

Good.

One is becoming more expensive.

What happens to the isoquant.

In the words because you need to produce less of

that good to make the one unit of get the

$1 off.

Yeah.

Good.

Right.

So the key thing here is it shifts inwards not

outwards.

Often people give the immediate response and shift outwards because

you're thinking about price going up.

So stuff getting more valuable.

But because of how this is fine that you increase

the one second shift inwards okay.

All right.

So this is a good start.

Now let's think about essentially by drawing these icons.

We're just kind of drawing a representation of the production

technology.

So there's no equilibrium behaviour in here yet.

So now we need to introduce equilibrium behaviour.

Right.

So to do that we want to just define this

second idea that we're going to draw on the right

which is the coastline.

So the ISO coastline is the line that Defines a

particular cost of production inputs.

So for any bundle you buy, conditional on the price

prices, it has a cost.

And the ISO cost line defines a set of bundles

that have the same cost.

So the cost.

Of.

A bundle of production is going to be the capital

rental rate, times how much capital you use, plus the

wage rate times how much labour you use.

Now let's rearrange that.

Let's call this cost C and let's rearrange this as

uh k I equals c over r minus w over

r ally.

All right.

And so the point I'm just making here is that

this isoquant line defines a downward sloping linear relationship between

the amount of labour using the amount of capital you

use.

And the gradient of that line is Negative.

Ah, so the icicle slide has stuck.

Negative.

Now producers are going to choose the amount of capital

labour they use to maximise profits or alternatively, to minimise

costs for any given level of output.

So if we think about in terms of if you're

producing $1 of output and you want to minimise your

costs, what you're going to do is produce it.

The point on the $1 isoquant line where C equals

one, right where it's just tangent to the isoquant.

So what the production equilibrium is going to look like

is where the isoquant in each sector is tangent to

the East coast line.

And in particular, because there are zero profits, the unit

value isoquant has to be tangent to the unisex line.

Moreover, if we have diversified production, that unisex line has

to be tangent to the isoquant for both sectors.

Okay, so that's what this will end up looking like

on the graph.

So we've just added this downward sloping purple line which

is the unit with gradient minus w over r.

And we've drawn it such that it is where it

intersects E to the Isoquant.

There's a point of of tangency.

And from the producer's cost minimisation, we know that the

kind of uh, to produce one dollars of output, the

allocation of capital and labour to reach the sector must

be at these tangency points.

Everyone happy with that?

Okay.

Now.

So that seems quite sort of straightforward an argument.

But the thing to note is that now we immediately

get quite a lot out of that, right?

Because we get the main TV.

We get produces.

Inspector two.

Could you use this point here?

So that tells us how much capital and labour get

used inspector, to per dollar value.

But again because of the consequences.

We don't know the scale, but we know the relative

amounts of capital Labour used Inspector to is going to

be defined by this point here.

And likewise in fact one is going to be defined

by this point here.

So we know the relative factor endowments used in both

sectors.

Right.

Given that you can now answer me kind of another

question about these icons, which is why have I drawn

the sector two is the cancer that is above and

to the left of the sector one Isoquant.

Which of our assumptions is that capturing?

Captive.

Yeah.

Remember we made this assumption that good is going to

be happening.

So any fact prices used.

To be.

More capital labour instead of two, right?

In order for that to be true.

Now that we've drawn on this unit a value of

this unit cost, we need that time.

Step or two is up here in this area where

you're using relatively more capital.

Sector one is down here where you're using relatively more

labour.

The other.

Thing we have is that because.

This.

Is the cost is defined by one equals rk plus

w l.

If we say k equals zero into this, which is

to say if we, the point where we hit the

x axis.

Will give us immediately the l equals the l equals

one over w.

So there's a point of intersection between the icicles.

The x axis gives us the inverse of the nominal

wage, and likewise, the point of intersection of the y

axis gives us the inverse of the capital rental.

Right?

So the point I'm making is that we can also

read off this graph.

What are the factor prices in equilibrium.

Right.

So now we've got the relative factor intensity in both

sectors.

And we've got the factor prices.

Up.

Just coming back since we talked about factor intensity reversals.

Uh yeah.

The the role that those character intensity reversals are playing

here.

Is it showing us that there's a unique, uh, line

that is tangent to both sectors?

If you have factor intensity reversals, that's not necessarily going

to be the reader case, okay.

But as long as we rule out these factor intensity

reversals, um, it will be the case that there is

a unique ice across line that is tangent to, uh,

to both sectors.

And that therefore uniquely pins down the factor prices.

Um, personally, I always find it difficult to see that

kind of sort of uniqueness argument in a graph, because

I think I find it easier to see them kind

of when you work through the maps.

Um, well, if you are, if you want something close

to actually to match, you can do it.

And this is the conclusion you, uh, you come to.

All right.

So what have we got now?

We've got kind of our first big result come out

of this whole, which is that if countries have identical

technology space, identical prices and production, and they must have

the same, uh, factor prices.

Okay.

Why do we know that?

Well, all we're doing here is we're saying if we

know the output prices, producer maximisation immediately gives us the

factor prices.

So both countries have the same factor prices and we've

assumed they have the same technology.

They're going to have the same factor prices as well.

Okay.

And so that gives a what we'll come to a

later.

I haven't got it quite here but we will come

back to that.

But so that this result is what's going to be

our factor is equalisation theorem okay.

Note remember at the start I said that one of

the things we are going to kind of take away

methodologically to this model is that sometimes when we think

in general equilibrium, we get unexpected result.

In fact, price equalisation theorem is an example of that.

Okay.

Because typically in economics you think about equilibrium being about

an intersection of demand and supply.

Right?

So if we think about here of, you know, supply

being determined by how much of your the two factors

you've got, we're saying factor prices here in in different

or you are not affected by changes in factor supply,

regardless of the fact that country one has relatively more

capital than country two the model.

Thank you.

If they trace the same output, they have the best

production.

They also have the same factor prices.

How true is this like intuitively.

Um, so we're going to come to that.

But it's not it fails empirically.

So one of the other things we're going to observe

empirically about this model is the fact price equalisation in

this strong form representing it here doesn't hold.

All right.

And I think you can kind of see that probably

from your own experience of travelling around the world.

Uh, wages in the UK are not the same as

the wages in the US on average.

And they're certainly not the same kind of wages in

like India or China.

Okay.

So towards the end of this lecture we will ask

if that is true.

Is that kind of a modification we can make to

the model that is more consistent with the data?

Yeah, this seems kind.

Of contradictory with another very common assumption in economics, which

is the capital is perfectly mobile across countries, right?

Because here we assume that they're not mobile at all.

So you couldn't take money out of the country and

put it in another country, or take one actually, and

put it in another?

Yes.

So so so yes.

Correct.

We're making that assumption.

Um, but note okay, note a couple of things.

One is because you have the fact price equalisation in

this model, there's actually no incentive to move capital across

countries because the return is the same in both countries.

Um, that said, in practice, just as there are big

wage differences across countries to the to the extent that

we can measure rental rate difference across countries, that also

seem to be big rental rate differences.

So I think the, you know, the assumption that capital

is probably mobile across countries, it's sometimes useful as a

modelling assumption, but it's again, it's one of those assumptions

that doesn't have much empirical support.

So you're.

Talking about relative factor prices is that um W2 are

Our legacy in all countries.

Is that or is country one W equal to country

two W?

Because yeah.

So it's going to be both.

So we kind of hear um.

You know you kind of can.

Take the relative prices off here.

Uh, but the kind of the relative.

Comparison, the.

Relevant comparison across countries are going to be real types

of price like W1W relative to, uh, p two.

Right?

I what I'm trying to avoid there is making any

statement about W because then you kind of get into

issues about kind of what currency you might be thinking

of.

So to kind of I don't want to say that,

but if you look at, say, w relative capital prices,

that is also going to be the same across countries.

Um, because we've said that the assumption is that the

prices are the same, so that the W is under

the same you we're going to get that.

It's not just the relative fact the price is the

same, but it's actually a very kind of real factor

prices as well.

So it's kind of an even stronger result.

Okay.

Yes.

Actual implication of this model then be that if you

took it for granted.

Yeah.

The reasons why you'd see that wages differ across countries

would either be because of, let's say, trade restrictions, because

they don't face the same output prices or because of

the differences in technology.

But that would be two possibilities.

Can anyone think of.

Like a third possibility in the context of this model

to take the model seriously?

And so you've kind of said, given us two reasons

why the assumptions in the model might not hold.

There is another obvious one based on what we've been

talking about.

Remember the diversified production assumption, right.

So another possibility could be if both countries don't produce

both goods, then this argument breaks down because this assumes

they're both producing both goods.

Okay.

Let's kind of let's keep going.

Uh, we've all learned a diagram, so I'm just now

drawing on the, uh, the dash lines already started the

origin and go through the points and tangents in the

two characters, and I'm drawing them because everywhere along this

way has the same capital to labour ratio.

So that Ray is kind of the set of points

that are consistent with what has to be the equilibrium

capital labour ratio in sector two.

And likewise, this gives us the capital ratio, sector one.

Right.

And remember that because we don't know anything so far

about the scale of production, what we know is that

the actual amount of capital labour we use in each

sector has to be along those rates, but we don't

yet know where we're going to come to to that.

And because once we draw these rates, kind of like

a cone, we're going to call this the diversification okay.

Why are we going to call it the diversification cone.

Well here's the kind of final thing we're going to

do with the Lerner diagram for now.

Since this Lerner diagram is impactful labour space, we can

plot on this diagram our country's factor endowment.

So that point E that I've drawn on there.

Now that point represents the country's factory endowment, which just

how much capital do I have?

You read that off the vertical axis.

And how much labour do I have?

You read that for the horizontal axis.

I now want to convince you is that if you

plot the endowment point on the line diagram, and then

you draw from that endowment point two lines, which are

lines that are kind of parallel to these two rays,

there's thinking about it, we plot this here, and then

we kind of complete this parallelogram that goes from the

origin along these two rows and then back up to

E, where the where the region intersects the two rays

tells us in equilibrium how much capital and labour we

have to use in the two sectors.

So that point, see.

That's how much capital and labour get used in sector

two in equilibrium.

And the point De is how much capital and labour

get used in sector one.

Why does that have to be the case?

Well, we know that the ratio of capital labour used

in each of the sectors has to rely on those

rates.

And we know from credit to market clearing that the

total amount of capital labour used has to be equal

to the point A, and the only way to use

capital labour ratios in each of the two sectors that

are along those rates and such that it sums up

to E, is if you split it across the sectors

in this way.

So basically what you're doing here is you're showing how

to uniquely split the capital, labour and across sectors in

a way that is consistent with what we know must

be the capital labour ratio in each of the individual

sectors.

So you know that what this is now telling us

is Now we know not just what the ratio is

in each sector, but we know exactly how much of

capital labour we're using in each sector.

Right.

Which if we then feed into the production function, tells

us how much output we're producing in each sector.

So we now know not just the relative amount.

We know the scale of production in each sector.

So we have a kind of complete result, the production

equilibrium.

That makes sense.

It's kind of clear what we're doing here, this kind

of completing the parallelogram exercise.

Okay.

So why are we calling this the kind of diversification.

Well whenever you're in diameter, you e lies within this

code between these two rays.

You can complete the parallelogram in this manner in a

way that will give you positive output in each sector.

But suppose you're in a point in downward point, like

maybe down here, right there you have a labour abundant

country and so below the regular sector one.

In that case, if you try to complete the parallelogram,

uh, it doesn't work because you get zero production, one

of the, uh, sectors.

So in order for the production to be diversified in

equilibrium, what you need is that you're in downward point

lies within this code.

And that's why we refer to it as the kind

of diversification and see that this is now we're getting

our answer to under what circumstances is production diversified.

It's if you're endowment lies within this code, which is

to say you're not too extreme in either direction.

You'll have an intermediate range of capital.

You're not very capital intensive or very labour intensive.

Questions on on that.

Side of the curve.

Um, the country specialises in like complete specialisation in one

specific.

Good.

Yeah.

In general if you're not in the cone you will

specialise in one.

Good.

And it will be the good that you kind of

If you have a lot of labour, you're specialised in

the labour intensive that have a lot of capital.

You're specialised in the capital intensive good, but also want

outside the cone.

This kind of previous argument about how much capital labour

you use in each sector doesn't hold you.

You don't end up on those rates.

You end up using a different amount of capital and

labour in order to exhaust your, uh, supply of the

two factors.

Okay.

Any additional questions.

On the Lerner diagram at this point?

Okay.

So we do one.

More exercise, which is what happens if we change endowments.

So we start at point.

A.

And now we, uh, loosen capital.

There's capital destruction.

How do we get the capital destroyed?

Uh, and our point and I use that word e

prime.

Okay.

Then you can complete the parallelogram from that new example

Prime, and you can use it to say kind of

what happens to output in the two sectors.

And you see that as you as you lose half

the output of the capital intensive sector, the column and

output of the labour intensive sector increases.

So we can also use this, um, diagram to thinking

about how changes in endowment are reflected in changes in

production in the two different sectors.

Okay.

So we have.

Used in the, in the diagram in kind of k

l space to characterise production equilibrium, which is great.

I now I want to show you that you can

kind of do the same thing.

Uh, instead of instead of doing in KL space, you

can do it in the price space.

Okay.

So why are we doing this?

Because essentially what we're now going to do is the

set of results we just got using the learner diagram.

We're I'm going to show you that you can get

the same set of results using what's called the the

the Mousset diagram, which is the device version of doing

it.

Okay.

Why do we do this?

Well, partly it's to kind of demonstrate the sort of

flexibility of the model in terms of thinking in terms

of either factor quantity or, or factor prices.

Um, there's a whole alludes to a sort of deeper

set of equivalences in how you solve these value endowment

models.

But typically anything you can do in quantities, you can

do the dual of it and prices.

And that's kind of as you get sort of more,

more advanced work using these types of models that relies

on this duality between the sort of factor quantity results

and the factor price results.

So it's useful to be aware of it.

I mean, the other thing is I think some people

find it easier to work to learn it, and some

people find it easier to work with a mouse diagram.

And it depends also a little bit on what kind

of comparative static you're thinking about.

So I want to show you both so that you

kind of have the option of preferring to work with

one or the other.

Okay.

So a lot of diagrams about isoquant costs.

Okay.

The Mousa diagram of fundamental starting point is going to

be isoquant.

It's going to be the unit cost curve, which is

it's going to be the combination of factor prices such

that the unit cost of producing a good equals is

twice.

So kind of primitive here is gamma right.

That's the unit cost function.

So it's as a function of factor prices.

What does it cost to produce one unit of good

I.

And we're going to start by plotting those unit cost

functions for the two sectors.

And then we're going to see how we can use

those plots to characterise what the equilibrium looks like.

Again here.

We are sort.

Of implicitly relying on the fact that we have concentrated

our production.

So if we want to produce more than one unit,

if you want to produce more units with the cost

minimisation, the minimised cost of production is just the gamma

times that the Y.

So we can kind of abstract at this point from

the scale of production and just focus on the unit

cost of production.

So what our unit ISO cost curve looks like, right.

So now we've got wages on the X-axis, we've got

rental rates on the y axis.

And you've got these two uh ISO cost codes, a

good one and or um, good two.

Okay.

So kind of same sort of a series of steps

to try and understand what's going on here.

Why this downward sloping.

Wage or rent cost is higher.

Maybe it's going to be higher and both are increasing.

Yeah.

If the if the wage increases or your overall costs

are going to stay the same.

You need cheaper capital.

So they're getting there's a sort of trade off between

the cost of labour and the cost of capital.

So that gives us that these two, uh, curves are

both, um, downward sloping.

Now let's take a little bit more.

So we've got that downward sloping I want us to

think a bit more about what the gradient of these

curves actually means, because you can see I've drawn them

so that they intersect once and only once and such

that the, uh, sector one could be at the point

of intersection.

And we want to, you know, understand what is, you

know, is that is it reasonable to draw it this

way, or should they be kind of wiggling back and

forth and intersecting lots of times?

What does it mean to draw them in this in

this way?

So let's think about the gradient of these unit cost

curves.

Um.

So here we appeal to to check with them.

All right.

The unit cost curve.

Is.

The, um.

It's almost all Union Costco gamma I of W and

R, right.

This is the, uh, cost minimising to produce one unit

of output.

So it's going to be equal to the wage times

ally, which is going to be our unit Labour requirements,

how much labour we use in order to produce one

unit of output at factor prices W and R plus

how much capital we use, which we'll call Aki, times

the capital rental rate, we can write the unit cost

function in that way.

Then if we take the.

Derivative of the.

Unit cost function with respect to W, Shephard's lemma is

going to tell us that, uh, the ally and the

Aki terms are uh, to first order condition.

They're not going to change.

Right.

That's an envelope theorem result because we have sold for

them by Minimising, choosing ally and AKA to minimise we

can.

We've got an envelope theorem here.

So when we take the derivative is just this derivative

with respect to W which will give us, uh, ally

when we do damage.

If I tell you, I think it will give us

a lie.

Okay.

So what this is then going to.

Tell us.

Is that the gradient of the isoquant curve equals the

capital intensity y.

Okay.

So come back to this gamma I term again totally

differentiate that.

Right.

So as you totally differentiate that term you're gonna get.

D gamma.

I that's gonna have to be equal to zero.

But what it's going to be is going to be

w times w plus d by d r times the

r.

And then you use these two expressions here to substitute

for the labour requirement and the capital requirement.

I got this expression here.

So this term becomes a I just term becomes the

ally.

You rearrange and you get this expression here.

And that's telling you what this is.

That's the gradient of the cost function.

And you can see it's given by the negative of

the unit negative requirement relative to the capital requirement.

And since we can imagine that's just the negative of

okay it's kind of a little bit we've done a

little bit of calculus there.

But the purpose of that calculus is just to say,

okay, the gradient of these cost curves is a meaningful

thing for this economy.

It's the ratio of the two factor endowments.

So when we were plotting them before.

Okay.

The gradient of these two curves is telling us about

how much capital relative to labour we're using the different

factor prices.

Okay.

So now why is there only a unique intersection here.

And why is the back to one line steeper at

the intersection?

Remember.

At this point of intersection differences in the same road

sectors, the gradient is set to one line.

At this point of intersection is the ratio may which

happens that one and the gradient descent.

Two line is the ratio of labour to capital in

sector two.

We know sector two is the more capital intensive sector.

So L two over K two at the same factor.

Price is always going to be smaller than L1 over

K1, right.

Which is to say whenever they intersect the stick to

one line has to be deeper than the sector to

lie, and it has to be because we've assumed that

sector one is the labour intensive sector, or alternatively, sector

two is the capital intensive sector.

That kind of tells us why the long line has

to be steeper, right?

And since it's going to be steeper at any point

of intersection, you immediately have that.

There's a single crossing property here that they can only

cross once, right.

And therefore there's a unique intersection.

And in particular, what ensures that there is a unique

intersection is the no factor intensity reversal assumption.

So we've seen again where that is coming into play

happy with that.

So that we can draw that.

Okay.

So now what.

We've drawn this kind of green line.

And the blue line.

Those are the lines.

Those are the tangent lines at the point of intersection.

Right.

Know that in equilibrium we have to be at that

point of intersection, because in equilibrium, facts are mobile across

sectors to both sectors have the same kind of rights.

So the only point at which both sectors face the

same prices is where they intersect.

So we read off from the moose diagram immediately what

the factor prices are in equilibrium.

And then from the gradients of those, uh, of the

two curves, at the point of tendency, we get the

relative factor density of both sectors.

So the green line gives us the intensity of sector

one.

And the blue line gives us the factor intensity in

sector two.

And we're happy with that.

So you know note we kind of go up to

the same point we got using the Lerner diagram.

We know what the factor prices are in equilibrium.

And we know how much labour and capital we're using

in both sectors in equilibrium.

We haven't done the kind of final part where we

had the environment.

If we split that across, um, sectors, that would be

much harder to do using the mouse diagram, because we're

not in CL space, but we've got again, we've got

the factor prices, um, and we've got the factory intensities.

And note because there's this unique section that means that

a unique set of equilibrium factor prices.

So again we have our factor price equalisation theorem that

is conditional on p1 and P2 w and are the

same in both countries.

Okay.

Let's take a break now.

And then we will come.

Back and see how we can use this to understand

a bit more about what's going on in this economy.

Um, actually, a question about the choice to make.

Yeah.

Um, because of what I'm saying to me and.

Yeah.

Yes.

So very quickly.

Okay.

And I realise it's probably too late for that.

Okay.

Okay.

Um, I think that's fine.

For whatever reason, I chose not to read the fine.

Um.

So.

Yeah.

No, it's too late.

Um, from my.

Perspective, that.

Wouldn't be a.

Problem because you'd be coming to the lectures anyway, so

I think you two would be up to speed.

I don't know exactly what the formal process your own

program would have for that.

Yes, but.

I guess it seems that you should be able to

do that.

But I don't know exactly what the regulations are.

You need to speak to them.

But if it's something I need to sign up on,

I'm happy to.

Okay.

Then.

Welcome to my show.

Okay.

I hope you have.

An opportunity as well.

Hello?

Yeah.

Let me know that with the programme, which I did

to make it more attractive.

Yeah.

Um, if you want to.

If you wanted to do that and have it into

me, I'll be happy to mark it.

Obviously, it doesn't count towards the final mark.

People don't.

Do it.

That's on there.

But yeah, although It looks.

It doesn't come like this.

But yeah, like the way they do not count.

It purely.

For getting feedback.

Okay, okay.

That's fine.

If they tell me and I don't have to make.

The decision.

Because I didn't read through the materials.

It is a joke.

Okay.

So let me know what happened.

Yeah, I.

Actually like and I studied economics and that thing which

is really like an environmental sciences university.

Yeah.

And so that was the reason why I will be

doing.

And I will be able to like, express that I

wanted.

Yeah.

But it is not my main interest.

I see more like methodology which is more.

Yeah.

And after that time goes but time management more so.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I mean I think both have advantages and disadvantages.

So whichever you think works best for you.

As a starter I think uh, like eventually like okay.

Yeah.

Uh, so then you also think about yourself like, what

am I, what I want to do and, um, at

the end of the year.

And, um, so, yeah.

Financial analyst.

For example, when I was thinking about this, it will

be more towards the end.

That is probably for reasons probably a lot more interesting.

And then I can also I also have like another

course of spontaneous methods.

So yeah like yeah.

That sounds quite close to.

Yeah.

So yeah it's so much close but like the level.

Okay, so probably be a little less technical.

Yeah, we have a large econometrics class for that.

Okay.

Thank you.

Oh yeah.

Let me.

I think it's.

Going to be fun.

Oh.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That's fine.

Whoever invented this.

So.

Two years from.

Now.

This is not quite.

The kingdom and.

That's not the end of next year's.

So we had one last week.

We have one.

Next year.

Open.

To the community.

If.

You do not have.

To.

Try.

At least.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I will not.

Hello and welcome.

To Do you want this to happen?

I want the professor's machine.

Yeah.

Even, like remembering the stuff that we've done this.

Time.

Well, I.

Want to.

See what I come up.

With.

I.

Don't know.

All right, let's start again.

Um, any questions about the Lerner or Mousa diagrams that

have come up over the break?

Then you want wanted to erase before we carry on?

Yeah.

Good.

Okay.

So we're going to start that in a kind of

we've done a lot of the kind of hard work

of understanding what the equilibrium looks like now.

So we're going to start to kind of bring, bring

together what we've learned into some, some theorems.

And our first day in which we kind of already

said is this right equalisation theorem.

So just to state that to make sure we're all

on the same page, if technology is identical across countries,

production is diversified.

And our other assumptions about hold in particular factor in

terms of your vessels is that in fact prices are

equalised across Countries.

And here we're kind of saying that the nominal prices

are equalised.

This should always be more of a kind of in

a common currency.

And since these nominal prices reflect an output price, all

the same, also the same, it also means real prices

are equalised across countries.

Obviously critical for this that both countries have to lie

in the same cone of diversification.

If one of the countries has an endowment that's outside

of the cone of diversification, it won't have diversified production

and that will in general lead to it having different

factor prices.

So up to now, kind of what we've been doing

is thinking about let's take output prices as given and

let's analyse the production equilibrium.

Now we're going to look at a couple of classes

about how well what happens if output prices change or

what happens in factory balance.

Okay, we've already talked quite a bit, but we haven't

talked at all about what happens if output prices checked.

So let's think about this this case.

So here's the theorem.

Okay.

So we're going to start by stating the theorem.

And then we will we will prove it.

So this is called the small percentage of them.

And it's about how output prices are the prices.

So the statement is a rise in the relative price

of a good raises the rate of return.

And if you use intensively in the production of that

good and low is the railroad sign of the other

factor in terms of goods.

Right now, that's a bit of a mouthful.

It's a little bit of a kind of a wordy

statement, but what it's saying is that the price of

one good goes up.

Then the the price of the factor that is used

intensively of that good, it goes up and it goes

up not just relative to the price of the other

factor, but it also goes up relative, uh, to output

prices.

So you get kind of inequality of that.

Right?

The, the relative price of the factors change, but also

the factor that is used intensively in the good whose

output prices increase becomes better off in absolute terms, in

terms of the fact price goes up relative to output

prices and the other factor gets worse off.

So in that sense, it's quite a sort of extreme

distributional implications.

It's not just that there's one factor gains more than

the other.

It's that one factor gains and the other factor loses.

So in that sense, this model has kind of stark

predictions for how changes in output prices affect factor prices.

So what we're going to do now is let's talk

through how we can prove that result.

And then we'll think about kind of what the implications

are.

And in a second we've got a kind of algebraic

crusade to go through.

But I want to also show you how you can

think about proving this result in terms of the, uh,

of the Mousa diagram or the learner diagram.

I think that will be easier.

Okay, so here's our land.

Let's take out the conversation.

Here's a diagram.

For the.

Shock here.

Let's think about the shock as being that the price

of good one increases.

What's going to happen here if the price of good

one increases?

The Y1Y.

Won't.

Happen.

Okay, so then what happens?

Yeah.

The slope is going to have to become steeper to

still be tangent.

So let's draw it on the board.

We're all on the same page.

Right.

Labour and capital.

And here's how we're starting off.

So initially this is our equilibrium.

This is a good one.

This is good too.

We increase the price of gluon so the sector one

isotope moves inwards.

So let's draw a new sector wanting a second here.

So this is what happens as P1 increases.

So then if we're going to draw a new I6

line that is tangent to both E6.

Once you see this it's going to be steeper than

the old E6 off line.

Let's draw it back.

So our new one is going to be something like

excuse my not quite straight draw a line drawing, but

it's going to be something like that.

Okay.

So the A6 line is getting steeper.

But note also it's rotating.

So as it's rotating its intercept on the y axis

is increasing and its intercept on the x axis is

decreasing.

So since the intercept on the x axis is one

over w.

That's telling you that W is increasing for the wave

to be increasing and the rental rate is decreasing.

So we're getting straight away of this.

But as the price of gold one which you remember

is the labour intensive goods.

So the labour intensive good is getting more expensive.

That is increasing the wage and reducing the, uh, the

rental.

Right.

Now.

Since P2 hasn't changed and P1 has gone up and

R has gone down.

Capital is definitely getting worse off.

Right.

Because our over P1 or R over P2, they're both

going down.

But the wait is a bit more complicated because W

is going up.

P2 is not changing.

So w over P2 is going up.

But what about the P1?

Right.

Because P1 is gone up and W has gone up.

So then the question is which has gone up more.

Right now we're going to see that in a second

algebraically, which I think is the cleanest way to see

it.

If you are very good at interpreting these kind of

graphs, you can also read off here that the proportional

shift in the intercept here is greater than the proportional

shift in the isoquant.

And that that means that W has gone up relative

to, uh, to P1, right.

That's how you can read all the price changes off

the learner diagram for doing the slope assignments.

And so if you wanted to prove yourself some theorem

graphically, that's how you do it in questions on that.

Okay.

So then let's look at how we could do it

algebraically instead.

So we've got diversified production in both, um, goods.

Uh, so prices are equal to costs.

So for each sector, the price of an AI is

equal to the cost of labour plus the cost of

capital.

So then we're going to.

Differentiate that expression.

And we're going to take the total derivative of everything

to change.

Doing that is going to give us this expression here.

And I want us to work through together why it

gives us this expression.

Because kind of what we're doing here is an example

of kind of hat algebra, which is a useful way

to do comparative statics on this, uh, model.

So I want to make sure we all understand what's

going on.

So our initial expression is p equals w I plus

aki.

So if I take the derivative of that I'm going

to get dp equals w times ally plus a.

I was w times d ally plus d r times

a key plus r times d a key.

So I've just taken the derivative of each term sequentially.

And I've used the product rule where necessary.

Now it turns out that when you're doing comparative studies

on these kind of models, expressing everything in relative changes

makes life easier and makes the equations easier to understand.

So we want to express this in terms of relative

changes.

So we're going to start by dividing everything through by

pi.

So all these terms we're going to divide through by

pi.

Okay.

So that thing gives us this expression on the left

hand side pi by pi.

Right.

That's the proportional change.

The percentage change in pi which is what we're going

to call p p hat.

Right.

Any variable when we put a hat on it.

Is that.

Right?

So we've now got p hat on the left hand

side.

On the right hand side here we've got a w.

So if we divide that through by w we're going

to get a W hat.

And then we've got to multiply by W as well.

So we're going to get w Ali over pi.

And then we can kind of keep going through and

doing that.

And turning everything into nice little hats here.

Okay.

And then the.

Kind of reason we're going want to do is that

then these terms you can see we've got some w

Ali over Pi's and our H's over those terms times

have a, uh, kind of intuitive meaning.

What does that give us?

W times ally over pi.

Is going to be kind of.

What if you wanted to describe in words what that

means?

What is it?

Uh, the share of profits to which actors return.

So the share going to happen?

Yeah.

And this is specifically right.

This is this is payments to labour relative to the

price.

Right.

So this is Labour's share of income and this one

is capital share of income.

So if we define lead to L as well over

p and theta k as rank of, we can write

this expression in terms of the labour and the and

the capital shares.

And since this is a.

Zero property, we're also going to have to leave with

one minus D to K.

Why is this end up being useful?

All right.

Well this is going to end up being related to

our factory intensities which we know about.

So if we now kind of rearrange this again we're

going to have the power equals beta l I times

w hat plus a l I hat plus one minus

theta l I times r hat plus AK hat.

So we've now got an expression that kind of links

the change in prices to the changes in factor prices

and the changes in um unit labour and capital requirements

multiplied by these terms that depend on the labour share.

And we've now got to this.

We're now at this equation in the middle of the

slide here.

Next step.

We again apply an envelope theorem.

So since the l and the a, k are themselves

chosen to minimise costs, the small shocks lead to l

a l plus b to k a k is to

be equal to zero.

And thus that's our envelope theorem.

So this these terms that involve the al and the

a k drop out.

And we're just going to be left with the p

equals to l w plus b to k r hat.

We got that expression now for both sectors.

Then we take the difference across sectors.

So we do P2 hat minus P1 hat.

When we do that then we get what we get.

Is that P2 hat minus p1 to L1 minus theta

l2 times our hat minus w hat.

And now.

Now, here's where we use the fact that we know

the relative capital intensive to do we know good to

establish a tentative relative to good one, which is to

say act of R2 is greater than 81 over R1.

If you multiply both sides of this by R.

You must.

You divide both sides by w, and then you multiply

the top and bottom of each individual fraction by p

uh p2 on that p1 on the right.

Then what you get is that it's good to the

top.

And it also means that the the share of capital

relative to neighbour in good two is greater than its

sector in good one, which is to say that Labour

shared income has to be greater in sector one than

in sector two.

So the factor here is the capital intensive sector also

mean that at the given factor prices, Labour's share of

income has to be higher in sector one than in

sector two.

Everybody happy with that.

And then the final step is to say.

Okay.

Well that that thing gives us this ordering of changes

in terms of price.

So let's just make sure we understand where um that

comes from.

Okay.

So.

The difference between the change in prices is equal to

the difference in the change of factor prices times the

theta L one minus theta um L two.

In addition, from the previous slide, you know that this

term is zero.

So pi hat is just a weighted average of W

hat and all that.

What that's telling you is that for each sector, the

change in the good price has to lie between the

change in the wage and the change in the rental

rate.

So then what.

We need to know is, okay, well, which one changes

more?

Okay.

Which one goes up?

Which one goes down.

Okay.

You can see if P2 has risen P1 had this

term is positive.

This term is also positive.

So in that case R has to be greater than

w hat.

Okay.

So we now know that if the price of good

two goes up more than the price of good one,

then r is bigger than W hat.

So the only ordering of these four things are the

w hat.

And the two price changes are averages of the two

price changes.

Is this ordering.

So we end up with this result.

Questions on.

On that.

Note.

You know, fundamentally, this is the same result as we

showed using our our learner diagram.

But.

I think it's a it kind of allows you to

derive this result without having to kind of reason about

how much different curves are shifting around.

And.

Saying this is a good two relative to good one

goes up capital, which is used intensively in good to

gain and against both relative to labour, but also, uh,

in absolute terms.

And Labour not just gets worse off relative to capital

but gets worse off in absolute terms.

So that's.

The reason we care about the scope, assignments and theorem

is fundamentally that it's the link between changes in output

prices and changes in factor prices.

And therefore in this model is how we start to

think about inequality and distribution.

And that's something we will come back to in a

moment.

But note that, you know, as always, the investment production

assumption is crucial here because we use that value in

the fact that we are this derivative differentiation for both

sectors.

We don't have diversified production.

I'm going to hold you.

Okay.

So that's still the same.

That was the second theorem.

Next theorem there okay.

So self dissemination was about how output prices affect the

price is reduced is how about endowment effect output levels.

And what does the theorem says it says is holding

output prices fixed.

So we're going back to holding up the prices because

if we increase the endowment of a factor this leads

to a more than proportional rise in the output of

the sectors that uses the factory intensively, and a decline

in the output of the other sector.

So this is very much the dual of the Samuelson

theorem, where the assumption in all the Samsungs about prices,

this is about quantity and light.

This assumption is kind of saying if we increase the

endowment of one factor, output in one sector goes up

and output in the other sector goes down.

So that might seem a little counterintuitive.

You might think if we've got more capital, we'll give

some of the capital to one sector.

Some of the other output will go up in both

sectors.

Right.

What the theorem is saying is that that is not

true.

Right.

What happens is that you give all that capital to

the capital intensive sector, and you take some labour out

of the other sector and move it to the capital

intensive sector.

So the capital intensive sector expands and labour intensive sector

actually shrinks.

So it kind of gives a rationale for why, if

you have an increase in the in the factor endowment

in the country, it might still be associated with one

of the sectors triggering.

How do we prove it?

Well, you know, one option is we can follow the

same sort of set of algebraic steps that we just

did for the Simonsson, except now we start talking, playing

conditions.

Right?

So we start with a labour that has to be

equal to total labour demand.

So this is labour using sector one.

This is labour.

You can take two analogously for the captive endowment.

No no I put prices based details in a case

are also fixed.

So they're not going to change.

So when we do the derivative we just get the

change.

In a labour changing company down a weighted average of

the changing output of sector one and sector two, where

our lambdas game now play the analogous role to the

foetus in this assignment.

But what the land does here is the share of

labour or Capital allocated to each sector.

Um, and then we can kind of follow the same

reasoning we used in the, uh, stock assignment to show

that if K is bigger than our hand, we must

have Y2 had goes up more than I get.

Then that's capital intensive.

Capital is going up.

And, uh, labour intensive output sector output of the labour

intensive sector is going down.

So again we're going to get this magnification effect right.

And that's how we can show algebraically.

But actually if we recall what we were doing very

much earlier in the lecture.

Right.

We proved this theorem back here when we were looking

at the Lerner diagram.

Right.

So imagine you're working with diamond equal to diamond eight

which is an increase in the capital endowment.

Completing the parallelogram as you go from E prime to

E, output of sector two increases up on capital intensity,

increases.

The output of the labour intensive sector actually decreases.

I think looking at this theorem on the diagram kind

of makes it clear why we get this magnification effect.

Because since output prices are fixed, the factor intensities in

the two sectors don't change.

So if you've got more capital and that capital goes

into the capital intensive sector, but the factor intensity can

change.

That means you also have to move more labour into

the capital intensive sector.

And the only place that labour can come from is

out of the labour intensive sector.

So we end up having to shift the resources out

of the labour intensive sector into the capital intensive sector,

meaning that not only output in the capital intensity goes

up, but it goes up by more proportionally than the

increase in the cap of endowment and output in the

labour intensive sector goes down.

Any questions on this?

Okay.

Yeah.

So I'm thinking about applications again.

Suppose that you have a, um, a poor country has

access of.

I guess in the model it wouldn't matter because wages

would be equal anyway.

Um, so there wouldn't really be rich in poor countries.

But hypothetically, if you had a lots of labour.

Yeah.

And then you had and you have some capital intensive

sectors, a labour intensive sector and you had more labour.

Yeah.

Uh, not only with the proportion of the economy that

is in the labour intensive sector increase, but you would

actually see it like the industrialised, you would see that

the content and sex sector falls.

Yes.

That is what this is predicting.

Exactly.

Okay.

That's what labour is most productively used in the other

sector versus the capital intensive sector.

Yes, it's because in order to produce more in the

capital intensive sector, while not changing the relative factor intensity,

you have to shift some labour or in your example,

it shifts some capital into the labour intensive.

Yeah.

So it would be like if it's agriculture versus manufacturing,

you would take capital from manufacturing, which is capital intensive,

and move it towards agriculture, which is labour intensive.

Yes.

All right.

Let's take stock on where we kind of are.

So we've done three theorems.

We've done the fact price equalisation theorem telling us that

if output prices are the same in both countries and

technology is the same and production is diversified, no no.

Factor intensity reversals factor prices are also the same.

We've done this.

Samuelson's theorem telling us about how a change in output

prices affect factor prices.

We've just done the key theorem, telling us about how

a change in factor in downwards affects output, and in

both the staff assignments and the reviews.

And we get these kind of magnification effects where a

change in output price or endowments kind of disproportionately benefits

one sector and hurt the other sector, not just relatively

but in absolute terms.

Note, though, that everything we've done up to now has

kind of been closed economy in that we've essentially said

let's take output prices given and let's analyse what the

equilibrium of a single economy, um, looks like.

And then we said, you know, okay, now shot output

prices, but still keep kind of changing the results and

see what happens to, uh, the economy.

So our final theorem, the only theorem we kind of

need to now put this all together to actually bring

a trade into the to the picture and to think

about what this model has to say about our comparative

advantage and patterns of trade.

That's kind of off our final set.

So to do that right.

Everything else I know it's not just being kind of

closed on me, but it's also being focussed exclusively on

the supply side because we've been taking prices as exogenous.

We haven't said anything about demand.

So we need to now appeal to the demand side

of the economy, to consumer prices.

And then we need to appeal to having two countries

and think what the pattern is.

So here's how we can do that.

And again we're going to start by stating the theorem.

And then we'll see how we can prove it drawing

on what we've done earlier.

So the Sherilyn theorem what does it say.

Well it's about how differences across countries generate comparative advantage

and trade in this model.

Um, so it says that a country will have a

low relative autarky price for an export in the free

trade equilibrium.

That good, which uses relatively intensively its relatively abundant factor

in production.

So the key kind of content here is that.

Each.

Country has a lower relative autarky price.

But the good, which used relatively abundantly, um, its relatively

low, relatively intensively relative abundance.

Back to production.

That is to say, if I am a labour abundant

country, I have a comparative advantage in the labour intensive

sector.

And that sounds very natural, partly because we've the terminology

we've used is designed to make it sound natural.

Um, but what we want to show is why that

is indeed the case.

But I note that then once we've got that bit

of an autarky price difference, is the law of comparative

advantage that we studied two weeks ago immediately gives us

the pattern of trade, because this model kind of fits

within the set of economies that were described by that

law.

So the key step we need to show is that

the relative autarky price is lower for each country in

the, uh, good that uses relatively intensively, it's relatively abundant

factor of our production.

How are we going to do that?

Okay.

So first thing, remember what we assumed.

How we assume countries differ.

The home country is relatively abundant.

Okay.

So what we're interested in is how this difference in

relative factor endowment affects relative autarky.

Right.

So I'm going to call the rho a f the

relative autarky price of good two in foreign in autarky.

And we want to know how that compares to the

relative price at home.

So the simplest way to do that is to start

thinking about homes demand and supply.

And this relative or token price in a foreign country.

Now here's why we've been preferences it for the very

first time.

Preferences are identical across countries and they are home authentic.

Therefore hos relative demand at price rho f is exactly

the same as Byron's relative demand, right?

Why is that?

Because preferences are both identical and homeostatic.

So when the home is rich or not, the bone

doesn't matter for its relative demand, but it has the

same underlying preferences.

So for given a relative price has the same relative

demand.

So there's no differences coming out of the preferences side

of the model.

And that's all we need to know about the demand

side model, since it's not our behaviour here really isn't

driven by the demand side assumptions.

Beyond this assumption of homoscedasticity.

That we've got home to demand.

And the question is what about home supply and relative

price here.

Okay.

So here we're going to use our reference key there.

So Genki tells us that since home has relatively more

capital.

Rather.

Than a foreign country.

What we get to the region, it's going to produce

more of the capital abundant, good.

And not just more of it, but it's going to

produce proportion, more of it than the foreign country.

So homes, relative supply of the two goods, it will

have a greater relative supply of the capital intensive.

Good.

Okay.

I sort of slightly jumped ahead in in claiming that

that's the case, because when we did, the ABC family

kind of shot one factor endowment at a time where

it's kind of what's more, here, when you think about

the difference between foreign endowments and home foreign inflation, how

do you need to do a two step process?

The first step, you change the scale of production but

leave relative levels unchanged.

And that doesn't affect relative output levels.

Again, it's probably the kind of equilibrium the model is

in many ways scale invariant.

And then the crucial thing is that once you've adjusted

so the two quantities have similar scale, then the home

also has a higher capital endowment than the foreign country,

which generally increases the relative output of good too.

So home has a different relative supply curve for foreign,

and in particular has a relative supply curve that supplies

more of the capital intensive.

Good, right.

So now what we know is that foreign autarky prices

home has the same relative demand as a greater relative

supply.

So that's clearly not an equilibrium in the home country.

That foreign relative autarky price of good to home has

an excess supply.

So how do we clear output markets if home has

an excess supplier relative price row at.

Home.

But we're still thinking about home in autarky here you're

kind of anticipating again like we think what we're trying

to do is solve for homes.

Autarky price.

Yeah, we're going to need that.

The price is decreasing.

Just think about it in terms of sort of standard

supply and demand growth.

Right.

So think about we have output relative price of good

two on the y axis.

And we have uh relative output.

Of.

Good to on the x axis we've got.

Um here we've got our downward sloping relative demand.

So this is relative demand.

And let's say this is the relative supply curve in

the foreign country okay.

So this point of intersection this is foreign autarky price

right.

Now the the argument we just made is that the

relative demand curve is the same in both countries.

So this doesn't shift.

But home's relative supply curve for any given price is

shifted outwards.

Um, sorry.

Yes.

Make sure I draw that right.

It's shifted outwards like this.

So this is home's relative supply curve.

So you can see at foran's autarky price homes supply

exceeds its demand.

But the equilibrium the home country will be down here

where you have a lower relative autarky price.

Okay.

So that gives us the relative autarky price of two

is going to be lower in the home country than

in the foreign country.

So we get this inequality.

That's what we've just shown on this graph here.

And therefore it follows immediately that the capital of the

country, which is our home country, has a comparative advantage

in the capital You're going to have to look at

a bunch of exports to and imports.

Good.

One in the, uh, free trade equilibrium.

Okay.

So now we've got our results about, uh, patterns of

trade.

And now let's in terms of think about how to

apply this model.

Pull everything together and think of how we can use

this together with our stop motion.

Theorem.

To think about how, uh, trade affects inequality in this

model.

Okay.

So let's rename our factors.

Now let's call our factors skilled labour and unskilled labour.

And let's assume we've got two countries.

We're going to call them uh, the US and China.

And we're going to assume the US is skill abundant

relative to China.

And we're going to assume it doesn't matter which good,

but good two is the skill intensive good.

So now think about.

Going from autarky us and trying to go from autarky

to free trade between these two countries.

And think about the rest of the wage of skilled

labour relative to unskilled labour.

That's our measure of inequality.

So the question is, what does this model have to

say about what happens to inequality in the US and

in China when they start to trade with each other?

All right.

Can we pull together everything we've done to answer that

question?

So let's take a step by step.

First off, which country has a comparative advantage in the

skill intensive.

Good for us.

So what does that mean about the relative prices of

the skill intensive good in autarky.

It's low and it's.

Lower in the US.

So now we open up to trade.

What happens to the relative price of the skill intensive

good in the US?

Increases it.

Increasing what happens in China?

It decreases.

All right.

So in terms of prices going from autarky to trade

is equivalent to a increase in the relative price.

And scale tends to be good in the US and

a decrease of the relative prices going into good in

China.

So then what happens to inequality?

In the US it's been most people haven't seen inequality

in the US.

I will say this.

Because I like so you're right but kind of substantiate

your argument.

There's a higher.

Price so there's more profit.

And there's also it's the fact that it's a high

skilled and high skilled labour.

So their salaries increase.

Yeah.

And kind of note specifically that the result we've looked

at that exactly gives you this prediction is to solve

the Samuelson theorem.

Constable Simpson says when there's a change in output price,

what happens to factor price?

Right.

And now what I'm telling you is that the price

of the, let's say, good choices contains a good and

let's say R is still the price is going down,

is rising to the level.

What we're saying is that the effect of moving up

to trade is to increase the price of the steel

intensive good relative to the unskilled tend to be good

in the US.

So the stop sign theorem then tells us exactly what

happens to the wages of skilled and unskilled labour.

It says that the wage of skilled labour goes up

and the wage of unskilled labour goes down.

Right?

So in the.

US, inequality goes up and not only does inequality go

up, but unskilled labour are actually worse off in absolute

terms.

And so this is a model that predicts that when

a skilled, abundant country opens up to trade with a

large scale, abundant country, inequality in that country goes up

right.

And you can think that that that kind of is

intuitive if you think about it.

Because the scale abundant country kind of has a lot

of skill relative to the rest of the world.

So as it's opening up to the rest of the

world, it's like the world as a whole.

The supply of skill is there's less supply skills that

mean skill more valuable.

And that's why skilled labour becomes more, more valuable in

the U.S..

So that's why in the U.S., what about in China?

Is it the same in China?

Is inequality go up in China as well?

Reason out from kind of what's happening to that to

goods prices.

Right.

You told me that in China, the price of the

skill intensive good declines.

So the price of the skill intensive goods declines.

What does this tell us about what happens to inequality?

It decreases.

Right.

Because in this case, the goods getting relatively more expensive

labour intensive goods.

So it's the unskilled unskilled tend to go to it's

unskilled labour does better than skilled labour does worse.

In this world, as you open up to trade, uh,

inequality changes in both countries, but it goes in different

directions in the two countries.

It's a world where in this skill, abundant country inequality

goes up and the unskilled, abundant country inequality goes down.

So fundamentally, what this model has to say about how

opening up to trade is going to affect, um, returns

to skill.

Like clear.

Any questions on on that.

Okay.

Good.

So that's kind of what I wanted to say about

the two by two by two model.

So before we move on to kind of thinking about

how we can generalise this model to more goods and

more factors, is that any kind of additional clarification questions

of all the other ones.

So if at least one country was outside.

Did we find any gains from trade?

Uh, okay.

So we need to the first things we.

Need to be kind of clear.

About how we phrase that question.

Because in in autarky, if we assume kind of both

goods are essential, both countries will be diversified in autarky.

Right.

So when you say that one countries outside the kind

of diversification, kind of what you mean is that when

we open up to trade, one country specialises, but in

general that that's not going to overturn the logic of

gains from trade because you're still going to get price,

relative price movements.

Um, and we're kind of in this world where a

very simplified representation of what's going on is this graph

that we've talked about before where that's autarky and like,

that's trade.

And as long as you get relative price movements and

not well, you're going to get gains from trading.

So diversification isn't necessarily here for gains for trade.

What it is necessary for is for price equalisation and

the ability to hold in the form that we give

to them.

So it is those results that potentially fail if you

don't have diversification, not the kind of basic logic of

income trade.

In addition to kind of the rolling boom actually doesn't

require diversified production, because if you imagine one country is

so labour abundant that it is outside the cone of

diversification, then it's going to specialise in the labour intensive

sector.

So it will indeed end up exporting the labour intensive.

Good.

Um, so that that kind of thing goes through.

But the way, the exact way output and factory prices

change will be different.

Other questions.

All right.

So Okay.

So we've done a lot of work with just two

by two by two.

What happens if we generalise?

So let's think about generalising to n goods and n

factors okay.

Clearly this is going to be more realistic in practice.

There are more than two industries.

And there are more than two types of production.

So we want to understand what happens if we generalise,

particularly if we're going to do empirical work.

And part of what we're doing in thinking about generalising,

you think about how do we take this model to,

uh, to the data.

Um.

It becomes a lot more complicated to solve these models

with inputs and impact.

Excuse me.

It is not a particularly easy model to work with

once you go beyond two by two by two.

So I'm not going to work through the details of

the model, but I want to kind of sketch what

the predictions look like.

So in terms of the number of units You get

versions of the scope, assignments and theorems in the more

general framework, but they're kind of weaker in the sense

that you think about the two good sample samples, in

case it was saying, if the price of the capital

intensive good goes up.

The fact he used it, and the fact that the

price of capital intensive good goes up, capital gains and

Labour loses, and because they were just too good, you

kind of had this automatic if one is going to

gain, the other is going to lose with many good

impacts.

That's no longer the case.

So you will typically get predictions of the kind that

would be some time to the gains.

And in some cases it loses by identifying exactly which

factor that is or saying sorry about all the factors

is not possible.

There's a little bit of an analogy here to the

difference between the kind of law of comparative advantage in

the two good case, and the many use case where

we saw that in the two good case, if you

know what the difference is.

So you know exactly the pattern of trade.

And in the many good case, you just get a

kind of correlation prediction.

It's sort of similar here, um, that there is equalisation.

That continues to hold in some versions of the model.

Essentially you get.

You know, in.

In the two case you get this cone of diversification

with within which factor price equalisation holds.

As you generalise you get kind of multi-dimensional objects within

which in fact price equalisation are OLS okay.

And provided that fact price equalisation holds and the model

then has very strong predictions about the net factor content

of trade, which we're going to look at in a,

in a moment in which we're going to take to

the, uh, data.

Um, and in particular, these are called the kind of

shoaling, uh, bandit prediction, maybe before we come to some

kind of a try and give you an intuition for

why fact equalisation does or doesn't hold.

Fundamentally, what you get out of each.

Factor.

In equilibrium is kind of a a price equals unit

cost equation.

So remember when we were doing it, it was it

was you know this is the differentiated version of it.

But we had pi equally plus Aki times r right.

That's the price equals unit cost equation.

And you get one of those bisector.

Those are the fundamental equilibrium conditions here.

So if you have.

If you have any.

Factors you're going to get into those equilibrium conditions.

And you're going to have n unknown factor prices.

So generally if n equals n you've got kind of

n equations in n unknowns.

And so you uniquely pin down the factor prices.

And that gives you a factor price equalisation type result.

At least as long as production is diversified.

Now in the sense of producing all n goods um.

Equally.

Sharp and ready to them and have more equations, um,

than unknowns, which will still tend to give you that

you, um, produce all the goods.

Sorry.

It was still tend to give you that you have

fact equalisation is now that you just don't need to

necessarily produce all the good.

But if you had m greater than the more factors

than goods, then you have like m unknowns, but only

in equations.

Then you won't have to get factor price equalisation.

But in the case where factorisation price equalisation completely breaks

down is when you have more factors than goods.

So for example, if you imagine you have a single

sector economy, but you have two factors of production, simply

knowing that you produced in that sector doesn't tell you

the factor prices and that sort of generalises that result.

Okay.

Well, when we do.

Get price equalisation, we get these electromagnetic production predictions, which

are about the net factor content of trade.

And I think I think we might stop here.

And then we will come back at the start next

time and talk through these predictions, because then we're going

to talk about how we take them to the data

and use them to test the model.

And I think it'll be more useful to do that

when we refresh next time.

So we will stop here and come back to this

next time.

Does anyone have any final questions?

All right.

Good.

See you all next week.

Hey.

Hi.

Oh, hi.

Yes.

I guess.

Uh.

Uh.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Um, I was not done, but I want to see

if I can do anything else.

Yeah.

Okay.

I think that will be interesting.

And then see what I can do with that.

But, uh.

Yeah.

Okay.

Well, this first half is the second half.

Yeah.

That's.

Yes.

Thank you.

Okay.

No problem.

No question.

Uh.

This will be discussed.

Uh.

I mean, have you seen.

You've seen the syllabus.

For this?

I can tell you what was asked for me to

send so I can send that to you.

Oh, yeah.

I mean.

You should have the reading list for this term.

Right?

Yeah.

Yeah.

So you're talking about the next term?

Yeah.

I mean.

Okay, I don't have it, but.

Okay.

Should we go back to the topics?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yes.

Yes.

When you say syllabus, I think reading.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

We don't have a syllabus.

Be on the reading.

Yeah.

Okay.

You can.

Share this email.

Thing.

Yeah.

You mentioned.

Yeah.

Sure.

I'm just sending it as is without.

Yeah.

Perfect.

Thank you so much.

All right.

Uh, Masters international trade.

How about you?

It's okay.

All right.

Well.

Let's go.

Back.

And watch.

And so I just.

SAT and I had this professor two years ago who.

Would always.

Say, yeah, working so often.

So I used to like this and like stuff like

that.

I mean, it's something that I read on this course

as a classmate.

Yeah, it's more of like an ethics of one thing,

but, yeah, no precedent for that.

We have a wall next week.

It's kind of all there.

Yeah.

That's right.

Yeah, I see that.

Lecture 5:

I like that rule.

Okay.

Yeah.

Because if it if it's because.

Yeah, most of the stuff is familiar.

I just took it like yesterday.

But I was there.

So it's two weeks ago.

Yeah.

Sure.

Maybe that's way too, like joint effort.

How are you doing?

How are.

You?

Did you change?

Yeah, I guess so.

They let you?

Yeah.

That was.

Awesome.

Yeah, it was very nice.

And then.

And so now I'm watching that and make any progress.

That's because that's quite different than just editing.

Because you.

Know.

Yeah.

How did you find this out this week?

I didn't solve it, but I don't think it was

the reason I didn't do it.

Was just.

Because, like, when she posted, it was.

Yeah, yeah.

That's true.

Maybe.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That's quite good for me.

I could tell that you could also easily make.

It interesting, but it's challenging, right?

Yeah.

I think it's a good way.

Yeah.

Yeah.

How do you.

Yeah, I'm going to the.

Uh, to the post with, uh.

Yeah.

That's my.

I fixed one as well.

I don't know, maybe I think some of the people

in my family.

Yeah.

Going with them.

Okay.

Did you have fun?

Um.

I wait a month for the first part and then

the second part out.

Yes.

But I, I will go back to just some popsicle

shortage.

But it was good to see what I'm wearing.

Yeah, I have to do this.

Oh.

Yeah.

No need to do that.

We don't celebrate at all.

Okay, but that makes it even more fun to celebrate

with you.

Yeah, I think that's what I.

Tell you guys.

Like I have flatmates from.

Which is actually a Japanese flatmate and like, an idiot

flatmate.

Yeah I know, like, no party is so expensive.

Are you going to experience.

That.

Okay.

Fair enough.

And everything.

Yeah.

Okay.

It's also nice to have a party with a lot

of people from your study.

There, you will meet them a different way.

Yeah?

Yeah.

Yeah.

So now we're talking about the party, and he said

that he was going as though some Japanese guy like

you got it for some reason with him.

But I just can't imagine why you would want to

do that.

Yeah.

I think it's going up.

Yes.

For the hunt for private property.

Okay.

That's.

That's why.

Okay.

Yeah, that would be.

Yeah.

I'm curious if the vessels will be.

I don't know, man.

Yeah, like last weekend.

I will do some stuff on there.

Yeah.

I guess.

Yeah.

Anyway, yeah.

Uh.

They let.

You.

Go to.

The house for Halloween now?

Yeah.

I know it's from the US, right?

Yeah, but in Colombia, we we can.

Go for it.

To go pretty big.

Like Halloween is pretty important.

We have like a we have to wear we also

address them.

But then again, it is a theme for parties.

So you have certain events, but it's not really a

very popular thing.

That's more.

So they asked us to choose what to wear tomorrow.

Either I will just make it easy for me to

happen and they'll do something like this one thing or

another.

Yeah, the thing is, the number of people inside of

the group.

How big is.

The tennis player?

Because of changing.

And I think a lot of people don't know.

Yeah.

That's a good.

One.

All right.

Okay, let's get started.

How is everyone?

Any questions Going.

Yeah.

Okay, so let's remind ourselves where we were last time.

Um, we were doing the Australian model, and we spent

the last lecture going through in quite a lot of

detail, the two by two by two model.

Um, and then just at the end, we had started

to talk about how, uh, the results we obtained in

the two by two by two case generalise to a

world where more than two goods and more than two

factors.

So now we're thinking about a world where there are

n goods and n factors.

Um, and we kind of discussed last time that they

would kind of be sort of generalisations of this theorem

that don't provide you kind of quite the predictive content.

And two by two by two case, uh, where you

have kind of, you know, the uh, factor, say in

the case of Samuelson, the factor that is used intensively

in the different set of games and the other factor

loses.

These theorems have more the flavour of there is some

back to the game.

There's some facts that loses, but we can't say exact

necessarily exactly what factor.

Um, it is.

And then we also talked about the conditions under which

we would get factor equalisation in the more general setup.

And we said there is key kind of how many

goods you have relative to factors, because each of the

goods you have gives you a zero profit condition.

Um, and so if you have n zero profit conditions

for the n goods in the factors, if there are

more goods than factors or the same number of goods,

in fact, in general, then you will get at least

a space, a set of the endowment space where you

get factor price equalisation right in the two by two

case where we had two goods, two factors.

This was the cone of diversification.

Remember I coded diversification.

Where was that.

Go back here.

Right.

And association in which when the endowment point they were

in the cone of diversification diagram uh you got flat

price equalisation if you have, you know, 200 goods and

200 factors.

There is going to be a kind of cone in

200 dimensional space in which you have factories utilisation.

So it kind of generalises in that sense.

Um, um.

And then the kind of question we're coming to is,

okay, well, what can we say actually about patterns of

trade in the more general model?

And this is what we talked about, for those of

you that were in the class this morning, this is

what we talked about in the end of class.

These are all invalid predictions.

So I want to go over them again.

Thank you everyone.

Uh, on the same page you have to understand what

relations are.

And then we're going to talk about some empirical work

that actually tests these predictions.

So actual invalid predictions, general number of goods and factors.

Right.

But we are going to assume that price equalisation holds.

And because factor price equalisation holds and all countries have

identical technologies, relative factor intensities are going to be the

same in all countries, which is to say to produce

one unit of output.

The amount of capital, labour, whatever the other factors you

use is the same everywhere.

So regardless of where a grid is produced in the

world, we know it's used produced using the same mix

of factors.

That's kind of one important ingredient that's going to go

on into these predictions that the, the the unit, what

we call the unit factor input requirements, the amount of

each factor required to produce one unit of output.

That's the same regardless of where the world we are,

where in the world we are.

Second key component is because the references are authentic and

we're in free trade.

Output prices are the same everywhere, and therefore consumption patterns

are going to be the same everywhere.

Which is to say that every country in the world

will consume goods in the same proportion, the same relative

proportion.

All that will differ is some countries consume more than

others.

I said, as you get richer or bigger as a

country, you're going to consume more, but you're going to

consume it in the same proportion.

So what the heck, Colin?

Benedictions do is take these two facts and combine them

to produce a prediction about the net factor content of

trade.

And then so the third key thing you have to

be aware of when thinking about making predictions is it's

not about the actual flows of goods.

It's about if we take the flows of goods and

we calculate the factors that we use to produce it

for us, what is the factor content of a country's

trade and specifically the environment?

Prediction is going to give you a prediction for the

factor content of a country's trade.

So how do we get that?

Okay, what if we asked a country J share of

world expenditure, which in a balanced trade world is just

its share of GDP and we're trading balances in its

share of world GDP adjusted for trade imbalances.

Because all countries are consuming goods in the same proportion.

Each country's share of world expenditure is also its share

of consumption of every village.

Right.

So if my country accounts for half of world GDP,

the world expenditure, it means we're going to consume half

of total world output of every good.

Now, if we translate that to factors, it means the

fact the content of our consumption is going to be,

you know, part of the world's total, uh, endowment for

that.

We factor so country JS the fact that the content

of its consumption is just its share of GDP into

the world factor in downward vector.

Okay.

Now we want to compare that to the fact to

compare the population.

That's even easier to obtain.

It's just sitting down because we're going to assume that

there's a lot of theory.

So whatever it has, it uses, and therefore the fat

content of its networks is just the difference between these

two things.

The endowment minus the factor content consumption.

Everyone happy with that?

Okay, once you see the logic, it's fairly, um, fairly

straightforward.

Okay.

So we want to take this to the data.

We want to take this, uh, prediction about the fat

content of train the data and use it to assess

kind of whether this model is empirically successful or not.

Now, I know this is not too difficult to do,

because in principle, everything in this equation is observable.

Um, if we can observe the factor endowment of each

country that gives us v, j, and if we sum

them up, that gives us v w and then sj

which remember what alpha j minus lambda alpha j is

the country share world GDP.

That's Is the trade surplus relative to GDP that is

observable.

So this right hand side here.

But you know we can obtain that from fairly standard

data sources.

Yeah.

How do we account for a trade policy model.

Um.

So.

Explicitly we don't write trade policy hasn't entered anything with

it.

Yeah.

Implicitly, to the extent that any trade policy interventions that

do exist are consistent with the assumptions we've made to

derive this equation.

It's not a problem.

And but to the extent that they violate those assumptions,

excuse me.

That would be a problem.

And I think the way you where you might have

a concern right is everything here is premised on free

trade.

So we're not explicitly accounting for any trade costs.

We'll come back to that.

Yeah.

We call it the H.

Of agenda's in multiple equations.

Is it because we have one equation per country J.

Uh, so you have one equation per country J per

factor L if we call factors L.

So this remember the v and the BJ, VW and

bj vectors you've got uh you know the same number

of for each country, you have the same number of

equations as you have factors.

All right.

So we were saying the right hand side relatively straightforward

to measure.

The left hand side is a little bit more tricky

because the left hand side is the net factor content

of exports.

So how do you measure the net factor content of

exports.

Well, you start off by measuring the actual goods flows

across countries.

That's the easy bit.

You know, how many cars am I exporting?

How many shirts am I importing?

Um, but then you need to convert those goods flows

into faster flows.

And to do that, you need to know how much

of each factor was used to produce each good.

So you need to know also something about the technologies

that are used in practice, which is a little bit

more, uh, more complicated because, you know, technologies are often

not directly observable.

So the most data demanding part of this testing the

actual equations is obtaining these factor intensities, uh, by sector.

But if you have that data right, then we can

compute the left hand side.

We can compute the right hand side.

And we can ask are they equal.

So we're going to look now at some work that

does that does that.

So the, um, the paper we're going to focus on

is this paper by Dan Traveller from 1995, um, which

is.

Yes, this is a paper about testing these HMO predictions.

We've just been looking at, um, and what Treasury's going

to do is he's going to argue that these predictions

don't hold empirically, but that they fail in a way

that they fail kind of not in just in a

random way, but in a systematic way that is informative

for helping us to think about, okay, well, what are

the features that are missing from this model that we

might want to add to the model to help it

better access the data?

Okay.

So what is, uh, you know, what is actually going

to do?

He is going to take the difference.

So he's going to have for each country J.

And he's going to call factors L.

He's going to take the difference between the observed factor

content of trade.

Yes.

And the predictive factor content of uh of trade.

I'm just going to call this difference Epsilon.

Okay.

Um, I'm just going to plot the nylon against the

predicted vector, uh, content of trade, right?

I know that if the actual equations are close to

accurate, these epsilon should be kind of clustered around zero.

But we should see that the kind of the Cylons

are clustered around zero, and that there's no systematic correlation

between the epsilon and the predicted factor for the trade.

Okay.

Here is what he actually finds when he does that.

So you've got the epsilons on the y axis, and

you've got the predicted content on the x axis.

So no zero on the y axis is here.

So it's all close to zero, which would be the

kind of success of the model.

We should see them sort of clustered around this horizontal

line here.

Now obviously that's not what we know.

Even visual inspection of this graph.

That's not what we're seeing.

What we're seeing is firstly, you know, there's a lot

of, um, deviations from zero.

But also these deviations seem to be systematically related to

the predicted fact econometric.

And you have this kind of negative linear relationship here.

And that line that is plotted on here is the

line, uh, negative, the predicted value content of trade.

So what he's finding here is that approximately speaking it

started on is equal to negative, the predictive factor concentrate,

which implies that the observed factor content of trade is

close to zero.

So this is obviously not a great look for the

uh for the model.

Right.

It's the face of what we are expecting is that

the fat content is traded close to the predicted rfactor

content.

What this part of the data is suggesting is actually

we're seeing very little fat content of travel.

So that's that's kind of point one that traveller points

out.

Okay.

Um, and he calls that the missing trade paradox, just

to kind of have some terminology there.

You know, there is two little factor content of trade

compared to what the model is predicting.

And then point two, which he calls the endowment paradox,

is to ask the question of kind of which particular

factors do we see countries exporting and import.

So he's going to define a country J the abundant

in factor L if its environmental factor is greater than

sq bwl which is to say for countries in Bandon

in a factor, it should be a net exporter of

that factor in terms of the factor content of, uh,

trade.

So what you should see here is you should see

countries are net exporters of their bundle factors and not

importance of gas prices.

And then for each country his data set he computes

a which factors you in that exporter and which factors

in your net importer.

Here is what he, uh finds.

When he does that he finds a.

Um, for the, uh, richer countries, which is clustered down

here, you've got poorer countries.

The top, richer countries are, um, here, the major countries.

He can't have very few abundant factors, whereas the poorer

countries tend to have lots of abundant factors.

So there's this systematic relationship between your kind of number

of abundant factors and your income level, which again, is

not something that the model would, uh, would predict.

Right.

And he calls this the, uh, endowments, uh, endowments paradox.

So we've got these kind of two the missing trade

feature and the endowments paradox, both of which are kind

of features that sort of reject this strict, actually automatic

prediction that's coming out of the the model.

So then what we want to think about is, okay,

well, why what does that tell us about how successful

this model is.

And also how does the way the model fail.

What can we learn from from that.

So probably the first thing to say is this is

a fair view.

This paper at the time it was written, was seen

as a fairly definitive repudiation of the heck's role in

banning predictions.

This was not an empirical success or even a mild

failure.

This was the model kind of.

dramatically failing to predict the factor content of of trade,

which would be a key argument that we take from

this model.

That said, you know, what do we learn from these

ways in which the models are failing?

Well, I think we start to kind of learn about

aspects that might be missing from the model, right?

So if we think about the endowment paradox, for example,

why should it be that rich countries appear to be

scarce in all factors?

I mean, just mechanically, what does it mean?

If you're spending a lot of factors, it means your

endowment of those factors is lower than your share of

world GDP times the world endowment.

So it's like you're consuming too much.

Viewed through the lens of the model, why might that

be?

Why you might be concerned with consuming too much.

Okay, one possibility could be strange imbalances, but that's easy

to check.

And that doesn't explain what's going on here.

Right?

But another possibility is your consumption, your sharing world GDP

or share world expenditure.

Coming.

From your shared world GDP is higher than would be

predicted based purely on your endowments.

And why might that be right?

Well, it could be that there's something else other than

just your factory diamonds that is boosting your output.

Right?

And an obvious explanation there could be well, maybe there

are technological differences across countries.

So where is what this kind of starts to suggest

is that there are kind of important cross-country technology differences,

which the model is not accounting for.

And that probably shouldn't be too surprising.

We've already looked at a model this term, the Ricardian

model, where everything is driven by technology differences.

Right?

And it's pretty hard to exist in the world and

to travel across countries without noticing that technologies do different

countries.

So.

Um, so we, you know, we shouldn't be surprised that

there are likely to be kind of technology differences also

playing a role in trade.

The question then, in kind of what becomes a more

interesting analysis than merely observing that there are technology differences.

Can we modify the spectrum model to include technology differences

in a way that kind of preserves the structure, you

know, otherwise preserves the structure we've been working with and

which better fits the data?

So you know what Traxler kind of then tries to

do in his paper on what a number of papers

since then do is to ask, okay, let's modify the

actual embedded model to include things that we do think

are, uh, more, more realistic.

How much better does the model do?

So in particular, what traveller considers he, he adds to

the frame what we've been looking at, all these differences

we've already talked about.

Um, he also makes preferences a little bit more complex.

So he adds investment goods, services and long traded goods

in addition to production.

So he's allowing particularly the non trading goods and the

ad home buyers in preferences, the idea that countries may

have a preference for goods that are produced uh domestically.

Um and when he had a modified business model against

the vanilla version he finds that as you already seen,

the actual debate model is is not performing well, I

think, as we get into the data.

But specifically, he finds that the kind of alternatives that

the data seems to fit better.

But those where there's home bias and consumption and neutral

technology differences.

I will remember a factor neutral technology difference will be

a technology that kind of increases the productivity of all

factors by the same proportion.

So it's all about capital being relatively more productive in

a country.

It's just factors generally being more productive in a specific

country.

Questions at this point.

So it is actually assumed that, um.

That all the same technology in unlike same wage in

all the countries.

Yeah.

So the derivation of the equations we went through which

rested crucially on that, there was both the same technology

in all countries and all countries had the same factor

prices.

So not only did they, not only do they have

the same kind of technological possibilities, they implemented those technologies

in the same way in terms of the unit factor

requirements.

Once that's not the case, you don't get those predictions

we derived.

So one uses data that for countries that don't have

the same technology, doesn't that like not necessarily disprove each

of but it just shows like that.

It's like not the right data to use for the

HIV to prove HIV, if that makes sense.

Um.

So I think, I mean, I think you can split

that kind of comment into two to sort of take

it in two different ways.

One way you could take it would be to say,

okay, well, maybe these predictions hold for some set of

countries, but not others.

And so maybe you should only, you know, if we

think that we're assuming similar technologies and technologies and all

similar kind of within OECD and say between the OECD

and developing countries, then maybe you should just test it

on the OECD and see if it works better.

That would be one critique, which I think you could

make that point.

Simple point that would be.

Simply assuming they have the same technologies does not invalidate

it as a test of HIV because no prediction HIV,

it is that they are using the same technologies.

So when you're kind of testing a model, it is

reasonable to say, okay, well the model predicts this.

So I when doing my test I'm going to assume

that does indeed hold.

And then kind of your null hypothesis in a statistical

sense is that the prediction that the model holds and

if you reject it, that is telling you that the

model fails in some way.

Yeah.

What do you mean?

Like, what does it mean when we observe that vector

confidence are very zero?

Yeah.

Um.

Kind of.

There's really two things that can be driving that.

One is countries aren't trading as much as the model

predicts they should.

They're kind of trading the right factors, but just not

in as large quantities.

The other could be that they're trading a lot, but

if the model predicts the US should be exporting capital

and importing labour, it's actually importing goods that have capital

embodied in them.

Um, in practice, I think the consensus is a bit

of both.

There is not as much trade as the model predicts,

and we're going to come into a second to why

that is.

But also trade is driven by factors other than just

differences in factory environments.

So the pattern of trade across goods doesn't simply reflect

comparative advantage based on factor environment differences.

So it kind of fails in both those ways.

Okay.

So building on this?

Yeah.

Silly.

Basic.

What?

What are the factors that you consider them like?

Is it a label?

Is it.

Yeah.

Um, okay.

So yeah, it doesn't say I cannot remember exactly what

the set of factors Tesla has in his paper.

After one of them will be capital, I suspect skilled

unskilled labour.

I suspect he has land may also have kind of

natural resources of different types.

But it's it's those kind of factors.

So we're talking, you know, not tens or hundreds of

factors a relatively small number, but it's those sort of

classic definitions of what a factor is and what the

choice there will be mainly guided by.

What is the level of disaggregation at which we can

measure across different countries what these factory diamonds are, because

that's a key input to implementing this effectively.

When I was thinking about this.

You can have a rich country that is facto scarce

simply because of the specialising.

All the people are basically doing, for instance, skill, right?

So they don't have enough available resources for other factors.

So but then it should be so then it would

be abundant in skilled labour.

Yeah.

That we would call skilled labour.

They're one of the factors.

Correct.

But when we're plotting even the other things, what we're

doing is we're plotting the number of factors that are

not right.

Right.

So yeah.

Yeah.

So so okay, so I think you make a good

point there, which is simply plotting the number of abundant

factors here.

That is not a well-defined statistical test of the model.

Right.

It's kind of descriptive data Tough rather than saying, oh,

I mean, it could be the all the rich countries

just have masses of one factor and almost anything of

not nothing of any of the other factors.

And then, yeah, you get to have one of under

practice.

That's a reasonable point, right?

Um, in practice, you know, that kind of comment is

why he also does this kind of regression based analysis

to more formally test the model, which kind of reinforces

what he finds in those pictures.

But yes, that's a very good point.

Any thing.

Oh, no.

Good.

Okay.

So post track lab right.

What developed was kind of a literature where the name

of the game was.

In what ways can we modify the actual model.

That kind of makes sense and allows us to better

fit.

Um, basically the, the data and in particular to benefit

observe trade patterns.

And part of that, you know, kind of renewed focus

on trying to better understand how much data has been

using better quality data.

So there's kind of a little bit comes back to

your question of, you know, does it make sense to

just assume all countries use the same, um, technologies?

One thing people started to do was say, well, rather

than testing the predictions, why don't we just test if

countries do indeed use the same technologies?

And so once you start to collect data on unit

factory input requirements across countries, you can see are they

indeed.

Are they do they not.

Um, and you know, that's kind of along the lines

of the second bullet here that you can separate the

consumption part predictions with the production parts and see which

of them holds kind of more successful or less successful.

Um, so it's worth mentioning this paper by Davis and

Weinstein, um, who kind of were the first people to

actually manage to put together these dispatch input data for

different countries up until then?

You know what Trackman does?

He says, well, I can observe fact input requirements for

the US, and the hetero and VanEck model tells me

that these two input records be the same across country.

So as I'm going to assume that the US back

to the same is all the same now, all other

countries use the same pattern.

But for us, what Davis might do is say, okay,

well, let's actually collect the data and let's see if

that is indeed the case.

And as you could probably anticipate by now, they reject

that being the case.

So they reject identical, uh, technologies.

So they then ask, okay, well what if we just

allow for factor neutral productivity differences.

How much does that improve?

It helps.

Uh, but they find that doesn't explain the missing trade.

And they want to kind of explain the missing trade

and why you see such a small, uh, fight to

contain the trade.

They argue that you've got to allow for price equalisation

to fail, um, for not just having neutral technology differences

across sectors and also for having trade costs, but in

trade costs, in addition to technology differences, trade costs are

the really kind of important thing we learn here.

You know, if you think about why there is much

trade as there is in the model, well, the model

assumes free trade in practice.

Think back to what we did in the very first

week and the gravity equation.

Right.

Trade costs distances across countries, they shape the passage of

trade.

And the sharing of vehicles are not taking account of

that at all.

So what they then show is once you allow for

these technology differences for factories, equalisation to bail out the

trade costs.

But the model then does a pretty good job of

matching the fat content of trade.

Particularly, you can expect that 80% of the net trade

in, uh, factor services.

So on the one hand, this is kind of suggesting,

okay, there is a variation of the model that does

much better.

We don't need to throw it out entirely.

Uh, but I think it is also worth noting that

once you've made all these modifications, we have a long

way from the world of the Xiaonan model.

Right?

We're integrating far more richness into our description of the

of the economy.

Questions on that.

Okay.

So then I want to say one more thing about

kind of factor endowment based, uh, trade models.

We spend quite a lot of time now going through

the heck sharing model, thinking about expectations, learning how it

works.

And then I spent like 15 minutes at the start

of this lecture telling you, okay, but empirically, it's really

not very successful.

So why did we spend so long talking about it.

Um, if it's not empirically, uh, so successful.

So what?

I want to spend the last couple of slides this

lecture doing is kind of providing you a little bit

of evidence to suggest there is kind of still something

of value here, which helps us to understand trade patterns

in practice.

Um, and this comes from a different way of thinking

about how to test the model.

So the hexagon and VanEck equations provide kind of one

way to test the, the model.

But there's another intuition which comes out of the model,

which is that countries should have a comparative advantage in

and therefore on average export the goods in which they

that have the goods which use, uh, relatively intensively, they're

relatively abundant factors.

So what Romanos does in this paper here is he

instead of testing the predictions, he says, okay, I'm going

to test that prediction directly.

I'm going to test whether couple of unknown countries have

relatively high level of capital intensive goods, and where the

labour abundant countries have relatively higher exports, labour intensive goods.

So the way he does that is he uses US

export data, sorry, US import data, data on exports to

the US by country and industry.

And he's going to regress these trade flows on interactions

between each country's factory abundance and each industry's factory intensity.

In particular, he'll focus on country level skill abundance, interacted

with industry skill intensity and country capital abundance interacting with

industry capital intensity.

And he's going to ask you, do we indeed see

that this interaction effect is positive, in which case we're

seeing kind of the the basic intuition of the model

and of what shapes comparative advantage holds up, uh, in

the, in the data.

And he's going to argue that that is indeed the

case.

So let's look at some of his results.

Okay.

So this is a table of regression results.

We've got exports to the US by country industry as

the dependent variable of um and the key variables we're

interested in this is the interaction between country skill abundance

and industry skill intensity.

And here the interaction between country capital abundance and industry

uh, capital intensity.

And the important takeaway is that these interactions consistently show

up positive and significant in various different specifications, which is

suggesting, you know, it is indeed the case that the

pattern of comparative advantage, one of the factors that affects

it are these differences in factory dominance as predicted by.

Anybody have any questions on that.

All right.

So let's wrap up there with the lecture.

actual, uh, model.

We've kind of shown that the, you know, the very

strong forms of testing, the model testing.

Exactly.

Detected early.

Many predictions don't receive a lot of empirical support, and

they do point us more towards a world where technologies

aren't identical and are trade offs.

But at the same time, remote work assumes that, you

know, factory downloads do play a role in shaping, uh,

trade flows, even if they're not necessarily the only or

even the most important determinants of trade.

Okay.

So let's now move on to the next lecture.

Right.

Um, um, what we're going to do then for the

rest of today is think about a kind of consideration

that we haven't talked at all about so far in

this course, which is the distinction between kind of short

run and long run effects of opening up to trade.

Implicitly, everything we've done up to now has really been

about the long run, and the dynamics haven't had any

kind of explicit role.

But we've assumed that factors are free to move across

sectors that goods prices and factor prices are free to

adjust.

There are none that we've had, none of the kind

of business cycle type frictions you would get in a

macro course that prevent adjustment.

And in that sense, these are really models that are

designed to think about the kind of long run cross-sectional

equilibrium once the economy has fully adjusted to opening up

to trade.

Well, this lecture is going to do is okay.

Well, what about if we think more about the the

short run and we think about, you know, what happens

if potentially there are some frictions that prevent adjustment in

the uh, in the short run, do we generate the

same projections for the effects of trade Or do we

learn something, something new.

So that's going to be our, our goal uh, for

to, for today.

Um, and then the first is going to be how

might we model, uh, the short run, how are we

going to learn to adapt our models to assume to,

to, to the short run?

And I think there are three assumptions we might think

about relaxing, uh, where the factors are mobile between sectors,

where the prices are flexible and where the market's clear.

Right.

Um, I think in principle, you could relax one or

more or more of these assumptions at once to model

the, uh, short run.

So when people write down models of, you know, short

run trade effects in the short run, typically they either

are going to assume that some factors of production are

sticky to particular sectors, that there are adjustment costs that

prevent taxes moving across sectors.

That's the version that we will look at today.

We'll focus on them all the way back.

Some sectors uh, some factors are sector specific.

Um, alternatively you could think about sticky price models and

what happens when prices are are slow to adjust.

Alternatively, where either investment or factory allocation is subject to

some adjustment costs that factors may choose to pay or

not, or you can have some form of non-participants where

you can actually introduce unemployment into a picture.

You can see that all of these factors are potentially

going to be important for understanding the short run.

Here today, we will focus on the what's known as

the specific factors model, where the way we kind of

adjust the model to make it more suitable in the

short run is we assume not all factors can move

freely across sectors.

And then we want to think on what does that

tell us about the, uh.

You know.

What do we learn about the effects of traders from

our long run perspective?

Why?

Why starting a short run?

Um, I think you can, uh, answer that question from

either a positive or a normative, uh, perspective.

Uh, in a positive sense, it's going to help us

think about, you know, transition dynamics between steady states.

You know, one question we could want to answer is,

what is the long run equilibrium once the economy has

fully adjusted?

But a separate and equally interesting question is going to

be if the economy is hit by a shock at

time t and it takes 20 years to get to

the new equilibrium, what happens in the meantime?

What does what is the speed of the transition?

How do different people adjust during the, uh, uh, transition.

So we're interested in these kind of transitional, uh, questions

and in particular how the cost and benefits of adjustment

vary across different types of agents is going to be

an important question for us.

Um, and then from a normative standpoint, if we're interested

in the gains from trade, where basically everything we've said

about trade so far is being about kind of steady

state gains and trade in the long run.

Uh, but of course, the actual welfare effects depend also

on the transition dynamics.

So we're going to care what happens in the shorter

run.

Uh, two and particularly for thinking about the political economy

of trade policy and public attitudes towards trade, the salience

of trade policy shock will typically be higher in the

shorter run than in the longer run.

If there is a shock to trade policy today, people

are more likely to be kind of aware of the

effect of that shock short run than long run.

So public attitudes towards trade may be disproportionately shaped by

what happens in the in the short run, which we

need kind of we need to think about these questions.

We're going to understand how people, uh, think about globalisation.

All right.

Any questions on that?

What was the time horizon be for short run compared

to Boston?

Yeah, that's a really good question.

To which I don't think there's anything like a definitive

answer.

Um, we'll look a little bit towards the end of

the lecture, some kind of empirical evidence on adjustment to

trade shocks and how quickly it happens.

I think a takeaway from that literature is that adjustment

is probably slower than we might expect.

So it's certainly not something that happens in a few

years.

Ten years might still be considered sort of getting short

medium run.

So it's decades rather than years that we want to

be, um, thinking in, though inevitably it will also differ

depending on the exact shock we're thinking about.

Okay.

So what we're going to do for the rest of

today, we're going to talk about this specific factors model.

And we will work through how to solve that model,

what it tells us about the short run effects of

trade.

Um, we're doing it today because it is essentially an

adapted version of the trolling model to introduce some kind

of short run factor specificity.

So it is all very nicely from what we've just

been talking about.

Um, and then we will look at what do we

see in the data about the short run effects of,

of trade and how mobile factors are across sectors?

Um.

At the time of working today.

Let's let's stop here and take a break a little

early is a good time to start.

And then we'll kind of come back and talk through

the specific factors model.

I haven't yet.

Encountered a model.

Entitled.

Action, which is very different from the actual.

And this I was wondering, why was that?

And why.

Do you favour.

Regression analysis?

Is it because natural experiments are horrified?

Or because the lessons.

The takeaways from the lecture is more on the general

sense?

I think it's.

More because natural experiments are harder to find.

You can occur.

By discover more oil to absorb more oil, which unsurprisingly,

that will be the case.

So.

Um.

But in general.

Because.

If.

You're thinking about sort of capital or skilled labour, finding

exogenous or finding natural experiments that lead to variation in

capital of skilled labour is trickier.

So the literature has mainly focussed on more of these

type of.

Correlational reason, there isn't a more substantive reason for it

beyond that.

Would it be.

Possible way for no Chinese?

Would then I mean, can't possibly.

I mean.

That's a really major.

Issue, right?

Yeah, you'd have to.

Yeah.

You'd need to know a lot about the exact content.

One thing people have looked at is, um, if you

think about testing the revision speed theorem, which is about

changes in entitlements, you can use immigration as a shock

to changes in endowment and then see if following immigration

shocks, that patterns of changes in trade or changes in

output also trade are kind of consistent with the returns.

So that's an approach some of the literature has to

take.

All right.

Let's do it again.

Okay.

So specific.

Factors model.

So the way you want to think about.

This is we.

Are starting from the Hector model.

And then we're kind of going to introduce some modifications.

And in particular the key modification is now we're going

to introduce this idea that there are certain factors that

are sector specific in the sense that rather than being

able to freely move across sectors, they can only work

in a particular sector.

So for example, if we think about a two sector

economy with manufacturing, agriculture, and if we assume that every

sector specific, what we are saying is that there are

manufacturing workers who can only work in manufacturing, and agricultural

workers who can only work in, in agriculture.

Okay.

So it's trying to kind of get at this idea

that at least in the short run, there are frictions

for the reallocation of labour across sectors.

And he's doing that in a very extreme way.

Where we assume that in the short run, labour is

the weakest in a particular sector.

You can then obviously immediately imagine extending this to say,

hey, maybe Labour can adjust, but subject to some costs.

Okay.

But for today, we're just going to kind of go

to the extreme and have there be sector specific factors

like reallocate across other sectors at all.

So formally, how are we going to set this up.

We're going to think about a two good three factor

economy.

So the two goods are going to be good to

one and two.

And then the three factors are going to be capital

and sector one labour and sector to labour.

Within each factor um the factory is completely homogeneous.

So we're not allowing kind of any heterogeneity in types

of labour within sectors or in types of capital.

But the fact that the labour itself is such a

specific means, effectively we do not have two different types

of labour.

There is 7 to 1 labour and there are 7

to 2 labour.

One question we might want to think about here is

if we're setting up this model of capital and labour,

and we want to have one mobile factor and one

sector specific factor, does it make more sense to think

of capital as being mobile and labour as being sector

specific or the other way around?

What's your take on that?

Is it kind of obvious what the answer to that

should be?

No, I don't think it's particularly obvious because you could

have that.

Labour is trained in a specific, you know, method of

production.

If you're a farmer, you know, farming and you might

not know factory, but then also capital could be a

factory and you can't necessarily.

Um, how about those factories start producing cars?

But you can also treat the capital likewise as just

money.

And if it's money, then money is fungible.

Yeah.

I think these are all reasonable points.

Right.

So the one thing to say is that in assuming

in the setup here, that labour is sector specific and

capital is not.

I am not trying to make a broader claim about

the fact that labour is necessarily faces greater frictions to

adjustment than, uh, than capital, and you could relabel this

with labour being the mobile factor and capital being, uh,

sector specific.

You know, more broadly, if we're thinking about if we

think about how we might map this to, to data,

depending on the context, that might tell you more about

which factors are more easily able to move across, um,

sectors.

Okay.

Another I sort of related point to that is.

Yeah.

Probably at least in the short run, both, you know,

workers who are trained in a particular skill and capital,

which takes the form of a particular type of machinery,

probably neither of those things are very mobile across sectors

in the short run.

So to think about which is more mobile Another way

you can do that?

Okay.

Well, which depreciates faster?

What's the lifespan of a kind of a worker doing

a particular job versus a machine doing it a particular

job.

And you know, there we might think that if you

think what is it difficult to retrain within that lifetime,

then kind of once a worker is in a sector,

they're kind of there for life.

Um, where capital, most machines tend, you know, the capital

depreciation rate in the economy is relatively rapid, which might

suggest the capital is somewhat more mobile than, than labour.

But again, I don't want to make that state.

I don't want to kind of say make that statement

too strong.

All right.

So just to be fixed, um, and here we're kind

of it's all in this long.

We're going to kind of almost think about the small

open economy version where we take output prices given and

we ask, what is the equilibrium look like conditional on

output prices and how the shocks to output prices affect

the, uh, equilibrium?

We're going to focus less on thinking about kind of

two countries opening up to trade, because it's not really

what we're using.

This, uh, this model for that you could do if

you wanted.

Uh, technologies.

So technologies very similar to the, uh, model.

Uh, each sector is going to have a constant returns

to scale production technology, uh, which is going to be

quasi concave, and it's going to satisfy these assumptions.

Um, so the second derivative with respect to both capital

and labour is going to be negative.

So we've got capacity for inputs.

In addition we're going to assume that the two inputs

are complements.

So the marginal product of labour is higher when you

have more capital.

And the marginal product of capital is hiring more, uh,

labour.

And that we're sticking with our kind of standard assumptions.

Firms maximise profits.

Uh, markets are competitive with the capital market and the

labour market in each sector and also output markets.

So really, you know, other than the sector specificity of

labour, this is looking very much like the actual voting

bloc.

So far.

Okay.

Um.

I let's first thing that kind of, you know, what's

happening in autarky.

And then let's think about what happens if we shock

the economy.

Um, no, I've said nothing so far about preferences.

Right?

So in the background, as usual, we're going to kind

of, uh, represent consumer preferences across countries home preferences.

But the properties of the model that we're going to

be focusing on are very much the supply side, uh,

properties.

So we're not going to be focusing on the on

the role of preferences here.

We want to focus on the supply side in there.

We've got two sets of equilibrium conditions.

We've got profit maximisation and we've got market clearing.

So let's write down what those conditions are going to

be.

Our producers are going to maximise profits.

This is in fact exactly the same profit maximisation problem

that we wrote down in this morning's class when we

were solving the first question on the problem set.

So you're going to maximise the value of output net

of input costs.

And we're going to take first order conditions which give

us a marginal product of each factor equals the factor

price.

The only thing I like careful about here is that

now because labour is sector specific, the wage also will

be sector specific.

It's no longer the case that we have a single

price of of labour.

The marginal product of labour will in general differ across

sectors.

And then we have market clearing and the market cap

is our usual condition that we have to use the

top happening down to one of the two sectors.

And then labour market clearing is even more straightforward because

we just give it a fixed amount of labour that

we use in each of the two sectors.

There's no adjustability there at all.

Everyone happy?

Good.

Okay, so here's what the equilibrium looks like.

Um, so it's going to be this graph.

And I'm going to go back and then I'm going

to draw it on the board here.

Just take you through the different steps drawing this um

graph so that we understand where it comes from.

Because this is a, you know, like the actual model.

This is a model where kind of solving it graphically

by drawing the right graph makes everyone's life much easier.

So here's the graph we want to draw.

Um, in the case of.

When I bring some pens.

Give me a second.

I'm going to go and get a whiteboard marker.

Sorry about that.

Okay.

So what are we graphing?

Okay, the first thing and really the most important thing

about this graph is it has two axes.

Right.

Two vertical axes.

So on the left hand vertical axis we're going to

graph the marginal product of capital in sector one.

And on the right hand vertical axis we're going to

put the marginal product of capital in sector two.

And we're going to plot those against the allocation of

capital in the two sectors.

So starting from the left hand vertical axis and going

to the right we're measuring how much capital do we

have in sector one.

And starting from the right hand axis and going to

the left, we've got how much capital we have in

say to two, and the distance between the two axes

is our total capital endowment.

So that's really the key thing that the distance between

these two axes is our total capital endowment.

So any point along that x axis defines a split

of capital between sector one and sector two.

Because capital is our only mobile factor when we're solving

this model, what we're really trying to do is we're

trying to solve for how much capital we have in

the two sectors, which is why this graph is going

to prove to be useful.

So first, um, we want to figure out what happened

in sector one.

Right.

Where's our noise after this thing here.

So we want to call P1 the F1 table.

And I want to plot that against K.

What's that going to look like?

What would you like me to draw here?

I'd like to always know.

What?

It's going to be downward sloping.

Right.

And the reason it's downward sloping is that as one

increases.

Right.

This marginal product declines because we said remind us.

So we had this assumption here.

The second derivative is negative.

So as k1 increases the marginal product declines.

We're going to get a downward sloping curve.

And it's going to look something like that.

Okay.

Then on the right hand axis we're plotting the marginal

part of the capital in sector two.

What's that going to look like.

Yeah it's mirrored right.

So it's going to be upward sloping, but it's only

upward sloping if you read the world from left to

right.

Right.

Because here we've got the axis on the right.

You're actually reading the world from right to left.

So it is kind of downward sloping in the same

way.

Okay.

So you get that downward sloping right.

And what is the interest point of intersection here.

What do we get from where they are equal.

Marginal productivity political capital equal.

So equal.

So that's the equilibrium okay.

Yeah.

Exactly.

So where because capital is mobile across sectors.

Our first order condition right is telling us that the

marginal product capital sector has to be equal to the

interest rate above the rental rate.

Oh.

And that has to be the same across sectors.

The capital is no problem.

So where we get the intersection right.

That gives us on the vertical axis.

It gives us the equilibrium interest rate.

On the x axis here, it's telling us the allocation

of capital between the two sectors.

Okay.

So at this point here that's pinning down our equilibrium.

And note that we once we know that we know

kind of everything we're interested in uh, here because we

now know how much capital is allocated to the two

sectors.

We know the capital rental rate are.

And then given that we get the wage is just

equal to the marginal product of labour in the two

sectors.

Questions on that.

Makes sense.

Is there kind of a key takeaway here is that

this model is much easier to solve than the actual

in model, right?

Last week we spent kind of two hours working through

how to solve the actually only model here.

We've done it in like ten minutes.

So it's an easier model to work with.

And the reason for that is just because we have

that labour is sector specific.

So it reduces the number of endogenous variables that we

need to solve for.

And there's the version of that on the slides.

Okay.

So now this.

Yeah let's think about that as being kind of what's

happening in autarky.

And think about what happens if we open up to

trade.

Uh, let's choose a new area to be good one.

So we'll fix the right one to be one.

And we're going to assume the home country is good.

So what does that mean?

It means that relative autarky prices are good.

Two is lower than the free trade or relative the

relative price, which we know is low.

And the relative price is good to in under free

trade.

Uh, and since we're fixing the prices, we want to

be the one that means to go from autarky to

trade for this country is going to be equivalent to

an increase in the price of, uh, good two.

So.

So then the question is, as we go from autarky

to trade and the price of goods to home increases,

what happens to our equilibrium.

So let's come back to our graph.

And let's ask what happens if we increase the price

of good.

Two suggestions.

What would you like me to move upwards?

Uh, yeah.

The curve.

This curve.

Right to the place P2 directly enters, is in the

marginal product of good two, which is this curve here.

So as we increase P2 that curve is going to

shift upwards.

P2 increases the curve shift upwards.

So you can see our equilibrium point also moves.

And it moves kind of inwards and to inwards and

outwards.

And we can immediately read off that what happens to

R and to capital?

Right.

Capital is going to reallocate from sector one to sector

two.

This kind of should be.

Seem fairly sensible.

We've increased the price of good two okay.

So holding the allocation of capital fixed.

That increases the marginal product of capital.

But we need to have equalise the marginal product of

capital across sectors.

And we achieve that by reallocating labour out of sector

one and into sector two.

Because as that reallocation takes place, the marginal product sector

one increases and the region of labour, oh, sorry, a

part of the stage two decreases until we're back in

balance.

Right.

But when we're back in bounds, we're now going to

have a higher, uh, rental rate of prime.

Okay, so that's this, Um, back to this graph.

Yeah.

Okay.

Now, what about what happens to wages?

Oh, right.

Because we're reading off a meeting.

And what happens to capital.

What happens to the allocation of capital and the price

of capital?

Well, we also care what happens to the returns to

the sector specific to the labour.

Can we see from this graph what's happening to the

wage rates?

Any thoughts on how we might characterise that?

I mean, so what's the wage equal to just like

formula wise.

What's the wage in sector one.

Sector one.

Marginal product of labour and sexual right.

So w one is equal to p1 times the f1

by DL.

So if you go up for this scenario but.

I don't know how you.

Get it from here.

Okay.

So what we see from here right is firstly that

capital K1 has declined.

So as K1 declined what happens to be to Df1

by DL one was the marginal product of labour in

sector one.

If we use less capital in sector one.

It decreases.

Right.

And why?

How do we know that must be the case?

Because we make this assumption here, which you know, we

didn't you know, this assumption is pretty plausible, but we

didn't make it at any point in the head.

So this is a new assumption we made here.

And the reason we've introduced it is because now we

you know, given that this is true, if we reduce

the amount of labour in sector one, so we reduce

the amount of Caplan's sector on the margin of labour

in sector one declines and therefore the wage sector one

declines.

So if workers in sector one, then wage declines and

it does so in both nominal and real terms.

Right.

Which is to say, if we look at instead of

just looking at W one, we look at w1 over

p1 and w1 over p2.

Those two things must also decrease.

How do we know that?

I will we just went through the argument for why

w1 must decline.

W1 is W1 is this one you want to be

at L1 right.

But no.

You could also write this as w1 over P1 equals

this one by the L1.

And since k1 is decreasing, the thing that increases one

by one to you wanted the P1.

You know, we also know that that declines.

And then w one over P2 well w one went

down.

The underlying shock here is that p2 went up.

So w one over P2 definitely going down.

So workers in sector one are losing out.

Now.

What about 62.

What happens to the wage in sector two.

Increases because the the.

Amount of capital in sector to increases.

So the marginal product of labour increases.

Yeah exactly.

It's the opposite to what's going on in sector one.

In sector two we're now getting more capital.

And because capital is complementary to labour in sector two,

that increases the marginal product of labour and that drives

up the wage in sector two.

So W2 goes up.

Right.

Um, I think P1 hasn't changed, but certainly goes up

relative to P1.

But then what about W2 relative to P2?

That's less clear because don't you two's gone up but

also P2 has gone up.

Okay.

So here's kind of where we do need to do

a little bit more.

Whoa.

Okay.

Um.

And what you can show.

And we'll do this in a minute.

If you do this work is that W2 is going

to go up and it's going to go up by

more than P2.

So that if we solve for all the different changes

we're going to get, the W2 goes up the most

in proportional terms.

Remember when we use this little change and it goes

up by more than P2 which in turn is up

Omar which is positive going up one W1 is going

down.

And we've also shown the P2 is going up and

K1 is going um, down.

So we can actually kind of this is sort of

stalled as Amazon s in terms of we're doing a

similar exercise whether the results are a different, um.

And again, we can kind of rank exactly how each

factor does as a result of this, uh, changing, uh,

changing the price of good to.

But what I want to do now on the board,

we show you how we know that w two goes

up more than, um, p two.

I think that's the rest of the results.

You can basically read off the graph.

This one is a little bit more complicated.

So let's do that.

So w2 is equal to p two times.

Sorry.

Yes w2 is p two times d f2 by d

k2.

Let's differentiate this.

We're going to get the W-2 over W-2 equals P2

over P2 plus P2 are times d2 f2 by dc2

r squared.

Okay, so I make oh sorry sorry I obviously should

be out.

I thought there was that.

Um, so then this is the l2 DQ too.

Okay.

So what you're now getting is that the proportional change

in W2 equals the proportional change in P2 plus.

Um, this term here is drop r and we should

have df2 by delta.

So just to be clear, kind of what I've done

here is I've differentiated each of these terms use the

product rule.

And then I've divided through by this equation itself.

But it makes sense.

Happy?

Good.

Um, so to show the W2 hats and P2 hat,

all you actually need to show is that this term

here is, uh, positive, which we did indeed issue.

Okay.

So that then gives you the, uh, W2 hat is

greater than P2, right.

Any questions on that?

Okay.

So let's get out of that.

So now let's think about.

Um, an economy that has a comparative advantage in agriculture

opening up to trade.

All right.

Let's suppose there are agricultural workers and their manufacturing workers.

And then this capital is profile between sectors.

If this economy that has a comparative advantage in agriculture

opens up to trade, who gains and who loses?

What farmers gain they can export.

And then maybe the losers might be those not working

on farms like those working in urban industries.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Right.

So, you know, according to these prediction here, if our

country has a competitive punch in agriculture and we have

another trade is a good two hit agriculture.

The gain is are those that are specific to agriculture.

So these are agricultural workers.

They gain the manufacturing workers in sector one they lose.

And capital the kind of.

Price goes up in terms of good wine and bad

in terms of good too.

So overall a good idea, gain or lose depending exactly

what preferences look like.

And then the the sort of key takeaway here is

you think about how that compares to what the predictions

of the Amazon team would be, right in the scope

of Amazon theorem, whether you gain or lose some trade

doesn't depend on what factor you are, so it doesn't

depend on what sector you work in.

It depends on what factor you are, right.

Whereas here where are you going to lose?

Depends on exactly which sector you're working.

And it's the workers that are specific to the actual

sector that gain and the workers that are specific to

the import computing sector, the losers.

So it gives a different perspective on who the winners

and losers from trade are.

Then you get from the Amazon model.

So that's what we have here.

And any.

Questions on that.

Good.

So that's kind of what I wanted to say about

this model in terms of the theory.

You can see it's a kind of more straightforward model

to, um, to work through.

But it does give us this very different sense of

who is who are likely to be the winners and

the losers from trade.

And in particular, it's a model that kind of rationalises

the idea that you often hear in kind of popular

discussions of trade, that if I'm a worker in an

important eating sector, then I lose from trade liberalisation, right?

That idea that workers and import competing sectors lose and

trade liberalisation, it doesn't.

You can't rationalise that fear within the context of the

Amazon model, in the silver Amazon model.

Whether I win or lose has nothing to do with

where I work.

But in this, as the risk factors model, it's exactly,

you know, if I'm sector specific and I work in

this in bulk and being sector, I don't have the

opportunity to move elsewhere.

That is when I will be the loser from from

trade.

So it's a kind of way of thinking about, you

know, why that is might be sensible under certain circumstances.

So we will move on and then do is ask,

okay, so we've seen these predictions that come from this

specific factors model.

And we've seen how they differ from the kind of

long run factor endowment model that we saw in the

shareholder model.

What do we actually kind of see in the data

about the effects of trade in the in the short

run?

So I want really to talk about a couple of

empirical studies.

I want to talk about this paper by Alasdair year

who study how trade liberalisation affects labour movement between sectors.

So really this is a paper that's trying to think

about the extent to which there is indeed some of

this short run, uh, sector specificity for labour.

Um, and then I want to talk a little bit

more kind of mostly about this paper, a little bit

also about the work done.

Hanson have done, uh, thinking about the local labour market

effects of trade liberalisation and using a kind of relabelled

version of the specific factors model to think about, not

what happens to people who work in particular sectors, but

people who work in particular, uh, regions, and how this

model can help us understand the kind of regional impact

of trade liberalisation in the case of Brazil or the

US, uh, and how that differs across regions.

But let's start with the Oh la la.

Hey.

So the question they are has ask is essentially we've

got these two extremes that we've thought about.

We've got the specific factors model where there's no labour

mobility in the short run.

And we've got the rolling model where there's perfect labour

mobility.

So to understand the empirical relevance of these two, uh,

frameworks, we kind of want to know, well, how much

labour mobility do we see in practice.

So the question they ask is if we study economies

following a trade liberalisation, how much labour mobility do we

in DC uh between sectors.

And the motivation here is that if you see very

rapid labour reallocation, then we're probably more in a kind

of roll in type world.

Our waiting history, uh, reallocation is very slow.

Then, at least for some period of time, the attractive

model may give us a better Understanding of how economies

are likely to be affected by these trade normalisation.

So this is a relatively simple study.

Then all they need on the data front is data

on the sectoral allocation of labour in different countries.

So they have a sample of around 20 countries that

have data from the 1960s to the 1990s.

And then for each of these countries, they know employment

in the different manufacturing, uh, industries.

And what they're going to ask is, how does this

change following, uh, trade liberalisation, to what extent does, um,

this trade liberalisation generate employment, uh, reallocation?

Um, and simply by virtue of the fact that the

countries that were undertaking major trade liberalisation during this period

tended to be mainly developing countries.

They are going to have a sample that is overwhelmingly

comprised of lower and middle income countries.

So specifically, they're going to estimate this regression here.

Okay.

So notation we uh we have EI being sectors J

countries uh and t time periods.

Um x the key dependent variable of interest is what's

the employment insect I in country J.

So this is employment is dying country J impurity.

And how does that change over time.

And you can look at that.

Delta is going to be different time periods.

So they'll focus on changing either over two year or

five year periods to get a sense of how the

rate of adjustment varies over time.

And then they're going to regret that on T, which

is going to be a dummy variable for a country

recently underwent a trade liberalisation.

So this is kind of the effect of interest.

Do we see that when country j liberalise is trading

period T that leads to a reallocation of labour across

um sectors.

And then they're also going to have time face to

face delta t and country into industry, face to face

UI.

Now, if you think about what they're trying to do

here and what challenges to identification might be, one potential

problem is that in our models kind of think about

a world where, you know, initially there is one static

allocation of labour and then the shock hits and there's

some reallocation.

And in practice, of course, we're not going to be

in a world where before the trade liberalisation, there are

just fixed, stable shares of employment in each of the

sectors.

There are ongoing changes over time that are occurring in

each of these, um, economies because other shocks are hitting

the economy that have caused sectoral labour reallocation, and also

because being lower middle income countries, a lot of these

countries are going through the process of structural transformation, which

we know tends to lead to labour flowing out of

agriculture towards manufacturing and at a later stage, also from

kind of low skilled to high school manufacturing, them from

manufacturing to services.

So we do have to deal with the fact that,

you know, there is this chain of ongoing trends in

labour shares over time that have nothing to do with

the trade liberalisation.

The way they try trying to do that in this

setup is these countries of fixed effects, which are trying

to sort of pick up.

Is this an industry where we are seeing, even absent

the trade liberalisation, a lot of labour reallocation or not?

What other concerns might you have about the identification strategy

here?

This is a.

Relatively simple set up.

So what might be areas where potentially might, you know,

where you might become concerned about what exactly they're estimating.

You think what they mean by trade liberalisation?

Um, so like if there was like a reduction in

tariffs, maybe the different like amounts of reduction could result

in different, um, like different changes in labour.

Yeah.

And then you thinking when you say different versions, how

do you think across countries or both industries who are

in a country.

Like it is a cross country?

Is is what you're doing.

Across.

The country analysis.

Mhm.

So you're saying that, you know, potentially the actual nature

of the treatment in the sense of the trade liberalisation

is very different across different countries.

And trade liberalisation in one country may not look like

a trade liberalisation in another country.

It's a reasonable point.

Yeah.

I would be very.

Concerned that T is an endogenous variable in the sense

that it's not random whether a country decides to liberalise

or not.

They might do it because of some factors in the

economy that themselves might affect a shift in labour.

Yeah.

So I think this is also a valid concern, is

that they are treating the decision to undergo trade liberalisation

as the exogenous shock here.

And as we've talked about before, that may not always

be the the case you choose when you liberalise trade.

And often it is related to other factors that affect

the economic performance.

Many developing countries ended up liberalising trade at the behest

of the IMF and the world Bank, after they'd gone

through some kind of crisis.

I think that crisis might itself obviously have affected the

distribution of employment across sectors.

So I think we're certainly right to be concerned about

somehow omitted variable bias, where TJ is correlated with other

country specific shocks.

that could be affecting, um, trade liberalisation.

Now.

So these are good points.

They're not points.

They're really good, but they're not points they're going to

address in this paper.

This paper, uh, was written 20 years ago.

Didn't spend a lot of time thinking about these kind

of identification, uh, challenges.

So I think it's probably fair to think of it

as presenting more kind of, you know, some interesting correlations

rather than necessarily being, um, causal estimates.

Right.

Note also that this kind of estimation specification is not

tightly linked to structural equations coming out of the models

that we've, uh, worked with.

Right.

If you think through the details of the models, we

went with, the extent to which labour reallocate into or

out of different sectors is going to depend on the

extent to which a country has a comparative advantage in

the different sectors.

So you could kind of do a more sophisticated version

of the analysis by interacting the trade liberalisation with some

measure of whether the country is likely to have a

comparative advantage in that sector.

Think of the kind of measures we saw from Rommel

earlier in the lecture, which would provide kind of a

novel way of testing whether what is happening is consistent

with the models.

But again, it's not something we're going to see, uh,

see here.

So we kind of have to take this as it.

All right.

What are they going to find is going to kind

of quickly summarise the results.

They estimate, you know, this specification in particular try and

recover alpha for various different, you know, samples and various

different time periods.

The kind of recurrent theme of those results is typically

they estimate values of alpha insignificantly different from zero, which

is to say they do not find any robust evidence

that trade liberalisation is associated with faster reallocation of labour

across sectors.

They do find some, admittedly fairly weak evidence that there

is more labour reallocation when they look over the five

year period, the two year period, which is kind of

consistent with the idea that labour may be reallocate slowly

and it takes time to adjust these trade liberalisation.

But even over the five year period, it's still looking

like there's very little labour reallocation, uh, going on.

So the big picture takeaway from this paper is that

they don't find evidence of rapid reallocation of labour across

sectors on a 2 or 5 year time horizon, and

this is kind of one of the pieces of evidence

that points to the answer I gave to one of

the questions earlier about, you know, what is the short

run?

Right.

Well, this would suggest that kind of five years, probably.

The medium run is longer than five years.

Um, they also do have another specification where they kind

of look at whether you see more labour reallocation when

the generalisation is accompanied by domestic reforms that they characterise

as being pro-market, by which really they mean reforms that

kind of are designed to increase flexibility in, in labour

markets.

And they see some evidence of that happening, which again,

kind of points to the idea that if there is

to be reallocation labour across sectors, the extent to which

that happens will depend on a country's labour market institutions

and the more flexible those labour market institutions, the more

reallocation you might expect to see.

Okay.

But, you know, big picture and not too much evidence

of labour reallocation in the in the short run.

Yeah.

So you just want to.

Check that I understand the result.

So what they're saying is not that if you have

pro-market reforms, that also leads to labour reallocation, but the

interaction of having pro-market reforms.

And.

It's that interaction.

Yes.

Then they're not specifically studying pro-market reforms on their own.

They kind of want to interact trade liberalisation with pro-market.

Okay.

Any other questions on this?

Okay.

So let's let's sort of take that as one piece

of evidence that, you know, at least over a certain

time horizon, the short run models are probably going to

be a useful way of thinking about the effects of

trade liberalisation, because if it is the case in 2

or 5 year horizons, we see labour reallocation.

Yeah, I suggest, and we're unlikely to see the effect

that emerging naturally was happening over these, uh, these type

of periods.

So it's kind of probably thinking about things in a

specific factors way, at least over these shorter time horizons.

Now let's switch gears slightly and let's, um, think about

how we can use the kind of specific scientist framework

to think about the regional effects of trade liberalisation.

Um, and this, this kind of work here builds on

a line of analysis that had been quite popular in

recent years, taking trade models, which typically have been developed

to think about national level outcomes.

And everything we've talked about so far in this course

has been about national level outcomes, but then applying these

models to regional level data rather than national level data.

And in particular, there's kind of a strand of recent

literature that argues that models either the specific factors model

or versions of models that are close cousins in this

article are very useful for thinking about the short term,

medium run effect of trade shocks on regional labour market

outcomes.

Um, and the the work has received the most attention

along these lines and which some of you may have

come across previously is that, you know, there's this paper

by author Gordon Hanson in 2013, and then they've written

a large number of follow up papers where they ask,

how did the increase in import competition from China affects

regional economic outcomes in the US?

So the basic setting here is, you know.

Three 1980 China trades extremely little with the rest of

the world.

And it's kind of not really part of globalisation.

And then, you know, first under Deng Xiaoping and then

his successors, there is a conscious policy of China opening

up to the world.

And China goes from being sort of on the periphery

of the global economy to the position it is now,

where it's the world's largest exporter and the world's main

manufacturing hub.

So a consequence of this is that US imports from

China grow incredibly rapidly during this time period.

Um, and this has stoked a lot of political opposition

to trade with China in the US, particularly, um, in

areas that were formerly kind of manufacturing hubs in the

US, where there is a perception that this increased import

competition from China has led to the decline of us,

uh, the US manufacturing industry and has hurt the US

economy.

So kind of against the background of that sort of

policy debate we'll touch on and try to do in

our work, is to understand, okay, if we kind of

look at the data seriously and we use the variation

in the data that's there, what do we learn about

how the US has been affected by this rising import

competition from China.

And in particular, they develop a kind of identification strategy

based on asking.

Do.

You know what they call local labour markets?

And the way you should think of those is they're

basically commuting zones.

So, you know, a big town and the area around

it where people commute into that town, that's what we

mean by local labour market here.

Do local labour markets that pre the China shock specialised

in industries that China Chinese imports would grow rapidly in.

Do we see differential outcomes or differential changes in those

like local labour market.

I said you give an example of that.

One of the industries that we see a very big

rise in Chinese imports is the furniture industry, right?

Another would be toys and then various other types of

manufacturing as well.

So if I live in a commuting zone in the

US, that very data starts in 1993 1990.

My commuting zone produced a lot of furniture.

Right then, I'm facing a bigger.

That region is facing a bigger import competition shot from

China.

Do we see that such regions experience different economic outcomes

post 1990 than, say, industries that were focussed on biotech

or regions that were focussed on biotech, which faced much

less of a China shop?

Um, and what they documented in their work is that

there are kind of strong effects of this import competition

shot on, uh, outcomes in these local labour markets, in

particular locally, that are more exposed to the shock.

Uh, see higher increases in unemployment and reductions in labour

force participation.

They see lower wages, and they also see higher, uh,

fiscal transfers from the government for various forms of kind

of out of work disability, retirement type benefits.

And the way they interpret this is what happens.

There's this import competition shock that leads to reduced production

in these local labour markets.

Right.

But in a if the economy was fully flexible in

the sense that workers could freely reallocate across regions or

across industries, you know, then these workers would be able

to find jobs elsewhere.

And in that case, you wouldn't expect to see the

regions that are more exposed to be differentially affected.

The fact that they're finding that these regions are differentially

affected is consistent with the idea that, you know, once

my furniture workers lose their jobs in the furniture industry,

they're not able to find other jobs either locally or

in other region.

And so they end up, you know, more than half

of the labour force.

They're claiming more government benefits and wages in the local

labour market.

Okay.

Um, they get pushed down.

So this is kind of consistent with the sort of

specific factors view of the world.

But in particular what I'm specific to is not necessarily

an industry, but it's to a region people find it

costly to move across regions.

And so if the type of industry that the region

specialise in specialised in is hard ahead, um, the workers

in that region as a whole are the ones who,

uh, who lose out.

Yeah.

I found that in uh, the paper.

Compares the mobility across and across region regions because I

think maybe there is a story.

Well, that's easier to, uh, between centres, but it's hard

to move between regions.

So.

Yeah.

Um, I think that's a good question.

And I think this literature is maybe not as explicit

in addressing that question as we might like it to

be.

um, the focus has been very much on these regional

outcomes, which is kind of suggesting that, you know, where

you think the friction lies is really in the mobility

across, uh, regions.

There is also some evidence that kind of what industry

you were initially employed in, and also matters for your

outcomes, which is kind of industry is also, um, a

relevant dimension.

But at least, you know, I haven't seen any work

that really kind of disentangle the relative importance of those

two.

For example, low level workers, as it is easier to

move between sectors, for example, for agricultural farmers to become,

uh, manufacturing workers.

As you see, a lot more regional unions, new houses

and, uh, you know, relationships.

So maybe it makes sense.

Yeah.

I mean, so I think of the kind of costs

of moving sectors and moving regions and potentially being very

different types of costs right there.

Kind of the regional movement is like, what is the

cost of moving house?

What is there's clearly some fixed cost to that.

How great is it?

And that's going to be much lower if you're a

student than it is, say if you own your house

somewhere already.

Um, and in terms of moving state.

So it's really about kind of how much sector specific

knowledge and skills do you have.

And, you know, some sectors you might build a lot

of sector specific sales.

If you're a software coder, you're probably not going to

retrain and become a farmer and vice versa.

Uh, but if you are, you know, say if you're

an HR professional working for one of these companies, you

probably don't care if you're doing HR for a big

agri business or for a legal firm or for a

software company.

So the extent to which there is mobility is possible

for a lot of different types of workers.

of, uh, different types of industries as well.

Which doesn't really answer the question of which is more

important, but I think it does point to it as

being probably quite kind of context dependent.

Yeah.

I think what I really like about this set of

research papers that they have done, and also in terms

of how long are the short run effects.

And they have.

Found that even though the shock happened in the run

with 2001, um, I think those affected by it are

more likely to vote Trump 15 years later.

Yes, they again, this is like consistent with the second

World findings.

They are finding these things do not dissipate in a

matter of years, that they find these persistence uh, long

run effect.

And as you say, you know, they not the reason

why when they follow up where they used to be

kind of what are the political implications of it?

And you find that in many cases, it kind of

manifests as increased support for the Republican Party in these

areas.

Okay, so there's this this line of work on kind

of China shock on US local labour markets.

That's kind of quite well known.

I wanted to then focus on a different paper, which

is this work by Brian Kovak on the Brazilian context,

uh, instead, um, which is a kind of nice application

for thinking about in the context of this lecture, because

he very explicitly takes a specific factors model and estimates

it, uh, in a context of regional mobility in Brazil.

So I want to show you kind of how he

does that and what he, uh, wants to try.

So our context here is, uh, is critical, um, and

this kind of one of these developing countries that for

a long time of almost 100 years, until the mid

1980s, adopted fairly protectionist trade policies.

And then starting in the late 1980s, it opened up

to, to trade.

And it's sharply and unilaterally Brazil sharply reduced its import

protection.

And the effects of these reduction in action is to

reduce output prices.

That's the output prices in Brazil, particularly for those industries

that saw big decreases in import protection.

So what what is your okay.

Well how does that affect uh, wages.

And do these wage effects have a regional dimension to

them.

Okay.

So here's the model he uses.

And this is going to be a sort of generalisation

of the model we just looked at.

So it's a specific factors model um with the twist

that what's what you're specific to is not a sector

but a region.

So each region are we think of as a separate,

uh, economy.

Right.

And then within the region there are many industries which

we index by and if the industry has an output

price RPI.

And these output prices are common across regions.

So it's like there's a Brazilian price for each good

I.

All.

Right.

And it's exogenous in the sense that it's kind of,

you know, think of Brazil as a small because it

isn't that small, but it's smallish, small economy trading with

the rest of the world.

And then when Brazil reduces its import protection, it's going

to affect these output prices.

And what Kovach wants to ask is how does that

affect wages at the regional level?

So each of our industries is customer tends to scale.

I'm going to use both labour and a sector specific

factor.

So here we have a sector specific but it's not.

Labour is mobile across sectors within a region.

What labour is not mobile is across regions.

So labour in labour is region specific.

And then the technology is the same for industry.

No, this is probably a more reasonable assumption within countries

than across countries because you previously were making this country.

Now he's just making this across regions within Brazil, which

probably is less of a stretch.

But what regions do different is they're fracturing that.

Once and we're going to have to.

Do we just going to keep things simple by having

to pack goods and.

Backlogs.

So as a thought experiment, suppose we dropped the regional

specificity of labour.

Suppose labour was free to move across sectors.

And suppose Brazil liberalised uh imports.

Right.

And reduce its import protection.

How would wages in a more, more exposed region?

The change in wages in more exposed region differ from

the change of wages in the less exposed region, if

labour is mobile across regions.

Okay.

So this is a little bit of a trick question.

So the the answer I'm looking for is it wouldn't

because the idea is that if Labour is mobile across

regions then, you know, labour is free to move wherever

it earns the highest wage.

So in equilibrium, any wage differences across regions will be,

uh, smoothed away and wages will be the same in

all regions.

So in a world with labour mobility across regions, what

you would expect is that changes in the output prices

don't have any differential effect across.

Regions.

Right now.

What would we expect of labour as region specific?

Okay, so that's what Kovak then works out and he

shows.

And this is a slight slightly more involved than what

we did earlier, but not much.

He shows that the change in the wage in region

R is just a weighted average of the change in

output prices for each good.

Where the weights which are these betas depend on the

initial employment shares in each region, which gives us these

lambdas.

It depends on the elasticity of substitution between production factors,

and it depends on the share of the industry specific

factor in factor payments.

Um.

So what this then gives is kind of through the

lens of the model, a mapping from changes in output

prices to change in regions where, crucially, regions had different

initial mixes of employment, different wage changes, which is exactly

the kind of argument oughta done and had some more

making without kind of deriving it theoretically, that your initial

employment composition affects how exposure is.

Different regions are to this, uh, shock.

Right.

So kovat kind of shows how to derive this theoretically

and this kind of specific factors regional model.

And then he's going to If this is indeed the

case.

Um, so I think he's going to kind of take

logs of this equation and he's going to request a

log page change in region arm on the region's exposure

to the Brazil's tariff pass, where the region level exposure

to the tariff cuts is the weighted average of the

tariff cuts multiplied by these metres that we defined on

the previous slide.

So the betas are kind of come from the initial

employment composition modified by contractors related to the elasticity and

the factor.

And the income shares the, uh.

Sensitive character.

Um, and then what he's doing here is this is

assuming that when you change producer tariffs by more, that

has a bigger effect on the output price.

So he's kind of proxying the change in the output

price with the change in the tariff.

And this is from a very simple equation.

It's an estimate.

Um, because he observes the change in the output tariffs

for 23 industry.

needed to change in 1990 and 95.

Um, he notes that you don't want to include non-tradable

in this because the non-tradable prices are dangerous.

Um, and then he adds, on the left hand side,

he has regional wage changes between 1991 and 2006.

Out of those wage changes, kind of effects related to

individual characteristics and industry characteristics.

So he's really trying to get the regional component of

wages.

Once you adjust for who's working in that region and

what industries are in that region that make sense?

Um, so here's what he finds graphically.

Right.

So here we're plotting the wage.

So I'm getting myself slightly there.

This is not what this is.

He's he wants to argue that the industry level tariff

changes can be thought of as exogenous.

Because one concern you might have here is, okay, why

did they change the parish by a different amount in

different industries?

What he argues, and there's much more of this in

the paper, is that essentially Brazil set its tariff levels

in the past.

I think a lot of it was done post-World War

two.

And then when they had this big tariff liberalisation in

the 1990s, they effectively reduced the level of all tariffs

to similar levels.

So what that.

Means is.

Industries that had high initial tariffs, experienced big cuts and

instituted low initial tariffs, had small cuts.

And that's what this graph shows here.

It shows the initial tariff level against the companies in

the tariff.

And you can see industries that higher initial tariffs experienced

bigger cuts.

So he argues that what drives the variation in the

tariff change across industries is not anything about decisions that

are being made in the 1990s, but simply kind of

what level those targets were set to 40 years earlier.

And that's a kind of argument for why he's going

to be making causally what's happening here?

This is showing you the amount of variation in the

colour changes across different regions.

So darker level, smaller class, lighter levels, more exposed to

the cuts.

And you can see kind of how it varies across

the different areas of Brazil.

And that there's, you know, a reasonable amount of variation

both across regions, but also kind of within specific, um,

states in Brazil.

And then here's his main set of regression results.

So you've got the, uh, racial tariff change in the

top row.

Yeah.

Um, and then you've got various different ways of competing.

Um.

Uh, various different ways of kind of computing the, uh,

the regional tariff change, which is kind of linked to

how how you deal with moderate prices or what you

do with the Labour share.

Um, let's not worry too much about that.

The main point to note is just kind of consistently

across different specifications is finding a positive relationship.

And whenever he includes, uh, state fixed effects, it is

also showing up as significant.

So, you know, broadly speaking, these estimates are kind of

consistent with the model in the sense that they're saying

that regions that expose bigger tariff regions that experience bigger

tariff cuts also see lower wage growth over this period.

So again, is kind of evidence that there is.

This.

Regional specificity of labour such that if your region is

more exposed to the import competition, that leads to worse

labour market outcomes in the region.

Any questions on that.

Put any numbers ten percentage points out of character, or

at least 4% lower wage growth.

Um, which is evidence of imperfect mobility across Brazilian regions.

One important disclaimer here, right.

It is very easy to look at this work and

the work by author Don Hansen and be like, okay,

what these papers are showing is that there are negative

effects of, uh, trade liberalisation.

That's not the right way to interpret their results.

What they're showing is differential effects across different regions within

the US or Brazil, based on how exposed they are

to the import competition.

So certainly regions that are more exposed to increase import

competition are doing worse here.

But that doesn't tell us anything about the kind of

level effect for the country as a whole.

Right.

Putting that in econometrics terms.

Right.

You're doing a different diff estimation here and you're estimating

the slope, but you're not meeting the intercept.

And the intercept is what tells you about the the

level effect.

So we do need to be somewhat careful about how

we interpret these results.

All right.

And we will.

Stop there for today.

Uh, the main thing we've been doing here is that

in the short run models.

And as you look through the kind of empirical evidence

we are seeing that certainly across regions, there is is

evidence that, you know, labour reallocation across regions and probably

also sectors is fairly slow.

So for thinking over reasonable time horizons, these short run

models are very useful for understanding the effects of trade

liberalisation.

Any final questions?

Good.

Oh yeah.

Yeah.

I just I'm curious.

Was that argument specifically the final argument that it's about

the relative declines in wages rather than absolute declines that

also true with all children.

Yes.

Yes.

They lost that relative to the rest of America, but

not necessarily in absolute terms.

Yes.

And well, people have kind of tried to use kind

of more structural analysis to be able to back out,

actually, what is the level effect as well.

They typically find that on, on the on average the

US gains from the China shock.

But there are these distribution effects such that some individual

regions may lose.

But the US as a whole benefit.

And that's that's the level effect coming in.

I mean I'm just trying to think so policy mitigation

can be reducing frictions in the labour market.

So that could be one.

But it could also be that there are these important

distributional implications.

So if you're going to liberalise trade you might want

to think about compensating the losers or particularly targeting assistance

to particular regions.

So it's kind of telling you who is more or

less exposed to.

It's really about these different things.

All right.

Good.

See you in a couple of weeks.

I.

Guess this is how we.

Are.

Even though.

That's like giving me a wrench.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah, I that's absolutely fine too.

Maybe, maybe we didn't pick that up.

I managed to switch.

Thank you for listening to you.

Yeah.

If you get some more complicated.

Factors like.

Did it make it possible?

Yeah.

It's a thing like I said before.

Lecture 6:

We have a great.

And.

I want to.

Know.

The.

Man.

Was really busy or.

Um, yeah.

Um.

Um.

So.

So, yeah.

I was it was good, I could.

Go.

Hi.

Good morning.

I.

All right, let's go.

Anyone got any questions before we get started?

Okay, so.

Before we get going with today's material, I wanted to

start with kind of trying to think through a little

bit about a kind of trade policy question that's been

in the news, uh, lately, just to kind of get

us thinking about how some of the, you know, ideas

we've talked about in this course, but also ideas that

still help us to understand this kind of issue.

So the relevant question is, obviously Trump on the US

election last Tuesday, um, one of Trump's signature policy proposals

is to impose new tariffs on US imports.

It remains to be seen whether this will actually happen

in practice, but what I want to think about is

suppose we are in a world where Trump imposes a

uniform tariff on imports from the rest of the world.

What happens?

And what are the economic mechanisms that that's potentially going

to trigger?

And what are the consequences for both the US economy

and for the for the rest of the world?

So to be kind of concrete, let's suppose we get

to set a policy.

And let's suppose there's a 20% tariff imposed on all

US imports.

That's the policy.

What happens?

I guess the most obvious one would be the consumers

from the US would be hurt because there will be

like nothing if the is important.

To invest in production and increase price.

Okay.

Let's practice that.

Let's take it step by step.

Okay.

So what what is the change that potentially causes a

shift to domestic production?

So before we get any kind of consumer expenditure shift

in what is the incentive for consumers to shift expenditure.

Well, I think the first thing that happens.

Yeah.

Import prices, we expect import prices to go up.

Right.

We want to do this.

I want to thank you for this system.

You kind of want to.

Go through state by state.

We import prices in the US to go up.

How much do we expect them to go up by

20%.

Definitely 20%.

We guess.

Maybe less than 20% because you still, when you're profit

maximising, you also take into account that you're competing with

American firms that don't have this at at 20%, so

you're probably pricing it in a little bit lower and

then taking, uh, taking some of the, um, so there's

some positive to consumers, but not 100% positive.

Yeah.

So so that's the right kind of balance.

That is going to depend on the extent of pass

through.

If there's 100% pass through, we'd expect a 20% rise

to the extent that there's less than 100%, potentially because

of mark-up adjustments, then we would get less than a

20% rise.

So it's you know, we don't really know exactly what

the size of the pass through is, but that's the

key statistic that will determine the magnitude of the effect.

Um, typically we expect tariff pass through to be less

than 100%, so you'd get a less than 20%, right.

That said, somewhat surprisingly, uh, in the previous Trump administration,

when there was the US-China trade war at that time,

the evidence on that trade war suggest that there was

100% pass through.

In that case.

I'm not sure we really understand why that is, and

it's kind of surprising, but we did last time around.

See that?

Basically, in a statistical sense, we couldn't reject the hypothesis

of complete faster.

Okay.

Right.

So import prices are going to go up.

Step one right.

What happens next.

Yeah.

Maximise they shift.

They might shift their consumption of goods from foreign goods

that are now comparatively more expensive than before to domestic

goods.

Okay.

So here now we're bringing in our consumers shifting expenditure.

This is us consumers we're thinking of here towards domestically

produced goods.

Okay.

And then who are the kind of winners and the

losers from that adjustment?

Who's who's winning from this?

Who's losing.

The winners will.

Be the domestic producers.

Okay.

Because just let's be explicit about why that is.

So a couple of reasons.

One is, um, the amount of sales will be greater

because there's a larger proportion of people buying there.

Also, they have an incentive to push it up, up

to the pass through.

And thus the margin could be higher.

Right.

Yeah.

So they're seeing an increase in demand.

But also, you know, if we think of this as

a very simple example where we're, you know, homogeneous good

cases and if the good is set by the world

price, well, the world price plus the tariff.

So the price is going up.

Okay.

So these domestic producers potentially they're being protected from import

competition.

They're going to win from this.

So they're you know those are the potential beneficiaries here

who is losing out.

Yeah the US consumer right.

This is a tariff is, you know, to distributional effect.

It typically helps consumers and helps producers in that industry.

Now are there any is there a group of producers

who of us producers who potentially lose?

Right.

I take the argument that U.S. producers that are now

receiving protection from import competition at price go up, they

sell more, they can win.

Yeah I do.

Yes.

So one of those will be those the US domestic

producers, I mean domestic producers that produce for exports.

So one is for instance, if they're using an input

material that is has to be imported because it's not

domestically produced.

Right.

So the mark-up on that will be higher, which means

they will be less competitive globally.

Okay.

Right.

So to the extent that US producers, um, use inputs,

right, US imported input costs are going to go up

and that is going to hurt the competitiveness.

um, of domestic producers that rely on imported inputs.

So if you're just producing kind of a final good

that you sell to us consumers, you're the winner.

But, you know, if you're very reliant on imported inputs

and you don't have a good, you know, if there

are close substitutes that are available on the domestic market,

uh, these producers are going to become, uh, less competitive.

So there's potentially going to also be a group of

us producers that, uh, do that here.

Can we say.

We're highlighting here we've got local winners and losers within

the US economy.

Can we say anything about the kind of net effect

of those two things on the aggregate US economy?

How what's happening to the US overall here.

You're better off, as it were.

So.

How much do you rely on input?

Yeah.

Yeah.

It depends to.

What do you mean?

About being better for worst?

Yeah, that's a fair comment.

A classic public goods is sort of a public economics

setting where you raise taxes, then you get some deadweight

loss on that.

But that's also assuming that making lots of assumptions on,

you know, where we want, where people get utility, lose

utility consumers.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And then they realise, I don't know, maybe there is

such a problem.

Maybe U.S. helps other foreign firms, which maybe cause some

trade wars have the power to lower.

I'm an astronaut anyway.

Mhm.

Okay.

So these are all good points.

I mean I think in general it's kind of ambiguous

what the net effect on the US economy is likely

to be here.

Uh we're going to do a lecture on trade policy

later on in the term.

And there kind of one thing we will look at

is when you when in a large economy like the

US imposes a tariff, uh, there are these efficiency costs

that we pointed to.

So there are, you know, potential efficiency losses from distorting

the market.

Uh, but we'll also talk about, you know, the importance

of understanding what the terms of trade effects of this

shock are, which, you remember, we did talk a little

bit about when we're talking about gains from trade.

We said in certain circumstances, whether, you know, we're kind

of doing a restricted trade versus less restricted trade comparison

here.

So part of the net effect is going to depend

on what this tax does to us.

Terms of trade.

If it improves US terms of trade, it is in

principle possible for the net effect to be positive.

We would probably expect that, in fact it is more

likely to be negative.

But standard trade models would say there was some ambiguity

here.

Okay, so so far we've kind of focussed on what's

happening to the US economy.

What about the rest of the world?

What's going to happen?

What are the consequences for other countries of this, um,

tariff?

Would you just like yeah.

Go ahead.

This is a foreign.

There's.

Less global.

Demand for that goods.

Okay.

So we would expect and sort of taking that again

in two steps.

We would expect imports to fall right.

US imports default.

That's the sort of very obvious things that U.S. imports

decline.

Um, and the benefit of that is that foreign the

exports also decline.

And if you are one of those foreign exporters that

obviously you are going to lose, uh, from that.

What other effects might we see?

I think, you know, kind of here, we've covered maybe

the most obvious kind of direct set of effects that

we would expect.

But then as the economy kind of adjusts to this

shot, what else might we see happening?

Um, maybe.

Like if.

The US has a large, um, industry and now the

costs are higher than the rest of the world, like

that good price in the rest of the world will

rise.

So are we seeing here?

Kind of.

Yeah.

This is the consequences of this for the rest of

the world.

Right.

As the US, if the US becomes less competitive.

Essentially, this implies kind of US export prices go up.

So the costs of these goods elsewhere increases.

Yeah.

And also there might be retaliation.

Okay.

Good.

So what do we what kind of retaliation might we

expect to see?

Uh, for example, countries that are not strong enough like

to, to negotiate with the US with retaliation.

They would, uh, increase their territories or which if it

happens, I imagine if it happens for small economies like

it would harm them more because typically for us by

car, automotive and so on.

Okay.

So so two steps to gain, right.

Firstly we might well see retaliation.

This is what we saw last time right.

Trump put tariffs on China.

Chinese are the ones.

That's okay.

Well we're putting tariffs on the US.

And this is very common when you kind of get

cooperation breaking down in trade policy that if one country

starts imposing tariffs then other countries respond by imposing their

own tariffs.

And obviously then, you know, say China imposes tariffs on

the US.

You get all these effects happening again, except now that

happening in China rather than in the US.

So it kind of magnifies what magnifies is not the

right word, but you get the same sort of set

of channels operating in other countries.

And then you kind of speculated a bit about which

countries are more likely to retaliate.

Right.

And made the basic point, which is a good one,

that you tend to see.

It's large countries that retaliate rather than small countries, which

is sort of empirically true that you tend it tends

to be larger countries that are more likely to retaliate.

And then the question is, you know, why is that?

Is there a kind of good reason?

And it sort of naturally reflects, you know, power imbalances

in the global economy.

Maybe in the US or country wise, China is more

willing to, uh, to do that.

It also, again, I'm kind of anticipating stuff here, but

when we get to kind of the terms of trade

argument later on in the term, we will see that

small countries don't have the ability to manipulate the terms

of trade.

So if there's potential gains from imposing tariffs through terms

of trade effects, these gains disappear for small countries.

And remember when we talked about the gains from trade

earlier, we argued that for a small country, free trade

is the optimal policy.

And that was because it couldn't manipulate it.

Um, in terms of trade.

One other question on retaliation.

When countries retaliate, how do they choose the set of

products to impose tariffs on what factors are likely to

influence the decision of, you know, which products China puts

tariffs on, for example?

And we don't really have a large domestic industry that

competes with those with this invoice.

Okay.

So one rationale could be they're going to provide import

protection to kind of large or influential industries within China.

Yeah.

That's one rationale for targeting.

The other one would be where for instance the US

is quite dependent on specifically China.

So if a large proportion of, for instance, machinery for

semiconductors is imported into China, they'll say, hey, we will

put it on that because you don't have anywhere else

to go but here.

So we know you'll continue to import, uh, so we

know it'll be harder for you to then be competitive

here.

Right.

So another rationale could be, you know, essentially thinking about

the extent to which imported goods can be substituted for

domestic goods, right.

The other thing that people do in practice, uh, and

this is kind of less about economics and more about

the political economy, is they target industries that in some

sense are the political base of the person in power.

So right when this happened in 2018 and China retaliated,

China targeted its tariffs to hurt industries and regions that

disproportionately were kind of the base of Trump's electoral support.

And this is something you see also in, you know,

when the US and Europe put tariffs on each other,

they choose what are thought to be a politically salient,

politically important industry.

So, you know, when it comes to setting these tariffs,

there's a lot of there's economics that goes into it.

But there's also a lot of kind of political thought

into how do you hit the government of a country

where it is most likely to to hurt them?

All right.

So we've got retaliation.

Um.

Anything else involving because this is the try to like

argue for, for exemption.

And also I imagine they would argue like they would,

uh, contribute for protection as well.

So, sorry, where are we in terms of retaliatory tariffs

or in terms of, uh, the kind of starting point?

Your point?

I thought I was like, uh, just just in the

US.

Okay.

So explain exactly what you mean by that.

A little.

More like.

Uh, industries that were, um, hurt.

Like, for example, the export producers, they would, um, uh,

they would increase their campaign contributions such that they could

be exempted from the US tariffs.

Okay.

All right.

Okay.

So this is another kind of set of points, right.

We sort of started from the premise that there was

a 20% tariff on all imports.

You know, in practice if this policy is corrected, what

we expect to see is kind of lobbying for exemptions.

Um, because it is, you know, known that Trump is

susceptible to this kind of, uh, lobbying.

And you can think about this lobbying happening at different

levels.

It could be individual firms, it could be industries, or

it could be, uh, countries.

If you've been following the kind of UK press over

the last few days, you see, there's already speculation about

what could the UK do to strike a deal with

the US to avoid these tariffs.

So the other form of kind of response you're likely

to see around the world is kind of is there

some kind of deal to be done to avoid tariffs.

What do you have to offer the US so that

your firms don't, uh, face the tariffs during again, looking

at the example of the first US-China trade war in

2018, um.

Following the initial waves of tariffs, there was a deal

struck between the US and China in which China essentially

agreed to buy a certain amount of imports in the

US, and the US agreed not to further increase, uh,

tariffs and that, you know, that deal acted to prevent

further escalation.

It's arguable whether it actually changed Chinese import behaviour in

any way, but it was part of the negotiations that

were going on around that.

Um, and then as well as countries, you're going to

have individual firms, individual importers, exporters, individual industries, uh, lobbying.

And you know, how this works is not going to

be exactly clear.

But what that creates is massive opportunities for corruption and

a kind of quid pro quo.

And if you kind of read what people who study

authoritarian regimes in Latin America are saying about this at

the moment, is that what they expect to see through

this process of lobbying for exemptions is it's a kind

of backdoor for, uh, making corrupt payments to the US.

Um, yeah.

So I think a couple more things are thinking about

second order effects.

One is and this is more from like India experience,

when you have higher import duties that the government has

set up on certain industries, one is certain industries just

say, hey, we're going out.

We don't want to, we don't want to produce here

anymore.

So they move to other countries.

Okay.

So yeah.

So let's put this one down.

So I'm going to put this under the heading of

FDI foreign Direct investment, which we will talk about in

a couple of weeks.

But this could kind of work a number of ways.

It could be, you know, in your example of Indian

industry to something we don't want to produce here.

But it could also be that if I export the

U.S tariff, okay, how do I get around that table?

I invest and produce domestically in the US.

So there may be foreign firms now invest in the

US in order to avoid the Paris.

So this there's this concept of tariff jumping FDI, which

is when you invest in a country to avoid the

the tariff.

So you know, this is another potential gain to the

US is it could attract investment into the US.

Another one that I was thinking about is that for

instance, if um, but that's more specific.

So for instance, if the US only says that we

will do it for goods from China, it also allows

for other countries to come into trade agreements with each

other, because they know the US is no longer necessarily

going to be a viable option.

So it could, with other two other countries, decide that,

hey, we're going to set up, um, trade agreements to

make it cheaper with us because we know the US

is not an option anymore.

Yeah.

And I think this opened up a sort of broader

question of how does it reshape the kind of landscape

of trade agreements and trade kind of coalitions in trade

bargaining between all the other countries in the world, which

is definitely you would definitely expect it to have effect.

And it is very hard to predict exactly what they

might they want, what they might be.

Yeah.

Are there some certain patterns?

For example, you now see a lot of trade wars

between Western and non-Western parts of the world.

And then you could I would imagine that it fosters

trade, but within the Western world and within the non-Western

rules.

There has been some speculation that that could be, you

know, what happens if to the to the extent that,

you know, clearly part of the US government's aims here

is going to be to isolate China to the extent

that it is successful in that it could lead to

the creation of a sort of regional or hemispheric, um,

trade blocs.

I think it very much remains to be seen whether

that will, um, occur.

I don't think it's really happened very much so far,

but it's a possible outcome.

And if Russia central with all the sanctions against Russia,

then you saw an increase in in export of fossil

fuels and other goods.

Yeah.

So I guess yeah, definitely the sanctions against Russia have

been much more stringent than any previous tariffs on China

and have much.

Russia has become much more isolated from the rest of

the global economy, though obviously it still does continue to

trade, and it trades a lot with other neighbouring countries,

which are used as a route to avoid the sanctions.

But also China and India are both still very willing

to trade with Russia.

So there you have kind of in a case where

Russia trades directly with, say, Western Europe anymore, it does

trade more with other kind of countries in Asia and

Central Asia.

So that's not a mechanism.

And you have more indirect trade.

I mean it relies on a form of kind of.

Corruption I think is probably the right word because it.

And the, the way trade rules are written, simply taking

a good say through Kazakhstan to get into Russia.

But you know not what you should be able to

do under the, under the sanctions.

So to the extent the US is going to actually

impose these rules, you wouldn't expect to see that.

But but I mean, test that, you know, if I

send it to Mexico, can I avoid the tab.

There is one channel which I think is potentially also

kind of a major first order channel that we haven't

talked about so far.

Any one.

Any suggestion.

This is maybe a bit unfair.

It's not really a trade channel.

It's more of a macro channel that people think is

likely to be important in this context.

Any suggestions?

Yeah.

I was thinking.

If you increase the price of U.S. goods.

Oh, sorry.

Yeah.

Increase the price of imported.

Yeah, that's what I mean.

So the US imports less and the export more.

I'm thinking about the demand for the US currency because

obviously when you when you buy from the US, you

buy in US dollars.

Yeah.

But then in practice also when you I mean because

the US dollar is so dominant often in the US

you often sell in.

Yeah.

Um you as always as well I think.

Yeah.

No you're normally you would say you would, the US

would pay in the foreign currency and they would, they

would.

Yeah.

I mean it's very complex but loosely speaking yes.

Yeah.

So yeah.

Okay.

So yeah.

What happens to the dollar.

This is what we were looking for.

What direction is the dollar going in as a result

of that.

If you want to say that the terms of trade

for the US will improve.

And that would make it more expensive, because people will

want to buy more things from the US relative to

how much they sell to the US.

And so they need US dollars on that, but it

might be the opposite direction.

Yeah.

I mean.

That is the concept.

I mean, currencies are complicated and they're not really my

area, but the the consensus is that this policy is

likely to lead to an appreciation of the dollar.

And, you know, the mechanism basically, if the US is

importing less, it has less demand for foreign currencies.

And therefore to bring the currency market back into balance,

the dollar has to get more, more valuable.

I just like a shift in the relative demand for

the dollar.

So there's an expectation that the dollar appreciates.

I think it is incredibly hard to predict how much

it would be.

One extreme is the dollar appreciated 20%.

You can see it would completely offset the tariff and

then you wouldn't expect any effect.

That seems I mean, I don't think you would expect

that to happen, but to the extent it does appreciate

that will obviously offset the effect of the tariff on

imports.

So the kind of dollar Adjustment channel is one that

will potentially neutralise the effect of attack.

If global if inflation is expected, then we also from

that perspective, we could expect that the savings increases as

well.

So and then the demand.

So I think the there you kind of have to

be very kind of like inflation is expected.

In which country and how does it differ across countries.

What did you have in mind.

It is in the US it's increasing.

Um.

Okay.

So you're saying our import prices are going to go

up.

So consumer prices going up in the US.

Yeah.

Okay.

And then what happens?

Um.

It's connected to consumer.

Yeah.

No.

So I'm not saying that there are potentially effects through

that channel.

It's just a question of kind of thinking through exactly

how they might they might work and whether they would

also whether they would be kind of quantitatively big enough

to sort of have a first order effect.

Yeah.

Um, I think it's.

To the extent that you kind of have a big

policy like that is it can have lots of spill-over

kind of macro effects in different, potentially unexpected channels.

So something yeah, something there may happen.

I find it harder to think through exactly what it

would be, but that may be just because I'm a

trade economist, another international macro person.

Um, but like in a smaller countries, the dollar appreciation

can cause inflation, right?

I'm thinking like in Argentina or Latin America, that they

rely so much in the dollar prices because they import

things.

So it could bring inflation like to them.

Yes.

So also it's going to depend or depend on, you

know, some of those countries are also pegged to the

dollar.

So if you're pegged to the dollar.

No.

But if you're if your country, your currency is depreciating

against the dollar and you pay for imports in dollars,

then yes, certainly inflation there.

What some people are also worried about is that this

could cause a debt crisis in emerging markets, because a

lot of their, uh, liabilities are denominated in dollars.

So if the dollar appreciates, suddenly your liabilities go up

and your GDP hasn't gone up, there's a mismatch there.

So there's, you know, and another concern is kind of

can this spill over to cause create crisis in emerging

markets.

Yeah.

Think about from the kind of choice of our kind

of inputs.

Yeah.

Because there is always a saying that when the tariff

to protect our industry to make they're stronger and they

have more profit to, you know, make more products.

Mhm.

So which direction do you expect that Uh.

Maybe you can put more promise in R&D innovation.

Mhm.

I get that.

They're kind of the protection.

They're these producers here.

They're getting getting protected from import competition.

Their market sizes increasing into the enterprise then that we

think market size has a positive effect on innovation.

You might seem positive in innovation but definitely possible as

well.

Yeah.

All right let's wrap up this discussion here.

I think this is useful both for just sort of

thinking through the myriad channels in which trade policy, uh,

might, uh, matter.

But also right now we've got a set of predictions

so we can come back to this in like six

months if the policy happens and see which of these

are actually borne out in practice.

Yeah.

Uh, yeah.

What do you expect the effect for the WTO trade

system?

Yeah.

I mean obviously this is completely non WTO uh compliant.

Um, so to the extent the US is willing to

adopt this policy outside of the WTO and to the

extent that kind of as countries lobby to avoid it,

they're going to do that aside outside the WTO as

well.

It's bad for the WTO.

It kind of moves us further away from a rules

based trading system and more towards kind of countries arguing

bilaterally.

All right.

So that was a, uh, diversion.

Let's come back to the topic of today's lecture.

So having spent the first half of the course talking

about comparative advantage and competitive models and into industry trade,

today we're going to change pace and talk about trade

within industries and trade.

That's not necessarily driven or not driven by comparative advantage

at all.

So we're going to provide a very different perspective today

on why countries trade.

And we're going to see how that helps us to

understand some kind of regularities of the global economy, that

comparative advantage based models struggle, uh, struggle with.

Okay.

So in particular, there's sort of two big picture empirical

motivations for wanting to study intra industry trade in, uh,

today's lecture, which is firstly that if we look at

global trade, most trade occurs not between industries but within

industries.

Right.

What do I mean by that kind of between industry

trade is, say us sending Japan cars and Japan's then

in the US back in as you're training with one

industry for another intra industry trade is the US sending

Japan Ford cars and Japan sending the US Toyota.

It's kind of different varieties within the same industry.

So then you can ask in practice in the data

is the most trade between industries or within industries, and

it's mostly within industries.

And note that all the models we've looked at up

to now have nothing to say about that at all.

So if we want to think about within the industry

trade, we need a new way of thinking about trade.

Likewise, all the comparative advantage based trade models, the fundamental

incentive for trade is, uh, differences in prices across countries,

right?

That's what generates, uh, the reason to trade is the

price differences that generate comparative advantage.

Uh, so what that means is you get you would

predict more trade between countries than are more different, because

countries that are more different and can have bigger gaps

in their autarky prices.

In practice, though, we see more trade between relatively similar

countries and in particular most world trade between developed countries

rather than between developed and developing countries.

And again, that's a comparative advantage.

Based trade models.

Are the example of within industry.

Trade here is like trading cars for cars.

Yeah I'm thinking generally is this trade that's within industry.

Is it sort of horizontal or is it vertical as

in like are you buying inputs for outputs or are

you buying like trading like for like yeah.

I mean I think it is both in practice.

Right.

And obviously 1 to 1 potential difficulty with this argument

is, well what's an industry?

There's lots of different ways to define an industry.

And if you define an industry fine enough, then you

can then you can't have within industry trade because in

the limit I could say, well, in the industry is

the US exporting this variety of cars to Japan.

And if that's an industry, then there's no within the

industry trade.

But if we think, you know, I mean, we might

think of the car industry as an industry.

All right.

So coming back to this example again, there is a

case where you can both have this horizontal trade, but

also where there's a lot of trade in the car

industry and intermediate inputs.

And so you might have one country providing the inputs

and then another country providing the finished goods.

So for example, if you look at car assembly by

US car companies under NAFTA, a lot of that is

done just across the border in Mexico.

So Mexico imports car parts.

It assembles them and then it exports the finished goods

to the to the US.

So they're kind of Mexico is both importing and exporting

within the car industry.

But it's doing it at different stages of the production

process.

Okay.

So just to provide a little bit of motivating data

to back up, these are facts.

So.

That there is more trade between developed than between developed

and developing country.

So over 50% of total trade flows are between developed

countries, about 15% between developing and Helping about 30% between

developed and developing.

And likewise, you know what?

This graph here is showing the US's main trade partners

in 2003.

Okay.

You see, Canada is the biggest trade partner here, followed

by Mexico, China, Japan and so on.

So this this graph is you know, it's about 20

years out of date.

Now China would be much bigger now.

And I think China is now the US's biggest trade,

uh, trade partner.

But you know, certainly what you see here is it's

the, you know, other industrialised economies that are overrepresented in

these figures.

And then intra industry trade.

Yeah.

Go ahead.

I just have a question about the trade between countries.

There's a lot of trade between similar countries.

If we see that there's less trade between developing.

So there's more trading, like if you're developing countries, what

this is saying is you're more likely to trade with

the developed country than with the developing country, right?

Because there's twice as much intra intra inter income as

intra income.

Um, to what extent is that?

Just that.

I'm not sure how to throw that out question here.

To what extent is that just that the developed countries

have more goods that they can competitive.

Yeah.

You're saying if it really is that you just trade

with similar countries, developed countries should trade with other developed

countries and developing countries should trade with other developing countries.

But actually the fact I've shown you is not that

is that developed countries trade with other developed countries, and

developing countries also trade with other developed countries.

So how do we understand that?

That the question.

Yes.

And my, my, my idea was.

That.

Because if you think of developing developed, developed countries just

having similar technology as a developing country, but then in

addition, there's some other set of technologies which, you know,

they don't have, then they're just more set of goods

that they could produce.

So then if two developing countries are trading and they

don't have access to a set of technologies, there is

a lot smaller set of goods that they could trade

compared to a developed.

Like if you think of something like I mean, we

take an extreme case, let's say a very poor country

does not have like it industry.

Yeah, right.

Lots of rich countries have IT industries.

The rich countries can trade within the IT industry across

each other.

They can also trade with developing countries because developing country

offers some.

The developing country offers something else other than an IT

industry.

But to developing countries wouldn't trade in an IT industry

because they don't have as much that they could offer

to other.

Yeah.

I mean, I think there's something to that.

Um.

You know, it doesn't just factor endowments in, in, like,

I guess it's more of a Ricardian model of like,

you would have a relative technological advantage in some advanced

sectors.

And what differentiates a poor country from a rich country

and developing some developed is the developed.

We have more advanced technology in specific sectors.

Yeah.

That allows for trade.

I guess the the kind of point you would need

to still push on there though, is there's going to

be something the developing country has a comparative advantage in.

Right.

So what shapes or what determines what the developing who

the developing country ends up exporting to?

I mean, kind of the story you've just told is

really about why developing countries would import from developed countries.

And then the kind of other side of that is,

well, who do they export to when you kind of

need a story for that as well?

I could answer that, but I think that's too long

of an answer.

Okay.

I will say that your idea indicated that there will

be more trade between developing countries and developing countries, but

the data shows that there are more trading shares between

developing countries.

Yeah, I think the idea that I had was that

if you think of it as a recording model where

you have, let's say that there's some basic let's say

that it's just agriculture.

Agriculture is one industry and all the goods are homogeneous,

which is one agricultural product.

And all the developing countries, they sell this product.

And then there's another set of countries which are rich

countries, and there are lots of different sectors that are

highly differentiated.

All the goods are which are very heterogeneous.

Then developing countries would never trade with each other because

anything that I trade, anything that I could buy from

you, I already produce myself, but I could.

I have a comparative advantage in this agricultural good relative

to all the developed countries.

So then I would sell this generic agricultural good and

I would import this some advanced technology, some advanced good.

But then between developed countries, um, they also can train

in advanced goods because there are multiple heterogeneous advanced goods.

So then they there were doubt could explain why there

would be a lot of intra developed trade and why

there would be, to some extent develop versus developing.

Yeah, very little interest developing.

Right.

I, I.

Can yeah.

I see the argument you're constructing and I think that

there are some elements to it that makes sense to

me.

I think there is potentially a, a simpler explanation which

is more just linked to the size of economies.

Um, and so let's, let's park this discussion for now,

because at the very end today and on the promise

that we're going to kind of come back to it

and see how the type of model we're going to

develop today rationalises these patterns.

And then you'll see kind of how it does it,

which is really about a story of country size.

And you can think about the extent to which that

satisfies you or you prefer your kind of alternative explanation.

Right.

But let's kind of let's see where we're going with

this first.

Okay.

So this was countries and industries.

Um, a kind of interesting side question here is how

do we actually measure how much there is intra industry

versus inter industry trade?

So here is the standard measure that has kind of

been developed and used in the literature, which is called

the um, the Google void index of the people who

developed it.

So it's a measure of how much intra industry trade

that is in some industry g, which can be defined

at whatever level of aggregation you like, including at the

aggregate level.

Um, and it's this thing here.

So it's one minus the absolute value of the difference

between exports and imports over the sum of exports and

imports.

Now, I think when you first see that it's kind

of not clear what how this works.

It works.

But if you think about an example um, so think

about the case firstly where you're just in a rolling

world, so you're just trading one industry for another.

So suppose the US exports $100 of cars and doesn't

import any cars.

So then exports 100, imports zero.

Exports plus imports are 100.

So this is 100 over 100.

So you get one minus one equal to zero.

So if you just purely export or purely import the

goods this ruble Lloyd index will be zero.

Alternatively suppose there's balanced trade within the industry.

So suppose both exports and imports are equal to 100.

Right.

Then in that case you've got exports 100 minus imports

100.

That's zero.

So the second term is zero.

And in that case you're in three industry trade indexes

one.

So when you have exactly balanced trade back and forth

within the industry the index is equal to one.

And then intermediate values are kind of giving you a

continuous measure of to what extent you are getting intra

industry trade.

So if we do this calculation for, you know, particular

US industries for chemical inorganic chemicals.

We're getting 0.99 machinery, 0.96 vehicles, 0.65, uh, down to

0.0.

Right.

So couple of points to take from that.

Firstly, there is a lot of intra industry trade, but

also the extent to which there's intra industry trade varies

a lot across industries.

You tend to see a lot more entry industry trade

and what we might think is a more high tech,

advanced manufacturing industries where it's kind of more simple manufacturing

footwear.

Clothing tends to have less entry industry, um, trade.

And then if you think of, you know, less entry

industry trade as being a more comparative advantage driven, while

the more intra industry trade is being a not comparative

advantage.

And while that kind of tells you something about the

kind of models you're going to want to use to

think about trade in these different industries.

Questions on that.

Okay.

So now let's jump into kind of the the model

that we're going to use to understand the entry industry

trade.

So this is, you know, an example of a set

of models that were branded as new trade theory when

they were first developed in the first developed in the

70s and 80s.

And they were developed very much to kind of rationalise

these empirical phenomena.

We've just been talking about the existence of intra industry

trade and the fact that you see a lot of

trade, even between similar countries.

It turns out that.

To rationalise that behaviour, we end up quite a long

way from the perfect competition world.

We've been in today.

So not only are we now going to have a

model of entire industry training, but to get to that,

we are going to relax the perfect competition assumption.

We're going to introduce imperfect competition.

We're also going to relax the constant returns to scale

assumption and have increasing returns to scale.

Um, and it may seem kind of a bit dissatisfying

that we're suddenly changing all these different components of the

model at once.

But one thing I want you to kind of try

and understand as we go through is how I once

you start to think about the potential for intra industry

trade, it kind of naturally leads you to a world

where you think about increasing returns to scale and imperfect

competition.

And so these assumptions kind of fit together, uh, naturally,

rather than just being sort of chosen one, you know,

independently of off the shelf.

So specifically, we're going to look at this, um, model.

Which.

Is originally, um, put forward by Paul Bergmann.

This is one of the papers that he won the

Nobel Prize for a few years ago.

So he was a very influential figure in the development

of this new trade theory.

I will spend most of the lecture focusing on this

Krugman 79 model.

Um, and then.

At the.

End of the lecture, we and more so on the

problems that we will talk about how you can take

this kind of Krugman style trade model or similar models

and use them to derive a gravity equation of trade.

Right?

Because back in the very first week, we said trade

follows a gravity equation.

If you want to model bilateral trade, the comparative advantage

models that we've been looking at up to now aren't

really, you know, designed to generate a gravity equation.

But we'll see how these new trade models kind of

very naturally map to a gravity equation.

Okay.

So here's the basic setup.

Two countries as usual home and foreign Asterix and foreign.

Um, here's what's different from before.

These two countries are going to be identical.

So not only is this going to be a model

about trade between similar countries, it's actually going to be

a model about how you can get trade between identical

countries.

Everything we've seen up to now in a Ricardian model

or a rolling model to get trade countries had to

be different.

What we're going to see today is how you can

get trade when countries are identical.

Um, it's just going to be one factor productions.

There's no role for differences in factor endowments here.

Each country has all workers and each agent has one

unit of labour.

So we've got El agents in each economy.

And then there's a single industry.

So, you know, not only are we not focusing on

entire industry trade, but in fact getting rid of all

the industries apart from one.

So we're just going to have this single industry and

there are going to be differentiated varieties, uh, within the

industry.

And we'll be kind of explicit what we mean by

what we mean by that when we look at preferences,

um, and then technologies are also going to be identical

both across countries and across varieties.

So there's no kind of Ricardian technological differences here.

Right.

Preferences.

So.

Um, it's sort of this preferences, I assume you've probably

seen a version of this in either micro or macro.

We see are we familiar with kind of of a

variety type except Stiglitz preferences?

Maybe not.

Um, they may be coming at some point.

Anyway, these are the preferences, right?

So let's look at what we've got here.

So each consumer I mean every consumer has the same

preferences.

Right.

Uh and what preferences they have.

Their utility is the sum over all the producer.

We're indexing goods by I.

And.

The end of them and they imagine that they get

some good.

I depends on the amount of it they consume and

then some function of that year of QE.

Right.

So you of QE is like a sub utility function

telling us how much you tells you we get from

each individual.

Good.

I and then our total utility you know it's additive

across goods.

You just add up how much we get from each

good.

Unless you function has some properties I don't consume anything.

Any utility it's increasing the more it's better.

And it's concave.

So there are diminishing marginal returns in consumption of each

individual.

Good.

Now we referred to this type of preferences as incorporating

a lot of variety.

Why is it that these preferences are, you know, have

this level variety feature?

Well, it's because at the individual variety level, you've got

this concavity such that as you consume more of an

individual variety, you face these diminishing returns.

But if instead of just consuming more of one variety,

you consume more varieties.

As N increases here, you don't face diminishing returns in

the number of varieties.

So the more varieties there are that you can spread

your consumption across, the higher utility you will get, uh,

all else constant.

Which is to say that what consumers really want to

do here is they want to consume very small amounts

of as many different varieties as possible.

So in that sense, they have this love of variety.

Any questions on that?

Will the marginal utility from consuming two different goods is

greater than the marginal utility of consuming three different bits,

like in as much like the the increase in variety

increases utility, but does it is the marginal margin for

increasing decrease, if that makes sense.

I'm not sure I.

Quite get the question, but let me try and answer

it.

And then you tell me if I've kind of gone

in the wrong direction.

Imagine all these.

Varieties are symmetric, so you just consume the same amount

of every variety, right?

Then in that case, your utility, big U, which we've

defined as the sum over varieties a little U of

XI.

If we consume the same amount of every variety, this

is just going to be like.

N.

Times U of Q okay.

So as you increase n, the sort of derivative of

u with respect to n is just one, right?

That's and it doesn't change with the number of varieties,

whereas as you increase Q okay, then this is going

to be.

So that's obviously not one that you have cured if

you do it correctly, are.

But holding Q constant, that doesn't change with n that's

independent of n, whereas the derivative of utility with respect

to q is n u prime q, which because of

the concavity of u is decreasing in q, right.

So that's the sense in which there's kind of diminishing

marginal utility to consuming more of any single variety, but

constant returns to increasing more varieties.

Yeah.

Okay.

Just thinking in terms of now this is more of

a micro lecture just because we do this, um, in

terms of sort of the ranking in terms of substitution

versus complementarity of different, uh, of goods and different utility

functions.

If you think of like Leon Teff preferences or like

a common Douglas function where you're extremely punished for not

having a single good.

Yeah.

You know that you can access versus like, you know,

full substitutes where that literally doesn't matter.

Yeah.

This is something in between where it doesn't hurt you.

I'm sort of checking my understanding.

It doesn't hurt you.

They don't have access to some good, but you would

get a lot of marginal utility from getting access to

that.

Yeah.

You can.

You're right into these kind of somewhere in between.

And it's also kind of depending on how you parameterise

it.

It can kind of be wherever you want in between

because one wanted.

We're not being specific about the functional form here, but

what it could be is, uh, this right, which is

a constant elasticity, uh, uh, utility function that's going to

generate constant elasticity demand.

Um, and then by choosing sigma, you are essentially choosing

the substitute ability between the goods.

And based on what I've said before, you can choose

sigma anywhere between zero and infinity.

So you can have kind of, at this point, whatever

substitutable to you.

Like between goods mean more formally the elasticity of demand

between varieties, which in this case would be sigma or

generally is this function of u.

So it will depend on this property of the utility

function.

And then kind of final assumption we're putting on preferences.

And this kind of speaks to your question.

We're going to assume that this demand elasticity the stigma

is weakly decreasing in Q.

So the constant elasticity version, the version where you have

just some sigma here, right.

In that case this sigma prime will be equal to

zero.

But we're being more general here because we're not saying

that we're necessarily in a constant elasticity system.

But we are saying that as honesty increases, demand becomes

less elastic.

Way to think about that.

Intuitively, as I consume more of a good, I become

kind of less price sensitive, less demand elasticity in my

consumption of that good.

So this is kind of consistent with the idea that

richer consumers are have less elastic demand than poorer consumers.

This will be a way of kind of micro finding

that, uh, property of a model.

Right.

This assumption is going to be important, as we saw.

In how the elasticity was defined here.

So for our purposes this is how we define this

is a definition.

So.

Um.

I'm trying to think of it.

So one way of answering that question is to say,

you know, this is about you're kind of probably have

seen this functional form.

And we agree that for this functional form, sigma is

the demand elasticity.

If you compute if you take this functional form and

compute that you're getting sigma.

Okay.

So that's kind of the sort of reverse engineering way

of answering it.

Right.

Um, an alternative way which is kind of a better

a better way.

But maybe I think there is a this elasticity is

the elasticity of demand to prices.

Right.

As we will see when we solve the consumer's utility

maximisation problem.

Elasticity of demand prices is given by that thing okay.

And that's that's why this is important because that's going

to reappear when we solve the consumer's, uh, utility maximisation

problem.

Any other questions at this point?

Okay.

So that's preferences.

Right.

Note that this is the first time in this course

that preferences have been at all interesting.

Right up to now, we've tried to make preferences as

boring as possible.

So they don't really haven't really played a role in

our model.

Everything's been on the supply side now.

Preferences are mattering okay.

That said, supply also mattered here.

So what does the technology look like?

Okay, first of all there are constant returns to scale.

There are increasing returns to scale.

And the way we're going to model increasing returns to

scale is that there's a fixed cost of production and

then a constant marginal cost on on top of that.

So it's a very particular functional form way of modelling

increasing returns to scale.

So in particular if you want to produce at all

you need to pay F units of labour.

So think of this as the cost of setting up

a firm how you want to set up a firm.

You need to come up with an idea or you

need to hire a factory.

You need to buy some land, right?

That cost is the F units of labour, and that's

a fixed cost that you pay regardless of the scale

of production.

Then on top of that, in order to produce, you

need to use C units of labour to produce each

unit of output.

So C is like your marginal cost of production.

It's an inverse measure of product productivity.

So the total cost of producing two units of output

is f plus c times q times the wage rate

w okay.

And that's going to capture all our increasing returns.

Why is that going to capture you know increasing returns

if it's not obvious.

Let's just think about plotting these things.

So if we plot the total cost against quantity it's

going to look like that right.

This is w times f plus c q.

So it's going to have an intercept here which is

at w f.

And then it's upward sloping with gradient w c.

And by contrast, what if we thought average cost.

So what's average cost is, uh, total cost divided by,

uh, quantity.

So that's going to be w c plus w f

over q.

Um, so that's going to look like this.

That's our average cost curve.

Right.

So you can see the average cost is decreasing in

the number of units produced.

Right.

So that's another way of looking at why it why

why it is you've got increasing returns to scale.

Uh here.

Any questions on that.

Sorry.

Why is fixed costs depending like multiplied by the wage

rate.

Um, because I would expect that fixed costs would just

remain like the same.

Not like it would not change.

I mean.

So it's an assumption we're saying that what your fixed

cost is, is you have to hire F workers.

And the cost of hiring those workers is f times

w.

So it's just how we modelled it.

The the crucial point is that the kind of the

fixed cost is independent of Q other than that, you're

kind of free to model it more or less how

you want.

As you say.

So the example would be like instead of the fixed

cost being like the machinery factory or whatever it might

be, you need to hire some amount of like lawyers,

accountants, whatever to have a functioning business.

And then you can once you have that fixed amount,

then you can hire as many, you know.

Yeah, exactly.

Or it could be you have to hire a certain

number of scientists to create your product for you in

the first place.

Something like that.

Yeah.

Okay.

And then so.

We had preferences technology market structure okay.

So this is normally where we say market clearing.

And we just say well market's clear done here.

It's a little bit more complicated because now that we've

got increasing returns to scale, um, we did not have

a perfectly competitive model anymore.

Uh, because, I mean, there's two issues here.

If all goods of all firms are producing the same

good and there's increasing returns to scale and there's perfect

competition, then you kind of get a natural monopoly, so

you just end up with one firm out competing, all

the others the most productive.

Um, ah.

And we don't want that.

And the second thing is, well, on top of that,

each firm is actually going to produce a different variety.

So there's kind of this because of this variety, each

firm is producing a differentiated variety.

So how do we think about competition between firms.

Well, the model of market structure we're going to use

is the monopolistic competition model.

Now is that something we have seen previously.

Have we talked about monopolistic competition in micro yet.

Not yet.

Okay.

Um.

Uh, what's the idea of monopolistic competition?

It's that each firm is the monopoly producer of its

individual variety.

So when it comes to producing a single variety, it

acts like a monopolist for that variety.

So in particular, it chooses its price level for that

variety to maximise its profits, knowing that no one else

can produce that variety.

So that's the monopolistic part.

The competition part is this isn't a world with a

single monopoly or just like an oligopoly with a couple

of firms.

There are many firms.

It's just that each producing a different variety.

And as we'll see, the fact that there are lots

of different varieties acts to discipline the price setting behaviour

of other firms in the sense that it affects their

profits.

And so that's the competition, uh, part of it.

So the way you want to think about this, you

know, each firm is producing under increasing returns at its

own individual variety.

It takes the behaviour of the other firms is given.

So there are no strategic interactions across firms here.

We're assuming them away.

Right.

But taking the behaviour of firms has given it is

a monopoly price set of its own variety, which allows

it to make profits.

But we're also going to assume this free entry of

firms.

And the way the free entry condition works is that

firms will enter until the net profits that you make

in equilibrium are driven down to zero.

So in equilibrium, profits will be driven down to zero

and firms won't make profits.

But that's an equilibrium condition rather than a feature of

the market structure.

I'm wondering what does it mean by saying no strategic

interaction will happen?

So like, you know.

So imagine you.

Have like an old coffee.

People.

And you have.

Like strong competition there.

You explicitly kind of model how much I produce or

my price is a function of the firm's price.

With that, we don't allow that here.

I don't take account of other firm's prices when setting

my own price.

Okay.

Any.

All right.

Let's take a break here, and then we'll come back

and we'll see how to solve this problem.

I'm sure.

Hey.

Okay.

You used to happen.

Now you do.

It happened with me as well.

You just send me an email and she'll give you

x.

Okay.

Thank you.

I don't know why that happened.

So.

Yeah.

Okay.

Send Kelly an email.

Yeah.

I'm sorry, I have one.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So the consumer.

Will be.

Higher.

I will.

Not miss.

It.

It will just pass through to the end of the

day.

Yeah.

I mean, so that was.

Kind of when we talked here about pass through.

Exactly.

Thinking about that that question.

So no that's okay.

So I mean I think the answer is we're not

sure exactly what the passthrough will be.

So if there was complete pass through that would be

the case where, you know, imagine the whatever you're selling

and then initially cost $100.

Now there's a $20 tariff.

You just charge the consumer $120.

The US government gets $20 and the phone gets $100,

and the firms get exactly the same amount as before.

So that would be the complete pass through case, which

is what happened in 2018.

But what we are expecting, I often happen is the

firm might reduce its price to like $95.

And so then the firm only gets $95.

The consumer pays like close to $115.

And then you've got kind of an incomplete pass through

in that case.

So most of the firms.

Yeah.

If there was incomplete pass through, then the firm is,

you know, in this case B the firm is reducing

its mark-up.

So it's.

Sort.

Of.

Like what that would be.

Yes.

What do you say?

Yeah.

Um, the.

Elasticity of demand would be one factor.

We expect to matter the competitiveness of the produce market

of producers.

Right.

Is the firm competing to sell with other U.S. markets?

Yeah, like if.

It was perfect competition.

We just expect complete pass through because firms don't have

any ability to change their price now if they're serving

a marginal cost already.

But if it's a very, very competitive market, but the

firm is charging a mark-up, then potentially have scope to

change their price.

And the extent to which they actually do that will

depend on the demand elasticity.

Okay.

Yeah, exactly.

Yeah.

Um, my question is.

So when we were talking about this, uh, trying to

think.

About how, how do we measure the gains for each

of those?

Yeah.

No, it's a good question.

Um.

There isn't a definitive answer to what you think of

as a the variety here.

Um, often in the trade data, it will be the

most disaggregated level of product available in the data.

So it's like cn8 like you'd call a cn8 thing

a variety.

And then those, you know, there'll be some number of

those varieties within a higher level industry.

Uh, what public economists sometimes do is when they have

the kind of barcode scanner data they call a barcode

of a variety, right?

So whatever, whatever level of product differentiation a barcode is

measuring, they'll call that a for it.

So that's kind of how people try to think about

these things empirically.

Right.

And do we have concerns like.

That either like the common way of managing this is.

Um.

People have done it by counting essentially counting varieties In

the import data.

So you can imagine you can look in US imports

over time.

If you think a variety is the combination of like

a in the US, like a ten digit product with

a country of origin, call that a variety and then

count how many different varieties the US imports and how

that changes over time.

You can use.

That's one way you can kind of try and estimate

ancient trade and access to more varieties.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So today is about notion theory.

I've also heard of, you know.

Next week.

Okay.

Like so yeah.

That's next week.

Yeah.

Okay, let's pick.

It up again.

So we've got this Pokemon model.

We've got love for variety.

On the preference side, we've got increasing returns to scale

on the production side.

And we've got monopolistic competition on the market structure side.

And then we want to ask, okay, what does equilibrium

look like and what happens when we open up to

trade.

So what we're going to end up doing, we're going

to solve for the autarky equilibrium.

And then we're going to open up the trade and

say how does the equilibrium change when we open up

to trade.

We're going to do that once the predictor starts working

again.

Any moment now, there we go.

There it's gone.

Okay.

So when.

We come in.

Come to.

Just solving for equilibrium.

Now, we've kind of said what our market structure is.

And as usual, we also have our market clearing conditions.

So, um, we'll have output markets clear and uh, labour

markets clear.

So broadly speaking, the set of steps we're going to

go through is kind of the same as it was

in, uh, the actual in the Ricardian model, we're going

to solve consumer optimisation to obtain a demand function.

We're going to produce a maximisation to obtain a supply

function.

Then we're going to impose market theory in the product

and the labour market.

And then we will have one additional equilibrium condition of

a type that we haven't seen before.

So we will also have this free entry condition which

will pin down how many firms there are in the

market.

Right.

Because now, unlike in the previous models, we have actual

distinct firms operating.

And we have to ask, well, how many of them

are all that going to be in equilibrium?

And it's going to be the free entry condition that

will allow us to pin that down.

Okay.

So before we solve formally, I kind of want to

talk you through the intuition so we understand where we're

going.

Like intuitively how does this model work.

And then we'll go through and solve it formally and

see kind of how we capture that intuition mathematically.

So intuition so sort of in autarky.

And suppose we ask the question how many different varieties

are going to be produced.

What are the forces at play here.

Well on the one hand there's this love of variety

and preferences.

And because consumers have love of variety in their preferences,

from the consumer point of view, you want as many

goods as possible.

Consumers would ideally like an infinite number of goods to

be available.

Why aren't there an infinite number of goods being available?

Well, it's because on the firm side, there are these

increasing returns to scale.

So if there are an infinite number of goods available,

each producer would sell a very small amount.

But it's very inefficient to sell a very small amount

because then you have very high average cost.

So there's this trade off between the consumers love of

variety and the producers increasing returns to, uh, to scale.

Right.

And the kind of tension between those two will be

what ends up defining the equilibrium number of varieties.

And in particular, it will be the equilibrium number of

recovery acts such that each firm makes zero profit.

If there are too many varieties, each firm will sell

too little and will make negative profits.

If there are too few profit, too few varieties, each

firm will sell a lot and have very low average

cost and will make positive profits.

Uh, so you can see when there's positive profit that

generates an incentive for entry.

When there's negative profits, it generates an incentive for exit.

So in equilibrium entry and exit will occur until at

the point where you're making just zero zero profits, right?

And that will pin down the number of varieties.

Okay.

Now how does that trade off change when you open

up to trade?

As we've already alluded to, if this were a neoclassical

world, which is a comparative advantage based trade, there'd be

no incentive to trade because the two countries are identical.

But why do we get trade here?

Well, the thing about the lack of variety, because of

the lack of variety, if I now start trading with

a foreign country and the foreign producers produce different varieties

to the home producers, as a consumer, I'm like, well,

I like variety, so I'm going to switch some of

my expenditure to the foreign varieties and in particular here,

because the countries are identical, you'll switch exactly half of

your expenditure to the foreign varieties.

So like I was spending all my money on English

sparkling wine and now I get the ability to buy

champagne, I'm like, oh, I like that too.

So I'm going to buy some champagne.

Okay.

So from this point of view, this is great because

now I get more varieties and I like that.

And so this is a new source of gains from

trade right.

Up to now the gains from trade that we've been

looking at have all been specialisation based.

Increase the efficiency.

But here's now a new source compared to today which

is access to increased varieties.

So this is kind of one new channel to gain

some trade that we get in this model.

But that's not all because we're kind of not finished

here.

There's also a second gains from trade which operates here.

Which is that as.

There are more varieties produced.

So now it's not just the domestic pricing but also

the foreign varieties.

It's like the market is becoming more competitive because there

are more firms are producing and selling in the market.

And as the market becomes more competitive, it forces firms

to reduce their mark-ups.

I said the monopolistic part of monopolistic competition is that

firms are charging mark-ups here, but the competition part is

that as you face more competition from other firms, those

mark-ups declined.

And so the reduction of those mark-ups right, generates an

efficiency gain because you're reducing the mark-up distortion in the

economy.

And this is a kind of second source of gains

for trade here, which is referred to as the pro-competitive

effect of trade.

And in particular, the reason there's this pro-competitive effect of

trade is that as you trade more, as you open

up to trade, it reduces the mark-up distortion.

So we get these two sources of gains from trade

the love of variety on the one hand, and the

pro-competitive effect on mark-ups on the other hand.

And we get both of these even though this trade

that I'm talking about, right, is purely intra industry.

It's trade, a two way trade of varieties within the

same industry.

So that's kind of going to be the intuition for

how we're going to get gains from trade in this

model and how trade is going to work.

Any questions about the intuition before we kind of look

at how we show you formally that this is what

happens.

Okay.

So let's actually solve the model now.

So we start off with utility maximisation.

Because there is this love of variety and preferences.

It's important that when we're solving the consumer's utility maximisation

problem we solve it for each consumer individually.

Right.

From the consumer's point of view, this isn't kind of

a Hummer.

It doesn't have homophobic preferences.

So it matters what the consumers are.

Income is in that sense.

Um, and it matters that we kind of solve consumer

by consumer.

So each individual consumer has an income.

Well the only source of income is equal to w

y y is w the consumer's income here.

Y.

Isn't there any other source of income in this world.

Okay.

So so so yes.

But what about profit y isn't it.

What happens to the profits in this economy.

Assumes.

You will profits.

Because it's a monopolistic competition.

So no firm would then make positive profit because you'd

have another parameter.

Yeah.

In equilibrium that remember that's that free entry condition.

What free entry does.

It drives profits to zero in equilibrium.

So if there were profits positive profits we have to

worry about where they go and someone's getting them.

Then you have to account for them in the utility

maximisation.

But because in equilibrium there is zero profits, the only

source of income is labour income.

So each consumer just has this income equal to the

wage W.

So the consumers utility maximisation, they maximise their utility subject

to the budget constraint that their income has to be

equal to their total expenditure, which is just a sum

over all the varieties of the price of the variety

times the quantity of property.

Okay, so we can write down the Lagrangian for this

problem.

In fact, let's do that.

Just make sure we're all happy with how we're solving

the model.

So all Lagrangian all right is the.

Sum.

Over varieties of you Q I asked the Lagrange multiplier

and my budget constraint, which I'm calling lambda times w

minus my expenditure, which is the sum pi q I

write and I am maximising with respect to my choice

of the quantities q I.

So if I take my first order condition now with

respect to my quantity of variety IQ, I say, well

where does that come in?

Okay, so here it's just a summation of the U

of Q.

So we're going to get U prime of Q I

and here it's just in the expenditure.

So we're going to get lambda Pi.

So we get this first order condition that's on the

slide that you q I equals lambda times p I.

Know what this gives us.

It's like a demand function right.

It's telling us what is my demand for variety.

I as a function of the price of variety I

r but also that this Lagrange multiplier shows up there.

Okay.

What's this like.

Has this Lagrange multiplier going to be solve for?

Well, if we come back to the budget constraint, our

income is equal to our total expenditure.

We now know that pi is u prime q over

a lambda.

Uh, so we get this expression here that the wage

W is the sum over all the goods U prime

q times q over lambda.

Right?

So this now gives us an equation here there are

w, q and lambda here are all endogenous.

But it links these variables in equilibrium.

So it is modelled after one industry and also across

industries.

Yes yes.

So in this model it's just a single industry.

Yeah okay.

Now what this equation tells us is that what pins

down the lambda is the w.

And this term here, which depends on how much I'm

consuming of all the varieties in the, in the industry.

So in general kind of lambda is an industry level

variable.

Right.

And here it's just one industry as we were just

saying.

So it's an aggregate variable.

Right?

Um.

But you know, what that means is from her eyes

point of view, if we think about this from the

firms perspective.

Lambda depends on the behaviour of all the firms as

it affects the quantity sold.

But if each firm is relatively small compared to the

whole industry, then its individual actions will have no effect

on lambda.

So what we're going to assume is that when firms

profit maximise, which we're coming to, they take lambda is

given.

Right.

And note that that, you know, that is a meaningful

simplifying assumption because, you know, being strictly correct, lambda is

endogenous to each of the firms individuals decisions.

So you could model when you model the firm's profit

maximisation, you could model the firm as accounting for how

its behaviour affects lambda.

The sort of classic monopolistic competition assumption that we make

here is that we take lambda as given from the

firm's perspective.

So we take the industry level variable lambda as given

when we're solving the firm's problem.

And that's what makes this model tractable.

Yeah.

This is equivalent to the discussion of large economies versus

small economies right.

So one massive firm you consider like Samsung within South

Korea.

Yeah.

They could consider how they would affect.

Yeah exactly.

The more the economy is dominated by a single firm,

the less reasonable it is to make this assumption.

Okay.

So let's come to firms now.

Right.

So from the consumer's maximisation problem we get the investment

function.

Right here.

And now.

Firms take that in.

This demand function is given and they maximise profits.

So what are the firm's profits going to be.

Is your price that you sell at Pi minus your

costs.

And your costs have two components.

Is your marginal cost WC and also your fixed cost

kWh.

Right.

And then the marginal cost.

And the price also has to be multiplied by how

much you sell, how much you sell.

Well, it's q I but then remember Q is how

much you sell to each individual consumer.

So your total sales is Q times L.

Okay.

So the this is the firm's profit maximisation, uh, problem.

Right.

And they're going to solve that.

And when they do you're going to get this equation

here.

But I want to work on the board how we

get there.

Because that's not it's not actually completely immediate.

And this is also useful for.

Understanding that demand elasticity.

Right.

So we are maximising p I minus wc times q

I l minus w f.

So how are we going to go about solving that

maximisation problem.

What's the first thing you want to do.

Let's do something even before we take the first order

condition.

Yeah.

Recognise that P depends on Q.

And let's substitute for it.

Right.

And let's substitute for it using.

So we know that p equals u prime over lambda.

So let's substitute that in.

So this expression here it's u prime q I over

lambda Minus wc times q I l minus w.

And now let's take our first order condition.

All right.

So now if we take our first order condition what

are we getting.

Okay.

So we're taking it with respect to Q I so

she shows up in two places.

It shows up here kind of in terms of the

quantity.

And it shows up here in the utility function.

So this term here is straightforward right.

So because it's linear.

So we're just going to get u prime UI over

lambda minus WC times L right.

But on top of that we're then going to get

the derivative of this term here which is going to

be u double prime.

So we're going to get you double prime q over

lambda times q I times l.

And this thing is equal to zero right.

Obviously the fixed costs don't depend on q I that's

what defines mean.

That's why they are fixed cost.

Um note also that when we've been taking the first

order condition here.

We haven't.

We treated lambda as constant, right?

That was the point I was making on the previous

slide that we assume firms take lambda as constant.

If you had if you, you know, come back to

your Samsung example, if you wanted to model Samsung as

a big firm, you'd also have to internalise how its

behaviour affected Lambda, which is doable, but it's more work.

Okay, so we've got this expression.

Okay.

Um, this isn't kind of very intuitive.

So how are we going to go about turning it

into something that makes more sense?

In particular what we're aiming for is this equation here.

How are we going to turn this into that?

Well, there's two things we can, um, do.

Firstly, let's divide through by u prime of XI.

So we're then going to get a u prime key

in the denominator here.

And we're going to get a U prime key in

the denominator here.

Okay.

Now why have I done that.

Well it's because I know something about you Prime QE.

So if I go back to my previous slide I

know that you find q I equal to lambda times

PR.

So then what this is then going to give me

is one over lambda minus WC over lambda times pi

times l plus l over lambda.

And then here I've got you double prime q over

u prime.

If I go back to my definition of sigma right

at the beginning here.

Right.

This is where sigmas now coming into it.

Right.

So the earlier question why do we define, you know,

why is it meaningful to that defines things in this

way, and it shows up in the problem here.

Okay.

So in particular u.

Prime Q.

A u prime that's minus one over sigma.

So this is minus one over sigma equals zero.

That's sigma q off okay.

I now know we're kind of done because all over

lambda is multiplying both sides here.

So the all over lambdas cancel out.

Okay.

Um and what we've got if.

We.

Do a bit of rearranging is we're going to have

one over sigma equals uh, one minus w c over

p.

And again you can then just rearrange that and you're

going to get a p I over w equals sigma

over sigma minus one times c Which, if I'd done

the math right, would be the equation that we had

on the slide here.

Right.

And that equation now, you know, that has a very

sensible intuition.

It's saying that your mark-up that you charge over marginal

cost.

So your marginal cost is w times C and your

price is P.

The mark-up over marginal cost is sigma over sigma minus

one.

Right.

And if you've ever kind of done standard monopoly pricing,

what is the standard monopoly price.

Right.

It's sigma Sigma minus one times where sigma is the

demand elasticity.

Right.

So here sigma is our demand elasticity.

And then sigma over sigma minus one is our market.

We weren't happy with that.

Now remember that we assumed that sigma is weakly decreasing

in Q.

So it's just a constant and you've got a constant

mark-up that's what you get.

In the constant elasticity of substitution world.

You'd have a constant mark-up over marginal cost.

But if sigma is decreasing in Q and as you

increase the quantity you sell, you decrease sigma.

And that increases this.

Uh mark-up.

So the mark-up is going to be greater when you're

selling more.

Right?

And again, you can kind of think of this as

richer consumers have a less elastic demand and therefore they

pay higher Mark-ups okay.

So when you're here, when the quantity sold Q is

greater, the mark-up is is larger.

Any questions on.

That?

Okay.

So this is kind of what we've just worked through

on the on the board.

So we've now done consumer maximisation which gave us the

inverse demand function.

We've done producer maximisation which gave us the market function.

So now we bring everything together for equilibrium.

We are going to restrict attention to a symmetric equilibrium,

which is to say an equilibrium where firms sell the

same.

Each firm sells the same quantity.

So what that means is we can drop the I

subscript on the variable on the varieties.

Each variety is going to be sold in the same

quantity and have the same price.

So we'll set q equal to q for all varieties.

That means our total expenditure is just the number of

varieties times the price p times quantity q.

And then we impose our free entry condition.

And our free entry conditions is that profits are zero

right.

So if we go back to our profit function we

set this profit function here equal to zero.

So d minus w c times ql minus w is

equal to zero, which we can rewrite if we divide

by w and take seeds that are outside, we can

have the w equals c plus f over QL.

So that gives us a zero profit um condition.

Okay.

Now no kind of look at two equilibrium conditions.

We have the Mark-up equation.

Right.

But the Mark-up equation gives p over w as a

function of q and c which is exogenous.

So this is, you know, an equilibrium condition linking the

quantity sold to the the ratio of prices over wages.

And so there's two unknowns in that condition.

And then if we look at the zero profit condition

again the unknowns here are p over w and q.

So combining these two conditions will be sufficient to pin

down the equilibrium, and in particular, I'll pin down the

given value of q and of p over w.

Why am I kind of happy that I'm just getting

the ratio p over w, and I'm not worrying about

the levels of W?

In neighbouring countries.

In certain countries?

No, it's simpler than that.

Right.

Think about prices.

When we're solving for prices, what can we always do?

We normalise it one and then.

Yeah we can always choose a numeraire.

Right.

Prices.

Prices are only meaningful in relative terms, right?

P and these are both prices the price of labour

and the price of an output.

So, you know, what we're looking to solve for is

not the absolute value.

Price is just the relative value.

So we're happy with just solving for W.

Okay.

So we're going to have these two equilibrium conditions which

will graph in a second.

The p condition coming from the profit maximisation and the

z z condition coming from a free entry.

Note that this condition is kind of downward sloping in

Q because as q goes up, average cost declines and

therefore the mark-up declines.

I know this should kind of be intuitive by this

point.

We say, right, free entry means zero profits.

So you're going to have zero profits then as your

average cost declines your mark-up is also going to, uh,

decline.

Okay.

So you get this downward sloping z.z condition.

Um, the other equilibrium condition we have is labour market

clearing, which is the total labour must be the number

of varieties produced.

Times labour demand of each individual variety.

What the Labour department.

Individual varieties.

The fixed labour demand plus the variable labour demand, which

is the marginal cost C times the amount produced by

the consumer.

Q times the number of consumers out.

So this right hand side here is just total labour

in a month.

And you can see that once we know Q is

labour market condition will allow us to solve for the

number of varieties N.

Okay.

So bringing this all together we've got the p condition

from profit maximisation.

We've got third condition from free entry P is upward

sloping because as you increase Q the mark-up increases and

Z is downward sloping because as you increase Q average

cost uh, declines.

All right.

And we can see that here on this graph.

So at the end of the day, we do get

to draw ourselves a nice graph.

It's a graph where we've got the quantity on the

x axis.

We've got p over w.

The relative price on the y axis is our profit

maximisation p p condition going upward sloping in the z

condition downward sloping.

And where they intersect is the equilibrium.

And that's pinning down the equilibrium quantity Q and the

equilibrium price to wage ratio p over W.

Right.

Then we use the labour market information to back out,

uh, the uh number of varieties.

Everyone happy with that?

Okay.

So this is our autarky equilibrium.

I know we haven't said anything about trade so far.

So far everything is just autarky.

Okay, so all this works out nicely to solve for

the auto equilibrium.

So naturally, the next step is.

Okay, let's open up to trade and let's ask what

happens when we open up to trade.

And the conceptual sector is thinking about what does it

mean to open up to trade in this model.

So now suppose I tell you we've got two identical

countries and we open up to trade what is going

to change.

And more competitors in parity.

Yeah I mean so so yes.

But also the number of firms Android is like an

endogenous outcome.

So what we want to start by thinking of is

what is in terms of the exogenous things in the

model.

What changes when I open up to trade if I

want to formally write down the free trade equilibrium.

How do I do that?

What do I have to do?

Like the kind of competitive advantage models, it kind of

always well, we had two different countries and they had

different prices.

And we opened up to trade.

And the price is equalise right here.

These are symmetric countries.

So they both have the same prices in autarky.

So what does it even mean for these countries to

trade.

Becomes larger and more popular.

Yeah.

And so and when we say market size become larger

what variable in the model is capturing that.

Well L right L is the size of an economy.

So if we're just going from autarky to free trade

here, what we are doing is we are increasing our

rate.

So to solve for what happens when we open up

to trade?

What we have to do is we have to ask,

suppose L increases.

How does that, um, change the equilibrium?

Okay.

And then note that the kind of we talked about

this already and we talked about the more intuition.

But just to reiterate the reason we're still going to

get trade here, even though these countries are symmetric and

they have the same prices, autarky is because of the

love of variety.

The domestic consumers want to buy some of the foreign

varieties, and the foreign consumers want to buy some of

the domestic varieties.

And that creates an incentive for trade and for the

economies to adjust.

Okay.

So since these two countries is matching, what's happening is

when we actually going from L to two L.

So how does this shift from L to L affect

the equilibrium.

Right.

We need our p curve that's independent of L.

So that's not going to move.

But L shows up in the z z curve as

we increase L right?

Holding q constant, it will reduce p over w.

So in terms of the z z curve, that's a

downward shift in the z z curve right.

Intuitively what is happening here.

There are now more consumers.

So for any given quantity demanded per consumer total sales

increase and the total sales increase that drives down average

costs and therefore reduces prices.

If we're going to be consistent with a zero profit

condition.

So as we open up the trade, the z z

curve shifts downwards and with the equilibrium moves in along

the p curve.

This new equilibrium point here.

And what happens at this new equilibrium point.

Well the quantity you sell to each individual consumer has

declined.

So sales per consumer decrease.

Okay.

But also the price to wage ratio.

The Mark-up is also going to uh to decrease.

So you know this immediately gives us these two sources

of concentrate.

On the one hand there's increased varieties that we're consuming.

So that's the love of variety okay.

But on the other hand we have this lower uh,

lower mark-up.

Right.

And that's the pro-competitive effect driving down the, uh, driving

down the wage and the way you should think of

that as coming from is, you know, now with a

bigger market, there are more varieties being produced.

So each firm that survives can sell more, and therefore

its mark-up has to be lowered to be consistent with

free entry.

To see the variety of that kind of format.

Remember we back out the equilibrium number of varieties from

the labour market clearing condition, which looks like this.

Okay.

Um, and you can say it depends on both L

and Q, and we know that f over L goes

down because L goes up.

We also know that Q goes down because we read

that off the previous graph.

So the.

Thing.

Is the denominator here has decreased.

Which means the total number of varieties available in the

global market has gone up.

So the total number of varieties being sold globally has

increased, which is I love a variety.

Um, but also sales per firm have increased, which is

why P over W goes down which is the competitive

effect.

Questions on that.

Okay.

So let me just kind of sum up what we

learned from this model.

Right.

What we have done is we've constructed a model that

generates intra industry trade between identical countries.

The reason we get this entrenched intra industry trade between

identical countries is the combination of the assumption of love,

of variety and preferences, and increasing returns to scale in

production.

And this not only gives us a trade model that

kind of rationalises these two empirical facts intra industry trade

and trade between similar countries.

But the way trade comes about in this model also

generates these two new sources of gains from trade increased

variety and the Pro-competitive effect.

In addition, by doing this, what we've also started to

do is introduce firms into trade.

Right.

In the Ricardian lecture earlier model that we talked about

producers.

There was no meaningful concept of a firm because since

everything was constant returns to scale like firms size was

indeterminate.

So you can't talk about firms in those models.

But here, because each firm is producing a different variety,

we have a meaningful concept of a firm.

Yeah.

Of course.

Increasing resistance doesn't mean fix it by fixed cost here,

right?

That's how we're modelling.

Increasing returns to scale.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Maybe we mentioned this but I missed it.

But so because we have that a L is increasing.

So you would just duplicate the amount of countries okay.

The market will basically treat it like it's a new

equilibrium.

But it's just okay.

So L increases doubles.

But then also Q increases in sales per firm decreases

the q.

So L.

Increases q.

Decreases but q times L increase.

So remember how much the firm sells Cells a few

times out.

Yes.

So their sales per consumer decrease.

Which is cute, but their total sales should go up.

Yes.

But my follow up question was in terms of the

the capital N in terms of the total number of

firms, yeah, it's L increases.

So the numerator increases but then the denominator also increases.

Um.

So you've got this equation right.

Yeah.

So we've got n is equal to l over c

q l plus f.

Right.

So q l goes up.

Yeah.

And then also l goes up.

Okay.

So let's divide through by L.

So we get one over c q plus f over

l.

This goes down this goes down.

So this goes up.

Yes.

What I wanted to ask was can we comment on

if it increases proportionally to how much L increases.

So will it.

Oh you want to know.

Like he's n go to two n or less than.

Two n yeah.

Exactly.

Or.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So you can.

Right.

So if you go back to here right.

If you ignore the denominator L goes to two L.

So then in that case n will go to two

n.

But q l also goes up.

So n goes up by less than l.

So we're going to have that.

So when we when the two countries.

Were you and I were less than two firms per

country.

Yes.

Yes.

Total total number of lives in the global economy is

bigger.

But the number of firms per country decreases.

Exactly.

Good.

Other questions on this.

Okay.

Now note that the kind of the final thing I

want to say about this model for now is.

We.

We bought firms in, but here all the firms are

identical.

In practice, we might expect that there are kind of

differences across firms.

That's next week.

So next week we'll talk about firm heterogeneity in this

type of model.

And what I want to say though for now for

the last few minutes, is once we have started to

develop this kind of intra industry trade model, we can

do lots more stuff with this kind of way of

thinking about trade.

It is conceptually a very different way of thinking about

trade to how we were thinking about comparative advantage trade

before.

And we've started with kind of the simplest version of

this type of model.

But once we have this idea of kind of differentiated

products potentially increasing returns to scale, there's lots of other

stuff we can do.

And in particular, one of the other stuff we can

do is start to think about where does the gravity

equation, why might we have a gravity equation in international

trade.

So a few words now on the gravity equation.

Um we talked about it in week one.

But just to give you a bit of history kind

of dates back.

The idea of the gravity equation dates back to Tinbergen

writing in the 1960s, and when Tinbergen wrote about the

gravity equation, he essentially just said, you know, empirically trade

flows seem to follow a gravity equation.

Bilateral trade between two countries is increasing in the size

of the economies, and it's decreasing in measures of distance

between them.

And to begin with, it was just sort of an

empirical observation that people struggle to rationalise with models because

it doesn't come naturally out of comparative advantage based models.

But then starting with this kind of new trade theory

and you can do it using the equivalent model we've

just looked at now.

But you can also do it using an army and

modelling system where products are differentiated by country of origin.

But we don't have the concept of firms which from

their.

People.

Showed how you can theoretically derive a a gravity equation.

And because it's such a strong empirical regularity and all

the modern workhorse train models have a gravity equation built

into them in the sense that they are set up

so that they predict a gravity equation for bilateral trade.

In particular, the kind of most well-known of these that

we're not going to study explicitly in this course, but

it's used for a lot of kind of trade policy

analysis is versions of this model by Eaton and Quantum,

which is take the Ricardian model we've worked with, extend

it to a world where many countries, many industries and

where trade is costly.

Then you get a set up, a kind of unlike

the kind of basic comparative on IT based trade models

does deliver a gravity equation.

So one of these kind of modern gravity equations going

to look like well, on the problem set, I'm going

to get you to show that in a simple army

you can set up, you can get this type of

gravity equation.

So this is exports from I to J is proportional

to GDP of I times GDP of relative to world

GDP times is where J is a measure of trade

costs.

That's kind of the distance term.

Right.

But then there are also these two additional terms that

show up the pi I and the p j.

So one thing that comes out when you start to

derive a more revenue model theoretically, is this sort of

intuitive empirical gravity model is like this stuff without the

pie in the P, it's like it depends on countryside

this size.

This is a constant and this is distance.

Okay.

What comes out of the theory is there's also these

two additional terms that show up, um, which we call

multilateral resistance terms, which capture features of how much market

access a country has in terms of both inward market

access and outward market access.

So p, j is a measure of the degree of

competition in market J, and in many models it will

actually map 1 to 1 to the price index in

country J.

And what this is saying is typically signal is going

to be greater than one, is that if market competition

in country J is weaker, then PJ will be greater

and you will sell more there.

It's like saying if there's there's less competition going on

in market J you can sell more to market J

all else constant.

So that's what the PJ term is capturing.

And then the Pi term is the kind of outward

multilateral resistance term um, you will solve for in this

form on the problem set.

But what it, what it's capturing is kind of how

much how high the trade costs exporters from your country

faced on on average.

And if on average, you face higher trade costs, then

conditional on any given level of bilateral trade costs, you

will tend to export, uh, more.

So hopefully when you do the problem set, it will

be more clear where these come from.

And we don't have time to kind of derive these

now.

But what I do kind of want to flag is

that they're kind of really important for thinking theoretically, where

does the gravity equation come from?

And why does, you know, why do modern gravity models,

they don't just have the y yj and the time,

they also have these adaptive.

Resistance terms in them.

And then just a few words to kind of estimating

the gravity equation.

Right.

This is our gravity equation that we derive.

The nice feature of it.

Right.

So everything is multiplicative.

You take logs you're going to get a nice log

linear equation right.

And then if we parameterise trade plots as depending on

distance and some.

Bilateral.

Uh term type tower J, which captures other trade costs,

we get this very straightforward gravity equation that we can

estimate where we request trade on.

Income.

Levels, trade costs and the multilateral resistance terms.

A problem we then often run into is okay.

Well, the multilateral terms aren't directly observed, right.

But the way you can address that is you use

fixed effects, export and import fixed effects to absorb them,

and then look at how changes in Y and y

day over time and bilateral terms in the trade cross

affect affect trade.

So the crucial thing there is that the the multilateral

resistance terms are export and import specific, so they can

be absorbed by fixed effects in a gravity equation.

Right.

And that often proves to be very useful when actually

implementing this set up empirically.

So so that's kind of what we're saying here.

And then the final thing kind of on this just

sort of a brief, uh, gallop through the gravity equation

I wanted to say is one thing people will then

often do is, you know, you you put your fixed

effect in your retrograde close on distance and you estimate

this efficient alpha four.

Right.

And we said alpha four is likely to be negative.

Well one thing people are interested in is how has

Alpha four changed over time.

Has trade become less elastic to distance over time?

And surprisingly, the answer is no.

So what we're looking at here is the estimates using

data from different years from the late 19th to the

20th century.

What is the estimated distance elasticity of trade.

And you can see typically it's close 2 to 1.

You know this is negative one.

And you know just below it.

But crucially it doesn't seem to have trended in either

direction over time.

So this is perhaps a kind of slightly surprising fact,

though despite all the increase in transportation technologies during the

20th century, the distance has not become less elastic to

trade over time.

It could be because historically there was more trade in,

let's say, like geographical endowments, like we can grow this,

you can grow.

Lecture 7:

Listen.

Can I like your hair?

Thank you.

I get it over.

Reading is like.

Is so bored to, like the problem.

Yeah.

No.

My orders.

My.

Yeah.

What?

Help me do it.

Um, but it took, like, eight hours, so.

I got it six.

Six hours?

Yeah.

Well.

Just slow.

Yeah.

No, it is.

The social contract.

Yeah.

Yeah I do, I have the African.

Yeah, I got from the island.

I won the world Bank loans, and they look so

cute.

Little things like that every time.

I look at it.

Oh.

This is so wrong.

So?

Then maybe.

This one, right?

Yeah.

Right.

Imagine sitting.

They've done the matrix assignment.

Okay.

Okay.

All right.

I'm a bit annoyed.

That they actually told us.

Yeah, exactly.

I was so surprised by the one thing I do

we have a trailer for.

This one.

And so on.

Oh, wow.

I think he probably read up on it.

I have to do this.

I hear it, but.

Oh my God.

I remember once I went back to the UK.

Okay, and I went back to sleep.

It was like -16.

Like, it's so cold, you know?

It's just like ice in your face, you know?

It's like.

It's like you're constantly, like, attacked.

This is like a one day.

Yeah.

Okay.

Um, did anyone have any additional questions that came up

about the stuff we talked about this morning, about the

extended essay?

Before we get on with the lecture.

All right.

Good.

I'll assume you all happy on that front, then.

Um, so what are we doing today?

Remember what we were doing last week, right.

Last week we looked at the Krugman model of trade,

and this was a bit of a departure from for

us, because up until then, we'd been looking at these

kind of neoclassical trade models where the world was perfectly

competitive and where the incentive for trade were differences in

comparative advantage.

Now, we introduced this, uh, carbon trade model that had

a very different perspective on why countries trade.

It was about trade between identical countries.

It was about intra within industry trade not based on

comparative advantage.

And the way we modelled it departed from the perfectly

competitive framework introducing imperfect competition.

In particular, we talked about monopolistic competition and also introducing

increasing returns to scale and firms.

And so it was the first time we had introduced,

um, firms into our model.

And today we're going to build on that by getting

a little bit more serious about the firm level dimension

of trade.

So for five weeks we had no firms at all.

And then all three We had firms, but all the

different firms were identical.

Um, in practice, you know, as you couldn't, you kind

of know from casual observation of the world, firms are

not all identical.

And there was a lot of heterogeneity across firms along

multiple dimensions.

And it's the implications of that heterogeneity for international trade

that we are going to be thinking about today.

So to kind of warm ourselves up, let's start with

a question which is, you know, it is undoubtedly true

that firms are different.

Nevertheless, sometimes in our models we are willing to simplify

our data structure by assuming away differences that we don't

think are important for the question at hand.

So the kind of question here is when thinking about

international trade, if, um, heterogeneity likely to be something that

is important to take seriously?

Or is it something we could simply assume a way,

as we have done up to now?

So what are some reasons we can come up with?

Why heterogeneity may matter.

Thinking about international trade.

Opening the floor to suggestions.

Firms might use different technologies.

Um, and that might make them more or less competitive

on international markets.

If you think there might be trade barriers, there might

be competitive in the domestic market, but not globally.

So they might not export for some firms in the

market, might export because they have better technology than others

in the market.

Yeah.

So I think that's that's true.

And that is something we see in practice.

But if I can push back a little bit.

So what why why does that why does it matter

that we have that feature of the world in our

models.

There are lots of features of the world that we

just rip out of our models.

Like throughout this course, whenever we talk about a country,

we talk about a country as if it's kind of

a point, right?

We don't have any concept of space within the country.

We don't have any concept.

We haven't been really focusing on kind of differences in

preferences across country.

Within the country.

We haven't been thinking much about differences in kind of

worker types either.

So we're willing to assume a way.

A lot of things that we do observe in practice.

Why might it be a mistake to assume this.

One reason might be a node?

I don't know, I'm not sure if this is model.

It depends on the model, I guess would be that

while countries, you know have well-defined borders and labour might

be living within those borders, farmers can exist across borders.

And so if what matters is not country technology, but

foreign technology, we'd need to know what firms exist in

what countries to understand why countries export or input certain

goods.

Okay.

Yeah.

So I mean, I'll take that as a definite possibility

that firms.

Firms not might might not be limited by borders in

the same way that, you know, things that are simply

stuck within a country.

Ah.

And indeed, next week's lecture is going to be about

foreign direct investment and multinational firms.

So we will kind of return to that theme very

much next week.

That's kind of one argument.

What other arguments could we possibly put forward here?

If tax like firms for export are just different.

Than.

Like trade pageants with uh for.

Sure rely on that.

Feature.

Okay.

Can you kind of that seems plausible, but can you

kind of say a little bit more to convince us

that that is indeed the case?

You're kind of saying firms that export maybe different from

firms that don't export.

So that's Important.

But why?

Why might we think it's important?

Why might it be important?

If firms that ask for that are just different, but

we are assuming that they are, they are not.

And, uh, maybe because they're different than, uh.

This would be like this would impact the pattern of

trade and that if we don't model that, we would

just miss that pattern.

So it's a.

Way of saying that maybe that's if there's something a

part of the trade or in some way different from

the firms that entry.

If we want to understand kind of how trade shocks

affect trade, we need to account for the fact that

different firms respond differently.

That's potentially a possibility.

So I'm trying to.

Think of like examples.

Okay.

And one is for instance doing some work on food

processing at some point in India.

I mean, there's a share of um.

So despite there being opportunity in the global market, it

was harder for some firms that were more local.

Um, had language barriers, for instance, had um, barriers in

terms of being able to access files were typically a

lot more, um, smaller.

But also, um, I just don't know what is at

the local and underdeveloped, um, that they were not able

to leverage benefits of global trade visa be unnecessary, which

is operating in the same geography, um, which might even

have the same scale as a local firm, but was

different on the other characteristics and hence could not access

opportunities in the global trade market as much.

So there are variations that, although they might be identical

on metrics that you care about, such as domestic output,

are still very variant in terms of, for instance, how

they're able to meet regulations, how much access they have

to bio networks.

Um, what are other software, um, features of, um, that

specific form that then affect it.

But also like I expect, like if I'm just putting

up another sector, um, that really is by sector.

So something that you can just say if I control

for industry, it takes care of it because for instance

difference it's possible that they are more export competitive because

they're um, you need to be a lot more technical.

So the average is slightly higher, so your barrier isn't

as much.

Yeah.

Um, and hence any shock to trade, be it, um,

tariffs be opening up markets with um price changes can

then affect firms within the sector differently and also affects

sectionals differently.

Okay.

So the idea that if we want to actually be

able to understand how three types of trade policy or

changes in trade cost, what effects those have on a

positive level, we need to be able to account for

the fact that the response actually in practice comes from

firms, and different firms may respond differently because of these

various dimensions of heterogeneity you've talked about.

Okay.

That seems plausible.

So.

Let me now consider tax.

Allocations or allocations on these problems.

Maybe there are other benefits.

And the demand is rather than in the aggregate.

So the idea that, you know, once you want one

to acknowledge heterogeneity, it naturally raises kind of distributional questions.

And one of those distributional questions might be whether resources

are efficiently allocated across firms or not.

Is that fair?

Yeah.

Yeah.

One other idea, which is that I know that empirically

there are some papers that look at, you know, whether

it's productive firms go to international markets and trade or

whether it's them having access to international markets make them

more productive.

So then if you if you can't distinguish, if you

just look at the country effect, you can't distinguish between

those two mechanisms.

Whereas if you look at the firm, um, at heterogeneous

firms, then you could sort of more easily model what

direction the causal effect goes.

And then there's that imperative to say, okay, if we

as a government want to increase trade Competitiveness.

Do we need to make our firms more productive?

Or do we need to help them get onto international

markets that will then, in turn, make them more competitive?

In which direction does actual causality go?

So I kind of and the idea being that for

this question and possibly for other questions as well, if

you actually want to be able to estimate the effect

that some, some of these policies which are happening at

the firm level, you need to kind of have a

realistic view of of firms.

That's a simplification of what you just said, but I

think it's the essential for it.

Yeah.

Okay, good.

So these are I mean I think these are all

good points to write.

These are all potential reasons why firm heterogeneity might might

matter.

So what we're going to do in today's lecture, uh,

we're going to start off by looking at some empirical

facts about the role of firms in international trade and

about why, you know, what kind of firm heterogeneity do

we see and how that's related to participation in international

trade?

Um, and we're going to use that to kind of

motivate why we want to think more about heterogeneous firms.

Um, and then we are going to work through a

model of heterogeneous housing.

Trade is a model originally developed by Mark pallets about

20 years ago.

Um, it's very much built on the crude model.

As you'll see, it kind of takes the crude model

as a basis and then kind of extends it to

bring in this firm community.

And by working through that model, what we're going to

try and do is, is two things.

Both we're going to try and understand why we see

heterogeneity in which types of firms participate in trade.

But then we're also going to use it to say,

okay, well we want to model that kind of heterogeneity.

What new things do we learn about trade.

Is there something the model tells us about either the

causes or the consequences of trade that we don't get,

uh, from the group model.

Right.

And as we'll see, he's going to develop new insights

which rely on the existence of this firm.

And so it's going to give us a kind of

new perspective on what's going on.

When?

When countries dream.

But let's start with some empirical.

Motivation.

And we're going to frame this in terms of kind

of three facts that it's important to be aware of

when thinking about how firms participate in trade.

So the fact one is that most firms don't trade.

If you look at the cross-section of firms in an

economy and you ask what share of firms are exporters,

typically the answer is going to be not many.

And maybe the magnitude of that not many is going

to vary across economies.

Some economies have more firms that train others, but typically

we'd expect in most cases to be selling, well, less

than, uh, 50%.

Okay.

Um, here's some data to back up that claim.

Uh, so this is data for the US Manufacturing industry

is a note here.

By focusing on manufacturing.

There are no I mean, we're dropping agriculture and mining,

but more importantly, we also dropping services.

And since we know the goods tend to be more

traded goods industries and services trade, it might not be

much of a surprise that in the services industries, most

firms participate in trade.

We think of a lot of services as being inherently

non-tradable, but goods.

We know that there is a, you know, a lot

of trade.

So we might expect to see that.

You see a lot of firms participating in trading here

in the manufacturing industry.

And what this table is showing is that that's not

not the case.

So this is U.S. data from 2002.

Um, we broke up into about, uh, 28, 25 different

manufacturing industries, and then we call aggregate manufacturing at the

bottom there.

And what the first column shows is just what percent

of firms in each industry are.

Sorry.

What percentage of firms are in each industry during the

distribution and the second column?

This is the one we're really interested in.

Within each industry, what percentage of firms are exporters.

So you can see the aggregate number for the US

manufacturing is 18%.

18% of the US manufacturing firms in 2002 reported being

exporters.

And when I say, you know, most firms don't export

that kind of 18% number is a typical number that

motivates that.

What you can also see though, is how that varies

across industries.

And there is considerable variation across industries.

I think the lowest number in this table is 2%

for miscellaneous manufacturing, and the highest number is 38% in

computers and electrical equipment.

So we do see substantial variation across industries, but even

in industries with the highest shares, it's still well below

50% that are exporting.

Just as kind of a sidebar.

What do we think might explain that variation across industries

in the share of firms that export?

There's not going to be our main focus today, but

it's useful to think about nevertheless.

Things.

One is, for instance, the durability of the word.

Um, so if you're trying to export, for instance, food,

then it, um, it might make sense.

You don't want to waste time in the export itself.

Uh, so it makes sense to continue to, uh, send

it to and also something like food.

Place preferences matter a lot.

This is something like electronics or electronics, where the laptop

here is the same as a laptop in India.

Yeah.

Uh, so preferences, um, durability of the good and also

then margins that you get because there are logistical costs

that are associated with export Senegal, and hence it just

may not make sense for an exporter to sell it

elsewhere in the country.

Okay.

So both kind of inherently how tradable are the goods

more tradable than others.

And also what kind of trade costs will you face

when you're trading.

Yeah.

What else.

So if we could go back to the theory of

comparative advantage, like some industries that have like a comparative

advantage in math globally, they would the there would be

the industries that see more firms exporting than other industries,

like.

Yeah.

Yeah.

If we think that the US has a comparative advantage

in certain industries like Ricardian or Sherrilyn, then we'd expect

to see, you know, relatively more US firms exporting and

industries where the US has a comparative advantage.

Then when in industries where the US does not.

Right.

And so, you know, if you look at the numbers

way within the industry to get in the high chairs

here.

Computers, electrical equipment.

These are probably, you know, relatively high skilled, high tech

industries where we think the U.S. may have a comparative

advantage, like quality of chemicals that includes pharmaceuticals are there.

And then some of the, uh, lower numbers, like 8%

in clothing.

That's definitely not an industry where the U.S. has a

comparative advantage.

Wood products likewise.

So, you know, part of the explanation could be here

that some just some industries are more tradeable than others.

And that might be the case in every country.

But then also different countries are going to have comparative

advantage in different industries.

Right.

And to the extent that starting these things, you might

expect to see them kind of split into a different

country.

Or if you had a country that had a comparative

advantage in clothing, then you would expect to see a

higher share of growth.

Okay, good.

So yeah.

Just to understand the table.

It says the final column is the mean export as

a percent of the total among the firms that export.

So is that a weighted mean by amount of output

or is it just any firm exports, yes or no?

I think it's binary and that if it's a yes,

then what percent?

And then it just averages those percents.

Just I believe it is the latter.

Right.

I would have to go back to the source to

be 100% sure.

I mean, if you look at the notes for the

table, which is where they should explain exactly what it

is, there's no mention of weighting.

So I believe it will just be the average.

But I mean, that's a good segway because let's talk

about this third column now.

All right.

Because we said that most firms don't export.

Right.

Another factor we see in the data is that even

when we look among the firms that do export based

on most of their output to domestic customers, right.

And that's kind of what we're looking at in this

column.

So we're looking at conditional on exporting.

What share of your sales are exports versus domestic.

And you can see here even among exports is the

average export share is only 14% across all these industries.

And again there is some variation across industries.

But it's actually the variation across industries is much lower

here than it was in the second column.

It's kind of between 10 and 20%.

And almost all of these are these industries, right.

Which is saying that on average, US firms that are

exporters typically don't sell more than 20% of their output

outside the US.

And that doesn't vary a lot across our industries.

Now, these are just US numbers.

Um, but people have kind of done similar calculations essentially

for any country you care to today.

and broadly the same patterns hold across countries.

Um, you do tend to see, you know, countries that

are relatively more open in terms of you remember at

the start of the course we talked about openness as

trade to GDP.

So countries that are more open in that sense.

The share of exporters will tend to be a bit

higher.

Um, and likewise the share of exports in total sales

will also tend to be higher.

Part of the reason you know, what's holding is down

for the US is obviously the US domestic market is

huge.

And so it's natural that US firms are a lot

there relative to the amount they export.

If you were a Belgian firm, you've got a much

smaller domestic market, so your export share relative to domestic

sales on average will be uh, will be higher, but

still kind of regardless where we look at this communication,

both the internet and those that do sell more domestically

than they do abroad.

In addition, these are facts about exports, but kind of

the same thing happens on the import side.

And most firms don't.

Import and imports account for a relatively small share of

total firm purchases.

So though we are seeing participation in international trade, we

don't want to think about firms that participate in trade

as being fully global and doing all of their business

globally.

They still have this strong domestic focus.

Maybe I'm overthinking it.

Like hypothetically, suppose that, you know, the larger firm gets

the more inclined to export.

And I'm thinking about why that table might not give

the full picture.

Yeah.

Um, if larger firms export more.

And then we also think that there's a distribution of

there are more small firms than the very large firms.

Yes.

You're saying that the weighted number will be higher than

the average.

Yes.

It could be one huge firm does almost all of

the exports.

And that would be, you know, 100, you know, 90%

of their produce is exported.

And then all the other firms it's 10%.

And so then it's located.

I think, to be honest, the simplest way to kind

of look at that would just be not worry about

the firm level data.

Just go to the aggregate data and say for manufacturing

as a whole, what is the share of exports relative

to value added or sales.

Right.

And that would give you a, uh, an average number

for the whole industry.

Excuse me.

Um, I don't know if the top of my head

what that number is for the US, but I suspect

you're right that it's going to be bigger than 14%,

but it's still not going to be a huge number.

Okay, so that's that plot.

To.

When we compare firms that do export to firms that

don't, they don't look the same along a number of

different dimensions.

So it's not just that some firms export and others

don't.

Is that the firms that participate in trade.

And this is true on both for both kind of

exporters and importers.

Those firms that participate in trade are systematically different from

non exporters in particular, they tend on average to be

bigger in terms of their sales and their employment.

They also tend to be more productive in terms of

TFP or labour productivity.

And they tend to also be more skilled and capital

intensive and pay higher wages.

So to get a little bit of evidence on that,

we're going to look at some regressions.

Um, so we are going to Russian regression where we've

got data on am I in industry J.

And we're going to regress the log of the farm

output, uh, or the log of some variable y, the

fermion industry J where y could be sales, it could

be productivity, it can be employment.

We're going to try lots of different variables.

And we're going to regress that on a dummy or

whether the firm is an exporter.

So this is the export dummy.

In some of our investigations we'll also control for firm

size as measured by employment.

And we will sometimes also have an industry fixed effect.

And the reason we kind of look at specifications both

with and without industry fixed events is allowed to speak

to the point you were raising earlier.

If we talk about, you know, firms that participate in

trade being different, is it because they come from different

industries or are they different within industries?

We want to answer that, that question.

So all in estimating this equation is to estimate this

equation.

Alpha is what the coefficient alpha is going to tell

us is how on average are found for export different

from firms that don't export.

So it's going to be a systematic way of comparing

exporters to non exporters.

Note that this is not intended to be causal.

This is all about uh estimating the association between being

an exporter and the output of interest.

It is easy to come up with no explanation for

why.

It could be kind of.

Is it the exporting changes the outcome, or is it

the outcome of exporting, or is it some third omitted

variable.

So we're not we're not.

Saying anything goes here.

We just want to know what the correlations.

So here's a table summarising results from that exercise.

So the way to read this table um each of

the different rows is for a different outcome variables into

its employment in the first row.

And then we go down from there.

Um, each of the columns is a different specification.

So column one is when we just have the export

we don't control the employment and the industry.

Fixed effect column two we have the industry fixed effect.

And on three we also control for uh employee.

Right.

And then each of the actual entries in the table

is the estimate of that alpha coefficient from a different

regression.

So every entry in that table is that is coming

from a different, uh, regression.

So what you're able to look at by kind of

comparing.

The.

Entries in this, uh, table is what is the difference

on average in exporters and non exporters.

Uh, the Unix is going to be log points of

the unit.

So roughly percentage um across different out.

So for example on.

Average.

And exporters are 119 log points bigger than non exporters

in terms of employment.

When we don't have any other controls they're also much

bigger in terms of sales.

They have higher value per worker.

They have higher productivity.

In terms of TFP though, the effect is smaller that

they pay higher wages, they have higher capital intensity and

they have higher skill intensity.

So this is the sort of basic pattern showing that

exporters are different.

Second of all, and when we add industry fixed effects

the estimates don't change very much.

They shrink a little bit.

Uh, but they're still kind of positive and similar sort

of magnitude for the most part.

So this is saying that most of the difference between

exports and non exporters is not coming from a cross

industry variation, it's coming from within industry variation.

Exporters look different to non exporters are within the industries.

And then the final column is what happens if we

also control for employment.

And you see when we do that we're still getting

positive effects.

So exports are still on average bigger and better performing

along these dimensions conditional on employment.

But typically for most of these outcomes this size of

the differences are smaller.

Right.

So what that is telling you is that kind of

a lot of the variation in outcomes between exports and

non exporters can be explained by differences in firm size

rather than difference in export status per se.

So there is also some additional differences that are coming

that is conditional on on firm size.

Questions on this?

Yeah.

How do we understand that you have a patient increase

since, like, actually add this?

Yeah, I mean, I, I'm not sure to be honest.

What that if that tells us anything obvious.

Right.

I don't think there is kind of a clear interpretation

of that.

You know, that's me.

Um, I guess comparing the kind of living with that

industry thinks it might be telling.

You know, you might argue that comparing TFP across different

industries is like trying to kind of compare apples and

oranges.

It's not the same unit, so it might just not

be a good idea.

Uh.

Comparing the second and third column, the same kind of

even conditional on firm size, if you are exposed to

it's kind of a positive sign about your productivity.

So there's some kind of relationship between productivity and exporting

there.

But I don't want to I don't want to kind

of read too much into that.

Any other questions at this point?

Okay.

So that's not saying that exporters perform better than on

exports along all these dimensions, though not necessarily because exports.

Okay.

Factory.

This one is a little bit a little bit more

complex.

And it speaks to okay suppose we study a trade

liberalisation episode.

Suppose we look at a case where a country reduces

barriers to trade.

And we ask what happens.

And specifically we ask what happens not just at the

aggregate or industry level, but what happens to different firms.

So there's a couple of kind of interesting papers we're

going to talk about here, which have kind of done

this thing.

So this is a pathway made complete liberalisation in the

late 1970s.

And there's also a paper by Dan Chaplin who looks

at the kind of the US free trade agreement.

And both of these papers.

The goal is to understand firm level responses to trade,

and in particular, to try to address the question that

was brought up earlier to different firms, respond differently to

trade liberalisation, and they're both going to argue that that

is indeed the case.

Um, so what particular columns in her work?

Okay.

So this was an important realisation.

So the context is Chile, like many Latin American firms

in its quite protectionist trade policies after the Second World

War, um, and then in the late 1970s, there was

a kind of change of well, there was a sort

of there was a change in the intellectual climate across

Latin America towards import protection, which led many countries to

dismantle these import.

And so this happened in the late 1970s.

And she studies as Chile reduces this import protection, how

to truly have a chilling effect.

And what does she mean?

She finds that for a lot of the least productive

firms, they actually shut down and stop producing entirely following

the trade liberalisation.

So this is a negative shock for shutting down, um,

where all product from all productive firms, she's seeing a

reallocation of market share across firms from the sort of

medium productivity firms that survive, but are relatively small towards

the more kind of highly productive, um, firms.

So the bigger the kind of initially bigger firms further

expand and the medium productivity firms lose market share with

experts.

And the implication of these changes is that aggregate productivity,

uh, in the UK is going to be capturing some

good, increases and increases, she finds it gradually increased around

19% following the trade liberalisation.

So she's finding productivity gains from this liberalisation.

But crucially, where these gains come from.

About two thirds of the gains are coming from this

reallocation effect, where more productive firms are expanding at the

expense of less productive firms.

All right.

So we talked a little bit about, okay, maybe one

of the things that matters about firms is how resources

distributed across firms.

Right.

And this is evidence of that may indeed be important.

Right.

Because where productivity is increasing here, not because individual firms

are increasing their productivity.

Right.

But primarily because workers that were previously employed in low

productivity firms are moving to more productive, productive firms.

So when you compute aggregate productivity, aggregate productivity is going

to be a weighted average of firm level of productivity

where the weights are going to be the market shares

of each firm.

So when you reallocate market share from Leicester, more productive

firms aggregate productivity goes up.

And what I find in her work is that that's

exactly what happens in China following this, uh, this trade

liberalisation.

Uh, yeah.

Then that if you want to connect this to sort

of classical economic theory, could you say that the trade

liberalisation sort of induces creative destruction?

Um, in the schumpeterian sense, if that.

A.

Little bit.

Yes.

I so I think it's a reasonable kind of high

level analogy.

Um, I want to push it too far because if

we, you know, if you think carefully about a schumpeterian

model, what causes the creative destruction is other firms entering

that are more productive.

And that's not what she's finding here.

She's finding that at least 30 firms found exiting, which

is kind of the destruction part of it.

But the reason why is not because there are kind

of more innovative firms entering.

It's just that the existing firms are expanding.

So it's kind of related but not the same.

And as we'll see, the Melies model we are going

to look at kind of provides an alternative way of

thinking about why this has happened, which is, you know,

has this destruction feature, but it's not exactly schumpeterian.

I was wondering if you argued deaths and low, low

production firms are, on average, more.

So therefore, if a country oversaw the first row and

benefits from trade.

Yeah, absolutely.

It can be.

Right.

So it is certainly generically true that firm size and

firm productivity are pretty strongly, positively correlated.

So you know, when when you hear that low productivity

firms shut down, a lot of these are going to

be smaller.

For me to have a relative term, at least at

the smaller firms, at the expense, with the beneficiaries being

the bigger firms.

So from a standpoint of view, especially for developing countries,

this might be why this is also a question.

I mean, there are definitely winners and losers here.

This is not a picture of everyone.

This is a picture of some people losing and some

people gaining within an industry.

And if you think that there are political economy reasons

why we care, particularly about small firms, this might suggest

that kind of trade liberalisation is going to kind of

exacerbate the problems that small firms face.

Especially if those bigger firms are multinationals.

Yeah.

I mean, so we haven't we we haven't said anything

yet about multinationals we will do next week.

But it is reasonable to anticipate that multinationals do tend

to be big.

Yeah.

I don't.

She discuss, um, whether this relocation is largely within industries

or if it's across industries.

It's within.

So she the way she estimates it, she's trying to

estimate purely the kind of within industry condition.

May this lead.

To more monopolistic.

In the long run and decrease the actually productivity of

the country.

Right.

Yeah, it's a really good question.

Um, this paper does not speak, uh, directly.

Uh, to that there is other work, uh, which kind

of looks sort of imagine a similar setting where country

is liberalising trade.

But now we've got data that also allows us to

compute mark-ups.

And then so we can ask, how does the trade

liberalisation affect, um, affect Mark-ups.

Uh, in particular, there's been work done on this kind

of looking at the aftermath of India's 1990s liberalisation.

Um.

I think what that literature.

Also what that literature find is not kind of completely

clear cut, but I think it would be fair to

characterise the kind of main thrust of it as being

that if there's more import competition, that additional competition will

tend to reduce mark-ups, because it's making the, um, environment

more competitive.

But there's also potentially an offsetting force that as, which

is the one thing you really need to as you

drive domestic firms out of the market.

Right, the market is becoming there's fewer domestic firms and

that can push you in the opposite direction.

So it kind of depends on what's the balance between,

on the one hand, maybe fewer firms producing domestically, but

on the other hand you've got more competition from abroad.

So there's two potential forces.

I think in most circumstances people find the foreign competition

forces stronger, but that's certainly not a.

There's no reason we would expect that to always be

the case.

So it is going to be context dependent.

Okay.

So that's closely related to the similar time by traffic.

We're looking at a different context.

So Trexler was looking at kind of the US free

trade agreement.

This is sort of the precursor to NAFTA, which came

into effect in 1989.

And Trevor's Canadian.

So he has Canadian data studying the effect of this

agreement on, on Canada.

Um, same trust that we talked about when we were

doing the hetero model, by the way, the kind of

missing trade paradox.

Um, so in this case, in the Canadian case, it

was kind of just an import liberalisation actually reduced its

import tax because at the time of the US case

is more bilateral and you see tariff cuts on both

sides.

So Candy is cutting its tariff on US imports, which

increases the import competition that Canadian firms face.

But at the same time, the US is cutting its

tariffs on Canadian exports.

So for Canadian exporters, there's an increase in their export

opportunities.

And what that kind of wants to do is study

both these effects simultaneously and understand how they affect firms

in in Canada.

Um, so we drafted by sectors looking to import competing

sectors which are mainly affected by the reduction in import

tariffs and increased import competition, and then export sectors who

get into increased export opportunities.

But the import competing sectors, he finds that the extreme

point, which is a 12% decline in employment.

But at the same time, he finds the labour productivity

increases by about 15%.

And about half of that is coming from the same

sort of reallocation effects that are happening.

Identify.

So his findings are kind of consistent with her work

showing that I had this increased import competition.

You are seeing these reallocations of market share from left

to more productive.

So it tends to increase aggregate productivity.

What about on the export side?

Here he doesn't find any employment effect, which is a

bit surprising.

You know you would kind of effect you would have

expected that as export increase Canadian firms increase their employment.

He doesn't mind that.

But he does highlight the productivity increases.

Um.

Though here he finds that the effect is more within

firm effect than the reallocation effect.

So it's plant level increases in productivity that are driving

the labour productivity increases.

And in other work, he links it to Canadian firms

investing in more advanced technologies as they got new export

opportunities.

So it's kind of the idea is that there's some

new technology out there.

And as a market share, market size increases with these

new opportunities, that stimulates these technological investments which drive that

higher level productivity.

So this kind of the reallocation effect is relatively less

important on the import side.

But he's still finding kind of these different responses of

different.

Questions on that.

Okay.

So we've got our three facts right.

Most firms don't export those firms that do export a

systematically bigger and better performing.

And trade liberalisation has these weaving industry reallocation effects that

affect aggregate productivity or industry level productivity, even holding firm

level productivity constant?

So what we're now going to do is we're going

to look at a model that can kind of rationalise

these facts and help us to understand how firm heterogeneity

might matter for understanding the effects of international trade.

So this is the mallet model.

It's an extension of the model has the same kind

of base in terms of imperfect competition, increasing returns to

scale, differentiated products.

Ah, but now things are going to differ.

They're going to differ in their productivity.

And we're going to ask how does the differences across

firms in productivity.

How do they affect firm level behaviour.

And then what does this mean when we have to

trade.

All right.

So let's walk through the setup.

Um two countries with foreign foreign variables get a start

as usual single factor production.

So each country has health workers.

All those workers are homogeneous.

All right.

So note you know immediately we are simplifying here.

We're not having any kind of role in type multiple

factors of of production.

We don't have any labour supply decision.

Um each agent has one unit of labour.

Um, and then there is going to be a single

industry with differentiated varieties within the industry.

So again, that's kind of as in the the Krugman

model we are focusing on, you know, what happens if

we just restrict to a single industry.

So all trade has to be entering trade.

Right.

Formally here's what the preferences looks like.

So it's we're going to have existing preferences with constant

elasticity of substitution.

Um so each country represented consumer identical preferences across countries.

As usual.

We're not trying to drive anything by introducing different preferences.

And the utility is to see as aggregate of the

quantity that you consume of each of the individual goods.

Hi.

Couple of things to note here.

One is last week in the Cruz model we had

kind of a discrete finite number of goods.

We counted them right here.

We're assuming there's a continuum of good Good.

So we've gone to a uncomfortable, uh.

I'm kind of bleeding.

I'm okay.

Essentially.

Um.

So because of that, you know, everything is going to

have integrals instead of sums.

The intuition is it's the same.

It's just the model is easier to work with in,

with this kind of continuum of goes rather than with

a finite number of grids.

And then second, how is this utility function different from

the one we used in the Krugman model last week?

What's the difference here?

This has monopoly power.

Right?

I mean, yeah, that's going to be true.

But we had that last week as well, I mean.

Here I am.

Just don't worry about this now.

We're just looking at the fact that this equation is

defining the preferences.

We had a similar equation for the Google model last

week, but it was slightly different.

And I want us to highlight what the difference was.

This is a concern.

That is true but is not the substantive difference.

Well we had last week.

We had.

Our utility.

I mean it was a sun rather than an integral.

But again that's not the important thing, right?

We defined it in this way.

Right.

For some function you.

Right.

And then if you remember, we had.

Sigma which was equal to minus.

U double prime over u prime, maybe a q that

I might be getting this definition slightly wrong because I

don't have it often.

You'll have it in my head, but.

Instead of having just q to the sigma minus one

to sigma, we had this general function u, and when

then we defined the demand elasticity in terms of the

U, and we said that this sigma.

So we could write this sigma as a function of

q.

And we said that the derivative sigma prime of q

r was negative, so that as you consume more demand

became less elastic.

And that meant that it was true, that channel when

there were shocked to this economy in particular when it

opened up to trade mark-ups suggested.

So here in the marriage model, we're assuming a particular

functional form for you.

We're assuming you have q q to the signal minus

one over sigma right.

What this is going to imply that sigma doesn't change

as q varies.

Right.

This is a constant plasticity function.

So we are simplifying the utility function we use last

time which had a variable demand elasticity and therefore variable

mark-ups to a constant elasticity set up where the you

know, the demand elasticity is not going to change.

And as we'll see, that also means that there are

constant mark-ups in this in this setting.

So that's a simplification relative to what we did last

time.

So given that utility function we can set up the

consumers utility maximisation problem, and let's do that just to

make sure we're comfortable with solving that problem.

One that comes up often.

So if the consumer is maximising utility right.

Uh let's set that up as a constraint maximisation problem.

We're going to maximise our utility, which is this integral

key to the sigma minus one over sigma subject to

a budget constraint.

What's the budget constraint going to look like here?

I mean, I haven't really given you the information on

like what the variables are called, but you know, generically.

P q I is less than or equal to.

Um, well, we have one the way into gas because

you have one unit of labour.

Yeah.

Let's call it expenditure.

Right.

Because we haven't.

The reason I'm being a little bit careful there is,

you know, at this point I haven't told you whether

there are also profits that could be part of income.

Right.

So we've got labour so we've got the wage.

But now we don't know whether there might also be

profit.

So you know, whatever the consumer's expense spends.

Right.

This is their the you know, that's their budget and

this is how much they, they spend.

Right.

So we just wrote our Lagrangian properly.

We're going to have it looking like this.

We have our.

Multiplier lambda.

We've got our expenditure and then we've got minus our.

Budget constraint okay.

So then we take a first order condition of this.

Right.

And the reason I'm really doing this is because I

think people sometimes get a little bit intimidated by these

kind of optimisation problems that have an integral in them.

But the thing to remember is it's just because you're

just.

There is no interaction across the different varieties under the

integral sign.

You're just adding up a lot of different varieties.

So if we take the first order condition with respect

to XI, right, all you have to do is focus

on the kind of key term here and everything else

drops out.

So you're going to get sigma minus one over Sigma

XI to the minus one over sigma r minus lambda

times pi equals zero.

That's your first order condition.

If we then rearrange it will give us this expression

on the on the slides.

And note that this is a we can think of

this as the inverse demand function.

It's telling us the price is a function of quantity.

You could rewrite it in your quantity as a function

of price.

And the only kind of non firm level variable, the

only equilibrium object in here It's not as though it

is going to go on tomorrow.

And so the kind of industry equilibrium part of the

model is going to operate through that Lagrange multiplier lambda,

which is obviously endogenous.

But as in the Corona model last week, we made

this assumption that relative to the industry, firms are small.

And therefore, because firms are small, they take the lambda

as given to firms going to maximise profits.

Obviously, this inverse function taking the lambda is given that

sigma is the same as what we did in the

model last week.

I'm happy with that.

Okay, so that was backwards.

Now what about production.

So the production is going to sort of basically look

similar to the government side, but there's going to be

a few little extra bells and whistles which we're going

to introduce because now we're going to have these heterogeneous

firms.

So there's going to be a fixed cost of production,

which is going to be F units of labour.

So thing of this is, you know, if I want

to produce, I have to have a factory and I

need to hire f workers to kind of run the

administrative part of my factory, regardless of how much I

actually produce.

Alternatively, if this was a model of capital, you could

think of the base cost as being the actual kind

of capital cost of buying the building that you're going

to use for your factory.

So that's the fixed cost.

And then in addition, there's going to be a marginal

cost that can see units of labour to make one

unit of output.

So C is kind of an inverse productivity measure at

the at the firm level.

And it's this C that we're going to allow to

differ across.

So there's just going to be a single dimension of

heterogeneity in this world.

And the only way in which firms are going to

differ ex-ante is in their unit labour costs.

Labour union Labour requirements.

Okay.

Now, just those two parts alone.

Are kind of exactly what how we determined how we

set up the technology in the crowd.

I remember in the mall there was a fixed cost

of entry, and then there was a marginal cost of

production.

Right.

And this so far is the same.

It's just that we're allowing the marginal cost potentially to

differ across firms, but we're also going to have an

additional cost here that we didn't have before, which is

there's going to be an entry cost.

Right.

So now if I want to set up my firm.

So think of this as the kind of cost of

being an entrepreneur or creating a blueprint.

I'm going to have to pay a cost for units

of labour.

That type of work is the entry cost denominated in

labour units.

So it's like, you know, I decided I'm bored of

teaching at LSE.

I'm going to go and set up a firm.

The first thing I have to do He's come up

with an idea for my phone.

I know the cost of that.

And that cost is F8, right?

And then I come up with my idea.

I'm also paying the entry cost.

What I do is I learn whether I have a

good idea and remodel that house, or whether you have

a good idea and you draw your unit cost C

from some distribution G of C.

So initially when I'm trying to come up, my dear,

I don't know, am I going to come up with

a good idea of an idea.

There's uncertainty there.

Right.

And then I have my idea.

And at that point it's revealed to me, oh, you've

got a great idea, which would be like having a

very low C, or you've got kind of rubbish idea,

which would be a very high C.

So some firms are going to pay the entry cost

and get good ideas.

Sometimes they're going to get that good ideas.

And then once I've learned my idea that when I

then still need to pay the f cost as my

case of the production, and then for each unit I

produce, I pay this cost to.

Okay.

So that's the setup on the technological side.

Any questions on that.

Because we don't have a time dimension.

Does that just mean that you make a decision whether

or not to enter the market based on your sort

of contemporaneous effect that the profit that you would make

against, you know, the expenditure of entry and, you know,

some the risk that you take with, you know, what,

what level of C you have.

Yeah.

Good.

Good question.

So the way to think about this is, you know,

the time does not explicitly exist in this model.

But you can think about it kind of within the

model.

There are some periods before we get to the final

equilibrium.

So it's like step one people decide whether they want

to enter.

And some number of entrepreneurs decide to enter.

Step two.

Those entrepreneurs get their cost draws, so they get the

distribution cost or season distribution GFC.

And then step three once I know my cost cholesterol,

I decide.

You know how much I actually want to produce.

And at that point, choosing zero is going to be

an option.

So you can choose.

You get a really rubbish drawer, like imagine the cost

is infinite, but then you know it's not going to

be profitable for you to produce.

So you actually choose not to produce anything.

So these as we as you'll see when we come

to solving these models, we're going to be these kind

of multiple stages of solving the model, um, where you

kind of learn information as you go on.

We're going to do that formally, kind of after the

break.

Um, so how does the.

Cost sort of translate into real life?

Is it sort of um, and like how they would

have different activities?

Is it sort of saying that it's kind of chosen

at random in this model?

Yeah.

Great question.

One way to think about it is kind of the

analogy I just gave, though.

When you're starting out as an entrepreneur, like some people

come up with Google and some people come up with

Myspace, right.

And you don't necessarily.

You don't.

You know, in this analogy you don't know ex-ante which

of those you're going to come up with.

Some ideas are just better than others, and there is

essentially no reason that which you you get, that is

the interpretation that is closest to how the model is

formally written down.

If you're willing to kind of push the interpretation a

little bit more.

Another way of thinking about this could be that the

the cost is kind of a measure of the entrepreneur's

talent or their quality, right?

The reason that's pushing slightly is because we would expect

that that had some sense of their own ability before

they set up the firm.

But it is possible to write a version of this

where, you know, there's a distribution of entrepreneurs with different

qualities, and they know that quality and therefore they make

the decision conditional Note on that, right?

So fundamentally it's getting at some difference across firms either

in like how good the people running the firm are

or the quality of their ideas.

Uh, but the question is, at what stage do you

learn about that quality is a little bit more hazy,

and you can kind of make a case either way.

When you have a little.

One more slide before we take a break.

Right.

Which is just to sort of finish the specification.

So we've had preferences Technologies.

Now what about market structure.

Okay.

And this is going to look relatively simple familiar because

it's the global market structure.

There's going to be monopolistic competition.

Remember what this means.

It means that each firm is the monopoly producer of

their own variety.

And they set the monopoly price for that.

Okay.

Um, and, you know, as we saw in the preferences,

trying to differentiate it.

So everyone's using a different variety.

Um, but they do this taking the behaviour of, um,

there's no strategic Interactions, and in particular they take that

land, but they don't internalise the effect of their own

decisions on lambda.

Right?

Now, here that assumption is kind of mathematically sound, because

since you've got a continuum of varieties, each individual firm

is of measure zero and has no effect on the

R on the lambda.

But obviously, that's kind of a modelling assumption that allows

us to formalise this idea that firms are small and

take the behaviour of our firms as given.

And then.

I think.

That's a free entry condition.

But note the implications of the free entry condition are

going to be different now because in the current model,

what because firms are symmetric, what the free entry condition

meant was that in equilibrium all firms make zero profit

right here.

It's going to be a little bit different because when

you enter you don't know a good cost draw a

bad cost draw.

So here the free entry condition doesn't constrain the profits

of each individual factories there, but it constrains expected profits

to be zero.

So at a time when entrepreneurs are deciding to enter,

on average they expect to make zero profits because of

free entry.

But in fact, if some of them are going to

make positive profits and some are going to make negative

profits, we'll have to look at how that how that

happens, right?

And that is the timing, which is the question you

are asking after you run your unit cost, you make

you make a profit maximising choice.

And your choice is two things.

First, why you want to pay cost or not.

Because you can choose not to pay a fixed cost

and just to exit.

And if you do pay the fixed cost, you also

choose how much to produce in order to maximise your

your profits.

And that's the problem that firms are trying to solve.

Okay.

All right.

So we'll take a break and then we will come

back and we'll talk about how to solve this model.

Okay.

Okay.

Is everyone happy with the setup?

Any questions about the assumptions we are making.

Yeah.

Good.

Okay.

So our goal now is to kind of characterise the

equilibrium in this model.

We're going to do that first in autarky and then

open up to the trade.

So we can understand both kind of how firms behave

without trade and then what effects trade has.

Before doing that formally, I think it's useful to just

talk through the intuition so we get a sense of

where we're headed, kind of what the key forces are.

So let's walk through just kind of the simple intuition

how phones are going to behave.

And then we'll come back and we'll do it formally.

So think about a country in autarky.

Right.

And ask, you know, once firms learn their costs, which

firms are going to choose to produce.

So which firms do we expect to be more profitable

here.

Remember firms differ in their C.

So which firms are that kind of more which firms

are potentially going to make higher profits.

Yeah, the ones with lower.

Right.

Because if you've got lower costs, you can charge the

prices and still make a profit.

So you're going to be able to sell more while

still making your profit.

So there's going to be the lower unit cost firms

that have the higher potential profits.

Right.

And since there's this fixed cost of production.

Right.

Absent the fixed cost, even the very high unit cost

firms would produce because they still make some kind of

profit, as long as they charge, you know, they charge

a price that was higher than the unit cost they

sell.

Not a lot but a little.

And they still make some profit.

Right.

The reason that doesn't happen is because we've got this

fixed cost of production.

So in order to want to produce, you've got to

be able to make high enough profits to cover your

fixed costs.

And only firms that are sufficiently productive in terms of

having a sufficiently low unit cost will find it profitable

to produce.

So what that is going to mean is we're going

to be able to divide our firms up into bins.

All right.

So if this line is the line where as we

go to the right we've got see increasing, there's going

to be some cut off I'm going to call it

C star.

Right.

And firms with costs below that cut off will produce

and firms with costs above that cut off will exit.

So that's what we get in autarky fairly straightforward.

We get this matters in the sense that only sufficiently

productive firms actually go on and produce.

And the remainder exit.

Okay.

Now let's open up to trade.

So now suppose there is a second identical country right.

So both countries start in kind of disequilibrium with the

same cut off C star.

I'm not open up to trade.

And I'm going to assume there's a fixed cost of

exporting.

Right.

So when we trade there's also a fixed cost of

export.

Now, in the crumbling.

World.

Cities and towns of differentiated varieties and consumers have this

lovely variety in preferences.

They want to consume all the possible varieties, so every

firm that that's operating becomes an exporter.

And you get this two way trade of varieties back

and forth between countries.

You know, that.

System is operating in that.

You still got the love of variety.

So consumers would ideally like to consume something of a

variety.

But from the first perspective, because they now face this

exporting, they're only going to export if the profits they

can make from exporting are sufficient to cover that fixed

cost of exporting.

Right.

So again, which firms is it going to be that

are going to find it profitable enough to actually want

to export?

It's also bureaucracy.

Yeah.

Again, it's those with the lower cost.

Right.

Now we haven't I haven't told you enough yet to

know exactly how much of a lower cost you've got

to have, but broadly speaking, it's going to be the

lower cost firms that can sell more and make more

profits from exporting.

So it will only be the lower cost firms, but

we'll want to, uh, export.

Well, then we'll want to export.

So if you're one of these lower cost firms that

does indeed become an exporter, finally is great because now

you get to sell not just domestically but also abroad.

Right.

And those firms are going to make higher profits.

They're going to expand.

They're going to increase their market share.

But think about what.

Happens to the firms that were previously producing.

So they're in this kind of produce bucket over here.

But now they don't export.

Right.

So from the perspective of those firms there's no new

opportunities because they're not exporting.

But they are facing greater to competition because now they're

not only facing domestic competition, they're facing competition from the

exporters, from the other countries.

So from the perspective of those firms, trade is a

negative shock that increases competition in the market and pushes

down their their profits.

So what's going to happen as these firms face more

competition is they're going to lose market share.

Their profitability will decrease.

They will shrink.

And for some of them, it will no longer be

profitable to pay the fixed costs and to produce at

all.

So we'll see some of the kind of firms that

previously were producing but were close to the cut off

exit.

So there'll be some exit of the, um, firms close

to the Sea Star.

And even for those that survive, they're going to lose

market share.

So this is going to generate this reallocation of market

share from less productive to more productive firms.

Okay.

Now we've got some more work to show formally that

that is indeed what happens.

But you can see from this intuition that this reallocation

effect of saying that having a contract or finding comes

very naturally out of this model where we combine firm

heterogeneity with fixed costs and production and exporting.

And that's the basic intuition for what we're going to

try and capture as we solved the model.

Any questions on that.

All right.

So let's see how that works in detail.

So starting off with firms and really you know firms

are at the heart of this.

So it's all about solving the firm level decision making

where firms are making decisions to maximise their profits.

Right.

Firms are going to do that.

Taking is given the inverse demand function that we have

previously.

I said in preferences we've got the inverse demand another

function.

But I'm taking this inverse demand function for priority is

given.

This is a variety specific inverse demand function.

So all varieties face the same demand elasticity signal.

Um so firms facing this inverse demand function, they maximise

profits.

They choose which markets to enter.

And that gives us kind of set of firm level

behaviours.

And then once we've solved the firm's problem then we're

going to aggregate and impose the market clearing and free

entry conditions which will allow us to solve for equilibrium.

So firms profit maximisation problem.

This is straightforward.

You know firm is using the quantity they produce to

maximise their profits which is prices minus costs times the

quantity they sell.

Right.

And the quantity they sell they're selling.

Q uh, uh, per Consumer Times L the number of

consumers.

And then we substitute north of here also the fixed

cost of production.

Okay.

And they maximise that subject to.

The inverse As demand.

Functions.

They know that P is a function.

Q right now that's exactly the problem we solved last

week with the Krugman model.

Except that now, rather than having a variable elasticity, we

have a constant elasticity of demand.

So we get the same optimal pricing formula that your

price is a mark of sigma over sigma minus one

over your marginal cost, which is C times the data

times the wage w.

Right.

So we had this same formula last week.

The only difference was last week.

The sigma was itself a function of few whereas now

sigma is constant.

So you can see in this environment firms are charging

a constant mark-up sigma over sigma minus one.

Right.

So not only is the Mark-up constant is the same

across all firms.

So Mark-ups aren't really doing anything.

Anything here.

But what we do see, okay, is because the C

varies across firms, higher cost firms are going to charge

higher prices.

Because they charge higher prices, they're going to sell less

from the demand.

So the first way that shows up is if you

have a higher cost, you charge a higher price and

therefore you sell less.

Now we can substitute that optimal price back into the

expression for profits to get the firm's equilibrium profits right.

And a little bit of simple algebra right.

All we're doing is we're substituting this P in here.

We're accounting for the relationship between Q and AMP that

comes from the inverse demand function.

And then we're simplifying.

So there's nothing complex going on here.

And that then gives us this expression for the profits

a firm makes.

So what have we got here.

Well on the right hand side here we're substituting of

the fixed cost of production.

Right.

And then the first term is the kind of variable

profits the firm makes depends on the firm's.

Unit costs and a note that by assumption, sigma is

very small.

The profits are decreasing in C, but that's very intuitive.

Higher cost firms are going to make lower profits because

they charge higher prices and have higher costs.

And it's this season, um, all this other stuff and

this other stuff depends on the demand elasticity, stigma and

the budget constraint and the, uh, the wage w and

the um, number of consumers are the crucial thing is

that all these other terms here are not firm specific.

Right.

So we can kind of lock them together.

You're going to love them together and call them B.

B is endogenous right.

It's endogenous.

And it depends on w and lambda.

Right.

But it doesn't vary across firms and industry level variable.

So if we define the in this way and then

we define phi as one over six which switching now

from costs to productivity just to kind of make our

life slightly easier.

That then allows us to write the profit function is

be the variable times the product unified to the signal

minus one minus the fixed cost of production.

All right.

So we see immediately then from that expression that more

productive firms and higher profits everybody happy.

And this is quite straightforward so far.

So now let's think about.

Um.

The decision on whether to pay the fixed production cost.

I say you're your firm, you pay the entry cost,

you learn your productivity and you must decide whether to

reduce.

Right.

That decision is straightforward.

You will produce if your profits conditional on producing are

greater than zero.

So that is to say, if the 85% likes one

minus WF is greater than zero, then you'll want to

pay the fixed cost to produce.

If it's less than zero.

You don't want to pay the fixed cost you don't

produce.

If it's exactly equal to zero, you're indifferent right now

because the left hand side is being like one minus

w after the contract is strictly increasing in firm productivity.

This expression defines a Cut-Off which will call Phi Star,

right.

So that's the first and productivity below five star exit.

And finally, the productivity above five star paid a fixed

cost of produce.

So this is the first key equilibrium condition of the

model.

We call it the zero profit condition.

And you can see five star is going to be

given by the solution to be five star equals values.

Right.

And that five star okay.

Um is one over C star.

And that gives us this division.

We already wrote up of funds into produce firms that

produce and firms that accept.

You know, the old funds that go on and produce,

we'll make positive profits in this situation.

So even though in the background we're going to have

a free entry condition such they expected profits is zero,

conditional on actually seeing a firm produce that firm is

going to have positive, uh, profits.

Right.

So this is kind of a nice feature in the

mould because it's consistent with the fact that in the

real world, we do see firms make a profit.

So this kind of rationalises that fact.

Now just to kind of make sure we're following what's

going on, I just said that all firms that produce

are going to have positive profits.

How is that consistent with the free entry condition driving

expected profits to zero.

You know what I'm.

It's not going to be that good idea.

But that's not what it is.

Something else.

Made me repeat the question.

Yeah.

Conditional on the firm paying, choosing to pay the fixed

production cost and produce, it's going to make positive profits.

So all firms that we actually see produce an equilibrium

will make greater than zero profits.

At the same time, it is going to be true

that because of the free entry condition, expected profits are

equal to zero.

Why?

How is it possible that those two things can simultaneously

be treated?

As expected, profits include the firms that did not decide

to produce, whereas this one includes only the firms that

decide to produce.

Yeah, exactly.

That was the kind of sleight of hand going on

that the expected profit is expected at the time you

pay the entry cost before you know your productivity.

So the expected profit is going to expect.

Your profit is going to be like the probability I

end up producing times expected profits conditional producing plus the

probability I don't produce unexpected profit condition I'm not producing.

Right.

And so that second group of firms are going to

make negative.

And that's what balances out the uh, the free kind

of what would be the free entry driving expected profits

to zero.

And so it's really important to kind of in terms

of understanding these models, to keep in mind that there

are these firms that enter a rubbish productivity draw and

immediately exit negative.

Okay.

So we've got a nice airy profit condition.

We've got this quite start note having to find five

star in this way.

We can then define or we can express our profits

which are to be 5% minus one minus AWS as

five over five stars and signifies one minus one times.

All right.

What we've done there is we use the zero profit

condition to substitute for B in this equation, so that

we now understand profits just in terms of the the

wage and the fixed cost and our productivity relative to

the Cut-Off.

And this expression makes it very transparent that if I

equal twice all your profits are zero.

And for any firm with five greater than five star,

they're going to have a half positive profits.

As an aside, one of the nice features of this

model is it's incredibly mathematically tractable, which makes it kind

of easy to use and work with.

And a lot of the reason for that tractability is

this ability to express profits and other equilibrium variables in

terms of the productivity relative to the to the Cut-Off.

So it's the fact that you can do this substitution

which makes this model so Easy to work with many

circumstances.

You repeat that?

Yeah.

So which is pretty intimidating.

Like, why is it, uh, attractive to, like, why does

this, this this ratio makes it more tractable mathematically.

Um.

Essentially, it's.

Because it means that.

All.

The key behaviours of the model depends kind of not

on absolute levels of stuff, but it depends on kind

of relative stuff relative to this Cut-Off.

So this Cut-Off ends up being kind of a key

sufficient statistic for lots of the behaviour in the model,

in a way that is probably not immediately obvious that

this helps, but when you start working with the model,

you realise that kind of expressing things in this way

always makes the maths easier if there is.

This is really a point about kind of what makes

the maths of solving the model easier, but it's the

fact that you can do this shows up in a

lot of papers as how they're able to solve the

model.

Okay, so.

Just to recap what we've just done right.

We've done for profit maximisation condition on producers.

So this is how much do you produce conditional on

producing which gave us this profit function.

We went a step earlier and we said okay what

will the firm choose to produce.

And that gave us the profit condition right.

And now we're going to go even one step earlier

and go back to when firms are choosing to enter

right now is when we'll write down the free entry

condition.

So this is where we'll get into the expected profits

are equal to to zero right.

So conditional on paying because these are your profits.

If you're going to draw about five star and you

get zero problems.

We don't know our productivity before we paid the entry

cost.

So I expected profits are the expectation that phi is

equal to five star.

So you expect all of these profits conditional on phi

being greater than equal to five star.

Which means we can write the free energy condition as

the cost of entry.

That's the energy.

That's how much I'm paying to set up a firm.

And then the expected profit conditional on entry is this

term on the left hand side.

So it's our profits of a firm with productivity Phi.

And then we're taking the expectation of that over all

values of phi greater than or equal to five star.

Happy with that.

So this radiation condition now gives us some kind of

second key equilibrium condition.

Right.

So we had the zero profit condition.

Okay.

Uh, which is just kind of one condition in the

endogenous variables here.

And then the pre entry condition gives us a second.

And if we um, combine them that allows us to

characterise the equilibrium.

And here's kind of a little graph showing how we

can do that.

Um so what we're showing on this graph is we

plotted from productivity more specifically productivity to the signal minus

one on the x axis.

And we forfeited profits relative to wages on the y

axis.

So we know that profit relative to wages are b

over w minus one minus.

F.

Okay.

So eight to the signal minus one.

This is linear.

We just get this linear relationship.

When you've got zero productivity, your profits are going to

be here.

And B minus F and then output.

And the intersection with the x axis is what gives

us the zero profit Cut-Off that defines this, this phi

star.

So all the firms that have, uh, productivity above five

star will produce and all kinds of profit below five

star will, uh, exit.

Okay.

And then when we combine that with the three entry

condition that and pens down, uh, um, those are the

values here.

The wages are going to drop out that shows up

on both sides.

So we end up with the kind of key variables

we want to solve for the five star and the

b.

So the zero profit condition is kind of one equation

in price.

Um and b We can choose the weight as the

numeric so it doesn't show up in that condition either.

And then this will be a second condition.

And the way we sort these shows up in there

is obviously the five star itself depends on B.

So it shows up in terms of the expectation.

And that pins down the the closed economy equally.

Does that make sense.

Let me just I want to show you kind of

a slightly different way of writing the pre entry condition,

which potentially for some of you might kind of make

it more intuitive just in case.

There's a confusion here, because I think we're writing this

as the expectation that we can be a little bit

more explicit as to what that expectation means, which I

think is useful.

So this is the thing we've got on the left

hand side here.

It's the expected expectation over five greater than or equal

to five star or Five over five.

Star two.

Sigma minus one.

Minus one times w f.

Now what is that going to be equal to?

Right.

So how do we take this expectation.

Well if you recall when we were setting up the

model, um, we said that you drew your costs from

a distribution G of C, right.

That was the cost distribution.

Um, which is going to mean since phi is one

over C, that there's an equivalent, um, productivity distribution.

So we'll call that h of phi.

So this is just a relabelling.

Right.

So suppose you're drawing your productivity from h of phi

okay.

So this expectation is going to be the integral over

phi greater than or equal to pi star of this

stuff AI over phi star.

So the sigma minus one minus one times w f.

And then we're, you know integrating over this distribution.

So it's going to be h prime by default.

And so this is just another way of writing the

expectation that makes it clear.

That kind of where this expectation is coming from is

the distribution of activities that you that you draw from.

And then a final thing we can do.

All right.

We know from the zero profit condition that phi star

is equal to w f over beta one over sigma

minus one.

So another way you can write this is phi growth

and w f over b to the one over um

sigma minus one.

So that's kind of another way of seeing what this

condition is like.

Okay.

So that's the autarky.

What we're really interested in is what happens when we

open up to trading.

So the knowledge spring trade is.

Of.

Two identical economies.

They're going to go from autarky to trade but not

to free trade.

Right now we're going to be serious about modelling trade

costs.

All right.

This is kind of interesting because this is actually the

first time in the course other than when we've kind

of recently been talking about gravity equations, that we are

formally modelling trade costs.

So let's kind of pause for a moment now to

see how it's actually model trade costs.

And he's going to have two different types of trade

costs in this model, which are called variable trade costs

and fixed trade costs.

So the fixed trade costs are kind of analogous to

the fixed domestic production costs.

So we're in authority.

We said that there was a fixed cost of producing

the open economy.

Equivalent of that in this model is that there's going

to be a fixed cost of selling into each market.

So it's not that you pay f to produce is

that you pay a fixed cost to sell in each

market.

So the fixed cost of selling into the domestic market

will be f d.

And the fixed cost of exporting will be f x.

Are we assuming that f x is greater than f

d?

Not yet.

I'm not exactly.

We are going to, in a moment put a restriction

on effects.

It's not going to be quite that.

Um, intuitively why might we think there are fixed cost

of exporting?

What does it mean for there to be fixed costs

of exporting?

Well, in practice, yeah.

It's the same as we talked about.

Is that starting at is, of course, starting now to

entering next month to set up a certain business unit.

Yeah.

I think that's the kind of right line to be

thinking about, right.

It's the, you know, any call, you know, just formally

a fixed cost is not of any cost.

That doesn't vary with how much you sell.

So what kind of cost might those be?

Well, it's stuff like setting up a distribution network, making

kind of marketing contacts in that, uh, in that country.

I mean, it might be, in some cases, kind of

hiring a sales manager in that, uh, country.

It could also be dealing with kind of regulatory approvals

in that country, depending if there are regulatory differences across

countries.

And you need to kind of prove regulatory compliance.

That would show up as a fixed cost.

So it's all these kind of costs that you have

to pay before you can actually start selling.

That's what he's trying to capture with this assumption.

But in addition, that's kind of going to be the

fixed export cost.

That's one type of trade cost in a while.

In addition, there's going to be the secondary trade, which

is the variable trade cost, which we're going to model

as iceburg, uh, trade costs.

So the idea of iceburg trade costs is that in

order to deliver one unit of output to the destination,

you have to send more than one unit.

And in this particular case, it's going to be power

units from the origin.

So Tao here is a measure of the level of

trade cost.

The higher tower is the higher the freight costs are.

And the reason these are referred to as trade costs

is because it's kind of like you send Tao.

Units.

And Tao minus one units melt away during the journey.

And when you get there, there's just one unit left.

So.

You know.

These variable It'll cost the town.

It's trying to pick up any trade costs which kind

of apply per unit, um, that you sell.

So, you know, we're not formally modelling tariffs here, but

tariffs could be kind of one example.

The caveat that we're not going to think about tariff

revenue at this point.

Um, but it could also be things like transport costs.

To the extent the transport costs are higher the more

you're selling then, um, it's going to be captured by,

uh, transport costs as well.

And then anything else that varies with the quantity you

sell.

Why do you think we model it in this way?

In some ways, this is not very intuitive in practice.

If you transport goods from one country to another, it's

not as part of the melts away in transit.

So why do we choose to model it this way?

Because it becomes a variable cost which is proportional to

how much you export.

Otherwise it's just a fixed cost.

Then once you reach that, then you're going to.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So so there's a kind of truth in that in

there.

It is going to be important that we have both

these variable costs and fixed constant that we model them.

Kind of consider them separately.

But there are ways you can model variable costs about

having it in iceberg costs.

It could be just a you know, for each unit

I ship I pay a $10 fee.

That would still be a variable cost, but it's a

different way of modelling it.

And also we can deal more easier in the model.

Yeah it's a French.

So this is right that this is an assumption that

is made for tractability.

Not because it's necessarily the most realistic assumption.

And in particular there's kind of two parts of it

to keep track of.

One is that you say this makes the cost proportional,

whereas the example I just gave was an additive example

that makes life more difficult.

So one is this costs a proportional.

The other is what this melting away captures is that

transport costs end up being kind of a resource cost

that is paid by the producer in terms of producing

more units of output.

And the practical implication of that is it provides a

way of modelling transport costs as using up resources without

having to explicitly model a transportation sector.

So fundamentally, what we're trying to do here is we

want to increase transport costs, and we want them to

be costly in the sense of using up resources, but

we don't want to separately model the transportation sector because

that's not what we're interested in.

And it would make them more and more complicated.

So this kind of melting away iceberg assumption does that

in a convenient form.

And that's why if you go.

On and.

Do more trade, you will see this assumption to occur,

um, in many different contexts.

So what this iceberg trade cost assumption means the exporter

point of view is that if I want to sell

a good in a foreign market, my unit cost of

producing the foreign market is not C, but pound times

C for each unit I want to sell all I

have to produce power units domestically, so it acts as

a kind of multiplicative or proportional increase in my unit

costs, such that when I'm selling abroad, I am effectively

less productive, higher cost than when I'm selling domestically.

Yeah.

Um, does this mean that the management of gravity.

Um.

Almost.

All right.

So the fact is, the fact that you have these

local currency preferences and there's this differentiation of varieties that

are very close to a gravity equation.

It turns out that if you want to get what

looks kind of like a classical gravity equation.

It also depends on the functional form of this distribution.

So for a particular functional form of this distribution, the

Pareto functional form, for those who like their distributions it

will deliver a gravity equation.

Okay.

So these are the additional assumptions we're making.

The open economy.

And so now let's go back and solve the phones

problem again.

But let's do it in the open economy sector.

So it's very similar to what it was in the

closed economy.

But now we've just got two markets to think about.

Yeah.

Before we go on.

Yeah I just wanted to sort of discuss the point

that before in previous trade models we just had a

binary open the trade closed the trade.

Right.

Yeah.

I understand that this title means that we can make

that more of a continuum.

So you can if you have the difference between, you

know, one state from another might not be autarky.

No trade to trade.

It might be, you know, there's a high concentration and

then you have a free trade agreement.

So that decreases Tao.

And then you can more look out.

Yeah, absolutely.

So we're about to focus on the kind of binary

trade versus autarky distinction.

But because we've now got Tao and continuous, you can

now use small tools to assess what happens if you

have marginal changes in those variables.

So another advantage of having trade costs is it allows

you to ask that question, which if you think about

it, is the empirically relevant one.

In almost all circumstances, trade agreements are changing power and

affect not about growth more tightly to free trade.

And then the problems that you will start to do

a little bit of that.

Okay.

First problem.

Right.

So this is kind of the same as before, except

now you're doing both markets are choosing how much to

sell domestically and how much to export.

But within each market the structure of the problem is

the same.

If you're going to price marginal marginal cost points quantity

minus fixed market entry cost.

No.

Kind of Crucially here your decision making is separable across

markets.

Right.

So because the market you have a constant marginal cost.

How much I sell in one market doesn't affect my

profits in the other markets.

It doesn't affect my productivity.

And so therefore you can treat the decisions as independent.

Right.

There's one decision.

What do I do in an empty market.

Another decision what they do in the export market.

And this independence of firm behaviour across the markets again

simplifies solving the model.

And it also means we can immediately apply the solutions

we had in the closed economy to say that what

firms are going to do is they're just going to

charge a mark-up over marginal cost.

So in the domestic market, exactly as before, every single

overstimulate at one times p w in the actual market,

say mark-ups that go over, say my minus one.

But now remember we've got the variable trade cost now.

So our marginal cost is tail times w.

So what you see is that the.

Actual.

Price is higher than the domestic price by a factor

tor, which is coming from the existence of these trade

costs.

Since then, they're going to have the same way, and

we're going to treat the wage as the numerator.

And I'm also going to have the same kind of

industry demand parameter.

Uh b so we're kind of solving for symmetric equilibrium

where the equilibrium valves look the same in both countries.

Now let's think about the firm's market entry decisions.

Okay.

So again it's analogous to what we did in the,

uh, autarky economy.

You're going to sell in the domestic market if your

domestic profits exceed your, uh, domestic market entry costs.

So that will give a cut off the domestic market

entry.

If I start two sigma one equals WW at $5,

the domestic entry cut off.

And likewise, you will get off the export entry and

the.

equation for export entry looks the same, except that again

we have to define divide now by this tau.

Because you are less productive when you're exporting, you're effectively

less productive when you're exporting than when you're selling domestically.

So now from these two equations, we're now getting two

cuts off the domestic entry cut off by star.

And the exponential comes off.

And if we take the ratio of those two equations

the B's and the W's drop out.

And we get an equation for the export top relative

to the domestic cut off.

So Jane, see everything's coming down to being able to

write kind of relative productivity levels.

Um, and that relative, uh, the relative value of the

Cut-Off similarly equal to one minus one times f over

f.

Right.

So at this point, we're now going to impose the

assumption that has this thing on minus 1FX straight to

the next.

All right.

So this speaks to the question you had a minute

ago.

Do we assume is greater than that?

Not quite.

We assume that parts of the signal minus one x

is greater than x, right.

Why do we impose that assumption is because if this

holds, then it must be that x is greater than

one, which is to say the export Cut-Off exceeds the

domestic Cut-Off.

Why do we want.

The export Cut-Off to exceed the domestic Cut-Off?

Why am I making this assumption?

Otherwise, you'd have more firms that export themselves domestically.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Right.

We know from the data that we looked at at

the start of the lecture that most firms don't export.

So we want kind of selection into exporting.

Right.

And the way we get that here is that we

impose this assumption such that I star here.

The domestic Cut-Off is below the export Cut-Off Of Phi

X star.

So whereas in autarky we kind of had two bins

of firms.

Now we have three bins.

So we've got firms below five or simply exit firms

above five star sell domestically and export.

And then the medium range of firms just sell domestically.

And this assumption that towards the sigma minus one f

is greater than f.

That ensures phi x star here sits to the right

of phi star.

So we're happy with that.

So we haven't quite finished solving the model yet.

But no this pattern of sorting already means that we've

matched.

The model is able to rationalise two of the key

factors that started with the fact the fire star is

ready to fire up means that most firms don't export.

It means not all firms export.

It should be more precise.

It means that not all firms export.

So it's giving us this feature that some firms export

and some don't.

In addition, those firms that do export are higher productivity

and are therefore an equal in going to be bigger

and sell more and make higher profits than those firms

that don't export.

So it's giving us both a few firms export out,

and it's giving us the firms that do export a

better performing.

So if we return to our graph that we use

to kind of pin down the autarky equilibrium, we can

now write the open economy as that.

So previously this was our domestic shopping side.

Okay.

Now we can add to the export profits line.

So the export profits line starts at minus f x.

Right.

And I've drawn it here so that f is greater

than f.

But note that that doesn't necessarily have to be the

case.

And then it has slope beta to the one minus

sigma.

So what is important is that the slope of the

export profits line is lower than the slope of the

domestic profits line.

Right.

And that's because your export probit has this additional term

times that one minus sigma.

And since sigma is greater than one and times greater

than one 2 to 1 minus sigma is less than

one, that slope is flatter than the domestic market slope.

So now we get.

The.

Domestic model where the domestic product line, in this case

the x axis, we have the export control where the

export profit line interface and then the total profit which

is the sum of the domestic profits and export profits.

It's zero for those firms that don't produce.

It's the domestic profits for firms that only sell domestically.

Each of these ones here.

And then for those that export is the sum of

these two lives because they're making both domestic and export

profits.

And that gives the kind of higher gradient line here.

All right.

So that shows how kind of profits vary with productivity

across these different groups of firms.

Questions on that.

Okay.

So now let's finish off solving for the open economy

equilibrium.

Um so we've got our two Cut-Off.

We solve for the two components defined by X that

gives us a domestic profits, which we provide relative to

the domestic part of our export profits that we can

write relative to export.

And then our free entry condition.

So this is the cost of entry.

WC must be equal to expected profits conditional entry which

now has two terms.

Here's our domestic profits.

As.

The.

Coal.

And Hayes are expected export profits, which look the same

as the domestic profits.

Except now we're seeing the exploitation of the product in

your drawers above the export Cut-Off.

All right.

So.

We now.

Have, um, three equilibrium.

Conditions.

The domestic market kind of condition, the exporter profit condition,

and the division in three equilibrium variables, which are five

star, phi X star and v.

So by combining them, we can fully solve for the,

uh, the equilibrium.

Okay.

So we're kind of done right at this point.

We have now characterised the equilibrium.

And then the final thing we want to do, relating

back to the kind of pandemic and work is okay,

ask now how does opening up to trade or reducing

trade costs, what's the actual effect?

So here's where what we're doing the kind of trade

liberalisation exercise.

Um, so here I'm just kind of talk through it

intuitively.

And then some of the exercises and the problem set

will get you to solve this more formally.

But the main thing I want to focus on in

here is the, the intuition and why we get these

reallocation effects that Nick and Dressler find.

Um, so we are going to get this reallocation.

And the reason why is because of how we kind

of import competition affects different firms.

So if you're an exporter, as we open up to

trade, you get new export opportunities.

And so you hire more workers in order to export

and you expand and you benefit from it.

Right.

But if you're only selling domestically, you face more import

competition and therefore you lose market share and you shrink.

And if you're sufficiently close to five star, you exit.

So what happens to the domestic tussle.

As you open up to trade, is it increases?

Right.

And that's what generates the exit.

The public um, the next wall.

So some firms close to the exit, others continue to

sell domestically but lose market share.

And then it's only the high quality firms that export

that expand.

And so you get this reallocation of market share from

Lester.

More productive firms which generate aggregate productivity gains even though

each individual firms productivity doesn't change, uh, ever in this

model.

And so kind.

Of coming back to this graph one last time.

Now what we've done is kind of we superimpose what

the profits look like in autarky relative to what they

look like in the open economy.

So the dashed line is all type of profits.

The solid line is open economy profits in equilibrium.

And you can see that some firms are exiting because

the exit Cut-Off is increasing.

Firms in this medium range are losing profits.

And it's only these firms right at the top here

that make higher profits in the open economy than in

autarky.

Right.

So it's just these very high productivity firms that benefit

from opening up to trade.

Questions.

Okay.

So that was kind of posit in a kind of

positive sense what happens.

What about the normative implications of this?

Well, another thing we get out of this model is

a new source okay.

So trade.

And so remember comparative advantage models the gains from trade

come from specialisation according to comparative advantage.

In the Krugman model we had the love of variety

effect and we had the Pro-competitive effect generating data trade.

Right here.

You've got a new source that doesn't exist in any

of those models, which is against the productivity due to

this resource, uh, reallocation.

So in the Malik model, you have another source of

gains from trade, which is that trade makes a kind

of aggregate productivity increase.

And it does so exactly because of how it interacts

with, um, heterogeneity.

So if I come back to that question, I question

you all on at the beginning of the lecture.

Why does firm heterogeneity matter?

This will be one way of answering that question.

Right.

Now that we have embedded firm heterogeneity into a trade

model.

Right.

Not only does it give us new predictions about how

market share reallocate and how different firms are affected by

trade, but it also generates an entirely new source of

welfare gains that doesn't exist with homogeneous firms.

So this is suggesting that this foundationally really is important

for understanding, um, spanning trade.

Um, the variety effect and the Krugman model is also

potentially operating here.

So it actually turns out that when did the number

of varieties consumers buy increases or decreases in this model

is ambiguous?

It depends how it's got.

It depends on the functional form of the productivity distribution.

In general.

We don't we're not we're not sure.

So there can't be a lot of variety here.

But it's not guaranteed.

And the competitive effect on the model is absent by

assumption because we just have constant constant mark-ups.

So the kind of the trade that we have in

these productivity realisations.

All right.

So we are going to stop there uh, for today

hopefully we have seen kind of how the measurement can

kind of rationalise these empirical facts.

We started with uh, and can kind of generate kind

of new forces in which trade matters for productivity.

Um, and then sort of building on the importance of

the next level.

And talk about the first one will talk about multinationals

today.

Do that.

Oh, good.

I'm.

Glad to be back.

I haven't.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I'd say so.

Why is it that kind of a difficult market?

A normal player?

Yeah, I'd say.

This setup would be would be played at a fixed

cost, regardless of whether.

You probably.

Want to think about it that way.

You have to pay the equity of whether you sell,

if you want to sell anywhere, and you also want

to.

Export only.

And they're trying to.

Pay the cost plus settlement.

Yeah, that's not.

Quite how I wrote it, but that's probably a better

way to think.

About it.

I want to talk about, you know.

Our.

Lecture 8:

Okay.

I got.

To go.

I got to go to your house.

The.

Irish.

Okay.

Um.

Okay.

Thank you.

You go back.

Home.

I went to work.

Yeah.

That's right.

Back to China?

Yeah.

Well, I don't know if I'd make that long trip.

I wanted to do that.

I don't know if I'm wrong on that, but I

guess you prefer standing here.

I don't know.

Yeah.

You don't know?

How flexible.

Okay.

Yeah.

Okay.

Ready?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, I probably will go.

I guess I just got Right off.

Here.

All the major.

Equity family would benefit.

Because we don't have holidays from Christmas.

Time.

Yeah.

I was going to ask you about.

That.

Now I get that.

I don't know either.

Yeah.

Do you think you're going to go back after you.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Do you want to dance?

I'm not sure.

I would pay for rent for a long period of

sugar.

No thank you.

Not like that.

Okay.

Yeah, I like dancing.

I know, long term.

It's not.

That hard?

I'm not going to be after this.

Yeah.

Are you going home?

Yeah.

I'm going to be a long time.

Three weeks.

Wasn't that.

Nice?

I hope you didn't get.

I'm sorry.

I mean, I'll be fine.

No.

No.

I was going to ask you because I'm going to

Stockholm, and I'm going to ask you for a recommendation.

Okay?

I feel like the main tourist attraction.

Not the best one, necessarily.

The most famous one is.

Have you heard of the all star shift?

No.

A very big ship.

Like 500 years ago.

And then like 50 years ago, they discovered that it

was inside of the market at the bottom.

Okay, so.

It hadn't decomposed or anything.

They also placed it in a museum.

So it's like a slightly rotten version of like an

original, I guess.

It's 17th century.

This is like.

How many days do you think I need?

because in general in Stockholm.

Yeah.

You can do everything you want to do.

Like, I'm planning to do four days, and I think.

It's going to be you can take off.

Like, do you like ABBA?

Is there a museum?

Yeah I like.

You.

I'm going to text you because I'm going to spend

holidays in Helsinki.

Yeah.

Uh, yeah.

I'm going.

What is it going to be?

17 to 21?

I'm 17.

I'm arriving this summer.

Which airline are you playing?

Are you.

Playing?

Are you flying?

We will start in a moment, but the.

It is a different one.

So we've got flying on the 17th.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah, I'm going to.

I think this is right here.

Uh, yeah.

I'm going to spend Christmas with them.

I'm coming back for New Year's Eve.

I'll just tell you where.

I hear everything.

Yeah, it's because my uncle married, uh, Finnish girl.

I don't know, it's really random.

Yes.

I have, like, 100% in customs.

That's good.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So you can get even in earlier than I am.

Yeah, I was with it.

Yeah, yeah, that's a better idea.

It was the cheapest.

Yeah, I have some right there, but.

No thank.

You.

At least my flight is sometimes.

That's the term, right?

No, no, listen to that.

So.

Right.

Now I'd rather fly.

I don't know, whatever it is, that it's from Heathrow,

because it's easier to get there.

You know, like at 6 a.m..

It's not.

All right.

Sorry to say.

Um, so today we're going to talk about FDI in

multinational firms.

Before we get started with that one announcement.

Um, so the last week of term, week 11, we're

going to have to rearrange the teaching in week 11.

So there's going to be no teaching for this course

in week 11.

Um, so next week we're going to have two lectures.

So there's going to be an additional lecture for PM

on Wednesday.

Um, I will send out details of where that is.

I'm not sure exactly what room they're going to have

in yet, but there will be a lecture at 4

p.m. on Wednesday.

So then the lecture in this slot on Thursday next

week will be the final lecture of term.

And then the class that was supposed to be in

week 11 will be delayed till the start of winter

term.

So we will, instead of having one one class from

this lecture in the first week of winter term, we

will have two and I will send you the details

of that as well.

Okay.

Sorry for the, um, any inconvenience that might, might cause.

We've had to rearrange the week 11 teaching.

Any questions or anything before we get it?

Okay.

All right.

So what are we going to talk about today?

So, you know, up to now in this course, whenever

we've been talking about market access and about firms selling

goods abroad, it's always been through exporting.

So we've focussed on kind of, you know, exporting as

the channel for which you access foreign markets.

But the point we're going to make today and what

we're going to think about today, is there is another

way in which firms may access foreign markets, which is

instead of by producing goods domestically and then transporting them

to the foreign market, they might might choose to undertake

what we'll call foreign direct investment and actually set up

production facilities abroad.

So we're going to be thinking about, you know, what

the consequences are of allowing for a world where rather

than producing at home and then sending the goods abroad,

you can just produce the goods domestically, directly, um, abroad

as an alternative way of accessing, uh, foreign markets.

So we're going to want to think about questions like,

you know, well, under what circumstances will firms choose to

take this option of accessing foreign markets through FDI?

What are the reasons that caused them to undertake FDI?

And then what might be the consequences of allowing for

this alternative form of of market access?

Um, so we'll start off with some terminology just to

make sure we're on the same page in terms of

the definitions we're using.

Um, then I'm going to show you some kind of

stylised facts about FDI in some kind of the key

patterns of FDI across countries.

Um, and then we will look at a kind of

a couple of papers that combine theory and empirical to

try and understand why firms undertake FDI and what kind

of, uh, what kind of firms will be expected to

undertake FDI and what kind of flows of FDI we

expect to see across countries.

That's the the outline.

But I mean, so starting off with definitions, um, we

will call a multinational enterprise any firm, uh, that has

production plants in more than one country.

That's a fairly common, uh, definition.

Um, and within our multinational, we're going to want to

distinguish between the parent, which is kind of the headquarters

located in the origin country, or sometimes we'll refer to

that as the source country, which controls the firm, and

firm makes decisions about kind of production and, and trade.

And then the kind of contrast of the parent will

be the affiliates, which are located in the host country.

So if I'm a UK based firm and I set

up a plant in Germany, then we've got the headquarters

in the UK and we've got the affiliate in Germany,

we're going to think about these firms as being profit

maximising, right.

So we're not going to depart from that assumption that

we've had throughout the course that when firms meet in

secret to maximise profits.

So in broad terms, the kind of question is going

to be when is it profit maximising for firms to

become multinational enterprises.

And we're going to look at different theories of why

some firms may choose to become multinational enterprises.

And, you know, think back to what we talked about

with Mel last week, where we talked about why some

firms choose to become exporters and others don't.

Right.

We're also going to want to think about why some

firms choose to become multinational enterprises and others don't.

So a lot of what we're going to do at

a technical level in this lecture is going to build

on the work we did last week thinking about firm

heterogeneity and trading.

So I think, I mean, the definition of a multinational

enterprise is quite, um, straightforward.

Perhaps the only beyond what we said in the previous

slide, the only kind of additional point we need to

to clarify is that when we talk about a multinational

firm, it's important not just that it has production facilities

abroad, but that it owns and manages its own production

facilities.

So think of the example of, say, clothing companies.

So think of Nike as an example.

Right.

So Nike is an American firm.

Its headquarters are in Oregon.

Um, but it does a lot of its production abroad.

So when Nike is choosing to source shoes that are

made abroad, face the choice.

Not only has it chosen to source outside the US

rather than sourcing those shoes domestically, but then it has

a choice.

Do I source from a foreign production facility that has

Nike I actually own and control and operate, or do

I source from an independent supplier?

So in addition to the decision of do I source

domestically or overseas, there's a decision that the firm makes.

Do I source kind of from do I integrate productions.

So do I source from a plant that I own

or do I source independently.

So I kind of outsource production in that sense.

Right.

When we're talking about FDI and our focus in this

paper is going to be on the case where the

firm not just offshores, but it also integrates the Offshored

production facility into the firm.

So actually owns, uh, the facility.

So to the extent that Nike and other clothing firms

tend to source from independent suppliers, we're not going to

think about that as, as FDI that's clearly closely related

to FDI because it's offshoring your your sourcing decision, but

it's distinct because you're not actually controlling the production facility.

So we're going to want to draw that distinction.

And in terms of not just to your offshore, but

do you integrate once you are once you offshore.

Um, so that aside, the definition of kind of what

a multinational is is quite straightforward, closely related, but slightly

distinct is the definition of what is foreign direct investment.

And this is a little bit more, uh, more tricky,

mainly because it's kind of hard to observe.

So the conventional definition is that we observe foreign direct

investment whenever we observe an investment in a foreign And

it gives the ambassador at least a 10% stake in

the firm.

So there's kind of two parts now, right?

One is that it's investors in one country investing in

another country.

That's straightforward.

But then the second part is that it's giving us

at least a 10% stake in the firm.

So the point the conceptually the point here is that

we're only going to call it FDI when you're making

an investment, not just so that you own kind of

a share of the company, but you have a large

enough share that you can in some sense control the

company.

Right?

So if I decide I want to buy shares on

the New York Stock Exchange, that's not FDI, I'm making

an equity investment then in the, in the US.

But that's very different from firms actually setting up their

own facilities abroad.

So.

That kind of raised the question.

Well, if we're thinking about actually controlling the program facility,

what should the threshold be beyond which we actually think

a firm controls.

Um, conventionally, in this data, 10% is used, probably 50%

would be a better, uh, threshold in many cases, because

if you have more than 50%, then you do have

a majority, um, state.

But I think for historical reasons as much as everything,

this is the definition that's typically used, uh, for FDI

flow data.

So that's kind of one when you're looking at the

data.

That's one thing to be aware of that there is

this issue of exactly how much of the foreign affiliate

do you control.

Another issue to be aware of is that once you

have multinational firms, right.

If I'm a big multinational, say I'm Toyota and I

want to set up a new plant in the United

States.

Okay.

One way of financing setting up that plant would be

for the headquarters in Tokyo to provide the financing in

the United States, and that would be recorded then as

an investment flow, foreign direct investment flow from Japan to

the United States.

But, you know, companies like Toyota are big enough companies

that they could also finance this investment by borrowing locally

on US capital markets.

Right.

And that, you know, from an economic point of view,

and in terms of setting up a production facility is

kind of the same, but it won't show up in

the FDI data in the same way.

So we kind of want to be aware of exactly

what we're observing or not observing in some of these

FDI data.

And for that reason, there is a distinction which will

come up in the lecture between are we looking at

FDI data as kind of based on these flows of

investment across countries, which is one way of doing it.

Another way is to just have firm level data on

exactly where firms, different plants are set up, and that

potentially allows us to observe something slightly different.

And for many economic questions, this second point data is

probably more informative about what multinationals are actually doing.

Yeah.

I remember reading one article which also points out kind

of a problem with this definition, which was it was

an article about Ukraine and how I think a large

share, if not most, of foreign direct investment into Ukraine

was actually Ukrainians creating holding companies abroad and then investing

that money into Ukraine to use taxes.

Yeah.

So then it's a Ukrainian firm investing in Ukraine.

But because the holding company is abroad, that meets the

definition of a foreign firm.

Yeah, exactly.

So I think this is another example of some of

the pitfalls in this kind of data, because conceptually we

don't want to think of that as FDI.

But you're right that it will show up as FDI.

And a lot of this, uh, data and the various

actions firms take to avoid taxes and be kind of

a major problem in FDI SDI data and the classic

example there is, you know, if you look at Ireland

and Ireland's economy looks much bigger than it actually is

because a lot of US forums hold intellectual property in

Ireland for tax reasons.

But that's purely about kind of flow and nominal flows

of assets in order to minimise tax liabilities rather than

actually about where the firm operates.

So it does become tricky in these situations.

And we don't you know, there's no perfect solution to

this, but it's something you kind of want to be

aware of when thinking about this data.

Any other questions at this point?

Okay.

So that's with those caveats in mind.

And kind of very remaining aware of the difficulty of

measuring some of these things.

Let's try and look at, you know, what do we

actually know about multinationals.

So the first thing to say is that they are

important in the sense of they account for a non-trivial

share of global trade and global output.

So this slide has some statistics to kind of back

up that that claim.

So if we look at the gross value added of

all multinational enterprises, it accounts for around a quarter of

world GDP, so about a quarter of total global output.

This was in 2000 is produced by multinationals.

That number will have gone up slightly since 2000.

Um, so they matter in that sense.

Um, now that quarter of world GDP, right.

That both the actions of the parent firms or the

output, the parent firms and the outputs of the affiliates.

And if that quarter of world GDP is primarily the

parents, then actually the foreign affiliates are not going to

be that important.

So we also care what shared world GDP is accounted

for by foreign affiliates.

Well, it's around 10%.

Okay, so 1 in 10 of every dollar's worth of

output produced is produced by the foreign affiliates of multinational

firms.

If we switch to thinking about trade, these numbers are

even bigger.

So about one third of all world trade occurs within

the boundaries of multinational firms.

All right.

So it's Toyota in Tokyo sending Toyota in, uh, Alabama,

some car parts, for example.

Uh, so there's a lot of trade going on within

these firms.

Uh, which obviously means that thinking about how these firms

make decisions is important for understanding trade.

Uh, you can also kind of coming back to the

question of using multinational firms to avoid taxes, using intra

firm trade, and in particular, how trade is priced to

avoid taxes is a big source of kind of firms

doing tax evasion and tax avoidance, which we're not really

going to focus on in this, um, course.

But if you know, if you take an accountant course

and think about transfer pricing and how firms minimise their

tax liability.

The use of intra intra firm trades is a useful

tool for this because it allows you to switch profits

across countries.

Um, and then there's on top of that one that

goes on with any firm.

There's another third of trade that in which multinational founder

on at least one side of the transaction.

So two thirds of all world trade in some way

involve multinational firms.

An example of the interferon trade to avoid taxes.

Would that be something like, you know, it's like vertically

integrated.

I'm selling the inputs to, you know, some production from

one country to another, but I'm going to sell it

for like, you know, way below market price because I

want because maybe the, you know, there are tariffs that

are proportional to.

Yeah.

Or more.

Just like imagine that corporate tax rate differs in the

two countries.

So you want your profits to accrue in the country

with a lower corporate tax rate.

Um so you are going, that means you you are

going to charge the country with the higher corporate tax

rate, too much for the input.

And that that effectively shifts your profits across countries.

Right.

And what, you know, one way to do that is

by manipulating the price at which you sell inputs within

the firm.

A much more effective way to do it is if

you have intellectual property.

The firm in the low corporate tax, uh, jurisdiction licenses

the intellectual property to the firm in the high corporate

tax jurisdiction.

So all your profits end up in the low corporate

tax jurisdiction.

Right.

And that Ireland's business model, that's why firms like Google

and Apple hold a lot of intellectual property in Ireland.

Right.

So that's trade.

And then another dimension of along which they really want

any kind of even more important is when we look

at innovation.

So if you look at just the 700 largest multinational

firms, which is a teeny tiny share of all the

firms they account for half of world R&D and 70%

of business R&D.

So a lot of the innovation, um, the new ideas

that are being created in the economy comes from multinationals.

And that's another reason why we care a lot about

what they are, what they're what what they're doing.

Now, what are the patterns of FDI across countries look

like?

So there's this nice review paper that Andreessen Yi wrote

a few years ago, kind of summarising the literature on

FDI.

Um, and in particular, they kind of highlighted six stylised

facts about FDI flows.

So I want to go through, um, them because they're

going to kind of help us understand what are the

key patterns in the data that we want to be

aware of.

So facts one, where are multinationals located right in that

question.

Then, you know, the sort the second part of that

question is where are the parents located and where are

the affiliates located?

So for both parents and affiliates, multinational production is primarily

in developed countries.

And when we look at production by multinationals in developing

countries, it's more likely to be by affiliates, uh, than

by parents.

So, for example, in 2000, developed countries with the origin

of 91% of FDI flows and the recipient of 79%.

So this is something that is primarily happening within developed

countries.

And here are some kind of graphs we can see

that speak to this.

So both of these graphs are each observation is a

country.

So each of these observations is countries.

You can see you've got Hong Kong here.

Um and on the x axis we've got income per

capita.

So on the x axis we plotting how rich the

country is.

And on the y axis on this left hand graph.

We're plotting the countries outward stock of FDI relative to

its GDP.

All right.

So we've got the total value of FDI investment abroad

by investors from that country relative to that country's GDP.

So the GDP thing is just a normalised right.

Bigger countries are simply by virtue of being bigger, going

to have higher FDI stocks.

And that's not the variation we're interested in here.

So we're normalising that.

And then we're plotting the outward FDI stock here against

GDP.

And then on the right GDP per capita on the

right hand graph we're plotting the inward FDI stock against

GDP per capita.

So you can see in both cases there is an

upward sloping relationship.

But the you know upward slope the correlation there is

much stronger for outward FDI than for inward FDI.

What do we take away from that.

What is that telling us?

If you kind of looked at these patterns, what would

you conclude based on looking at these patterns.

Any suggestions?

So one just is that the regional countries, um, are

investing in forms outside of the country.

That is just the left hand side.

Yeah.

Um, and the right hand side is telling me that

they're investing in firms that are, um, I mean, disproportionate.

So basically they're also investing in countries where, uh, they're

not as rich.

Um, and that is then what is affecting it.

So it's not like they're not investing in developed countries.

They are doing that, but they're also sort of diversifying

in terms of which countries forms they're investing in.

Which is why, although there's an upward slope, which is

telling me that, for instance, on the right hand side

and the right graph, um, uh, if I just take

Luxembourg, for instance, um, it has high, um, inward FDI,

although it's quite rich.

Um, but that's not very varient from if I take,

uh, I don't know what they are will be um,

but any of those Mozambique, Mozambique also, for instance, is

right there.

So they're quite similar in terms of their FDI inward

ratio.

Um, although they're very different countries.

Yes.

All right.

So I think you've kind of got the main point

here, which is that this the outward FDI graph is

showing us that if we think about where FDI is

coming from, It's overwhelmingly coming from the richer countries.

So most multinational firms have their headquarters in the richer

countries.

And that shouldn't come as a surprise, because you the

thing about multinational firms is we're kind of all familiar

with them because all the big brands that dominate the

global economy are multinational firms.

And we know that, you know, most of these big

firms come from developed economies, right?

The slight caveat to that, and obviously what has changed,

particularly over the last 20 or 30 years, is the

rise of China.

Right?

And in particular, as the Chinese economy has grown so

rapidly and China has become this kind of manufacturing powerhouse,

we have started to see the emergence of kind of

large numbers of Chinese multinational firms in ways that we

didn't before.

So, you know, even though China is still a Relatively

low income per capita level relative to OECD countries.

We are starting to see kind of FDI coming out

of China in a way.

It hasn't really come out of other developing countries that

have gone aside, you know.

It's the richer countries that are doing FDI.

And then in the inward stop, you can see, you

know, we see slightly more after you get going into

developed countries, but also kind of a lot going into

developing countries.

So this is kind of telling you that developing economies

might not be the source of FDI, but they are

a destination, uh, a destination for FDI.

They're certainly not the only destination.

Okay.

So that's fact one, which is kind of about patterns

of FDI at the country.

Level two is about where do we see lots of

FDI in terms of industries.

Um, and it says that we see more multinationals in

industries and more capital Intensive and more R&D intensive.

In addition, if we ask whether FDI flows into industry

or intra industry.

So remember we drew this distinction for trade flows when

talking about the Krugman model.

And we said that one of the motivations for the

Krugman model was that a lot of world trade is

not between industries, but within industries.

The same is true for FDI.

We see a lot of intra industry FDI, that is,

Japanese firms investing in the US in the same industries

as US firms invest in, uh, invest in Japan.

Okay.

So, you know, here's some data on the kind of

variations across industry in FDI.

So now what we're plotting is each of each observation

is now is an industry.

These are, uh, four digit makes industry.

So unless you happen to know the nature classification, these

numbers are not going to mean very much.

But what we're calling holding on the x axis of

the left hand graph is the industry's capital intensity, measured

by its capital stock relative to employment and on the

right hand graph, its R&D intensity measured by the ratio

of R&D expenditure to sales, um, and then on the

y axis.

In each case, we're measuring the share of trade within

the industry which occurs within firms.

Right.

So this is an indirect proxy for the importance of

multinational, uh activity.

Because obviously the trade to be occurring within firms, it

has to be occurring within the border boundaries of a

multinational.

So it's a way to proxy multinational activity.

And again, in both cases we've seen that, you know,

there's a lot of variation here.

But on average more capital intensive industries see more, uh,

intra trade, as do more R&D intensive industries.

So this is this evidence is sort of interesting descriptively,

but also it starts to point to thinking about, well,

why do we see some firms doing FDI and not

others?

This is kind of suggesting that it might be related

to have a capital intensive and R&D intensive.

Those those firms are and we will come back to

come back to that.

Third facts.

FDI kind of obeys a gravity equation in the same

way trade deals.

We talked about this a lot this morning okay.

So what do we know about kind of gravity in

FDI.

Well we know that if you look at the amount

of production.

So output by foreign affiliates of multinationals is declining in

the distance between the headquarters country and the destination country.

But it is declining more slowly than trade is either

looking at total exports or parent exports of inputs to

their goods.

So this distance effect is still there for FDI.

but it's a bit weaker than for a trade, right?

And again, that's something we're going to want to come

back to when we think about why firms take do

FDI.

And in particular, we're going to want to think about

why might we see that it's declining more.

So the.

Question is at this point, do you think this will.

Okay.

Yeah.

Good.

Yeah.

Well, yeah.

Yeah.

Uh, is there any way to measure, like how much

of supply is from a foreign affiliate?

I mean, not foreign affiliates, but foreign firms.

So I'm just trying to think like this is environment

intensive industries.

Um, do not have, um, sort of FDI as much.

Um, but is there a way to.

Yeah.

So in principle, that can be measured.

Um, if you've got the right data and some countries

and industries will have that data, I don't think I

have that statistic on the slides.

Um, it.

Just be like, what could the statistic be?

What share is coming.

Like, you.

Could say what share of total output in the UK

in the clothing industry is produced by foreign owned firms.

That statistic exists.

Okay.

Um, I don't know exactly what the number is and

it will vary a lot across countries and industries, but

you can measure that.

Uh, I wanted to ask about so in that last

paragraph, we'd say with making the comparison between, you know,

the gravity equation of minis versus the gravity equation of,

you know, parent exports of inputs to their affiliates.

And so I wanted to ask that that to me

kind of implies or suggest at least that it's more

common for the parent to produce the export to produce

the input inputs, and then to export that to the

affiliates that then produce the output, rather than the other

way around that the affiliates produce inputs, that then goes

to the parent for the final Manufacturing.

Is that the case?

Not necessarily.

I mean, I can see why you're kind of concluding

that from there.

But I think in some cases you get parents providing

inputs to their affiliates, and in some cases it is

the other way round.

And it kind of depends a little bit on the

nature of the industry, how that specialisation happens.

Because I guess intuitively I would have.

Yeah, intuitively think that if you're investing abroad because you

want to use different like factor prices, then probably you

want to you want the inputs to manufacture some final

output back at home.

Whereas if you're looking to get access to the market,

what you actually care about is can you produce the

output there?

Yeah.

And then maybe if you have returns to scale, then

you just produce the input domestically, but then the output

is done.

Yes.

The thing I would add on top of that is

that if you look at kind of the specialisation patterns

between parents and affiliates, often you see kind of a

lot of the tangible production happening in affiliates, but the

intangible production happening in impairments.

So in addition to being about parents actually sending physical

goods to their affiliates, you can think about parents exporting

kind of R&D services or marketing services to their affiliates.

And there's definitely a lot of that in the data

as well.

But question no good.

Right.

So carrying on for.

Multi.

So now we're coming to the fact that it's kind

of analogous to.

Remember we had the mallet fact exporters are bigger and

more productive and better performing than non exporters.

This is the analogous.

Version of that for FDI.

Both parents and affiliates of multinationals tend to be larger,

more productive, more R&D intensive, more export oriented than non

multinationals.

Um, so if we thought of exporters as being better

performing than non exporters, right, we can now think of

multinationals as being another group of firms that are even

better performing than exporters.

Right.

So on average you know multinationals tend to be the

biggest and in a certain sense best performing firms.

Example data of that from the US.

So US multinational parents account for less than one inch

200 firms, but they account for over half of value

added employment and R&D.

So you know, there's relatively few of them, but they're

big and they do a lot of, uh, innovation.

Um.

Now this thing kind of comes back as a big

factor here, comes back and speaks of it to a

kind of a question of, well, what do parents do?

Versus what do affiliates do?

There's no single answer to that.

And it varies a lot across firms, across the industry.

But on average, we tend to see that, you know,

parents do more R&D.

They also do more of a kind of brand development,

product development, advertising, those kind of roles, whereas affiliates are

more likely to be involved in either actually producing the

good or in some industries in selling the good.

Right?

They might be wholesalers or resellers.

You know, one of the group of companies that does

a lot of multinationals are big supermarkets, right?

Where you might have the headquarters that comes up with

the overall strategy for the company and pricing strategies.

And then what does the affiliate of a supermarket do?

It just sells the stuff primarily.

Okay.

Um, the real question of where does the affiliate sell

to?

So do you think you would fit a foreign affiliate

if I'm the UK affiliate of Toyota now and I

produce cars in the UK.

Do I sell them to the UK market?

Do I sell them back to Japan or do I

sell them to third countries?

We see all these things, but more than anything we

see selling in the host country.

So for example, if we look at the output of

US affiliates in 2009, 55% of that output stayed in

the host country, 34% were sold to foreign customers outside

the US, and then 11% was exported back to the

US.

So these are US affiliates abroad.

Over half of that output is being sold in whatever

country they are located.

Then another third is sold to Third Market.

So they're using that foreign affiliate as an export platform

to serve non-US markets.

And only 10% is exported back to the to the

US.

So most of the output is not kind of being

traded back and forth with the headquarters firm.

It's sold elsewhere.

I am the final fact I want to do at

this stage.

Um, where does FDI come from?

And here we can draw a distinction between is it

new investment or is it mergers and acquisitions?

If I want to set up an affiliate in Germany,

do I buy an existing German firm and use it

to produce my output or merge with it?

Or do I set up a new factory?

Um.

A lot of it is mergers and acquisitions.

Particularly in developed countries, you see maybe more greenfield investment

in developing countries.

But a lot of the way that firms enter new

markets is by merging or acquiring an existing firm.

Right.

And we think that probably speaks to something about the

importance of having country specific knowledge.

When you're setting up a foreign affiliate, part of what

you're acquiring when you buy a foreign firm is you're

acquiring people who know the local market or know the

local workforce, and potentially therefore bring skills to the table

at the headquarters in a foreign country that doesn't have.

And this points to potentially the importance of there being

frictions, which make it hard for firms to operate across

multiple countries, because you do need this kind of market

specific knowledge to work in each different country.

Is this also saying that in comparing FDI, going to

develop versus developing countries for developed, it's more likely that

you're buying an existing firm that has local market knowledge,

whereas in developing countries you're more likely to start from

scratch and do sort of greenfield.

Yes.

So now, to be clear, both happen in both locations.

We don't want to kind of say it's either, you

know, always one or the or the other, but it

is saying that when multinationals open or set up affiliates

in developing countries, it is more likely that it is

going to be a new investment, setting up entirely their

own firm.

I think there's potentially a bit of a tension there,

because on the one hand, you might think that for,

say, a firm coming from the US learning how to

operate in a relevant country, it's going to be harder

than learning how to operate in the UK, for example.

So that might speak more to the need to have

kind of local knowledge.

On the other hand, I think probably what drives this

is when the technological gap between countries is bigger, there's

more of an incentive for multinationals to kind of come

set up the firm using their own technology, train their

own people.

And I think that's probably the main incentive.

Right.

Um, one thing we've seen in China, obviously, is when

China opened up FDI, a lot of the time, it

was when you can come and do FDI in China,

but only if you do a joint venture with a,

uh, a Chinese firm.

So in that situation, you see a lot of joint

ventures between foreign firms and and Chinese firms, and China

has used that as a way of kind of acquiring

and learning about new technologies.

So we can see that kind of FDI acting as

a mechanism for technology transfer.

Okay.

So that was some sort of high level facts about

patterns of FDI.

And now we want to kind of step back and

think a little bit more conceptually about, well, why do

we see, um, FDI.

So there's a because I want to introduce this framework,

which dates back to Dunning in 1981, about what it's

a framework for thinking about why we see multinational firms

emerge.

And he calls it the Oli framework.

So offer ownership Alpha location and Alpha internalisation.

And the idea is that for a firm to become

a multinational, all these kind of three conditions need to

be satisfied.

The three conditions being then need to be an ownership

region, a location region and an internalisation region at reason.

So let's explain kind of what that is.

So the ownership part here is the idea that for

a firm to become a multinational, it must own some

firm specific assets which make it rational or profit maximising

for production in the foreign country to be done by

that firm and not by a local firm in that

market.

So think about a world where every potential firm has

access to the same technology, right?

In that world, you would never expect to see multinationals

emerge, because clearly there's some cost of having to go

to a foreign market, learn to operate in a different

environment.

To rationalise paying that cost, you need to have some

advantage over the local firms that are there already.

And if all firms have access to the same technology,

what's that advantage going to be?

So we can think of this kind of ownership rationale

is the firm needs to own something they can exploit

in that country, and which local firms do not have

access to.

And typically, you know, intellectual property would be the classic

example of that.

There could be intellectual property, you know, in this form

of a technology, but also in the form of a

brand or a trade, you know, a trademark that they,

they own and, and control.

So that gives a reason why you don't just see

the local firms out competing.

So that's step one ownership to location.

Why does the firm want to produce in multiple locations

rather than just concentrating its production at the headquarters location?

So there has to be some reason why it is

profit maximising Estimating to split production up across different locations.

And when we think about the reasons why that might

be, it's useful to distinguish between horizontal FDI and vertical

FDI.

And we're going to dig into both of these in

more detail in the rest of the lecture.

But in terms of definitions, horizontal FDI is when a

multinational serves a foreign market through production abroad instead of

exporting.

And so this is very much directly about the market

access choice.

You can access the foreign market by exporting or you

can access it through production abroad.

So we say a firm is undertaking horizontal FDI when

it chooses to establish a foreign affiliate, because it wants

to produce abroad and then sell into that host market.

Right.

This is Toyota setting up a plant in the US

to sell to US consumers.

Okay.

The other main type of FDI is vertical FDI, where

you fragment production across countries not because of where you're

selling to, but because it's cheaper to produce in one

country and another.

So this is what we may be expect to see

more frequently.

If we think about developed countries investing in developing countries

where potentially factor prices are lower, why were U.S. firms

willing to do joint venture deals with Chinese firms?

Right.

Even if that meant that Chinese firms might learn and

acquire their technology, it's because production costs in China were

lower than in the US, and that provides an incentive

to undertake vertical FDI.

And it is possible that I will have data showing

that more FDI in the developing country and more.

Broadly speaking.

So the the reason I'm being a little bit vague

there is, you know, when firm when you see if

a foreign direct investment in the data, it doesn't come

with a tag saying this is horizontal FDI and this

is vertical FDI.

But what you can do is look at things like,

you know, where does the foreign affiliate sell its output.

And it's certainly the case that for a lot of

investment in developing countries, it's clearly not to produce output

that is sold within that country, then it's more likely

to be exported back to the headquarters or exported to

a third country for assembly.

But broadly speaking, we do.

You can do about vertical FDI flows as being closed

between developed and developing countries.

And horizontal FDI is more between countries at similar levels

of development.

Is it true that vertical.

FDI is um, overall the whole country is more capital

intensive?

Um, and therefore so for example, they have better machines

or better technology, and that's what they should do.

I mean, you've had in this country.

Um, yes, sometimes.

Okay.

So I think there's two parts of that that are

may be useful to unpack, which is, I think, for

almost all FDI.

Part of the reason the firm ends up fragmenting production

across locations is that it owns something, and that's something

is often a technology that is not available to firms

in the destination country.

And this is the ownership part of this framework.

So it is often the case that when you see

FDI, the firm that is doing the investment has a

technological advantage over the average domestic firm.

The second part then is what is it that they're

always more capital intensive, as we saw previously, on average,

you do see more FDI and more capital intensive industries.

And multinational firms do on average tend to be more

capital intensive.

But again, it depends a little bit on the industry.

So, you know, there are going to be some industries

where the capital intensity factor is really important, but there

might be others where it's more about the skill, intensity

or the composition of the workforce.

So I wouldn't simply say the kind of thinking about

capital intensity will help us always understand why we're going

to see FDI flows.

Because if the reason is, uh, it's capital for technology,

then the population might not benefit in terms of employment,

but maybe there are still lower prices.

But if it's lower wage levels, then there is an

incentive to then it probably will result in, uh, less

deployment.

Yeah.

So you're thinking about kind of what is the effect

of FDI on the destination, uh, country.

And I think correctly pointing out that the answer to

that question will depend on what type of investment we're

seeing and how capital intensive it is.

And, you know, a clear distinction you could draw.

There will be between sort of if you look at

the mining sector, right.

When we do mining investments abroad, it's typically incredibly capital

intensive, employs very few people.

Right.

So unless the government has an agreement to essentially tax

the output of the mine, that mining can often operate

as kind of an enclave industry that brings very few

benefits to the host country, whereas if it is a

more labour or skill intensive investment that can bring more

spill-over benefits.

So those kind of differences definitely, um, exist.

And those of you that are going to present the

Java chick paper next week, it speaks to these questions.

Okay.

The location is the final part of this framework is

Internalisation, which is even if I own a firm specific

asset and I want to produce a broad expression of

do I do it In an integrated form by owning

the foreign plant, or do I outsource to an independent

supplier?

So this internalisation is speaking to this integration versus outsourcing

decision.

And as we've talked about already, it's only going to

be FDI if the firm does decide to integrate.

So the final part here is does the firm want

to integrate the foreign producer or does it want to

outsource to the foreign producer?

We are not going to talk today about what affects

this internalisation decision.

It kind of depends on where the optimal boundaries of

the firm lie, which is often related to kind of

contracting frictions, uh, in terms of transacting with the supplier.

But today we will just focus.

We will simplify that by showing that if the firm

wants to produce abroad, it does it for FDI.

But just to flag that, there's kind of another part

of the literature that thinks explicitly about this internalisation decision.

Because this is separate from ownership.

Does that also mean that you could lease sort of

the technology or whatever for a specific advantage you have

to the supplier.

In principle, yes.

And you do see some of that.

But you know, if a firm owns a patent, right?

If I want to exploit that patent abroad, one way

is to set up a foreign affiliate and that uses

that pattern.

Or alternatively, I can just lease that patent, license that

pattern to the to a foreign firm.

And both those things can happen.

Okay.

Any other questions about.

Okay.

So that was kind of quite a long introduction.

What we're now going to do is we're going to

talk about kind of theories of why multinational firms appear

focussed in particular on why might we see horizontal FDI

and why might we see vertical FDI.

So in each case, we're going to look at kind

of a theory of why it occurs.

And then we're going to look at some empirical evidence

kind of trying to test how well this theory explains

actual patterns of FDI in the in the data.

So we're going to start with horizontal FDI.

Um, and we're going to start by this paper with

this paper by Lael Brainard, um, who formulates a simple

idea of kind of what are the economic forces that

shape when firms decide to undertake horizontal FDI, and who

then takes that hypothesis to the data and kind of

provide some evidence in support of her hypothesis.

So the basic idea is what is known as the

proximity concentration trade off.

And this proximity concentration trade off is about trying to

ask what are the costs and benefits of horizontal FDI.

And the idea is that the benefit of horizontal FDI

is proximity to your customers.

Okay, so let's come back again to the example of

Toyota.

If I produce a Toyota in Japan and I want

to sell it in the US.

I need to put it on a ship, send it

across the Pacific, and it then needs to pay us

import tariffs when it arrives in the US.

So there are these trade costs that we talked about

last week.

Alternatively, if I produce that same Toyota at a plant

in the US, then I can simply drive it out

of the factory and have it delivered to the consumer.

So it reduces the trade costs.

So the key benefit of horizontal FDI in this theory

is the proximity to the customer, reducing trade costs.

So that's the benefit right.

But if we want to think about a trade off

also we need a cost.

So what's the cost of doing FDI.

Well this is the concentration part.

So the idea there is if you want to establish

your car plant in the US, there's a fixed cost

to setting up that plant.

Right.

And that fixed cost is additional to what you've already

paid to set up your headquarters in Japan.

So in some sense it is most Deficient regard.

You know, absent trade cost, it is more efficient to

concentrate production in a single location.

If you want to fragment production across multiple locations, that

generates additional fixed costs.

And then the proximity concentration Trade-off is it is the

cost of the additional fixed costs and fragmenting production.

Does it justify or not the benefits from being closer

to the consumers and for being more having better proximity?

Okay, so Reynolds hypothesis is that this is the basic

trade-off that determines when firms choose or choose how to

do, um, horizontal FDI.

Um, so Shyam wants to test whether there's evidence in

the data that supports this trade off being important.

Um, she has a simple model in the in the

paper, but we're kind of here.

We're just going to kind of formulate what she wants

to test verbally, which is to the extent of proximity

matters.

Right.

We'd expect to see that when trade costs are lower,

you see less FDI.

Right.

Because as as trade costs fall, it matters less, less

if you're proximate to your customers.

So we see less horizontal FDI when trade cost the

lower and then the proximity.

So the concentration part is going to depend on what

are the fixed costs of establishing a new plant in

industries where the plant level economies of scale are very

high, which is, say, where there's very high fixed costs

of establishing a new plant.

Right.

You're less likely to do FDI in those industries.

So what she's actually going to kind of test empirically

is she's going to look at the ratio of sales

by foreign affiliates to exports.

So it's it's about you know, you're selling to the

foreign market.

Do you do it through your foreign affiliates or do

you do it for your exports?

So this ratio of sales by foreign affiliates to exports

is kind of an indicator of indicate how much FDI

were doing and how predictions should be greater.

When trade costs are high, stakes are higher.

You do more FDI, less exporting, and it should be

better when plant level scale economies are low.

Because when plant level scale economies are low, the fragmentation

costs are smaller.

And this.

Is the problem said no.

It's closer to being based on the Krugman model, with

each firm producing a different variety.

But to be honest, let's let her model.

We're going to look in a second at a paper,

Hultman, which has a more sophisticated version of her model.

So let's hold off thinking about the model till we

look at their model, because it's going to be an

easier, a more sensible one to think about.

Okay.

So this is what she wants to test.

Here's how she's going to implement that text.

So the data she has, and in some ways kind

of one of the nicest things about this paper is

she was the first person to use this data is

the US Bureau of Economic Analysis runs a survey of

US multinationals asking them not just about their headquarter operations

in the US, but asking them why all their foreign

affiliates operations and where they're located, how much they sell,

what industry they operate in.

So she's going to have this data, and she has

this data from 1989.

Um, and she has it for operations in 27 countries

and 63 industries.

So for each of these country industry combination, she's going

to take the ratio of this is exports of the

US to that country C and industrial relative to the

sum of exports plus foreign affiliate sales.

So this is kind of this dependent variable higher when

there's more exporting relative to FDI.

Um and she's going to regress that on measures of

trade costs.

So she has both the freight costs and the tariff

costs.

Uh, she has some country destination, country specific variables.

It's income per capita, tax rate, trade, openness, openness, FDI.

And then she had a part level and firm level

scale economies, measures to contest the proximity part of the,

uh, trade off.

A tricky thing here is how do you measure plant

level scale economies?

That's not totally obvious.

The measure she goes for is the number of production

employees in the median US plant, in an industry where

the plants are ranked by value added.

So the idea here is if plant level scale economies

are bigger, you will have a bigger plant.

So she simply going to take kind of US data

on how big plants are and how that varies across

industries as a proxy for plant level scale Economies.

You can see, however, this is a very indirect way

of measuring this.

And then she has also about the difference between plant

level and farm level scale economies.

And she will use the number of non-production employees in

a firm as a measure of firm level scale economies.

So what we're looking for, if the model is kind

of supported, is that you have this pattern of coefficient

estimates.

So negative effects of the trade costs on the export

to FDI ratio.

Right.

Because higher trade costs we should do less exporting and

more FDI.

And then the plant level scale economies are will have

a positive effect.

Let me just make sure I get that right.

Yeah.

The alpha seven will be positive.

And the firm level scale economy is negative.

Right.

And the reason we've got in there, both the plant

level and the firm level scale economies is that.

If you write down the model, what kind of matters

is the ratio of plant level scale economies relative to

farm level scale economies?

So she's including most of them.

Um.

And here is kind of a summary of what she

finds when she runs these estimates.

So we've got kind of various different specifications here using

different kind of random effects, different estimation methods, different controls,

um, key variables of interest, the freight and the tariff

variables.

So she's reporting on the estimated coefficient and then the

t statistic in parentheses.

So you can see in this first column you've got

negative and kind of highly significant effects of the trade

cost, which is kind of what we'd expected.

As trade costs go up you're doing less exporting uh

relative to FDI.

And that conclusion is pretty robust across different specifications.

Um, and then the other key variables of interest at

the plant level and farm level scale economies, which also

end to kind of as predicting higher plant level scale

economies, more exporting, higher firm level scale economies, less exporting.

All right.

So we've gone through that pretty quickly.

But the key takeaway in this paper is firstly the

idea of this proximity concentration trade off and the basic,

you know, market access versus fixed cost trade off.

That's here.

And the fact that in this US, uh, FDI.

Data.

We do seem to see evidence that is kind of

consistent with this, uh, hypothesis.

Any questions on that?

Okay.

Let's take a break there and then we'll come back

and we'll kind of dig into this proximity concentration trade

off in a little bit more detail.

Yeah.

I just want to make sure that you show up

every night.

Um, what do you think about.

It.

Marcus?

Yeah, you can stop it.

I like my mom.

Yeah.

Um, establishing a new company.

Yeah.

Why not?

Yeah.

Of course.

Yeah.

From scratch.

I'm not.

Saying that for Anyone else?

No no.

No.

So both those things are definitely FTI.

What I was saying, when was that?

In practice, a lot of the FDI we observe is

M&A.

So we're going to we're thinking about them here both

being FDI.

But just you know, in reality a lot of the

FDI we see is M&A rather than kind of new

investment strategies.

Yeah.

I know this is a completely different topic.

Yeah.

Um, this is an exciting one.

Yeah.

Well.

Yeah.

Well, to us and.

This is one of.

The great.

Did you?

Like.

Making up country club.

Yeah.

But this course typically.

No.

Unless you're explicitly asked to write.

And I say for this because I think for micro

that might be more important for this course because that's

not our main focus.

I am almost always happy for you to just assume

that kind of standard regularity conditions apply.

Mean is going to be well defined, is going to

have an interior optimal.

So I'm not looking for you to kind of go

through check second order conditions show that things are contiguous.

That's not that's not right.

Yeah I know that.

But you know.

Yeah.

In order.

But it's not what we're doing.

Oh.

Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

No.

Yeah.

Yes.

Yes.

So, what is this about?

Oh.

Yes.

That's fine.

Yes.

The cost.

Of exports, for instance.

Automotive.

Industrial.

So you won't be excluded by.

A downgrade and then.

It'll be.

U.S..

Automotive exports divided by U.S..

Automotive.

Plus.

What was automotive.

Industry?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

In other countries?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So that would tell me then that as freight prices

increase, as we read from the US to see Japan

increases, I will decrease the amount of exports I give

to them, which will send.

And sales of foreign affiliates could be anywhere.

Right?

It could be, I mean, it doesn't mean.

Yeah, yeah.

Okay.

Is it.

Yeah.

Going horizontal.

Yeah.

Which is anyways exporting locally.

Yes.

I'm selling local selling.

Correct.

Yeah.

Okay.

Okay.

Okay.

Let's carry on.

Any clarification questions?

No.

In the equation in the slide previously.

Um, why do you specifically control the way chiefs basically

control the FDI?

So yeah.

I mean, I think the notation here is like as

this is a major like openness to FDI.

So.

You know, she's worried about omitted variable bias.

Um, and she's worried one of the other factors that

might affect how much would we do relative to FDI

is how open you are to FDI.

Likewise, how open you are to trade and then the

taxpayer.

But the trade variable is there because obviously, as we've

talked about, FDI patterns can be influenced by tax differences.

So they're basically all those other variables are there to

try and reduce the risk of omitted variable bias.

Yes.

So the data contains um, uh, company level data, not

just on firms in the U.S. also, as you know.

So it's it's she has the data on the data

for multinationals that are based in the US, But for

those firms, I observe how much their foreign affiliates in

other countries sell service.

This SLC is sales by foreign affiliates in countries, say,

of US firms and it's in industry L.

This is all activity by affiliates of US firms.

Does that make sense?

Have you seen you can take different values because the

affiliates are in different countries.

Yes.

Yeah.

So it's like the US firm has some affiliates in

France and some in Germany.

And we ask, how much do your affiliates in France

sell and how much do your affiliates in Germany sell?

And the exports will be the exports from.

The US to Germany and from the US to France.

Can you adjust fixed effects?

Uh, that's the error term.

Oh, right.

Yes.

Unconventional notation for an error term.

time.

Yes.

In fact, if you kind of want to get into

the econometrics of this paper.

Right.

So this paper is written when was it 97.

Yeah.

So it's written nearly 30 years ago now.

Um, you'll note that.

Yeah, she doesn't have any of the specifications here that

include fixed effects.

If you did this paper today, you would definitely have

country and industry fixed effects in the area.

The fact that she didn't reflect a change in the

style of how people run regressions over that time period.

Okay.

So now we're going to shift to this paper by

Hellman Melton people, um, which is going to also be

about the proximity and concentration trade off.

But it's going to analyse this trade off when firms

are heterogeneous.

So, you know, we've got mallets on this paper.

Right.

So it's going to build on the mallet trade model

that we looked at last week, and incorporate FDI into

that model and ask, you know, when firms are heterogeneous,

which firms do FDI and what determines the patterns of

FDI in terms of this proximity concentration?

Trade-off.

So the starting stylised packaging in white is important, right.

And this is related to what we already talked about

in terms of those untrusting people.

Um, motor in fact is multinationals are on average more

productive than non multinationals.

So this table here is showing the result of a

regression where you have firm level productivity on the left

hand side.

And you regress that on a dummy for is the

firm a multinational.

And then a separate dummy is the firm.

If it's not a multinational an exporter.

So you can see that on average exporters are 39

points more productive than normal exporters, which is consistent with

the evidence we saw that motivated them at its model

last week.

But multinationals are 54 log points more um productive than

non export and non multinational firms.

So not just our multinationals more productive than the baseline

but they're also more productive than exporters.

So even if we compare multinational tax orders on average

multinationals are more productive.

So in the same way Mel, it's used this to

kind of motivate a model where the most productive firms

are selected to exporting themselves.

And you want to think about a model where, you

know, medium productivity firms select and exporting, but the most

productive firms are going to select into doing FDI, and

they're going to use that model to think about the

proximity concentration.

Trade-off.

So here's our setup.

We're going to go over this relatively quickly because the

baseline here is the mallets model we saw last week

with a few additional bells and whistles to introduce FDI.

So we're going to have multiple sectors.

That's one difference from last week.

It'll be eight sectors which will be indexed by little

h R.

And they're kind of going to be H sort of

sectors that produce differentiated products with heterogeneous firms.

And then there's also going to be one homogeneous sector

right.

Which just produces a single homogeneous good under perfect competition.

And we'll talk in a minute about why that x

r demand will be called Douglas across sectors.

So there'll be a fixed expenditure share for each sector.

And B to H will be the expenditure on sector

H.

And then within each sector we're going to have C

estimate.

So this is the same demand we had in the

Mellis model.

So the demand for each variety will be E to

the minus epsilon.

So we've got this demand elasticity epsilon.

And H is kind of the industry level demand variable

which will be endogenous and equilibrium.

Firms compete.

Monopolistic labours are only factored production.

There are many countries indexed by I Now first of

all, what role is this homogeneous.

Good.

Well the homogeneous good is going to be the numerator.

So it's going to fix price levels.

But in addition it's going to be producing the same

technology in all countries and is going to be freely

traded right.

And because it's produced with the same technology in all

countries and it's freely traded, that means it's going to

pin down the wage rate in each country to be

the same in all countries.

And in particular, we're going to normalise the wage to

be equal to one in all countries.

Why do you think they do this?

Why are we making these assumptions?

Maybe so we can make relative comparisons across countries.

When you say.

Relative comparisons, you mean in terms of.

If they have.

If the wage equals one, have something to compare with.

But even if the wage was different in each countries,

you could still draw that comparison.

So I'm not I'm not sure it's that.

Yeah.

If you want to isolate the model so it knows

only compute for the trade cost and the fixed cost

of time.

Expand on that.

What do you mean by kind of isolate the.

We want to make the simple the model the model

as simple as possible.

Um, so even though the uh, like this assumption is

strong, um, we only want to look for the these

two factors.

Yeah.

This is broadly it.

Right.

It's a it's a simplification assumption.

Right.

So by pinning down the wage in all countries, what

it means is kind of when we do comparative statics

on this model the wage never changes.

Right.

And on the one hand that's a bad thing.

Because if the question we wanted to ask is say,

if you change the cost of FDI, what happens to

the wage?

This model is clearly not going to be able to

answer that.

So this model is not being designed to answer that

kind of question.

What they want to do is just looking to be

able to look at kind of each individual in industry

separately and understand how firms behave within that industry without

taking kind of these kind of general equilibrium wage effects.

So effectively, this is kind of a partial equilibrium, uh,

assumption.

They're shutting down the general equilibrium wage adjustments.

And then they're going to say if we just focus

on, you know, partial equilibrium or More industry equilibrium.

How does each industry individually behave?

So they're buying themselves some tractability with this assumption, at

the cost of not being able to speak to general

equilibrium of things.

Okay, so just to recall, the demand of demand here

within each sector is basically what we had last week

in the matrix model.

Now what about supply.

And here's where it's a little bit more complicated because

we now have this option of FDI.

So the basic setup is as in merit in that

you pay an entry cost which is going to be

for its free labour unit.

But the wage is one.

So we can just say acting you pay your entry

cost fee.

Um, you then draw a labour requirement per unit of

output, which we're calling here a.

So this was our C in the matrix model last

week.

Is the inverse how productive you are.

And just as in merit you draw that from some

Based exogenous distribution after learning your productivity.

Then again, as in marriage, you decide do I want

to exit or do I want to produce?

And if I want to produce, do I want to

serve the foreign market?

And then the additional decision is, if I serve the

foreign market, do I want to do it through exporting

or through FDI?

So now we're going to have a fixed production cost

feed, which you have to pay to produce a fixed

export cost that you pay to export, and then a

fixed FDI cost fee if you want to do FDI.

Right.

So here in terms of the kind of market access

decision it's going to be, well, do I want to

pay the fixed export cost and then export.

And if I export I pay the iceberg trade cost

IJ.

So the trade part of the model has these fixed

and variable trade costs just assimilate.

Or alternatively, instead of trading through exporting I can pay

the fixed cost which is going to be we will

typically assume it's higher than the fixed actual cost, but

then I won't face the iceberg trade cost.

So you can see that's kind of capturing the proximity

concentration trade off in that by paying the FDA cost

I avoid the trade cost.

That's the proximity benefit.

But I paid the additional fixed cost, which is the

concentration cost.

More discussing the.

Uh numeraire.

Uh, yeah.

Why like is it also speaking to the fact that

this is a horizontal, uh, FDI instead of a vertical

one like the in which we consider the factor prices?

Yeah.

Good point.

Yes.

It's definitely related to the, the motivation here to do

FDI as we'll see is purely horizontal in that if

you do FDI, the reason you'll do it will be

to sell to consumers in the host country.

So this is a model of horizontal, um, FDI.

And because it's a model of horizontal FDI, we are

less interested in factor price differences across countries.

Whereas clearly if you think about vertical FDI, you don't

want to set the wage to the same everywhere because

that's what it actually motivates to be FDI.

That's a good point.

So yeah, you may be asking, why do we have

all of us across sectors?

Simple.

Like because of Douglas in place fixed expenditure share.

You don't have to worry about that expenditure share adjusting

when you shock the model which makes the comparative static

analysis more straightforward.

And you know here because again we're focusing on really

trying to understand in equilibrium in individual industries, we don't

care about reallocation of expenditure across industries.

So it's it's simplifies, but it does so in a

way that doesn't detract from our main focus.

Right.

So.

Okay.

So let's solve this model and kind of you do

this.

We do this essentially in the same way as we

solve the matter model.

But just now we also have to think about this

exporting versus FDI decision.

So.

We have a lot of expressivity here.

But you know these firms are competing monopolistic.

They face constant marginal costs.

So they're going to and they face constant elasticity demands.

They charge a constant mark-up over the marginal cost.

Right.

And as last week, they make profits that are increasing

in their productivity or decreasing in their cost to a.

And that enables us to write the profits that they

make in the domestic market as a function of their

cost.

Uh, this B term, which is just a captures the

demand elasticity epsilon and the level of demand in the

market, a uh, minus the fixed domestic.

cool.

And if you remember, you know, if you if you

kind of have internalised the lecture notes from last week,

you remember we saw a very similar expression there, except

what was a, a a was one over theta.

Um, likewise, we get a similar expression for export profits.

So the profits from, from from I selling in j

depend on demanding country j you substitute of the day

what was and now also depends on the trade costs.

Alternatively, if we serve the market through FDI right the

trade costs disappear.

But now we pay the fixed export cost.

So you can see that now when we want to

think about do I do export or do I do

FDI, I just need to compare these two expressions.

And that's going to tell me which firms do export

and which do FDI.

And then we will also need to think about do

I make positive profits which will give us an exit

cut off in the same way we got last week?

Um.

So to solve that problem, let's just put a little

bit more structure on the model and in particular on

the fixed costs.

So we're going to assume that the fixed cost of

FDI exceeds toutefois on the minus one times FX, which

exceeds FD.

If you ignore the fixed cost of FDI.

This assumption here is the one we made last week,

which ensured that exporters were, on average, more productive than

domestic firms.

Right?

Is the assumption that ensured that the export threshold was

above the exit Cut-Off.

Right now, we're saying that the FDI is even higher

than this set of parameters which determine the export, uh,

Cut-Off.

And when that's true, right.

We're going to be able to sort firms across different

modes of market access, as shown in this graph.

So this graph, we have the firm's productivity on the

x axis.

We have profits on the y axis.

This top line is profits in the domestic market.

The next slide.

This is a profits from X 14.

And the bottom line is profits from FDI.

So where the domestic profit line intersects the horizontal axis

that's the exit cut off.

So any firm with productivity to the right of that

cut off will sell domestically when the export profit line

intersects the x axis.

That's the export threshold.

So firms to the right of that will choose to

export.

And then where the export and FDI profit lines intersect.

So the left of that export profits exceed FDI profits.

And to the right FDI profits exceed export profits.

So for the right firms with the highest productivity above

this intersection, do FDI and firms to the left to

exporting.

Okay.

So hopefully you can kind of see that the logic

here is very similar to the American model.

We've just got an additional cut off.

And so this allows us to get four bins of

perms, the least productive asset immediately, and low productivity, but

not quite as low productivity.

Stay in the market and only sell domestically.

Relatively high productivity projects or and only the most productive

firms undertake FDI.

So this pattern of sorting is going to be consistent

with the empirical fact we started with that.

On average it's the FDI firms are the most productive.

Um, so just to clarify.

So a firm can only so if a firm is

above all three cut-offs, they would rather FDI than export.

They wouldn't do.

Both.

Yeah.

There's no incentive here to do uh to do both

because because you pay.

Because they're a separate fixed cost of FDI and exporting.

You don't want to do both because you can save

on paying one or other of those fixed costs.

So the most productive firms here only do FDI and

don't export at all.

So what we just saw is the pattern of kind

of which firm what firms do what in equilibrium.

And now what we're going to do is aggregate across

firms to get predictions about ratios of FDI sales to

exporting at the industry level.

So remember in the Brainard paper, her dependent variables were

about at the industry level or the industry country level,

how much exporting we will be seeing relative to FDI.

And what help American you will want to get is

similar predictions.

So they're going to compute total export sales of the

industry in a country relative to total FDI sales.

And then we're going to ask how do those how

does that ratio depend on the, uh, parameters of the

model?

So total export sales.

So this is export sales by firms from country to

country J.

That's just going to be the total state, total exports

of firms that are between the export Cut-Off and the

FDI cut off.

Right.

And then this this term here is their sales when

you sold a profit maximisation problem.

So the numerator here is export sales.

And the denominator is FDI sales because it's only firms

that have crossed the low I but we'll do FDI.

If we now know that this J doesn't depend on

a so we can pull that out.

Um then what we get is we get kind of

an expression that just depends on the export Cut-Off and

a.

Expression that just depends on the FDI Cut-Off, which is

to say that once we pulled out both these integrals,

right, only depend on the Cut-Off because the BJ cancels

and nothing else in there is endogenous.

So the kind of endogenous component of the model here

is just operating through the Cut-offs.

And so we're able to express the ratio as a

function of the variable trade cost.

And the cut-offs, uh, for exporting and FDI, uh, respectively,

where we've defined this function B as the integral between

zero and a of uh y to one minus epsilon

doy.

Okay, so that's just a simplification of this expression showing

that everything depends on these, uh, these cut-offs.

Right.

And the reason we're doing that is because.

What it shows is that for our initial set of

comparative static predictions.

The functional form of gee doesn't matter, right?

Because the f I entail will define the cut-offs, which

in turn will define the ratios.

Right.

And we'll get.

Those comparisons are going to hold for any functional form

of G.

One happy with this?

Um, that said, okay, so this is true regardless of

the functional form of uh, of G.

And it gives it gives us a kind of expression

for exports relative to FDI for any productivity distribution G.

And in particular, it tells us how that ratio depends

on me, the fixed costs and the variable trade costs.

So this is kind of our basic proximity concentration trade

off.

But to implement what they want to do is kind

of test these predictions.

And to do that, they're actually going to put a

function, make a functional form assumption, which is going to

give them a equation that they can actually estimate.

So in particular, they're going to assume that the productivity

distribution one over A is predicted distributed.

Right now we briefly spoke about prior to distributions in

the class this morning when we said that if you

put a Pareto distribution on the productivity distribution into a

mallet model, it becomes highly tractable.

All right.

And we're going to see that tractability again here.

So they're going to assume that the productivity distribution the

distribution of this beta follows this power law functional.

All right.

So theta has to be greater than or equal to

the lower bound P to be.

And then it has this shape parameter which controls the

dispersion in the distribution.

Uh k.

Right.

And because this has this kind of power law form,

it's incredibly easy to work with, and in particular, if

you substitute it into this expression here.

Right.

And we assume that she has this better functional form,

you can explicitly compute these two integrals.

And that gives us this expression here for the ratio

of exports to FDI.

And now I'm not necessarily be to be honest the

computation of the integrals is not difficult.

But it's also not the main point.

So I wouldn't worry about it too much.

But what I do want you to notice that once

we've got this expression, if we then perform comparative statics

on the expression, it tells us that the ratio of

exports to FDI is going to be lower when the

trade costs are higher.

So when either tau is higher or FX is higher,

we will see less exporting relative to FDI.

And it's going to be higher when Phi is higher.

So when the fixed cost of FDI is higher.

So those are the analogies, proximity concentration predictions to those

we already saw in Brainard.

But there's an additional prediction here, which is that the

ratio of export FDI sales will be lower when there

is more productivity dispersion, which is to say, when the

shape parameter, the pressure distribution k is lower.

So we get this additional prediction that more productivity dispersion,

uh reduces the ratio of exports to FDI.

So and I want to highlight that prediction because that

is a prediction that we can only get because we've

approached this question through the lens of a model with

heterogeneous firms.

Right.

And what it's saying is that what matters is not

just the behaviour of each individual firm, but how much

dispersion there is in Raising productivity across firms.

So that's kind of interesting because it's a prediction that

comes from firm heterogeneity about the industry level behaviour.

And when we test this model we're going to be

interested in you know is the actual behaviour of these

ratios consistent with these predictions that are coming out of

the heterogeneous firms part of the model.

So that's one comment that we're going to want to

test that.

Second of all.

What's the intuition for this result.

Right.

So I've stated this result at the bottom of the

board here.

More productivity dispersion less less exports relative to FDI.

But why is that the case?

Yeah.

If I go back to my.

Example.

Adding more capital, more like a better technology, better at

higher productivity, Um, compared to the foreign country.

It might be good to exploit that technology where the,

um, productivity is lower, um, much lower, less than the

more it's incentivised.

So that seems sensible.

Now map that onto our model.

What part of our model is capturing that idea?

Can we see anyone?

Go back to this graph.

Right.

Remember in this graph we said that this is the

FDI.

So the firms that do FDI are the ones to

the right of this Cut-Off.

So imagine we hold these cut-offs constant and we change

the distribution of firms productivity.

That's what we're doing when we're changing K as we

increase productivity dispersion.

There are more firms in this tale out here, and

one of these firms in the tail.

Do they do FDI rather than exporting?

So as we see more firms out there doing FDI,

the ratio of exports to FDI declines.

So I think it depends on what the mean force.

If the mean.

If the mean firm were productive enough to become multinational

firm, then higher dispersion would mean that fewer firms would

be, you know, more than half, but fewer firms would

be multinationals.

But if we assume that the median is below that

Cut-Off, then a very low dispersion means that very few

firms will be so productive that they actually meet the

threshold.

And so it depends on, you know, the distribution that

you decide where does the median fall.

So partially, yes.

In that I think what you've said is probably true

for a general functional form or a parameter distribution.

That's not true.

So for a practical distribution, if you increase the dispersion,

you were Well, the effect of that is to have

more firms falling into this FDI bin.

Right.

And that's because what does a predator distribution look like?

Right.

Um, if we.

All right.

So imagine we're plotting a predator distribution as a function

of data.

And imagine this is the density function of the distribution.

A predator distribution looks like that.

Right.

So it's downward sloping, uh, like in that way.

And it's kind of an inverse.

It's an inverse power relationship here.

Um, as you increase dispersion, what you do is you

shift it this way.

So at low productivity levels, there are fewer firms.

And at high productivity there are relatively more, uh, firms.

So for a Ferrero distribution.

The implication of that increasing prodigy dispersion is just as

more up here in the tail.

Okay, but I.

Think without having sufficiently checked that that is not necessarily

true for other functional forms.

Other questions on that.

So just to reiterate the kind of key intuition more

productivity dispersion.

There are more firms in the tail and those firms

in the tail are the ones that do FDI.

So to test for kind of whether this firm heterogeneity

is important for understanding the proximity concentration trade off, we

want to look at, is it indeed the case in

industries where we see more productivity dispersion.

We see more FDI relative to exporting.

Okay.

So let's come to the empirical part of this paper.

Right.

So the best starting point for the empirical estimation is

this equation.

If you stare at this equation you will realise it

is a kind of horrible, nonlinear thing.

So we're going to look linearise that to convert it

to a nice kind of log linear specification that we

are familiar with.

Um, and then they are going to regress this ratio

of exports to FDI on measures of the trade costs

to get the kind of proximity part plant level scale

economies, to get the concentration part, and measures of firm

size dispersion, which will be this kind of productivity dispersion

part.

And then they're going to control for industry characteristics.

And they will also have country fixed effects.

Yes.

Yeah.

That is uh, how the multi-sector assumption is useful here

because at first we have this setup, but I haven't

seen it in the model.

Yeah, I think that is a good point.

Right.

I kind of try to answer to your question would

be, well, they want to estimate how this varies across

industries.

So you know here we don't explicitly have industry subscripts

on the variables, but you implicitly all these industries have

industry subscripts, right.

But that said, if you just wrote down the kind

of single sector version of the model, you could still

get subject to normalising the wage, you could still get

this equation.

So the fact that there are multiple industries in the

model is not really something that the model exploits or

takes advantage of.

What they're really interested in is understanding a single industry.

Right.

And that's the kind of partial equilibrium sense of the

model.

So I think that is a very fair critique of

this model.

Um, right.

So they're using essentially the same data that Reynolds uses.

So they have uh, data now from 1994 rather than

1989 on U.S. exports.

So just to be clear, because there was some confusion

on this before for each industry Ele and destination country

countries.

See, they have data on how much does the US

export to that country in that industry.

And then they also have data for how much the

US do affiliate of US multinationals that are located in

that country.

How much do they sell.

And it's the ratio of those exports to FDI sales

that will be their dependent variable.

They've got that for 52 manufacturing industries in 27 countries.

They're going to have measures of add below and transport

costs of freight costs and tariffs are they're going to

measure pilot level scale economies by the number of non-production

workers per establishment on average in each industry.

Note that this is a different measure of plant level

economies of scale to the one that Brainard used.

Again, it's not totally clear how to measure this.

And then the real thing of note, because it's kind

of different here is how do we measure firm size

dispersion.

So I'll tell you how they do it.

And then I'll tell you why they do it that

way.

So what they do is they take.

They regress the log of a firm's rank in the

firm size distribution within an industry on the log of

firm size.

And I don't think this necessarily seems like the most

intuitive thing to do.

But it turns out if you have a parameter distribution,

then this regression kind of identifies the size dispersion specifically

k over epsilon uh minus one.

So a property of predator distributions is you can get

the dispersion parameter from this regression of log rank on

log size.

And they do this.

They have data for kind of firms in different industries

both Europe and the US.

Because you might worry well maybe this size dispersion thing

is not really an industry characteristic, but it's something that

varies across both countries and industries, in which case kind

of treating it as an industry primitive, it doesn't really

make sense.

So they want to establish that.

is it the case?

And if they do this for the US and Europe?

Is it the case that the size dispersion, uh, across

industries in the US is kind of closely related to

the size dispersion across industries in Europe, and they can

argue that it is, and therefore it makes sense to

think of productivity dispersion as meaningfully varying across industries in

the same way in different countries.

Explain.

Why could we assume that empirically, uh, performance follow a

distribution?

Yeah.

Good question.

Sorry, I should have come to that because I think

there are two parts to why people make this assumption.

One is it is incredibly convenient, right?

So that is not a good reason, but it's definitely

part of why people like this assumption.

It makes models very tractable.

Uh, and the reason for that is because it's a

power function.

Remember that the, um, the distribution here, um, is going

to be it's going to look like this with potentially

a constant there that controls the mean, right?

But it's a power function of productivity.

Um, and because it's a power function, it enters everything

multiplicative.

And we know how to deal with that.

Like you can integrate this thing in a way you

couldn't if it was like some kind of log of

something.

Um, so that's the, uh, kind of theorist's answer to

the question.

The empiricist answer to the question will be that if

you assume productivity is pretty distributed in these models, it

implies that employment and sales are also pretty distributed.

And if you look at employment and sales distributions in

the data, at least the upper tail of those distributions

looks like a Pareto distribution.

Um, if you plot, say, size distribution, you know, measures

of size distributions in the data, they tend to look

like that.

So they have a hump, which the distribution doesn't have.

But if you focus on the kind of right hand

side here, the rate at which you could decline is

similar to a burrito distribution.

So there is some empirical evidence that a pressure distribution

is a not crazy approximation to what these distributions actually

look like in the data, at least in the upper

tail.

If you want to do the whole distribution, you might

be better off with a log normal distribution.

Um, but Peralta is not crazy, which is lucky because

it's also convenient.

Other questions on that.

Right.

So let's get to their results.

Okay.

So we've got.

Um.

Five columns and two panels here in each column.

So.

each set of results, you can see the regression of

the export to FDI ratio or freight rate, tariff rate

levels and economies to dispersion measure.

And it also measures how capital intensive and intensive the

industry is.

Um, the different columns are different ways of computing industry

level productivity dispersion.

So do you do it based on US data, European

data or French data?

And do you do it by simply computing the standard

deviation of sales across firms, or do you do it

by doing this kind of log rank log size regression

that we talked about.

Right.

And again, they're doing it in all these different ways

because one of the novelties of the paper is introducing

this idea that the extent of productivity dispersion is an

industry level characteristic.

There's actually going to matter here.

So they want to show that how you compute this

industry, you know, for the different plausible ways of computing

this productivity dispersion measure, you get similar results.

And then they have a kind of a narrow sample

or a wide sample, depending on exactly which countries and

industries they include.

Um, but let's just the results are pretty similar across

all these publications.

So let's just focus on this first step here.

You can see that both the freight and tariff effect

are negative.

So higher trade costs, lower exports relative to FDI whereas

the plant level scale economies effect is positive.

So this is consistent with Brainard.

This is supporting the existence of this proximity concentration trade

off as an important factor affecting.

The, uh.

Patterns of exporting relative to FDI.

Then the the new variable rate is this productivity dispersion

measure.

In.

The fourth row.

And there we're seeing that kind of consistently it's entering

negatively and significantly implying that more productivity dispersion is, as

predicted, reducing exports relative to FDI.

So this is kind of it's a nice feature of

the paper in the sense that definitely even though they're

here, they're looking at industry level data, industry country level

data that the underlying firm heterogeneity is important for understanding

the patterns in the industry level data.

And if you you know, you can spend some time

staring at this table.

That result seems to be robust to various different ways

of computing this productivity dispersion.

And they certainly make the case quite strongly in the

paper that regardless of whether you use US data or

European data or French data, you're getting kind of a

similar ranking of industries in terms of their productivity dispersion.

You can also see if you look at the final

two rows and this comes back to your point More

capital intensive industries.

We're seeing less exporting relative to FDI and more R&D

intensive industries.

We're seeing less export to FDI.

So this is kind of confirming the point that we

see more, uh, FDI in these industries that are more

capital and are in need.

So.

Any questions on this?

The final thing that I wanted to kind of show

you empirically from this paper is the previous regression results

are kind of tell us about the statistical significance of

these different effects, but they don't tell us about the

magnitude of these different effects because the units are not

the same for the different variables.

You can't look at this set of results and say,

you know, which matters more for the exports to FDI

ratio dispersion or trade costs or plant level confidence because

you need to know how variable these how much these,

uh, variables vary themselves.

So the final thing they do, and this is quite

a kind of useful trick that you often see empirical

papers, is they standardise the coefficient estimates by reporting the

beta coefficients.

So when we talk about the beta coefficient, what we're

asking is if the independent variable moves by one standard

deviation, how many standard deviations that the dependent variable moved

by.

So this is a way of putting the coefficient estimates

on all the different variables in essentially the same unit.

So you can directly compare them.

Okay.

So.

What you're saying in this table is for each of

the variables we kind of look at freight rates at

rates scale economies and then are used different measures of

dispersion.

What is the average.

What is standard deviation.

And then what's the beta coefficient when we do this

normalisation so that we can compare them.

And the key point they want to make here is

that essentially for all these variables that we look at,

the beta coefficient, the mag in absolute terms are about

0.2.3, which is to say a one standard deviation change

in any of these variables leads to a 0.20.3 standard

deviation change in the dependent variable, the ratio of exports

to FDI sales.

The point there being that the dispersion variables are equally

important for understanding variation in exports to FDI as the

classical proximity concentration variables.

So the kind of argument they want to make in

the paper is, well, you you know, we all think

about the motivation for horizontal FDI as being proximity versus

concentration.

Right.

What we're showing is that once you account for firm

heterogeneity, there's this other variable that matters.

And not only does it matter, but it's important in

explaining the variation in the outcome of interest is similar

in terms of magnitude to the classical variables.

So again, you know, reinforcing their case for why accounting

for firm level heterogeneity matters in understanding this industry level

behaviour.

Questions now.

Okay.

Um I think we will stop there for today.

There's a few slides left to come kind of briefly

going over some ideas about vertical FDI.

But I think if we start this now, no one's

going to take it in.

So we will come back next time, which remember will

be on Wednesday 4 p.m. and we will finish off

this lecture.

And then we will move on to talk about trade

policy.

Yeah.

You know this.

Shows up in the timetable as well.

It.

If it doesn't have it will do by tomorrow morning

then putting it in there.

And I will also send you an email with the

room and the time.

Thank you.

All right.

Thanks, everyone.

See you next week.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Tweet this.

Like I don't know who comes in and rearranges them.

No, I turned them off because they.

Talk outside.

So why don't you.

I don't want you to be honest.

Okay?

I would.

Probably give you more.

Oh.

That's right.

All right.

All yours.

Thank you.

Have a good morning.

You too.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

You.

Know.

I thought I was more like this.

Right?

How do you work?

Uh, it kind of works.

I just.

Move the way.

I want to?

Come with us.

Come with me.

Okay.

Who wants to be allowed to do that?

I mean, I.

Know.

A country that has.

Great neck.

And.

Neck, like four or.

Six ways to go about it.

Right.

But.

If you can put one in there.

I don't want you in a dark corner.

It sounds bad.

All right.

I'll get the people behind you to move back on.

Yeah.

Lecture 9:

Are you going home for Christmas?

Yes or no?

Yes.

I'm going to feel great.

Um.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I feel like home is like, two hours away from

me, so I think.

Um.

And then I lived here.

For the entire hour.

And.

Yeah.

It's just like a presentation where we have to read.

Um.

I mean, when I'm present.

That can be.

Fun.

Camping water.

Oh, you do that?

Uh.

Hi.

How are you doing?

Uh.

I was just meeting between your classes.

It's not.

It's really soft on the inside where it's like.

Yeah.

And then.

I was like, oh yeah, yeah.

I wish I could have two, you know.

Yeah, I would uh.

Oh, you did the science.

Yeah, yeah.

We haven't.

We did.

Like you tried to do yesterday.

Yeah.

That's.

Right.

Will you be after us?

Yeah, I can do okay I agree.

I sure sign as well before tomorrow at 1 p.m..

So, uh, as much time as I read.

So you agree to, like, um, a blank Okay.

This is our presentation.

No.

Oh, with the minority?

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah.

Um, I want to get you some feedback from this.

I want to get, like, useful feedback.

I'm actually.

Very.

Glad to be here.

I had a question about.

Something.

Okay.

Um.

Does anyone have any questions or anything?

Before we get started?

Please do remember to, um, fill out the course evaluation

forms.

Most of you have done so far.

Uh, we get updates on the rate, the response rate.

And it is very low for this course so far.

So please be encouraged to fill out the forms, or

I will just keep asking you about it until you

do so.

It's easier for everyone if you do it now.

Okay, let's remind ourselves where we were.

So remember last week we were talking about foreign direct

investment?

Um.

And we talked about we kind of the overall perspective

through which we approached the kind of question was this

Ollie framework.

Remember this stunning framework, which is kind of why do

we see FDI?

Well, it's when there's an ownership reason in terms of

some firm specific assets that the firm can potentially exploit

by producing different locations.

So that's the ownership.

L was location.

Why do we do it abroad versus domestically?

And then I was uh internalisation or integration.

Does the firm, um, own its foreign affiliate or does

it outsource to an independent supplier?

Now, for everything we've talked about, we've just kind of

assumed that they own it.

So we're not analysing that last trader.

But what we've really focussed on is why firms with

a firm specific asset in in our case, the firm's

specific asset was that they were kind of the monopoly

producer of some differentiated variety.

So kind of like a mellis or a Krugman type

firm that owns the blueprint to produce a particular variety.

That's the ownership part.

And then what we really focussed on was the location

part.

Do you produce domestically and export or do you produce

abroad?

And we talked about two reasons why you might or

two types of reasons why you might produce abroad.

Uh, horizontal versus vertical FDI.

So horizontal FDI being where you produce your undertake FDI

producing the foreign market to serve foreign consumers.

And we framed the trade off about whether to undertake

horizontal FDI in terms of the proximity concentration trade off.

And if you recall, we looked at the kind of

paper by Brainard documenting some evidence in favour of the

proximity concentration trade off.

And then we also looked at the paper by Milton

Yee poll, which kind of extended the merits model to

include an FDI market access decision.

And we kind of then saw how they produced evidence

in kind of in favour of their model, which in

one way was similar to the Brainard evidence, who also

had this extra dimension that the dispersion of productivity across

firms mattered because it affected the share of firms that

sought into FDI versus exporting.

And that's where we kind of got to at the

end last time.

So finishing off, you know, we want to kind of

finish off this lecture on on FDI.

So the part we didn't get to last time was

thinking about verticals FDI.

So if you remember when we introduced this concept of

vertical FDI, the idea was that another reason firms might

want to produce abroad is not to access foreign consumers

per se, but to reduce their production costs.

So in particular, if you think about a multinational that

comes from a high income country, um, think back to

actual.

In fact, the price equalisation doesn't hold in practice, right?

That's something we've learned during this course.

Right.

So factor costs differ across countries.

And on average they tend to be higher in, uh,

richer, more developed economies.

So if you're a multinational coming from one of these

richer, more developed economies, there may be an opportunity to

reduce your production costs by producing abroad.

And that's the essential idea of, um, vertical FDI.

So the final thing kind of we want to look

at here is a little bit of evidence on the

prevalence of vertical FDI.

We're not going to look at an explicit model of

vertical FDI.

We are going to talk a little bit about what

kind of evidence there is on on vertical FDI.

First thing to say is.

Though as we'll see, kind of you know, you do

see vertical FDI happening.

Most FDI is horizontal.

The main reason why firms seem to undertake FDI is

to access, uh, consumers in, uh, in foreign markets.

And there's various ways of documenting that point.

One way is simply if you look at sales by

foreign affiliates, are they predominantly to, uh, Local, uh, local

consumers in the host market or are they back to

the headquarter firm, or is the, uh, foreign affiliate used

for export platform FDI?

Right.

And you can think of horizontal FDI is mainly being

about local sales to foreign consumers, whereas vertical FDI is

more about maybe you produce an input abroad and then

you send it back to the headquarters, but it's those

local sales that are the dominant kind of the largest

share of foreign affiliate sales for most multinationals, certainly not

for.

All right.

And there are exceptions to this, but on average, that's

what we tend to to see.

We also see a lot of kind of export platform

FDI where the foreign affiliate serves not just the host

market, but also other nearby countries.

So you can think maybe FDI decisions may be made

not on a region, by a country, by country level,

but at a regional level.

I have one more affiliate in Europe, one in the

Americas, one in Asia.

Uh, so.

That's kind of one bit of evidence that a lot

of FDI is horizontal.

Another is that, you know, when we do look at

the factors that determine patterns of FDI, which is what

we were doing last week with that Brainard paper, um,

it seems to be the the factors that matter more

for horizontal FDI, which are the main drivers of the

third pattern.

So we saw last week that if we look at

the share of exports relative to FDI sales, um, it's

driven by these proximity concentration through proxies or the, uh,

trade cost measures and the fixed point or scale economy,

uh, measures.

Um, in addition, kind of an auxiliary result in that

in our paper was that the share of exports relative

to FDI sales is higher, uh, when the country's income

difference from the US is larger.

Why does that speak to the relative prevalence of horizontal

versus vertical FDI?

What might we infer from that observation?

Any thoughts?

I have there is more about horizontal, but vertical is

becoming more and more important recently.

But why?

So the fact that, um, the share of exports relative

to FDI sales is increasing in the income difference for

the US.

Why does that point towards FDI being more about horizontal

and vertical motivations.

Or where the why higher income difference with the US

than FDI in their country?

The intent is to become vertical because they have more

exposure to other companies.

Yeah.

So that's the idea.

They kind of if you think about you remembering Reynolds

data, say it's all us multinationals during the investing.

So if you think where is the US multinationals likely

to do vertical FDI, it's going to be in like

low production cost countries.

So they're going to be which on average will tend

to be countries that are poorer than the US.

So if you're seeing a lot of vertical FDI, you

might expect to see US multinationals mainly undertaking FDI in

poorer countries.

Okay.

What this fact is, is saying is that kind of

that's not true.

And in fact, the ratio of exports to FDI is

higher for poorer countries.

Again, that kind of it's not direct evidence, but it

points to points against vertical FDI being the main, uh,

the main driver.

And then likewise this work by kind of study by

Karl Marx and, and Markus again kind of confirms that

the horizontal measures, the kind of related to horizontal determinants

of FDI, seem to be more important than measures that

are related to vertical FDI.

That said, and this is something you alluded to, it

is probably also true that in um, recent years, with

the increasing fragmentation of production, the increasing bonds of global

value chains and splitting up the production of are good

across multiple different countries.

But FDI has probably become, uh, more important.

So I just want to talk briefly about this empirical

paper by people.

Who can.

Provide some evidence that we do see important, you know,

traces in the data suggesting that vertical FDI, vertical motivations

are an important determinant of FDI, uh, decisions.

And his starting point is that essentially the argument I

made to you on the previous slide about using countries

income differences as a proxy for is it horizontal versus

vertical FDI?

But that is not that is a very incomplete argument,

right.

Potentially even, uh, kind of incorrect or misleading.

Um, because his point is that what you want to

look for, if you're looking for vertical FDI, is not

that there is more FDI between countries that are more

different.

But do we see that in industries which are, say,

capital intensive, they do FDI in countries that are more

capital abundant, or likewise, do industries that are more skill

intensive, do FDI in countries that are more relatively more

scalable?

And the reason we kind of, you know, we're not

looking at a model here, but the reason he is

making this argument is he is building on the basic

picture and intuition that countries which are abundant in a

particular factor of production will have a lower opportunity cost

of producing goods that are intensive in that, uh, factor.

And therefore we should see, you know, for countries that

are still abundant, will have a low opportunity cost of

producing relatively skill intensive goods.

So that creates a vertical motivation to do FDI in

those countries.

So in another way of thinking about kind of the

empirical test he's going to do here is, if you

recall the rimless paper we looked at which showed that

for patterns of exports, if you interact a country's factor

abundance with an industries factor intensity that positively predicts, uh,

exports.

And we put that forward as evidence in favour of

the kind of basic role in intuition.

You kind of wants to do a vertical FDI or

an FDI version of that and see if this kind

of interaction of industry factor intensity with country factor abundance

matters for, uh, the allocation of FDI.

Okay.

So specifically, this is the specification he's going to estimate.

Um, he is going to have a measure of the

FDI in industry I in sorry industry I in country

J.

Um and then he's going to regress it on a

bunch of stuff.

Right.

So what we've got here is we've got the kind

of proximity concentration variables.

So this is a measure of trade costs.

We've got measures the scale economies in an industry, the

market size of the destination country.

It's factoring downwards the industries factor intensity.

And then his key variable of interest.

Right.

This is kind of the smallest variable.

It's interaction of industry factor intensity with country factor endowment.

And he's primarily going to focus on an industry skill

intensity with a country's, uh, skill uh, scale abundance.

Right.

So he what he kind of expects to see is

that if vertical FDI is important, this beta six coefficient

should be, uh, should be positive.

He's going to estimate this using US FDI FBI data,

and he's going to measure FDI.

And he has three different measures.

But it's kind of the same measure that we've looked

at before.

Um, his main measure will be sales of foreign affiliates

in the host country.

He'll look also look at exports of affiliates back to

the parent country.

And he will have the Brainard measure of exports relative

to FDI sales.

Okay.

So something that makes sense for kind of what we're

doing here.

Um, so what does he find?

All right.

Here's a here's a set of results.

And this particular set of results is using this third,

uh, measure of FDI.

So it's the measure of exports relative to FDI.

So it's actually the particular one we're showing is an

inverse FDI measure.

So in that case we expect me to six be

negative just to avoid any confusion.

So what we're seeing here is the proximity concentration trade

off higher trade costs lower exports relative to sales.

Higher plant level scale scales economies, higher exports relative to

FDI sales.

And then the interaction is this term here the interaction

of human capital abundance with industry skill intensity.

And you can see as kind of predicted to show

evidence of vertical FDI.

It does show up negatively, which is saying that we

see less exports relative to FDI in industry, in kind

of industry country pairs, where we have this interaction of

high industry skill intensity with high country human capital abundance.

Right.

And then this graph here is another way of kind

of cutting this result.

So here it's sort of a simple graphical representation of

what we're finding.

So he has divided the countries in the sample up

into three groups low skill, medium skill and high skill.

And equally the industries have been divided into three groups

low skill intensity, medium skill intensity and high school intensity.

And then for each of those nine combinations.

So we kind of have a three by three grid

here.

Uh.

It's plotting.

Measures of how much FDI we're seeing in industries.

So this is here industries in low skill countries that

are low skill intensive, medium skill intensive, high school intensity.

So you can see in low skill countries, uh, most

FDI is going into low skill industries.

In medium skill countries, that's still true.

But the gradient is flatter.

And then in high skill countries the gradient is uh

reversed.

So again this is suggesting that we see high school

intensive industries go to high skill abundant countries, which is

consistent with the vertical FDI motivations affecting the location choice.

Okay.

Um.

So I think that's kind of what I wanted to

say on on FDI.

Key takeaways from this lecture.

Firstly, you know, multinationals matter.

There are a lot of questions in international economics where

to really understand what's going on.

We need to be thinking not about the role of

firms, but about the role of multinational firms.

Um, then multinationals are different from other firms.

They're really big.

Uh, they're very R&D intensive.

They're very capital intensive.

Uh, they pay higher wages.

Um, and because they have these operations across multiple countries,

they also are kind of solving very complicated profit maximisation

problems.

We haven't really got into that so far.

But if you start to think about where multinationals are

choosing to locate, it becomes a very complicated decision.

Because everything I do in one country affects my costs

and my sales in another country, and it creates these

interdependencies across markets.

Um, that makes the analysis of Multinationals quite, uh, quite

complex.

Two main motivations for, uh, foreign investment.

The horizontal motivation.

The vertical motivation we'll be talking about.

One final thing to say about them is that if

you think what is going on is horizontal FDI in

the horizontal FDI story, trade and FDI are substitutes because

it's about do I access a foreign market through exports

or through FDI?

So if I'm exporting, I'm not doing FDI and vice

versa.

Uh, vice versa.

Whereas in the vertical FDI story they're more like complements

because I produce abroad.

But then the stuff I produce abroad, I then export,

you know, to the consumer or back to the head

headquarters.

So horizontal and vertical FDI, not just different in why

FDI happens, but they have these very different views on

kind of how trade and FDI are related.

And that's kind of another way that you can use

to try and separate the two and think about the

different implications for the global economy.

Uh.

It's also worth saying, though, the two are very kind

of conceptually distinct.

You know, in theory, in practice, they often will get

mingled up.

And you might be, well, I want to serve for

a market, but I also want to do it to

where it's cheap.

So you kind of take both effects into account when

making the allocation decision.

And then finally, kind of in this sort of FDR

lecture, we you know, there's a lot of aspects of

FDI we haven't talked about.

Um, perhaps the most important ones being the role of

FDI in technology transfer across countries and the integration versus

outsourcing decision, the kind of AI in the Oli framework,

which we haven't done to, um, that said, one group

is going to present this technology transfer paper in the

class on tomorrow.

So we will learn a little bit more about that

tomorrow.

Any final questions about FDI before we move on?

Yeah.

For the case of FDI, it is still.

True that high productive productivity firms, uh, would have this

selection, um, effect.

Um.

I think broadly, yes.

And the intuition there is that what drives that selection

effect is a kind of fixed cost, marginal cost trade-off.

And if you think there's a fixed cost of doing

FDI, uh, and your savings are in terms of marginal

costs, in terms of cheaper production costs, uh, the firms

that are going to find it beneficial to pay that

fixed cost are always going to be the larger firms

because they're doing they have a bigger market size, and

therefore the marginal cost matters more to them.

So any trade off where it's kind of a fixed

cost, marginal cost, trade-off is going to generate the prediction

that only bigger firms select into it.

So that intuition is quite general across a lot of

different settings.

Yeah.

Vertical FDI, the horizontal FDI can understand it as horizontal

without the products at the destination.

And for vertical we produced at the destination country.

So so I guess, yes, with the caveat that, you

know, for horizontal, you want to be careful that you

are both producing and selling in the destination country.

Whereas for vertical you're kind of by where by destination

you can mean the host country, the country where the

factory is set up.

Right.

You're setting up a factory in a country and you're

producing there, and then you're selling in that country, or

at least in that region, whereas the vertical you're producing

in that host country and then where you sell is

a little less certain.

It kind of it might be that you just produce

an input and you send it back to the headquarters

country, but in practice, what you might.

What you will have to say is you might produce

an input in one country and then send it on

to be used as an intermediate input, a different country,

which then sends it to a third country for assembly.

So it can become kind of these quite complex, uh,

linkages.

Okay.

Yeah.

Anything else?

Okay.

So let's let's move on now.

Leave FDI behind us.

Uh, and then today what we're going to talk about

is trade policy.

So we've inevitably touched on trade policy at various points

during the course already, particularly when we talked about gains

from trade.

Um, if you recall, when we did the gains and

trade and we had those revealed preference arguments about gains

and trade.

One of the exercises we did.

Okay, well, what if we compare autarky to restricted trade

or restricted trade to free trade?

When we were talking about restricted trade there, we were

kind of implicitly thinking about trade policies.

But we were doing it then in quite a kind

of abstract way.

So in this lecture we're going to think about trade

policy more explicitly, uh, both about, you know, why what

rationale there might be for imposing different trade policies.

And then also about the institutions that govern, uh, trade

policy and what role trade agreements have to play in

the in the global economy.

So I'm going to start off by just briefly talking

about different instruments of trade policy, because we kind of

need that as background.

Uh, then we will spend most of the lecture talking

about motivations for trade protection, kind of why you might

want to introduce protectionist trade policy.

Um, and we will focus on two different rationales infant

into the infant industry argument for protection and the terms

of trade argument for protection.

And we will try and understand the kind of at

a theoretical level where those arguments come from.

Um, and then you know, how in a sentence, kind

of how strong those arguments are and also kind of

what weaknesses they might have.

So we can start to think about when they might

be applicable.

Um, and then we will finish off by kind of

using that as a, as a starting point for thinking

about the role of trade agreement and why you get

institutions like the World Trade Organisation or why countries signed

free trade agreements.

Okay.

So instruments, I think this should all be familiar.

So let's just go over it quickly.

The kind of classic trade policy instrument that we primarily

focus on is the tariff.

What is a tariff?

It's simply a tax on imports that can be expressed

in ad valorem terms.

So say a 6% tariff on the value of imports

would just be a 6% tax on the value of

imports.

It can also be expressed in specific terms, right, which

could be, say a $6 tax per unit of import.

So there's a distinction.

There is is it.

You know the tax is specified per unit that you

import or on the value of the import.

Both exist in practice ad valorem tariffs are more common

these days.

Then, in addition to tariffs, there is a whole big

set of other things that can affect trade, uh, which

collectively are referred to as non-tariff barriers.

So it's very much a catchall category.

Uh, we talked about this a bit already, because the

structured essay prompt for trade is to think about the

role of non-tariff barriers in, in trade policy.

But the couple of distinctions I just want you to

have in mind.

One is that when thinking about non-tariff barriers, it is

useful to distinguish between non-tariff barriers that are applied at

the border and those that you can think of as

behind the border.

NBS so border NBS, that's like any restriction on trade

which occurs at the border.

So that could be quantity restrictions, right.

If you think about a tariff is a price instrument,

there could also be quantity restrictions quotas or export Restrictions,

export subsidies.

It could also be customs checks that call the code.

The border is a kind of classic red tape.

Our rules of origin requirements if you're not in a

customs union.

So stuff that generally happens at the border.

Um, but then really what this distinction about is pointing

out that there's also a bunch of stuff that doesn't

happen at the border, which also potentially affects, um, trade.

Okay.

Um, and when thinking about behind the border NBS, it's

useful to keep in mind that many policies that act

as kind of impediments to trade in a behind the

border sets are not primarily about trade.

So, you know, as example behind the border.

And it can be, you know, domestic production subsidies for

home buyers and government procurement.

It could be about health and safety standards, environmental regulations.

So, you know, picking some environmental regulations.

That is the, uh, example.

Right.

The reasons countries impose environmental regulations are almost always not

to do with trade.

Right.

It's typically about correcting some externality in the production process

that can create pollution or carbon emissions or some other

negative externality.

So there are very kind of legitimate public policy reasons

for having these regulations.

But to the extent that environmental regulations differ across countries.

Right.

It means that firms are going to face kind of

different production standards in different countries.

And this creates a potential barrier to trade.

So for example, suppose we're talking about pesticide regulations.

And there's kind of minimum acceptable.

So maximum maximum acceptable levels of pesticide that can be

in your product.

If your domestic country has a higher maximum pesticide level

than the market you're exporting to, then you kind of

are facing more stringent environmental regulations on your exports than

on your domestic production.

And that potentially imposes additional costs that firms face when

they're exporting.

Likewise, if health and safety standards or product technical regulations

differ across countries, potentially you have to meet different standards

when you export and when you import to, you know,

one potentially trivial example, but that actually kind of is

quite relevant.

Think about electric plugs, right?

Plugs.

The design of plugs is different in almost every other

country in a way that is very annoying when you

travel, right?

That's also annoying.

For firms that are producing electrical goods for different markets,

you need to put a different plug on it depending

why you where you sell it.

Right.

And that's a form of there isn't really a vertical

differentiation in the regulation.

No, it's not that one plug is, you know, more

stringent than that, but they're just different.

And that creates additional costs through the fact that regulations,

in this case product standard regulations are not harmonised.

So we can think about this sort of broad swathe

of regulatory policy as creating these behind the border NBS.

And what this also means, the kind of other important

distinction here is that when we think about border barriers,

if you're thinking about barriers to importing to a country,

most of those can be removed unilaterally by the importing

country.

The barrier is a tariff I can unilaterally decide to

lower.

My tariff is the barrier is customs checks.

I can remove the customs checks, I can remove import

quotas.

But if the barrier is that different countries have different

plugs or different, or the foreign country has a different

environmental standard, to me it's much harder to remove them

unilaterally.

So potentially the case for kind of negotiation over trade

policy is stronger for these kind of behind the border,

uh, non-tariff barriers.

And as we'll come back to at the end of

the lecture, it is indeed the case that, um, a

lot of modern trade negotiations are focussed on these kind

of behind the border, non-tariff barriers, on and on how

you can remove them without.

Uh, while still leaving countries the ability to kind of

effectively meet their domestic policy objectives through, say, environmental regulation

or safety standards.

Yeah.

Uh, on the.

Topic of.

Tariffs, I mean, I've only heard within the context of

import tariffs, do we see something like export tariffs, and

if so, would that be because of like terms of

trade gains.

Yeah.

Um so okay firstly on terminology for whatever reason we

call them export taxes not export tariffs.

No idea why.

Um We don't tend to see them use, uh, regard,

though, as it is the case that you could use

an export tax to manipulate your terms of trade in

exactly the same way as you could an import tariff.

So from a pure terms of trade perspective and export

tax and the import tariff applied appropriately are going to

be equivalent.

So there's kind of a theoretical rationale for what you

might see them in practice.

Almost never.

In India they do it.

Oh there you go in India.

Um so they do it more for like agricultural products

because that's to disincentivize, for instance, like when there's a

sugar shortage.

Okay.

Um, um, it's more not necessarily.

It's basically to, um, disincentivize people from exporting.

So then they have these temporary export.

Um, yeah.

traits so that they don't then sell abroad and then

locals are sort of suffering.

So there are significant discussions that keep happening on those

because it will be like an overnight discussion that they'll

say, hey, there's this tariff now, um, which then makes

it much harder, um, as a producer, to get the

best price because then prices are basically set by the

state for those.

So you're not you're not making margin.

There's a there's a nice example.

The other I mean, the other place you do see

export restrictions is not necessarily the price side but on

the quantity side.

So you know we talked before about OPEC and the

oil cartel.

Right.

The quotas for production are essentially a quantity restriction on

exports.

Uh, likewise yesterday if you were reading the news, China

banned the export of certain, uh, minerals, kind of rare

earth minerals to the, uh, US right now.

I think the motivation for that is not necessarily is

more kind of potentially national security based on the economic

space.

But you you do sometimes see those kind of, um,

this policy thing.

Do you think that one reason why we might see

more import tariffs rather than export taxes is because if

we don't think in the in a case of like

a general tariff or general tax, but industry specific, you're

more likely to have an industry lobby specifically to raise

import tariffs to protect themselves.

Then you have then your politicians to specifically target an

industry with an export tax, in which case that industry

might lobby.

I mean, you see how this.

Yeah.

Oh yeah.

So yes, yes, I do think, I think that, um,

you know, the distributional implications of an import tariff is

it benefits producers at the expense of consumers and an

export tax is the other, don't you, around.

Um, and therefore I think lobbying is likely to be

an important part of it.

So this is what I'm saying.

The US actually has an explicit ban on export taxes,

which I don't think most other countries have.

The US has just banned.

Okay.

Right.

Okay.

So what I want us to think about now is

what are the motivations for why we might want to

adopt protectionist trade policies.

And I want you to think about this against the

backdrop that if you go right back to the start

of term on week one, we looked at empirical evidence

arguing that on aggregate there are gains from trade.

I remember the kind of Franklin Romer work, the firework

we looked at on the empirical front, and then we

looked also in succession.

We used a lot of theoretical evidence of why in

different models there were gains from trade.

So by now I think we kind of made this

fairly strong conceptual case that in most models, not all,

but most models there are going to be gains in

trade.

We've also seen some empirical evidence supporting that.

So you kind of might leave from that saying, well,

okay, it's obvious that countries are never going to want

to adopt reductionist trade policies, and they're going to want

to do everything they can to make trade as free

as possible.

And that's clearly not the case.

Right.

Though there is a lot of work that goes on

to try and reduce trade barriers.

Countries also sometimes impose protection.

And that's not just President Trump, who we've already talked

about and has his own fairly idiosyncratically views on trade

policy.

It's also, you know, other countries.

So what what reasons might there be for countries to

adopt protectionist trade policies?

And we're going to talk about to the infant industry

argument for protection and the terms of trade, argument for

protection.

We are not, uh, today really going to talk about

political economy reasons and lobbying reasons for protection.

But that is another important class of argument why lobbying

by certain interest groups might need to.

Uh, to to protection.

But let's start off with start off by talking about

infant industry protection.

So to talk about this, we're going to kind of

start by taking a big picture of you thinking about

industrial development and what are the factors that drive industrial

development.

And I wanted to start with this quote from Danny

Roderick, who's kind of one of the leading thinkers on

this topic.

So he's talking about growth experiences in East Asia, and

what he says is what is common in the experience

of Japan, South Korea, China and all other growth superstars

is that they base their growth strategies on developing industrial

capabilities rather than on specialising according to their prevailing comparative

advantages.

They each became manufacturing superpowers in short order and much

more rapidly than one would would have expected based on

their resource endowments.

Right.

So what's interesting about this statement is that he is

arguing that the way these countries are kind of successfully

industrialised in the second half of the 20th century succeeded

was not by simply removing trade barriers and saying, okay,

here's what our comparative advantages, we're going to specialise in

that.

But actually by actively intervening to try and shift their

comparative advantage, right.

And in particular, kind of not this kind of using

industrial policy to change the structure of production in the,

uh, economy.

Now, this is quite a broad statement because it's kind

of talking about industrial policy broadly, which, you know, might

be policies that we think of as trade policy, but

might also be a kind of wide range of other

interventions government might make in the economy.

Right.

If you think about the example of China, right.

China has a broad range of industrial policies.

There's a lot of state owned enterprises.

There are lots of subsidies, um, that are provided.

There's explicit efforts to use kind of joint ventures and

use FDI as a mechanism for technology transfer.

Right.

But Paul said part of kind of what this industrial

policy has aimed at is promoting Chinese exports, which obviously

it's been incredibly, um, successful.

Likewise, if you look at earlier industrialising countries, South Korea,

Taiwan, uh, Japan, to a lesser extent, countries in Southeast

Asia, all those experiences have been accompanied by a transformation

of kind of first developing relatively low skill, low tech

manufacturing and then moving gradually into more high tech manufacturing.

But part part of that transformation has been accompanied by

kind of governments, government policies shifting the structure of production.

So the Korean government was very explicit in trying to

kind of gradually upgrade the capability of Korean manufacturing firms

and make them kind of more knowledge and knowledge intensive.

So then the sort of question is what role trade

policy might play in this, uh, in this process.

Right.

There's one question we're going to want to think about.

And as a prelude to thinking about this question, we

also want to ask, you know, what is the rationale

for intervention here.

So the kind of classic way economists think about this

is if we're going to make an argument for intervening,

we're going to want to start by identifying a market

failure, and then think about what policies we can introduce

to address that market failure.

So what might be the market failures we're dealing with

here?

There are many possible you know, there are many candidates.

I think some of the, you know, potentially more important

ones, it could be about learning spill-overs.

So development of the development of knowledge, incentives for innovation,

the failure of private sector actors to be able to

appropriate, uh, new knowledge.

It can also be about coordination failures.

So this is linked to the kind of big push

development ideas, um, with a sort of subset of what

infrastructure should the public sector be providing?

Um, and then there are also this is kind of

probably less relevant for what we're thinking about now.

But yeah, institutional development broadly is clearly, uh, important property

rights, contract enforcement, etc..

So there are these market failures out there.

And then the question of kind of what policies might,

uh, address them.

And again, here there are a lot of different options.

You can think about innovation policies to subsidise the creation

or adoption of knowledge.

You can think about credit policies to fix, uh, uh,

financial constraints.

But kind of what we're really interested is to what

extent trade policy matters.

And if you start to think about trade policy, that

on the one hand, is it, you know, do you

want import protection?

Or on the other hand, you want export support or

do you want some mix of the two?

So in a second we're going to look at a

theoretical argument for why import protection may play a role

in this kind of structural transformation.

Ah.

That said, in practice what a lot of these East

Asian economies have done is focus less on import protection

and more on subsidies and incentives to, uh, to export.

And there's a debate in the literature about, you know,

if you do want to use trade policy to support

industrial development, should be kind of inward looking, which is,

say, protectionist or outward looking, which is encouraging.

Exporting the balance of that argument at the moment tends

to favour kind of being outward, outward.

So in a second we're going to kind of look

at a more a kind of simple model of some

of this, but any kind of big picture questions before

we do.

All right.

Um, so you see, this model is going to look

a little bit different to the other models we've looked

at in this course, in both in that it's going

to have kind of more centre the externalities and the

market failures.

And also it's going to be very much a toy

model.

We're not trying to model the entire economy here.

It's a very, very simplified model.

But it captures an interesting idea, which I think is

useful for thinking about this process.

So here's the setup.

You've got a small economy, which we're going to call

the South that takes world prices, has given the South

is producing two goods using a single factor of production

labour, and it's endowed with RLS units of labour.

The world price of the two goods will be denoted

pi star and p star will be the relative price

of good two.

And what we're interested in is which good does South

produce and what what are southern wages.

Okay.

And all the action of the model here is on

the supply technologies.

So two sections.

Good.

One is the boring sector.

Good one is just a constant returns to scale production

function with no externalities where one unit of labour produces

lambda one units of output.

Right.

So the production function there is just like y1 equals

lambda one times L1.

Okay.

Good two is where the action is.

So good two has constant returns to scale at the

firm level, but increasing returns to scale, marshalling externalities at

the industry level so that labour productivity is given by

lambda two times this thing one plus alpha min l

by L2.

So ignore the l bar term for a second.

And just imagine this is one plus alpha L2.

What it's telling you is that the more workers there

are the work in sector two.

So L2 is employment in sector two.

The more workers there are the work in sector two

the higher industry Productivity.

So this is capturing, if you like, the kind of

agglomeration externality in this industry.

As the industry gets bigger in terms of higher employment,

it gets more productive.

Okay.

Why might that be?

One motivation could be that there are some kind of

knowledge spill-overs here across firms.

The more production that's going on, the more ideas you

create and the more productive you become.

It could also be something about kind of creating thick

input or thick labour markets that increase productivity.

Right.

Either way, we're just this kind of reduced form way

of capturing these increasing returns.

In.

This model, that increasing returns to scale is something that

in fact that's where the collaboration.

Yeah.

So at the industry level here there are increasing returns

to scale.

So this is one way you can model increasing returns

to scale.

Exactly.

So what about be considered tactile labour.

Yeah.

So good question.

So what is elbow.

Elbow is just some parameter of the model right.

So just Elba is a number like it could be

200.

So the role bar is playing here is that as

you increase L2 up to Elba you get increasing returns.

But then there's some point above which you don't get

any increasing returns.

Right if you plot this.

So let's plot labour productivity as a function of L.

Right.

Uh, of L2 when L2 is zero, labour point two

is is just lambda two.

And then as L2 increases, labour productivity increases up till

we have L2 equals L bar and then it's flat

thereafter.

Right.

So that's what that function looks like.

Piece of notation we're going to call theta one plus

alpha times L bar.

Right.

So that's the max theta is the maximum possible labour

productivity in sector two.

So in practice your labour product in sector two is

going to be somewhere between one.

Uh oh.

It's somewhere between lambda two and lambda two times theta

depending on the size of the industry.

Right.

We're also going to assume that the total seven population

is greater than L bar.

So that itself just specialises in good to.

Then its labour productivity will indeed be lambda two times.

It won't happen with this.

So then we ask what is the equilibrium of this

economy.

And the key point we're going to make is that

because we've introduced these increasing returns.

There are multiple equilibria.

So we want to show that there are multiple equilibria.

And then we want to ask does it matter which

one equilibrium we're in.

Okay.

So here's the first equilibrium.

Suppose the South specialises in good one, which is to

say everyone in the South works in industry one.

Right.

Then in that case the southern wage is just equal

to southern labour productivity, which is lambda one labour productivity

and good one times the price of good one P1

star.

Okay.

And since nobody's working in good to the unit, cost

of producing good two is going to be the wage

divided by lambda two because our labour productivity in good

two and L two is equal to zero is lambda

two.

So then is this an equilibrium.

It's an equilibrium.

If the unit cost of producing good two is greater

than or equal to the world price of good to

right.

Why is that?

Well, if w two is less than P2 then there's

an incentive for people to set up firms in sector

two.

So for that not to be the case, we have

to have P2 star less than three over lambda two,

which is equivalent to saying if we use we substitute

for w is lambda one P1 star.

But this is an equilibrium if the relative price P2

star or P1 star is weakly less than lambda one

over lambda two.

So what we're getting here is a condition in the

goods prices and the relative activities to specialisation in good

one to be in equilibrium.

Okay.

Right.

What's the other possible equilibrium.

Right.

Let's go to the other extreme.

And suppose that instead of specialising in good one we

specialise in good two.

So now we specialise in good two.

If we specialise in good two then our labour productivity

and good two is lambda two times beta.

So our weight is lambda two times theta times p2

star.

Now we need to ask is okay would anyone want

to producing good produce good one under these conditions.

Well the unit cost of producing good one is W

over lambda one.

So it's going to be an equilibrium specialising good two

only if P1 star is less than or equal to

w over lambda one.

And if we specialise for uh sorry if we substitute

for w that means P2 star over P1 star.

Greater leak to lambda one over theta lambda two.

So now what we're getting is we're getting a condition

under which specialisation in good two is in equilibrium.

Okay.

So when do we get multiple equilibria.

We have multiple equilibria for parameters such that both specialisation

in good one and specialisation in good two are simultaneously

possibly appropriate specialisation, and good one is in equilibrium.

When this inequality holds, specialisation in good two is in

equilibrium when this inequality holds, so they both hold simultaneously

when the following is true, right?

So when lambda one over lambda two lies between p

star and theta p star.

When.

This is true.

Right.

And note that kind of everything in here is is

exogenous with respect to.

So when this is true then you have multiple equilibria.

Note that.

It is.

The existence of the increasing returns to scale.

That means that theta is greater than one.

That means that this interval has kind of length greater

than zero.

If theta is equal to one.

This collapses to a point and kind of generically you

only have a unique equality.

So it's the fact that we have this increasing returns

in good two that introduces the possibility of having multiple

equilibria.

Now let's assume we are in a world where this

these inequalities hold.

So we have multiple equilibria.

And let's ask in practice do we care which equilibrium

we're in.

Our consumers better off in one equilibrium than the other.

Now how do we measure consumer welfare here.

Well consumer the only income is wages right.

So we're interested in real wages.

But prices are exogenous.

So we were interested in the wage W but if

we can compare the wage w across equilibria, that will

give us a comparison of consumer welfare in the two

week period.

So remember this is our expression for wage in the

second equilibrium.

This is our expression of the wage in the first

equilibrium.

So we can take the ratio of the wage in

equilibrium two to the wage and equilibrium one.

And it's equal to this thing here.

Okay.

What do we know about that.

Well, if we come back to our inequality that must

hold for the equilibrium to exist, for the multiple equilibrium

to exist, it tells us that this thing is greater

than or equal to one and it's greater than one.

Whenever this inequality here is strict.

So if we assume this inequality holds strictly, this thing

is greater than one, meaning that wages are higher in

equilibrium, two are than in equilibrium one.

So from the policymakers perspective, what this is telling us

is that you would rather have an economy that is

in equilibrium two than in equilibrium one.

In that sense, it matters which good you produce in

this, uh, sector.

Um, a bit of terminology, because it's sometimes, I mean,

it's not really relevant for what we're doing here, but

it's useful to note it sometimes comes up in discussion

of trade policy, we will say has a latent comparative

advantage in good to if given the realisation of Walmart

selling externality is the opportunity cost of a production is

lower than the relative price, right?

Which is to say if this thing is greater than

one.

So South has a latent comparative advantage in good two

if its wage is higher in equilibrium two than in

equilibrium one, and if that equilibrium two exists.

So so far everything we've done has been kind of

positive economics in the sense we're just characterising the equilibrium.

And now what we want to do is bring policy

into it.

But does anyone have any questions before we kind of

bring policy into this.

Okay.

So.

Think about a world.

South has a latent comparative origin.

Good two.

But we're in the multiple equilibrium case where both possible

equilibrium could exist.

But suppose initially we're in equilibrium one.

So the southern economy is specialised in producing sector one.

We know that if we could induce the economy to

switch to sector two that would be welfare improving.

Right.

The question is what policies could we use to switch

the equilibrium for sector one to sector two?

So what policy intervention might the government want to adopt

here?

I'll give a speech with the wages.

Then they have no recourse.

They are more ready to act.

But just being be a little bit more precise.

When you say give a subsidy to the wages, give

a subsidy to food for wages.

To schools rated price higher or uh average cost lower.

Mhm.

But in which sector.

Uh.

Yeah.

That's kind of the key thing that just to make

sure you kind of stay right.

The what we showed is that if the South is

initially in equilibrium, while there's no incentive to switch and

produce in sector two because the unit cost of production

in section two is higher than the price.

However, if we subsidise production in section two, you can

reduce that unit cost of production, inclusive of the subsidy

below the price.

And then that creates an incentive for firms to start

Producing in sector two.

Okay.

So that's one policy.

We could use a production subsidy.

What else?

Suppose I say you can't use domestic policy.

You have to use a trade policy.

What trade policy could you potentially use here.

Yes.

Sorry, sorry.

What is if if assuming that consumers, um, have that

love of their ID sort of a model, then that

would mean that if I stop imports of the two,

then ideally you'd want at least some production of it.

So then producers would potentially move there.

Yeah.

And in fact kind of it's even kind of similar

in that you don't need to make any love of

variety assumptions.

Right.

Because you are if you're specialising a good one right,

then as long as we assume that both goods are

kind of essential to consumers, they consume a non-zero amount.

Then you are importing good too.

So the price of good two TX stars, that world

price.

Now suppose you put a tariff on that good.

Then the domestic price is no longer going to be

P2.

Star is going to be P2 star plus the tariff.

So if you choose a sufficiently large tariff then you

can increase the price of that good till it's above

the marginal cost of production.

And then again, just as with the domestic production subsidy

that will create the incentives to start producing in good

to right.

So here an import tariff on the latent comparative advantage.

Good could provide the incentive to switch from equilibrium one

to equilibrium two.

And then the follow up question is but I do

these policy interventions to achieve your goal.

Do you need them to be temporary or permanent.

So.

I think it only has to be temporary.

Like as long as we reach the bar, it will

not have any incentive to deviate from equilibrium to.

Right.

Yeah.

Like once.

Because kind of when we were arguing for the existence

of the equilibrium, we kind of said if we're in

the equilibrium, there's no incentive to deviate.

So if you can introduce the policy such that the

economy switches from equilibrium one to equilibrium two, then once

you're in equilibrium two and specialise in grid two, you

can remove the production subsidy or remove the import tariff

and you will still stay in that equilibrium.

So it's kind of sticky in that sense.

Okay.

So this is in a simplified form the infant industry

argument for protection right.

Note that it relies on both the existing of these

kind of increasing returns to scale at the industry level.

Combined with the fact that the South has a latent

comparative advantage in one of the goods that can kind

of rationalise providing temporary protection or temporary production subsidies in

that industry, which then allows you to kind of switch

to the equilibrium where you have higher wages, and then

if you remove the policy, you will stick in that

equilibrium.

I suppose that if you didn't have a latent comparative

advantage, um, and you still went through with these policies,

if they were temporary, you just fall back to the

original equilibrium.

And if they were permanent, you'd be stuck in a

less efficient.

I mean, assuming you switch over to, to be less

efficient.

Yes.

Yes, exactly.

If you didn't have a latent advantage, then once you

remove the policy, you'd go back, then there would be

an incentive to go back to where you, uh, came

from.

Right.

And as you say, if you keep the policy, then

you stay there.

But we don't really have it in this model.

But you're also going to be efficiency costs of imposing

that, that policy, which would be the cost bearers kind

of sticking in that agreement.

So this I mean, this input industry argument is one

of the kind of classic arguments for using kind of

either production subsidies or import protection to support a domestic

industry.

And you can see, as we've just worked through is

a perfectly theoretically sound argument under certain conditions.

And then the question is, okay, well, how much should

this be a guide to actual policy implementation.

Right.

So for example.

You know.

Coming back to the Trump tariffs, if you wanted to

make kind of a an economic argument for these tariffs,

it could be that, well, what Trump is trying to

do is protect us in protecting US manufacturing from import

competition from China to so that the US can kind

of switch to the good higher manufacturing production equilibrium.

And this will be a temporary policy that can raise

US welfare.

And then the question is, okay, well what are the

responses to that argument.

Do we accept that argument.

Or there are other potential problems with this infant industry

argument.

So in practice, you know, there are kind of two

main critiques that people raise of this argument, the kind

of information and rent capture critiques.

So the information one is, as we said, for this

argument to work, you need increasing returns to scale, and

you need the latent comparative advantage.

Neither of these are directly observable, right?

Measuring or inferring the returns to scale in the industry

is difficult.

And it's not something that there's really a any consensus

around.

Likewise, knowing if you have a latent comparative advantage in

an industry when you don't produce in that industry is

kind of guesswork.

Right.

So one argument against this infant industry argument is simply

we don't have the information to implement it successfully.

We don't know that we're covering an equilibrium one.

And there's an equilibrium two out there.

Maybe we're already in equilibrium two.

And we're trying to shift ourselves towards equilibrium one.

That would be problematic.

Um, the second argument is the kind of rent capture

argument that by providing protection, right, you're creating rents for

the domestic industry.

And this creates an incentive for the industry to lobby

to for that protection or for those subsidies to be

maintained and that kind of lobbying and focus on capturing

rents rather than on becoming more efficient can lead to

long run efficiency losses rather than kind of increasing scale

that takes advantage of the market externality can just lead

to the existence of a very low productivity industry that

is protected by import competition.

So, you know, these are both kind of perfectly reasonable,

uh, issues to raise.

Then what do we know in practice from kind of

where infinite industry policies have been tried?

Um.

I don't think we would want to kind of say

blanket infant industry protection good.

Infant industry protection.

Bad.

But it is certainly the case that if you look

at countries that have adopted or did in the past

adopt these kind of infant industry policies, and I'm thinking

here of a lot of Latin America and also India

after the Second World War, it tended to be more

the result of that tended to be more low, resulting

kind of low productivity manufacturing industries that weren't internationally competitive

rather than temporarily.

There was this production and they moved to this new

industry where they became competitive.

So the track record certainly in recent years been in

industry protection hasn't been very successful.

And those economies that have kind of succeeded in industrialising

and growing, though they undoubtedly have kind of intervened in

markets.

The intervention has been more about promoting exports than protecting

our imports.

So probably the kind of I think the balance of

feeling tends to kind of lean against imposing these kind

of infant industry protection, but there may be cases where

it is kind of relevant and justifiable.

Any questions on that?

Okay.

Let's take a break here.

And then we will kind of come back and talk

about terms of trade.

Yo.

Yo.

Yes.

And you want them to think if.

You don't do a.

Policy?

Yeah.

You mean in terms of kind of alternative ideas?

Because, I mean.

So a production subsidy would play on the the wage

effectively.

So that's the right.

I mean, if you could play on the lamda or

the alpha, that would be another option.

But it's less immediately obvious how to do that because

you because essentially those are technology parameters.

Okay.

Yeah.

I'm also trying to think that, for instance, Vietnam.

We also did like a lot of education policy.

Yeah.

So can that then play on the Lamda which is

potentially.

Yeah.

That's a you could think of it that way.

Or you could also think of like if the wage

is an aggregate of high skilled and low skilled labour,

and your education policy drives down the cost of high

skilled labour that would reduce the the wage.

Now the question would be, does it differentially reduce the

wage in one sector relative to the other sector.

So kind of slightly more complicated model okay.

Yeah.

Yes okay.

This was in the production subsidy volume.

Okay.

Let's get started again.

Um, it's already quite late in the evening, so I

imagine everyone's getting a bit tired already.

Um any questions?

Kind of on what we did in the first half

of the lecture before we move on.

Okay, so first half of the lecture was infant industry

argument for protection.

What are the theoretical conditions that are needed for it

to hold, and what are the practical limitations in implementing

it?

Second half of the lecture is going to be terms

of trade.

And again, what is the theoretical rationale for the terms

of trade argument?

Then what do we know empirically about how this plays

out in practice.

And how does this link into the kind of reasoning

behind trade agreements?

So we have I promise you, in Problem set three,

we showed a version of this argument already in our

code using our kind of revealed preference arguments.

Now I want to kind of make this argument in

a much simpler partial equilibrium setting, which is just going

to let us see kind of more transparently what the

logic of the terms of trade argument is.

So we're going to assume trade in a single goods.

This is a partial equilibrium model of trading a single

good that is produced and sold in perfectly competitive markets.

Okay.

And in particular I'm going to call this good bananas.

So home is importing bananas from the foreign country okay.

And home is imposing a tariff on bananas.

And we can think of this as a specific types.

Attack of tea per unit of bananas imported per banana

imported.

And then we're going to use simple supply and demand

analysis to ask what's the impact of this tariff on

prices, trade and and welfare.

And this will help us see the optimal kind of

terms of trade argument.

So we're going to look at a bunch of pictures

now.

So first off his home import demand right.

So what we're drawing here is demand and supply curves

for uh bananas.

So we've got quantities on the x axis.

We've got prices on the y axis.

The blue downward sloping line is homes demand for bananas.

Downward sloping red is home supply of bananas upward sloping.

And then the difference between demand and supply is going

to be homes import demand okay.

So the point where the two curves intersect that would

be autarky.

The autarky equilibrium in the home country.

Right.

Because demand and supply are equal.

So in autarky homes import demand, which is shown on

this right hand graph, is zero.

And then as we reduce the price, home demands more

and supplies less, and therefore its import demand goes up.

Okay.

So what we're just showing here is how we construct

homes import demand curve.

Likewise we can do the same thing for foreign.

But foreign is a supplier rather than an import and

export of an importer.

So we've got foreign export supply curve foreign import demand

curve.

They intersect at the autarky price in the foreign economy

knowing that we've drawn it.

So the autarky price in the foreign economy is lower

than the autarky price in the home economy.

Right.

That's why foreign is an exporter and home is an

importer.

And then as the price rises above autarky, supply exceeds

demand.

And so we get a foreign to export supply curve.

Hopefully that's straightforward.

Any questions.

Good.

So what does world equilibrium look like.

Well it's where homes import demand equals foreign export supply.

So now we've drawn the import demand curve and the

export supply curve on the same graph.

They intersect at this point one which gives us under

we're under free trade here.

So under free trade this is home to imports of

bananas.

And this is the world price of bananas.

The price at which home imports those bananas okay.

So that's our starting point.

And now we impose the tariff.

So remember we impose the tariff tea per banana.

So what I want you to think about is starting

from here imposing the tariff.

What changes.

How am I going to change what I've got here

to get the equilibrium with the tariff.

You know the.

Times import demand curve shifts because they demand less given

the higher price.

Okay, so this is the right way to be thinking

about it.

Where we want to be really careful is thinking about.

What price we have here on the the y axis.

Right.

Because kind of what you said, right, is that the

tariff will increase the price and then that will affect

homes import, uh, demand.

Right.

So then the question is kind of are we plotting

this import demand curve against kind of the the home

price or the or the world price.

Right.

So let's be careful.

I mean, in principle one could do either.

But let's just think through that carefully to make sure

we kind of do it the right way.

So if we think about the.

We've.

Got some world price p and then the home price

is going to be that price plus the tariff.

Right?

I think we can agree on on that.

So from Holmes perspective, the price is p plus t

okay.

And from foreign s perspective the prices p.

So one thing the tariff immediately does is it introduces

this wedge between the domestic price and this this p

which we'll call the world price.

Now you could represent that in the way you said

is okay for a given world price homes price shifts.

So that's a shift in the import demand curve the

way we're going to do it.

Just because it's more convenient this way is we're going

to think about homes import demand curve being fixed as

a function of price.

But potentially the price at home face is being different

than the price that foreign prices.

So rather than thinking about shifting the import demand curve,

we're going to think about the effect of the increase

in price being to move home up its import important

on curve.

Then the question is okay so home is moving up

its import demand curve.

So it's demanding less what's happening in foreign.

In excess supply.

Yeah.

But so and then how is that going to get

eliminated.

Right.

I guess I know how are we going to get

back to equilibrium.

It's like foreign stays here at home goes off over

here.

Drop the price.

Right.

So then.

Okay.

So if home is now demanding less for equilibrium we're

going to need foreign to supply less.

So that means the price in foreign has to decrease.

So home is going that way.

Foreign is going that way.

Right?

Where are we going to get back to?

Equilibrium is going to be when homes import demand equals

foreign export supply.

So they're both on the same kind of vertical line.

But the vertical difference between them.

Right.

Well that's the the difference in the prices T so.

Just if we just focus on this centre picture.

Right.

Our new equilibrium is going to be kind of where

homes demand import demand is at 0.2 and foreign export

supplies at 0.3.

So the fact that they're both give the same quantity

is telling us that the market is in equilibrium, and

then the vertical distance between them is going to be

the magnitude of the tariff t.

So the effect of the tariff okay, is to raise

the domestic price relative to the foreign price, but it

is also to drive down the world price.

So the new home price isn't the original world price,

but it's some lower world price plus two.

So from foreigners perspective, the price of bananas drops are

and you know, and that's the world market price.

And from homes perspective the price increases.

So we get a new equilibrium at which imports of

bananas decline okay.

The world price is lower but the domestic price is

higher.

So I'm happy with that.

Okay.

One complication around that suppose home is a small country.

Well remember, what we mean by small country is that

it takes the world prices given.

What happens then.

Becomes effectively flat.

Yeah.

The key thing then is the foreign export supply curve

is horizontal.

Right.

So foreign has perfectly elastic supply at the world price.

And in that case home moves up its import demand

curve and foreign means just horizontally along its export supply

curve.

So the world price doesn't change.

And the home country bears the full brunt of the

increase in the tariff.

So the small country case here is the case where

the world price doesn't change.

Okay.

Now let's talk about welfare okay.

So we've said what happens now.

What does that do to welfare.

So the way we're going to measure welfare here is

that is as a combination of consumer surplus, producer surplus

and government revenue.

So the government revenue will be the tax revenue, which

is easy to calculate.

And we're going to assume that the underlying structure of

the economy is such that we can measure the consumer

surplus by the area underneath the demand curve and above

the equilibrium price.

So this is kind of classic introductory micro way of

measuring consumer surplus.

Um, and if you want to motivate that, you think

about the demand curve as measuring each consumer's willingness to

pay per unit of the good.

But it's paying the price.

And the difference gives you a measure consumer surplus.

Likewise, producer surplus is the area above the supply curve.

But under the equilibrium price, which gives us a measure

of the profits that producers make.

So we can use our equilibrium graphs.

Right.

And this is the key thing here.

We can do this all graphically.

We can use our equilibrium graphs to read off how

this tariff affects consumer surplus, producer surplus and revenue.

And then we're going to assume they're all in the

same units.

So we can then add them up to get what

happens to our overall welfare.

So here is a graph indicating that.

So this graph we've gone back to.

The home countries demand and supply curve.

And we're going to because we're interested in what happens

to home welfare.

So when you use the home country demand and supply

graphs to analyse what happens to home welfare.

Okay.

So what have we got on this graph.

Remember was our initial world price in the free trade

equilibrium p t star is the new world price with

the tariff, and RT is the new home price with

the tariff.

So p t is equal to p t star plus

little t.

Um.

So when we impose the tariff the domestic price goes

from p w to p t.

So what happens to consumer sales when it goes from

this area here above the price and under the demand

curve to this area above the new price and under

the demand curve.

So the increase in the price causes a reduction in

consumer surplus equal to this area.

This kind of quadrilateral here which is made up of

the air is A plus B plus C plus D,

so that A plus b plus c plus d those

areas.

That's the loss in consumer surplus right.

No.

Consumers are getting worse off here because the price is

going up.

What about producers.

Well the increase in the price benefit to producers and

the change in the area above the supply curve and

under the price line.

Right.

It goes from initially this area to now this area.

So can shoot producers have gained by an amount equal

to a to producers benefit and the amount they benefit

is 80.

Now what about government revenue?

Uh, which areas on this graph represent the revenue from

the tariff?

Yes.

Why?

Because there's now a new world price, which is p

t star.

And so.

That.

So then the government like adds on an extra tax

for every banana at that new world price.

Yeah.

And then SD2 minus s two is the quantity that

they import.

So that times the tax which is p t minus

p t star.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Right.

So the area of this rectangle here is the level

of imports t times the tariff t.

Right.

And that's just the tariff revenue.

So C plus e is the government revenue.

So now overall change in welfare add those things up.

Changing consumer surplus plus changing producer surplus with changing welfare.

So what do we get at the A is cancel

out because consumers lose A and producers lose.

So that cancels.

So producers gain that cancels.

The C's seas cancel out because consumers lose C but

the government gained seats at that councils.

And then what we're left with is the B, the

D and the E.

So the overall change in welfare is E minus B

plus D.

And let's think about what these different terms are.

Capturing the b and the d.

These little triangles.

Those are the efficiency losses due to the distortion in

production and consumption decisions caused by the tariff.

The introduction of the tariff is changing consumers demand right.

And the D captures the efficiency loss due to that

change in demand.

And it's changing supply decisions.

And the B captures the efficiency loss due to the,

uh, changing supply.

Right.

So because we're starting here from an efficient economy, the

tariff is causing these efficiency losses and B in the

deer capturing those efficiency costs of the time.

And then the E the gain.

What is that capturing.

So that's the terms of trade We said that this

was a turn to trade based argument.

So here's where the terms of trade are coming into

it.

The fact that the world prices decrease means the price

of our imports has fallen.

And then generically, that is good for a country, right?

If you think about the terms of trade, is the

price of your exports relative to your imports.

If your terms of trade go up, which is to

exports become more expensive or imports become cheaper, then you

can buy more imports for a good amount of exports.

And that's going to boost wellsford.

So it is the terms of trade gain here caused

by the decrease in the world price of the imported

goods that generates the benefits represented by a rectangle.

Now, what about the net effect?

What can we say about the magnitude of E relative

to B plus D?

Any ideas?

It's.

Okay.

I mean, so this is the point where it's kind

of reasonable to think it's not obvious because it is

indeed ambiguous.

Right?

In general, we cannot say whether e is bigger than

B plus d or vice versa.

So it could be either way round.

However, what we can say is that for a sufficiently

small tariff, E is bigger than B plus D, meaning

that there are gains.

How do we see that?

Well.

The area of the rectangles B and d are both

proportional to the tariff squared because as you reduce the

tariff towards zero, the triangles shrink along both dimensions, and

therefore the area of the triangle kind of gets smaller

proportional to the tariff squared.

Whereas as you shrink the tariff what happens to the

rectangle is, it gets, uh, it gets less high, but

it also gets wider.

And the area, the rectangle is turned out to be

proportional to the tariff.

So for a very small tariff, the gains are proportional

to t and the losses are proportional to t squared.

And what we know is that kind of as a

number is you take the limit as you go to

zero, t is bigger than t squared.

So for a very small tariff, sufficiently small tariff the

gains must exceed the losses.

And so the country gets better off by imposing the

import tariff.

Okay.

Variation.

What happens if home is a small country.

That is a small country that is northeast.

So there are losses, right?

Yeah, exactly.

Remember what we said before.

If you're a small country, there's no terms of trade

effect, so the rectangle doesn't exist.

If you're small, Pete star equals PG and that means

you don't get the terms of trade gain.

You're only left with the efficiency losses.

So the tariff unambiguously makes you worse off first.

So for a small country and this is what we

showed before on the problem set.

Uh, free trade is the optimal policy here.

But for a large country that can influence the it's

terms of trade, there exists some tariff level that will

increase its wealth.

I don't have it here, but sort of generically, if

you imagine plotting welfare as a function of the tariff.

It is going to look something like this.

It's going to kind of start by going up and

then there'll be a hump shape and then it will

decline.

And eventually, when you get to a point that the

tariff is so large you don't trade at all, it

will flatten off, but you'll get some kind of maximum

over here, which is kind of the, you know, optimal

tariff level.

So this is, you know, for a large country, this

is telling you not just that for a small tariff

you're getting a positive effect, but there is going to

be some kind of optimal tariff level that maximises your

welfare.

And if you increase it, if you increase the tariff

too high, then the efficiency costs do start to dominate

the terms of trade.

Yeah.

So you don't want to kind of keep increasing the

tariff too high.

Yeah.

I suppose that in some of these analyses in terms

of what differences between a small country and a large

country's, only the effect, the prices of the specific market

that you look at, right.

So you don't have to necessarily be a large economy

to be a large economy.

Right?

You know, like a specific market.

Right?

If you're the only country that imports bananas and you

import half of the world production of bananas.

For a tiny economy.

But you could still be a large economy in the

US.

Yes, this is exactly the right way to think about

it.

And in fact, this is kind of exactly the point

I wanted to make on this kind of bullet here

on the next slide that, um, there's this paper by

Brian Weinstein who kind of tried to estimate, uh, how

much market power countries have in different goods, which is

to say, what scope do they have to impose their

terms of trade.

And their finding is exactly consistent with your argument that

even countries that are small in terms of their share

of GDP in the goods they trade, may have a

non-negligible share of the world market in their trade and

therefore may have some market power to influence terms of

trade in their goods.

So traditionally, this has been seen as kind of an

argument that, you know, most countries you might want to

think of as large countries that at least for the

goods they export, have some market power and ability to

influence their terms of trade.

That said, we're going to look at some other evidence

that points in a different direction in a second.

So there is that evidence out there.

And I mean, I may not I'm going to show

you some contradictory evidence that points in the different direction.

And kind of we're going to note that it's still

a bit uncertain what the solutions are, but we'll kind

of come back to that.

Um, so that was the kind of optimal tariff argument

that kind of turns a trade argument for why you

might want to impose a tariff if you have if

you are a large country that can manipulate your terms

of trade.

Any questions on on that?

Okay.

Just before we move on, you know, we focus today

on the infant industry argument and the terms of trade

argument.

There are other reasons why countries might want to adopt

protectionist trade policies.

We already talked about lobbying as a potential reason.

Also, when you have imperfect competition, you can use trade

protections potentially to kind of shift investment and profits across

countries.

Right.

So think hear island attracting investment through a low corporate

tax rate.

The Irish economy has clearly benefited from that, even though

it's a kind of beggar thy neighbour policy from other

countries perspective.

Likewise, you can try and attract kind of high profitability

companies into your, uh, country.

And that could be another rationale.

Or you might want to adopt protectionist, uh, trade policies

in the kind of thinking about the Trump tariffs you

could think about.

Part of the rationale there might be to encourage multinationals

to invest in the US so that the investment and

jobs and potentially profits are located in the US rather

than, uh, elsewhere.

Um.

Yeah.

We also be emotive, uh, if like there would be

growth in certain industry, for example, you have learning by

doing effects that also be.

So yes, potentially.

Um, I think there the question would be, can you

make a strong case that imposing import protection will indeed

generate those kind of learning by doing effect?

And there is some scepticism about that.

But if you have a dynamic model with technological externalities,

then you can get kind of our rationales for that.

Okay.

So kind of.

To build on the kind of theory we've just done

on terms of trade, I now want to look at

some kind of evidence on the impact of tariff protection.

So we kind of talked about tariffs in theory.

What do we actually see when tariffs are imposed.

And the particular case we're going to study is going

to go back to kind of Trump's first term and

the US-China trade war that occurred in his first term.

So, you know, cast your mind back six years, um,

to 2018, where we saw the Trump administration imposed large

increases on tariffs, so large increases of tariffs on imports,

predominantly from China.

There were also some steel and aluminium tariffs on on

other countries, but the main target of these tariffs increases

was China.

So in particular import tariffs rose between 10 and 50%

depending on the product, targeting about $283 billion of US

imports from China.

So targeting a relatively large amount of trade.

And then there was also these tariffs on steel and

aluminium imports, not just China but other countries.

Um, and then we saw other countries, particularly large countries,

China, EU, Mexico, Russia, Turkey responded by imposing their own

tariffs on the US.

So you kind of had this trade war where the

US imposed tariffs and other countries responded by also imposing

tariffs on us.

So we're going to talk about a paper by Amity

Reading or Weinstein, which looks at how did the Trump

tariffs affects US trade and welfare.

Um, and what's nice about this paper, for our purposes,

is the kind of model, the conceptual lens that they

use to interpret their results is exactly the partial equilibrium

tariff model we've just looked at.

So when you read this paper, you'll see it should

look kind of very familiar based on what we've just

done.

And they're going to kind of try and get estimates

that they can use to quantify the effects of these

tariffs through that partial equilibrium.

Let me explain why in this context, would it be

appropriate to use a partial equilibrium?

Yeah.

Good question.

Um, so answer one is that it's much simpler.

Right.

And obviously that is an incomplete rationale.

But it is important because we don't want to overly

complicate our lives.

Answer two is that if you do the general equilibrium

version of this kind of setup we've had here.

So if you do this but you now have two

countries, you know, generally grim effects going on in the

background, the key intuitions are exactly the same.

And then all that you get on top is that

there's some general equilibrium adjustment.

So it's that effectively the general equilibrium mechanism that if

you impose a tariff on your import good.

But trade balance to hold, you also reduce your exports.

So kind of what's happening to be in the import

market is basically the same.

Plus you will reduce your exports.

So I think the reason the second reason we typically

teach the terms of trade argument in partial equilibrium is

that people have worked out in general equilibrium and it

doesn't differ much okay, okay.

Potentially.

So for kind of you know, they're going to do

some welfare calculations here kind of using the partial equilibrium

framework.

When you come to actually putting numbers on this, you

might worry a bit that the numbers kind of might

be misleading because you're not capturing the general equilibrium adjustments.

That's the limitation of using the partial equilibrium framework.

Um, if you were thinking about, say, a single tariff

on a single good, which accounts for a small share

of total imports or exports, then you'd expect the general

equilibrium adjustments to be teeny.

So it would probably make absolute sense to do this.

Um, but the US-China trade war is not affecting all

trade, but it is affecting a decent chunk of it.

So you might think that there are some relevant general

equilibrium adjustment.

We're not going to factor them in here.

There are other papers that study the same tariffs in

general equilibrium framework.

Um, they come to similar conclusions with a lot more

conceptual machinery.

In particular, there's a paper by, uh, Feigenbaum and co-authors

would be the kind of main reference to that if

you're interested.

Okay.

So let's think about the Trump Tower.

So first of all what happened.

So here is a chart showing through the course of

the end of 2017 and 2018 what tariffs were imposed.

So it's showing the different waves of tariffs that were

imposed.

So first off there was some tariffs on solar panels

on washing machines.

Relatively small uh amount talking 10 billion of trade.

Then steel of aluminium came in different waves.

Um initially it was going to be everyone.

Then some countries got exemptions.

Then the exemptions were taken away.

Um and then after that come the China tariffs, two

relatively small waves.

And then it's this third wave is the really big

wave of tariffs.

And what you're seeing plotted the the blue line is

showing the uh I think the average, the average US

tariff across kind of all its imports.

And how that changes as these waves of tariffs are

imposed.

So you can see that rises from 1.5% the Beginning

of 2018 to close to 3.5% by the end.

And the big increases are coming from the China tariffs

that are imposed in the second half of 2018.

So what am a theoretical one that I want to

do in their work is to ask, okay, so we

have this simple partial economic model of the effects of

tariffs where we say the tariff raises the domestic price,

drives down the world price for a large country.

Um, and then the welfare effects depend on the slope

of the demand and supply curve.

Can we say what happens to us prices?

Can we use our estimates to get the elasticities, which

tell us the slope of this demand and supply curve,

and therefore can we calculate these areas, these triangles B

and D and the rectangle e and work out the

overall welfare effect?

That's our objective.

How are we going to do that.

We're going to start off by running some regressions.

So we are going to regress the change in the

log of some outcome y.

And that outcome will be either import prices into the

US, the quantity of imports or the value of imports.

Okay.

And this is going to be.

So suppose we are doing prices the price of product

I from country j in month T.

Right.

So look at the disaggregation of our data here.

It's monthly data which is important because these are being

introduced during the months of the year.

So we don't just want annual data.

We want to get more high frequency.

Uh we're looking at imports coming from lots of different

countries.

This is going to be important because we compare what

happens to Chinese imports to other countries import.

And we're going to do this at the product level

where US trade data is available at the ten digit

level.

So there's over 10,000 of these products.

So it's very disaggregated data okay.

And this is the natural level at which to do

this estimation.

Because US tariffs themselves are imposed at this same level.

So we're going to regress the change in the outcome

on the change in one plus the tariff and some

fixed effects.

And the fixed effects we have here are the product

level and its country Three year level to think a

little bit about what the identity variation is.

We're comparing changes in outcomes across product country months that

see different changes in the tariff rate.

Controlling for product fixed effect and country year are fixed

effects.

So we know that a lot of these tariffs are

imposed on imports from China.

So kind of within a product here we're comparing what

happens to imports from China to imports from other countries.

That's kind of one dimension of variation.

But we're also comparing what happens to imports from China

in tariff products versus in non-tariff products.

Moreover, we're exploiting exactly which month.

These tariffs were imposed here.

So what we want to see is do we see

the changes in the outcomes for tariff products from tariff

countries in the months when the tariffs are imposed.

Make sense?

Here is a summary of their results.

Okay.

So in each case we're just reporting the tariff effect

here.

And we're doing it for a bunch of different outcomes.

We've got the foreign exporter prices.

So this is like the world price here.

We've got the import quantity.

And we've got it in two different ways, which is

to do with how you handle zeros in the data.

And then we've got the change in import values also

in two different ways okay.

So if you look across these columns column one shows

that there's no significant effect on the exporter price.

Columns 2 to 5 show that both import quantities and

import values declined.

And then the notes of this table.

If you kind of want to get into the details

of how they're doing this, they are all that.

So interpretation Column one.

What is that telling us about what happens to the

world?

Price.

Does that mean.

There's no change?

Right.

And so this is the surprising thing of this analysis.

And this is the bit of evidence that points in

the opposite direction to the broader normal Weinstein results.

What they find here, and what a bunch of other

papers that analyse this same episode have found, is that

for this case of the US imposing tariffs, particularly on

China, the tariffs did not seem to affect the world

price, which is to say it looks like for this

example, the US is a small country right now.

Obviously that is surprising.

We would expect the US clearly as a large country,

we would expect to see it having some market power

and see it to be able to manipulate its terms

of trade.

In the case of the Trump tariffs, that did not

happen.

Right?

What that means is that the tariff was passed fully

through to US import prices.

So US import prices increased by the full amount of

the the tariff.

So the flip of saying that world prices didn't decline

is that there's a bigger increase in US import prices.

I don't think we I certainly don't have a good

idea of why there was complete pass through in this

case, why the world price didn't decline, but robustly across

different studies.

That's what's come out of the data.

Yeah.

You can if you look at a lag period, it

should not change that.

It's possible that it's hard to change it in the

same month but three months down the line.

And would this capture it because.

So.

Part partially right.

So.

The way this is set up I think they have.

Do I have it here?

What does it say?

Say, yeah.

So their data covers January 2017 to December 2018.

And the variables are expressed as changes over 12 month

periods.

So they are they're not simply using month to month

differences, but their data ends in December 2018.

And look at the China tariffs.

The big ones came in in October.

So they've got a relatively short period there at the

end.

So I think the point you're making is a potential

concern.

Maybe it's just that it takes time for the world

prices to kind of adjust.

They have written a follow up to this paper where

they use another year of data, and they argue it

doesn't make any difference.

So that's certainly the author's argument is it's not just

about it taking time to adjust.

I think potentially this is an area where we as

kind of more time passes and people look at this

data more, we might learn more about about that, but

it doesn't immediately seem like that critique is kind of

what explains it.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Other questions on.

That.

Okay.

Sorry.

Yeah.

So if you look at if you're also like implicitly,

we also assuming that nothing else changed at the same

time as these tariffs that could affect oil prices.

Mhm.

So that I mean hypothetically that could be a a

reason if there's something happening in it.

Because most of these experts are from China.

If something was happening in China at the same time

that affected prices, um then that might negate.

Yeah.

No.

So so that is true.

Note that we are exploiting your variation across 10,000 different

products.

So it's not just that something had to happen in

China that affected prices at the same time, but it

had to be happening in China that affected prices for

the products that happened to face tariffs from the US.

So that doesn't rule out the possibility, but it's not

the kind of omitted variable would not have to simply

be a China specific shop.

It would have to be a China product.

You know, it had to be the right combination of

China products and times to explain it.

Right.

And given again, given that we're using relatively high frequency

variation here.

It's not obvious what that would be.

Right.

So I think it's possible.

But then the question would be what?

You know, what do you think happen in China at

that time that could explain that.

And you know, also here because you're kind of getting

this is a pretty precise zero.

It'd be like it has to exactly offset it.

I say it needs to be just the right magnitude.

Um, okay, so what we take from this, the this

example world price doesn't change.

So we're kind of in the small country case.

So we know because we're in the small country case

that uh US welfare is going to go down.

Right.

So these term uh tariffs are kind of act of

self-harm in that sense.

And from the quantity and value responses you get the

elasticities which allow you to calculate the areas to actually

do the calculation.

Um.

So you know, they do the calculation.

You can read the paper and see how it's done.

Understanding the exact details of the calculation are not too

important.

What do they find, um, in terms of import effects

that they find the reduction of the imports was around

52% for the treated products.

So it's a big drop in trade, right?

It's not that nothing happens to trade.

There's a big drop in trade is just well priced.

It doesn't respond to drop and trade in dollar terms.

About $132 billion a year is a quite a big

drop.

Um, what does that imply about welfare losses, a deadweight,

the kind of efficiency loss?

Putting it all together is $8.2 billion.

Okay.

So it's negative.

And we knew it was going to be negative because

you didn't get the terms of trade gain.

But know that this is a very small number relative

to us, uh, GDP.

I don't have in my head I should have a

number here for the size of US GDP, but US

GDP is in, you know, tens of trillions.

Right.

So this is a very small percentage loss.

So there is a cost here.

But it's not like a big cost to the relative

to the size of the US economy.

Yeah.

Um, the other way that I'm thinking about the welfare

losses that typically when there's an import tariff, even the

domestic prices may increase.

So you're not just having a welfare loss captured by

the trade, but also domestically.

So this will not capture that so well.

It depends exactly what you mean by domestic price right?

No.

In in our model there was a single price for

bananas.

And that will apply to both bananas you import and

bananas that are produced domestically.

So in that sense it does capture.

What it's not capturing would be spill-overs to other industries,

right.

Which would be the general equilibrium thing.

Also, what it's not capturing is some of the imported

goods may be intermediate inputs to domestic production and raise

the costs of, uh, domestic production.

That's not being captured here either.

So the price is taking a singular, but the quantity

would not be reflected.

Right.

Or how do you reflect the quantity?

Because if the data is trade data, then, um, I

only know how much import trade has fallen, but I

may not know that because of the increase in prices.

Yes.

Through the lens of this model, right now, obviously the

model is not a perfect representation of the world through

the lens of the model E is zero.

So we don't need to worry about it.

So we need to compute b and d to compute

b and d.

You need to know the change in the amount of

trade.

Right.

Because initially this was the trade.

And now that's the trade.

So we get that from our trade data.

And we need to know the slope of these two

functions.

And the the elasticities we estimate can map onto the

slope of these two functions.

So that's how they're accounting for that without directly you're

right.

They're not directly observing changes in domestic production consumption.

But you could infer it from the testing.

Okay.

Um, final thing on this.

We focussed on the US tariffs.

As we said, there were also retaliatory tariffs.

So you can also study what happens to other countries

import prices.

There's been less work on this.

But you know, what they have done also suggests that

US export prices didn't decline.

So it's not just that the world price didn't wasn't

affected by US tariffs, but also seems to have not

been affected by the retaliatory tariffs.

So for whatever reason, world prices seem to have been

pretty sticky in response to this particular, uh, shock.

And it's a little bit of an outstanding kind of

research question.

Why that, uh, why that was.

Okay.

Um, now, the other thing I want to say about

the terms of trade argument is that the optimal kind

of tariff argument is premised on there being no retaliation,

right?

Because it's what tariff can I impose holding other countries

policies constant that would increase my welfare, as we've just

been talking about in practice, if one country imposes a

tariff, other countries tend to retaliate.

Why does that matter?

Well, terms of trade are kind of a zero sum

game.

If I improve my terms of trade, your terms of

trade deteriorate.

So the way you increase your welfare through the optimal

tariff is by hurting your neighbour.

And if the neighbour retaliates, they're trying to do the

same thing to you.

And if you imagine the two countries have kind of

equal power, the equilibrium of that game is terms of

trade don't change, but we get all the efficiency losses

from higher tariffs.

So in a trade war, we typically expect everyone loses

because the terms of trade don't change.

But there are efficiency see costs.

So a big important caveat to the optimal tariff argument

is it only works if you assume there's no retaliation.

If there are retaliation from other large countries, the community

also forget the terms of trade.

Then you know, the accord, the, um, argument kind of

breaks down.

And in this kind of trade war case, you expect

everyone to end up worse off.

Why is this relevant?

Well, this leads us into why do we have trade

agreements?

If it was simply the case that everyone agreed that

it's always better to liberalise trade unilaterally, then you wouldn't

need trade agreements because everyone would do it on their

own.

It's the fact that there is this unilateral incentive to

adopt protection, but that that then leads to these coordination

failures.

When there are trade war, that leaves everyone worse off.

That provides a rationale for institutions that support trade agreements,

because the idea is this is a way for countries

to come together and make the necessary commitments to avoid

the incentive to, uh, implement, uh, protection.

So I just want to finish off this lecture very

quickly by talking a little bit about the kind of

key trade institutions.

So in particular, this is kind of coming out of

Bretton Woods at the end of the Second World War.

You get the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade called

GATT, renamed the World Trade Organisation in 1995, which was

set up exactly to facilitate negotiations towards reducing, uh, tariffs.

Right.

And it does this by kind of negotiating on tariff

reductions, on binding tariff rates.

So you don't increase tariffs in future.

And on converting they also negotiate over converting non-tariff barriers

into tariffs, the idea being that tariffs are a more

transparent form of protection and non-tariff barriers.

So by converting non-tariff barriers to tariffs you then have

something more transparent and measurable that you can negotiate over.

Crucially GATT, WTO, the kind of key idea is it's

a rules based system for international trade such that there

are rules that govern what countries can and can't do.

And these rules are designed to prevent the emergence of

the kind of trade wars that we saw in the

interwar period, and that we're going to see next year

as this gap WTO system crumbles.

How do these rules work?

The key idea is non-discrimination.

You don't discriminate against across trading partners, which is the

most favoured nation idea.

If I impose a tariff on imports from one group

member, impose the same tariff on imports from any other

GATT member.

And the second non-discrimination principle is national treatment.

The idea that any regulations or other rules that a

domestic firm has to face, a foreign firm selling in

the market faces the same rules.

So you can't use kind of discriminatory regulation as a

way to impose protection by the back door.

Uh, historically, Gats has been pretty successful in reducing tariffs

up until 1995, and with the exception of agricultural, uh,

trade.

Um.

I think agriculture training.

There's a lot of lobbying and therefore liberalising agricultural trade

doesn't work very well.

But WTO is very successful in successive rounds of tariff

reductions until 1995 and then has made very little progress

thereafter.

There was a Doha round that started in 2001 but

failed.

Um, and then as these kind of multilateral negotiations through

the WTO stalled, we've seen far more regional agreements.

So I think things like NAFTA, the EU bilateral free

trade agreement, the Trade and Cooperation agreement between the UK

and the EU is an example of of this.

And you see that in this graph.

Right.

So this is plotting kind of average MFN tariffs for

high income and low income countries, which you can see,

you know, have declined somewhat over time.

Uh, but not a huge amount in this time.

But the most important thing is this explosion in the

number of preferential trade agreements in force, which has really

resulted as countries have kind of given up on multilateral

negotiated.

Lecture 10:

Oh.

No.

Yeah.

So?

How did you do premiere?

Hello?

Oh.

Hello.

Will you come back?

To.

All right.

Um, okay.

So last lecture of term today.

Any questions about, of course, or any logistical issues or

anything anyone wants to ask about the to get into

the content.

Okay.

No.

Okay.

Good.

Right.

So what are we going to be doing?

uh, this afternoon, we're going to think a little bit

more about the effects of international trade on, uh, income

inequality within countries.

So this is a topic we have touched on already

during the course.

In particular, when we looked at the Australian model, we

had that one theorem, the Samuelson theorem, which was about

how, um, trade liberalisation affected, uh, factor returns for different

factors.

And that naturally maps onto thinking about distributional effects.

Likewise when we talked about the specific factors model also

because that is a model with multiple factors of production,

it also has predictions about the returns to different, uh,

fact.

So we kind of thought about these questions a little

bit theoretically through the lens of those, uh, two models.

What we're going to do today is take a more

empirical, um, Perspective.

So the goal today is going to be to kind

of look at some of the evidence empirically on how

trade affects, you know, returns to different parts of production,

how it affects kind of different, uh, individuals within a,

in a country and use that evidence to think about,

okay, well, what do we what do we learn about

thinking about the mapping from trade to, uh, to inequality?

So let's start out with kind of a thought experiment

just to kind of make sure we're on the same

page in terms of thinking about how we might address

this question empirically.

Right?

So I mean, the question I pose you is how

does trade openness affect inequality?

One way you could think about answering that question is

to collect some cross country data.

So suppose for each country we collect data on its

trade openness.

Right.

That's data we've talked about, you know, repeatedly during the

course.

And we also collect some measure of inequality within that

country.

That could be a measure, the Gini coefficient.

It could be kind of 9050 or 5010.

Wage inequality.

It could be, you know, whatever your preferred measure of

inequality is.

And suppose we regress the measure of inequality on I

tried it on this.

Okay.

What are the probable sources of bias if we run

that regression.

Yeah.

Relevant variables.

Just the income of a country and both the income

distribution as well as how open it is, we know

that more open, more rigid countries tend to be more

open.

Probably richer countries also have a different income distribution.

Okay.

Yeah.

So omitted variable bias definitely a concern.

Well we the other natural concern.

Is also just reverse.

Yeah.

It's very much possible that for instance right now US

wants to shut its borders because it feels like there's

inequality that's rising.

So it could also be the reverse way that's affecting

you.

Although I'm just trying to think whether you can solve

for that by taking sufficient lag, but maybe not completely.

Yeah.

Okay.

So I think, I mean, so the step one kind

of we clearly concerned about omitted variable bias and reverse

causality.

Um yeah.

So kind of natural.

Next question then which are leading us into is why

how might we solve that.

So if you were interested in doing empirical work on

this, what approach might you what other approaches might you

consider?

Okay, so you suggested one which might be can we

use sufficient lags of.

You're thinking about lagging trade openness.

Yeah.

Um, I mean I guess they I think you can

kind of think of that as a starting point.

I think it's not going to address the kind of

more fundamental problems here.

So we probably want to think about other approaches.

And instruments of the first class about trade openness on

the gains as the technology.

Things like that.

Okay, so this would be one approach right.

This specification here, right, is directly analogous to the specification

we talked about when we talked about the gains from

trade at the start of the course.

Except we've got a different left hand side of variables.

So we had an instrument the trade out with this

there.

So perhaps we could use the same instrument here.

That's definitely one approach.

You can you could take uh that has been done.

Um, it finds that on average there is a positive

relationship between trade.

Openness and inequality is not a very strong relationship, but

it does seem to be, uh, uh, it does seem

to be that a kind of on average, opening up

to trade seems to raise inequality.

Of, uh, kind of thoughts about how we might approach

this question, or about kind of empirical strategies we might

think about here.

Okay.

Um, so we're going to look at a couple of

papers that kind of have different approaches for thinking about

this.

Uh, question.

What you'll see is we get to that is in

trying to address this question, we are mainly kind of

not going to focus on the kind of simply regress

cross country inequality or changes in cross country inequality or

trade openness approach in the same way that we did.

You know, that's the we did focus on that approach

for the gains from trade.

We're going to take a slightly different approaches with, uh,

inequality.

And perhaps the reason for that is that while when

it comes to the question of how does openness affect

the aggregate gains, essentially all the models we've looked at

in this course have had the same prediction, there would

be positive effects.

So we kind of start from the position that theoretically

we're expecting positive effects.

And then we're interested in kind of estimating.

Is that the case in the data and if so,

how big they are when it comes to thinking about

inequality.

We're going to get very much different predictions out of

different models.

And even within a single model.

Think back to the Samuelson model when we talked about

applying the scope of Samuelson model to asking if you've

got skilled labour and unskilled labour, does trade liberalisation increase

or lower inequality?

What was our answer?

Do we remember what we did then?

What I call if you if you have a comparative

advantage in skills, then increasing the opening to trade can

mean that you have relatively higher return, um, factor price

or skilled.

But yeah, the gap increases.

Right.

So you have an increase in inequality, whereas if you're

poor you have a comparative advantage.

In low skilled industries the gap might decrease.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Right.

So and the key point there being that the prediction

wasn't trade raises inequality, it was trade raises inequality in

one country and reduces inequality in the other country.

So when we're kind of thinking about this question, one

thing we can take away is it's probably not as

simple as saying is trade increase or lower inequality is

probably much more nuanced.

And we might expect to see different effects depending on

the kind of country where we're talking about.

So the empirical literature has kind of focussed much more

on kind of almost like more like case studies.

Let's study what happened in a particular country when we

liberalised trade off.

And also maybe often instead of having to a particular

type of workers when we, uh, liberalised trade.

And that means what we're going to get out kind

of as we look through this analysis, in some sense,

a kind of more nuanced perspective than just trade raises

or doesn't raise inequality.

We kind of want to understand the different mechanisms that

might matter, uh, might matter here.

And that's not particularly important because they were sort of

at a generic level.

Why does trade makes inequality what it is?

Because it changes the relative returns to different factors of

production.

How we kind of group workers is potentially going to

matter for how we answer this question.

So there's not a single measure of inequality we can

look at.

You can think about inequality between lots of different types

of workers.

So it could be between workers and capital owners on

the one hand.

Or it could be low and high skilled workers.

Um, or it could be what happens to different regions.

We talked about a bit about that in the context

of the Kovak work and the auto done and Hanson,

uh, work.

But you could also look at workers at different stages

of their life cycle or employed versus unemployed workers.

And potentially we're going to get different answers depending on

which of these dimensions.

Um, we look at there kind of before we Dive

into the details of the empirical work.

I think it is just worth flagging that this big

sort of question of how does trade affect inequality, really?

You immediately want to kind of caveat that with, well,

you know, what type of inequality and what type of

country, what type of situation are we are we thinking

of?

And it's really more about, uh, understanding the different mechanisms

that might operate in different circumstances.

Probably the more useful goal we can seek to achieve

here, rather than giving a kind of up down answer

to that.

Does trade affect inequality question.

Right.

With that said, let's think a little bit more about

how trade affects the distribution of wages.

Right.

So we're now focusing on a particular type of inequality.

We're going to think about the distribution of wages across

different types of workers.

And we're going to think about what are the mechanisms

through which trade might matter to the wage distribution.

So one answer, and very much the classic answer in

international trade that we've already seen in the course is

to stop the standards there.

Right.

And we've already said today that, you know, the prediction

of the self disarming is something which if you're the

abundant country, as you start to trade, your inequality goes

up and it goes down in the still scarce country.

Right.

And if this is true, what we'd expect is that

globalisation increases wage inequality in the North and reduces wage

inequality in the South.

So inevitably, you know, this is a prediction that's taken

to the data.

We talked about this a little bit, uh, before, but

probably, you know, the key takeaway from that empirical literature,

which is nicely surveyed.

And this is a review paper by Goldberg.

Apparently it's the sort of Amazon theme doesn't seem to

be very successful in most cases in explaining the relationship

between trade liberalisation episodes and wage inequality.

And it kind of fails in two distinct ways.

One is that in practice, many countries that you would

think of being as typically many countries that you would

typically think of as being unskilled labour, abundant.

Um, so some of the kind of leading examples that

they give in the paper, as many of the kind

of Latin American countries, when they liberalised trade in the

80s and 90s, that was followed by increases of wage

in wage inequality, not the decrease in wage inequality that

the stoppers would have predicted.

So that kind of basic prediction seems to fail in

many cases, not necessarily all.

There's some evidence that when Brazil liberalised trade, some kind

of self-determination type forces were were important.

But they don't understand.

It doesn't seem to kind of explain the majority of

experiences.

And then the second thing is that if you think

about how this pessimism predictions were correct, they're coming from

the hexavalent model, which is an inter industry trade model,

where you kind of export one Bongo to new import.

So the grains and trade effects, uh, factor returns in

that model.

Is it because it shifts the relative demand for different

factors by shifting the demand for skill across industries?

Right.

The skill abundant.

If the skill intensive sector expands, that increases demand for

skill.

It does so by increasing demand for skill coming from

that industry.

So what you can do in the data is you

can ask, okay, if we do indeed see increased demand

for skill or any other factor, does that come from

across industry shifts or does it come from shifts within

industries in the demand for skill and in practice?

The kind of rise in the demand for skill that

we've seen in most countries since, certainly the 1970s or

so, has primarily occurred within not between industries.

And this is a challenge for the kind of scope

assignments, because in the scope of Simon's Anthem, demand for

skill doesn't change with any industries, any changes across industries.

So this also suggests that something is going on that

kind of sits outside the framework of that model and

that, if we want to trade, has played a role

in this changing demand for skill, it could have all

come from other factors.

Trade has played a role.

We need to think about how trade might affect demand

for skill, not just across industries but also within industries.

Yeah, so.

Are we saying that as a society, we don't necessarily

see Labour reallocating from sort of low skill intensive industries

to high skilled, intensive industries, but rather the industry has

to become more skill intensive and that way.

Yeah.

So we're saying that the second thing definitely happens.

We might also see some of the reallocation across industries.

But the the big if we kind of decompose changes

in the demand for skill in, say, a country like

the US over the past 30 or 40 years.

The biggest share, the increase in demand of skill is

coming from individual industries becoming more skilled.

Okay, so so these facts, you know, this kind of

observation that a small percentage of the team doesn't fit

the data very well, kind of has led to a

wave of work trying to think of alternative ways of

understanding the relationship between trade, um, and wage inequality.

And we're going to sample essentially that.

We're going to look at two, two empirical papers today,

um, which are kind of representative of the two main

strands of this, uh, literature that has proposed alternatives to

solve the Samuelson.

Um, so one strand of this to focus directly on

how trade might affect distribution of wages and demand for

skill within industries.

Um, and we'll kind of come back.

We'll, we'll come back to kind of exactly how that

works.

And then another focus is says, okay, maybe the question

is not so much about what happens to, you know,

the wage distribution, but what happens to fat in kind

of a sexist back to specific model, uh, specific factors

model what happens to workers that are kind of work

initially specific to particular industries or particular region.

So this comes back again to the kind of literature

that in many ways be stimulated by the order to

enhance and work on the China shop of if we

think about workers as not primarily being defined by their

factor type, but by where they work, whether that be

their industry or their region, what does that type of

model tell us about the relationship between trade and and

inequality?

And we'll look at an example from that literature as

well.

Okay.

So we went over these two papers.

We're going to talk about this work by Hamilton and

Davis, which is kind of about effects of trade on

wage inequality and demand and uh, within industries.

And we'll look at this paper by Topalov for studying

India's trade liberalisation and how that affect poverty levels in,

um, in, in India.

And we'll kind of see how these papers speak different

perspectives on the potential channels for which trade matters for

for wage inequality.

We're going to start off with the Amity and Davis

paper.

And as a prelude to talking about that, we want

to kind of think a little bit more about what

we know about the relationships between firms and wages, because

the amity in this paper is going to be a

paper that foregrounds the firm as the mechanism through which

trade affects, uh, factor returns.

So this is new for us because in the texturing

and specific factors model, we didn't have firms.

It was all about competitive industries and the kind of

zero profit conditions in those industries being what eventually pinned

down.

Back to returns.

Now, the last few weeks we have bought firms into

the picture and we've talked about an improvement type models.

We've talked about firm heterogeneity in methods, we've talked about

FDI, and we've highlighted how firms are very different, and

in particular about how the firms that participate in international

markets for exporting an FDI are different from firms that

that don't.

And so this strand of literature, the kind of firm

heterogeneity literature, one direction it's gone in has been to

think about, okay, well if the firms that participate in

trade are very different from those that don't.

And I remember one of those dimensions along which they

were different was we argued that they were more skill

intensive and they paid higher wages.

Right.

Then.

What does that tell us about how trade is going

to affect our wages of different types of of workers?

So a way of thinking about this is, you know,

in the Mallett model, we assumed workers were all identical

and there was just a single factory production.

Where do we get to if we start to introduce

heterogeneous workers into the metamodel.

So you have heterogeneity across both firms and and workers.

Okay.

And we're not going to formally work through a model

of that.

But what we are going to do try and develop

some intuitions based on our understanding of the matrix model.

And then we're going to look at the, um, what

we learn in the data from the Amitai and Davis

paper.

Okay.

So some facts about firms and wages.

First off very well known kind of fact, robustly shown

across time and across countries.

There is a firm sized wage premium.

So on average larger firms pay higher wages.

Um and this is true both unconditionally on worker type

and conditionally on worker type.

So that's to say, you know, average wages are higher

at larger firms.

But also if we control for the type of workers

that work at different firms, even conditional on kind of

observable worker characteristics.

It's still true that workers at larger firms tend to

earn higher wages on average.

And then there's a trade, a version of this fact,

which is the export of wage premium, which is that

the average wage is higher to exporters than non exporters.

And this is also true both conditionally and unconditionally.

So if you simply compare wages across exporters and non

exporters exporters pay higher wages on average.

But then if you look at kind of wages within

the same type of worker.

So we can kind of control for how much skill

the workers at these different firms have.

Then the exporters on average pay higher wages.

And so the the unconditional firm size and export wage

firms is partly because larger firms, exporters tend to be

more skill intensive on average.

But it's also partly because they pay higher wages to

workers with the same characteristics.

Yeah.

Because exporters are more likely to be large firms.

Yeah.

Do we also see the export of wage premium if

you condition on the size of the firm in addition

to the worker composition?

We do.

It shrinks it but it's still there.

Yeah.

Um now note here.

The opposite at this point in the course, kind of

if you were a given type of worker, you always

received the same wages.

So now if we start to say that workers with

the same characteristics received different wages, what is this telling

us about the nature of the labour market?

Yeah.

I think there's some sort of market failure.

Um, because otherwise you will have people who have the

same skill level.

Moving to places that, um, move into forms that pay

them more.

So either there might be something that's either they don't

know, or it's possible that the other form is not

able to, um, include them in their workforce.

So there might be some friction in increasing the number

of people that you can employ.

Yeah, exactly.

So it's kind of it's suggesting that in practice, the

labour market clearly isn't perfectly competitive.

If we had a perfectly competitive labour market, we would

expect that, you know, observable, identical workers should receive the

same wages.

The fact that that doesn't seem to be the case

suggests that there is some, you know, there is some

friction in the labour market.

It's not necessarily telling us anything about what what friction

that is.

There's lots of different frictions we could think of, but

it's suggesting there is a friction there such that, you

know, workers that, you know, in principle should have the

same marginal product or receiving different wages.

And then the kind of question is, well, why is

that?

And if the labour market is inherently competitive, how does

that change how we think about kind of what equilibrium

is going to look like?

And as you'll see, as we'll see, that will play

a role in the Amity and Davis paper.

Um, so this these observations that kind of the dimensions

of firm heterogeneity, which we've already said are important for

trade or the larger, better performing firms tend to be

those that participate in trade, but they also have different

labour market outcomes.

Very naturally raises the question okay, well then maybe trade

matters for wages through the kind of relationship between the

fact that different firms employ different types of workers and

pay different wages.

So this is stimulated a literature on using firm level

data to study how trade effects are wage inequality in

the Amity and Davis papers, the kind of one we're

going to look at in that there's another paper by,

uh, Bahujan, which is also very interesting.

What he shows is he looks at the kind of

an exchange rate depreciation in Mexico, which occurred in 1994.

Um, and so if you think about it, when the

domestic exchange rate depreciates, exports from that country become cheaper

on world markets.

So it's kind of like a positive shock to exports.

So following this depreciation, uh, exporters, Mexican exporters have this

positive demand shock.

They can sell more abroad.

Whereas firms that only sell domestically don't benefit from that,

uh, positive demand shock.

And what Verhoeven shows is that this leads to kind

of, as you'd expect, the boom in exports.

But also, you know, wages increase at these exporting firms

relative to the non, uh, exporters.

So in that sense the the workers at these firms,

it's uh, you know, at least in part benefit from

this increase in exporting.

Um, and because these exports are on average more productive

farms, you tend to pay higher wages.

This raises in wage inequality within the industry in Mexico.

It's a kind of note that there's two components to

this argument.

One is that the initially the kind of firms that

export are more productive and they pay higher wages.

And then when there's a positive export shock that exacerbates

that existing inequality.

So the basic mechanism here is the kind of idea

that if the if exports pay higher wages, then trade

shocks that promote exporting are likely to raise wage inequality

because there's further benefit in the exporters are not benefiting

non exporters in the same way.

So you can see that's kind of a new channel

relative to what we've talked about or through which trade

might matter for wage inequality by altering the kind of

relative returns to working at an exporter versus a non

exporter.

All right.

And now Davis are going to have a.

Similar.

Uh channel is the model which we're going to look

at in more detail.

Um, in a, in a second.

Okay.

So before we kind of look at the empirical world,

let's think of a little bit more about this idea

of kind of labour markets being imperfect and, um, identical,

you know, observing identical workers receiving different wages.

So one way to rationalise that or to explain that

is to think about kind of the labour market being

characterised by rent sharing between firms and workers.

So the idea there is that, you know, workers receive

kind of almost like a base wage, which depends on

their skill level or their marginal productivity.

Right.

But in addition, to the extent that firms are profitable,

firms that are more profitable share some of those rents

with workers and increase their wages.

So, you know, in the classic model, firms profits would

just be returned to the owners of the firm.

In practice, we do see evidence that firms that have

higher revenue, which you can access into higher profits, increased

worker wages, like a positive shock to firm profitability, is

typically correlated with an increase in worker wages.

So there seems to be some of this rent sharing

going on.

And you can see how this this rent sharing, because

it's not dependent on worker type, is going to mean

that workers at more profitable firms with more rents to

share, receive or receive higher wages.

And then if we bring trade into this right, we

can think about potentially the mechanism through which trade matters,

being that, uh, trade and this is very analogous to

what we just talked about with the Bahujan paper trade

boosts, the larger firms that are exporters and are more

profitable, Therefore allows them to pay higher wages.

It doesn't have the same benefits for non exporters.

And therefore we expect trade to kind of raise the

wage exporters relative to non exporters and therefore to boost

inequality because we also expect that initially the exporter to

pay higher wages than the non exporters.

And so this is kind of a channel through which

rent sharing can both lead to wage heterogeneity across what

we think of as identical workers, but which also through

which also trade can exacerbate the inequality this creates.

So potentially a channel through which trade not only increases

wage inequality, but no here there's nothing in this argument.

There's nothing about the comparative advantage of a country or

whether it's a developed or a developing country.

So this is also potentially an argument, unlike stopper Samuelson.

But why we might expect to see trade increase wage

inequality in all countries.

So in that sense, it's a very different type of

story about the links between trade and inequality to, uh,

to stop the Samuelson.

So the goal of the Davis paper is going to

be to test this prediction.

They want to know if you want to try and

provide evidence that it is indeed the case, that you

see this kind of effect operating, uh, within industries and

in particular, they're going to claim it's primarily about this

kind of red sharing mechanism.

So are we.

Assuming that movement of labour is restricted, just because I'm

wondering that if there was a skilled worker in the

non export industry, and I heard that like a similar

skilled worker in the export industry had the higher wages,

I would prefer to move to that industry.

Yeah, I think I kind of, um, implicit in this

argument is the idea that there have to be some

frictions Limiting preventing workers from kind of costly reallocating across

sectors.

As you say, if you know that there are higher

wages for a worker as the same skills you, there

is an incentive to, uh, to move.

So this kind of speaks to the fact that the

labour market has to be part of the labour market.

Imperfections here has to be a friction to, um, labour

mobility.

And you could think about.

A sort.

Of simpler way of thinking about that is the kind

of adjustment frictions we talked about already in the specific

factors, uh, model.

But I think probably we actually want to go beyond

that there and think it's, you know, something more fundamental

about the the labour market, which isn't so much that

workers couldn't move.

But even if they want to move.

There are costs to doing that.

Um, so have you done kind of search and matching

models in macro yet?

Not yet.

Um, but so those are models where when a firm

wants to hire workers, it has to search for new

workers and make a match with workers.

And there are costs to doing that once you introduce

those kind of costs, um, the frictions they create can

create a reason why, even if workers would in principle

like to move these higher wage jobs, they can't, or

at least they can't cost lessly.

And so far it's kind of consistent with sustaining these

agencies.

Any other questions at the moment before we kind of

get into the details of it?

Okay.

So this is a paper about Indonesia and it's going

to be about liberalisation of trade in Indonesia during the

1990s.

Um, so in particular we think about Indonesia reducing its

tariffs on imports.

Right.

So now there is a slight shift of focus here,

kind of in most of the discussion we've been having,

we've kind of focussed on exporters versus uh non exporters.

But the trade liberalisation we're focusing on here is actually

an import uh liberalisation.

So you.

Know.

Indonesia had a relatively big tariff reduction during this decade.

So our output tariffs.

So tariffs on kind of final goods fell from 21%

to 8% during the decade.

And tariffs on imported intermediates fell from 14% to uh

to 6%.

So they're kind of somewhat somewhat big changes.

Um, and then the question we're going to try and

ask is how did these tariff changes affect the wages

firms pay?

Um, and does the answer to this question depend on

not just does the firm participate in trade or not,

but whether it's an exporter or an importer.

Okay.

So we're going to be looking at how different firms

are exposed to these tariff changes and then how the

effect of the tariff changes on firms varies depending on

the firm's, uh, trade status.

Okay.

And we've sort of talked through verbally already, kind of

what we would expect to find in the heterogeneous firms

model.

They have a formalisation of this in the paper that

you can read.

But the key kind of prediction there is that the

the fall in the input tariffs, they expect that to

reduce wages at non importers and raise wages at importers.

And the idea there is that if the input tariffs

decline and I'm importing inputs that's reducing my costs which

is equivalent to making me more productive.

And as they become more productive my revenue goes up.

And therefore I have more rents to show my workers.

And that leads to higher wages.

So for the importers that are, uh, benefiting from these

input, uh, their wages should grow up.

And for the non importers, the wages go down because

they're now going to face more competition.

Think of it like in the Melies model is about

exporters, but you can rewrite it to be about importers.

And then you see in the world, the domestic firms

faces higher competition and their market share declines.

It's the kind of same thing that's operating here.

But now we have this additional prediction.

As your market share declines your rents decline.

So you pay lower wages.

Okay.

So what data uh, do they have.

They have um, plant level data for manufacturing plants from

an industrial survey.

Um, the survey is a census of, uh, plants, um,

with at least 20 employees.

So they're going to miss the very smallest part, but

they're going to have most of the, you know, they're

going to have the bigger plant.

And we know that it's the bigger plants that tend

to do most of the trade.

Um, they know which industry each of these plants in.

So their data covers 290 different industries and, crucially, to

make their analysis feasible.

They're going to know what the plant exports and they're

going to know what inputs it used, both imported inputs

and domestically produced inputs.

Um, so kind of as an aside, part of the

reason there has been much more work on firm heterogeneity

in the literature in the last 20 years has been

researchers started to get access to this kind of firm

level data.

Um, for the 1990s, this kind of data was, for

the most part, not available.

And that really limited research on these questions.

And then as more and more of these types of

data sets have been available, um, particularly data that not

just has kind of firm balance sheet information, but also

information about trade.

The combination of that has just made it feasible to

answer these kind of, uh, empirical, firm level trade questions

that couldn't really be studied previously.

Okay, so we've got to think about each firm.

We kind of know standard balance sheet data.

So we're going to know stuff like how much does

it employ.

How many people does it employ.

What wages does it pay.

What are its revenues.

Um, and then also we're going to know stuff about

its trade status.

And then what we're interested in doing is kind of

constructing a measure of how much each firm is exposed

to this trade tariff, uh, liberalisation.

So here's how they're going to do that.

And they're going to have two different exposure measures, which

would be the output path and the input tariff, both

of which are going to be at the industry level.

So these aren't firm specific tariff measures.

These are industry levels.

Um, so the output tariff.

Is.

Going to be the average tariff on products within each

Industry, right?

So there's a slight complication here, which is that the,

you know, the 290 industries that they kind of firms

belong to, that's a much more aggregated level of measuring

stuff than trade data, which is, you know, 6 or

6000 or more different products.

So there's multiple kind of trade products that belongs to

each of these industries.

So the construct, the industry tariff is just the average

tariff of products within each industry.

Right.

And that's the that's the output tariff because it's looking

at the products that are produced by the industry.

They also have the input tariff, which is a weighted

average of output tariffs using the industry's input expenditure shares

as well.

So the idea here is rather than looking at the

stuff the industry produces, let's look at the stuff that

it, uh, uses right from this morning's class.

This is kind of similar to what UVO was doing

when she was computing the, um, uh, the backward measure

of exposure to FDI using the input output linkages to

weight tariff.

To get a sense of what is the tariff not

on the goods an industry produces, but on the goods

it uses in, uh, in production.

And we're drawing this distinction because kind of conceptually, the

two might matter in different ways.

If you reduce the output tariff on imports, you're increasing

the the amount of competition an industry faces, which will

tend to it might be negative for the industry, but

if you reduce the input tariff you're reducing the industry's

costs.

So broadly speaking, we might think that firms are going

to kind of welcome input tariff reductions, but they actually

want protection from in terms of output tariffs.

Look at these two different measures of exposure to the

tariff liberalisation questions at this point.

Okay.

So let's start looking at kind of some of the

patterns that are in the data.

So first off we just want to establish that it

is indeed the case that exporters and importers pay higher

wages on average.

Right.

I told you that this was true.

We want to check that that is indeed true in

their data.

So what they're doing, folks, in the first column, they

were addressing the wage, uh, in a firm f period

t I think I is the region of Indonesia.

It's in Asia.

Sorry, I'm blanking on that.

I think that's what it is.

Um, and then they're regressing on that, on on dummy

variables.

But is the firm an exporter?

Is it an importer.

And it does it or does it do both the

imports and exports.

So the kind of key thing in that first column

is just that, you know, exporters, importers or firms that

do both on average they are paying higher wages.

Right.

And in fact, you can see the firms that do

both importing and exporting are paying higher wages than firms

that either just export or just import.

So this is kind of confirming that they pay higher

wages.

Yeah it is the fixed effects for industry.

Yeah.

I suspect that is probably true.

Thank you.

Yes.

Good point.

It would make more sense that it was the industry.

Yeah.

Good.

Um, and you know, that kind of leads nicely saying,

you know, what happens as we move across this table.

As you can see, they change the fixed effects.

Um, and they also from column three onwards, they start

to add controls for how skilled the workforce is, in

particular the share of skilled workers employed by the firm.

So the first two columns are just sort of unconditional

effects, not controlling for anything about workforce compensation.

Um, and then column 3 to 6, we're trying to

control for workforce composition.

Now one limitation of this paper is they don't have

very detailed data on worker characteristics.

Ideally, if you want to kind of, um, control for

all worker characteristics, you want to know exactly what their

education level was.

You want to know how long they've been in the

workforce, in what industry are the demographic characteristics of workers?

They don't have all that.

They have this kind of crude skill share variable.

Um, but the point they want to make is even

when we control for this, and unsurprisingly, wages are higher

when the skillshare is higher.

But even controlling for that export is important is still

pay higher wages.

Right.

So they want to argue here that the differences in

wages is not about exporters and importers employing more skilled

workers, though that is the case.

But they are paying higher wages even to the same

type of workers, right?

Which is why they're going to interpret their results through

the lens of rent sharing, not in this case through

the lens of demand for skill.

Okay.

So kind of having established that as a preliminary, what

specification are they actually going to estimate?

And here indeed is the notation confirming that AI is

industry so affirmed by industry is we're going to address

the wage paid by firms in industry AI in year

T on a firm fixed effect.

So that's picking up kind of time invariant differences across

firms and average wages on a uh lt fixed effect.

And I think l hear now is the location.

Right.

So at this location, yeah, it's picking up variation over

time and across different regions within Indonesia.

Um, and then we're going to regress it on our

output, our input tariff.

And we're going to interact the output with a dummy

for whether the phone's an exporter and the input tariff

we've had done before, whether it's an importer.

And then we're going to have a bunch of other

phone level controls picking up other factors that we think

might affect the wages.

And we've got our errata.

Okay.

So the key coefficient of interest here are the beta

two and the beta four.

So they're interested in identifying do changes in the output

tariff differentially affect the wages paid by exporters.

And do changes in the input tariff differentially affect the

wages paid by importers.

Right.

And if they do, they're going to kind of argue

that that is consistent with trade liberalisation differentially affecting different

types of firms and that feeding through to the wages

they pay.

Um.

In practice, they're going to estimate this in five year

differences.

So they.

I think there's a concern here.

They don't want their results to be driven by just

year to year fluctuations.

They want to pick up more kind of medium term

effects, which is why they use the five year differences.

Um, in addition, you know, we might be worried about

what's driving the tariff changes, right?

Tariffs don't just change randomly.

Someone is choosing to vary these tariffs.

So you could worry that the, um changes in the

tariffs are affected by kind of industry performance in a

way that could generate endogeneity bias.

So for example, suppose you're the policymaker in Jakarta.

And you know, industry one is about to have a

period of very high productivity growth.

Right.

Then maybe you think, okay, well I know they're going

to be very productive in coming years, so they don't

need import protection anymore.

So I'm going to remove the tariff on that industry.

Okay.

Then you would get kind of a correlation between the

cut in the tariff and the firm's future productivity growth,

which we expect to be correlated with future wage growth.

But that's not because the reduction is have caused the

wage change.

It's because of the endogeneity in how the tariff is

set.

So whenever we're kind of looking at these trade policy

papers, we always need to think, okay, well what caused

the change in trade policy?

Um, they don't have kind of like a silver bullet

instrument in this paper, kind of like, you know, it's

not the case that policymakers just nicely chose to randomise

tariff changes, which would have made their life easier.

Um, so instead, what they're going to do is they're

going to use initial industry characteristics as an instrument for

tariff changes.

So this is kind of acknowledging that industry characteristics might

affect changes in tariffs, but kind of what can potentially

cause the the bias here is if.

It.

Is kind of expected future industry performance that affects the

tariff changes.

So by just using initial industry characteristics, they're hoping to

get around or to remove any endogeneity bias that might,

uh, generate.

Yeah.

Um.

I'm just really so on this, but could you maybe

explain it?

Um, how could this regression single out the effect of

within industry trade, um, like, instead of entire industry could?

Um, yeah.

It's because it's really because you have this firm level,

uh, dimension to it.

Right.

And the shock, remember that the, the tariff variable.

Well.

When we talked about how that was constructed.

That's constructed to be an industry level variable.

So all the firms in a given industry are facing

the same shock, right.

And then by interacting the tariff variable with the export

and import dummy.

What you're asking is do exporters and importers facing the

same shock as non exporters respond differentially.

And that's where the kind of intra industry differential in

the response is coming from.

Okay.

Other questions at this point.

You know might not understand this but so one is

FX5.

So the mean that obviously varies over time because there's.

So it's possible that I was not an exporter but

I become an exporter.

Yeah that is coding.

But also I'm just trying to understand that because this

is an import tariff reduction.

Mhm.

Um how does that affect the firms incentive to export?

Yeah.

Um, I think so.

That's a good question.

And the answer is it's not obvious.

Right?

You're right to point that it's not.

We know that that's kind of not obvious.

Right.

The the kind of the intuition and the reason we've

been talking about so far has also been about what

happens with the input tax.

So why do we also have the output tariff in

here.

So one reason to also have it in here is

that in general there's there going to be correlated.

So not having it in here you're going to worry

about emitted variable loss.

But they kind of want to go further than that.

They want to argue that if you are a non

exporter then when the output tariff declines you are very

directly affected by the increase in import competition.

Okay.

So it's kind of a direct negative shock to you.

Whereas when you're an exporter part of your sales are

affected by that.

But the part of your sales data exports is not

affected.

So you are less exposed to this shock.

So for that reason, they kind of expect exporters to

be less negatively affected by the outcome of tariff reduction

and non exporters.

But it is right to point out that that is

a a sort of less direct channel than how we

would expect the input tariff to affect importers by reducing

their costs.

And it is not, you know, classically in a sort

of Mellis model, what you kind of expect here.

This isn't this isn't the output tariff on my imports.

It's other countries output over my exports.

And it's important to note that that's not what we

had here.

Yeah.

In terms of will we actually the actual estimate that

we get from beta for I'm trying to sort of

um, understand.

So we have firm fixed effects.

Yes.

Um, but then we also have FME, which is just

a dummy for each firm.

Right.

Which is whether they're an exporter or not, an importer

or not.

Yes.

Over time.

So the only variation we get is for firms that

actually change importers.

That is not quite.

Because you're also interacting with the input tariff, which is

time varying.

So even imagine that none of the firms change whether

they're importers over time.

Then the firms that are initially importers are going to

have a different shop when the input tariff falls, so

that the time variation in the input tariff is actually

the more important variation there.

Yeah, exactly.

Okay.

Okay.

So here's a sample of their, um, results.

So what have we got here?

We've got the five year difference in load wages and

dependent variable.

Um, and then across the different columns we're kind of

successively adding different variables.

And column five is when we've got them all in

there.

Um, these are the IG Experts.

Okay.

So there's a.

Bunch of kind of interesting things in this table.

First off down the bottom here.

Right.

We just have the variables that are the change in

whether I'm an exporter and the change of whether I'm

an importer.

So these are the firms that are switching.

Okay.

And what you see is both those variables have positive

coefficients, which is to say that when a firm becomes

an import or an exporter, its average wages go up.

Okay.

Now that's what we don't want to interpret that as.

The wages necessarily go up because it becomes an export

and import.

It's more of a correlation.

But it's kind of consistent with this idea that exports

and importers pay higher wages.

Um, what we're really interested in is kind of these.

Uh, interactions.

So we've got the, uh, change in the output and

the interaction of being an exporter and the changing the

input type, interaction Being an import.

Um, and you can see they're both they're showing up

as negative and significant.

Now remember, because here we're talking about tariff reductions, the

fact that the you're getting a negative coefficient there is

saying that for as the output tax declines, wages go

up at exporters relative to non exporters.

And as the input tariff declines wages go up at

importers uh relative to uh non importers.

So this is kind of consistent with the uh theoretical

predictions.

They they made that this trade liberalisation is increasing.

Wages are importers and our exporters relative to firms that

don't participate in international trade.

Question in.

Terms of the magnitude Um, what these results implies ten

percentage point cut in output territories is average export and

non exponential wage ratio by 4.8%.

And importers it's 5.2%.

So kind of similar magnitudes on both sides and relatively

large effects.

If we go back to here right.

You can see the output has fell by about 13%

and input tariff by that 8%.

So the kind of implied changes in the wage ratio

is in the sort of 4 to 6% range.

So, you know, that's a fairly substantial change suggesting that

these are kind of economically meaningful.

Um, effects know also that nothing in the previous table,

though, is like directly says inequality.

Right.

There's no inequality variable in here.

So how does this speak to inequality.

Well, it does because we know that the exports and

importers pay higher average wages initially.

So if we further increase the gap.

And that's the sense in which we're raising, um, inequality.

Now, they didn't want to take that argument.

The hypothesis of the paper is that this is happening

because the firms that participate in trade are generally getting

higher revenue relative to the firms that don't.

And they are sharing some of that with their workers.

So it's it's the rent sharing mechanism that explains these

results.

Um, I think it's difficult for the paper to definitively

pin down that that is the case because their data

just isn't really detailed enough to do that, but they

do want to provide some additional evidence kind of supporting,

uh, that argument.

So what we've got in this table is kind of

a set of alternative outcome variables that we can, uh,

consider to try and back up their claim.

So in particular, in the first column there, the dependent

variable is the, uh, revenue of the firm.

Um, okay.

And again, you're seeing that the revenue goes up by

more for exporters and for importers.

So this is kind of consistent with the trade liberalisation

being a revenue boost for um, these firms.

Um, and then.

They have kind of various other different specifications where they

look at columns two and three is looking at different

types of workers, unskilled and skilled workers within the firm

and showing that for both unskilled and skilled workers, the

effects are relatively similar.

Okay, so the argument here is it's not about firms

paying more to one type of workers relatively or another.

It's about them paying more across the, across the board.

Um, and then they also try some regressions that kind

of directly control for skill shares or for they have

some kind of what they call education is really about

whether workers of production are non-production workers.

And just showing that that doesn't affect many results.

So here they kind of they are trying to the

extent that they can, to make the argument that, um,

what is happening is not a change in the demand

for skill, but the wage is paid to kind of

observe of the identical worker.

So it's kind of directly speak to this rent sharing

mechanism.

Yeah.

Um, I was wondering, are the, um, results also results

also like perversely interpretable?

So if the impact of the new wage go down

or necessarily only.

Um, it would be very natural to think that that

is an implication of this, but it's not.

I mean, in their data the tariffs are falling.

So they don't have direct evidence on that.

But the the mechanism that they are putting forward, there's

no reason to think it would be estimate.

So this is what you're saying?

Yeah.

So if I just look at the first row, not

the interaction, it's also telling me that as output are

false.

Um.

Yeah.

Which is increase.

Sorry.

Wages decrease.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So just on average as well for forms you're seeing.

Yeah.

That's kind of the sort of and think about the

variation that that's coming from here.

It's kind of variation across industries.

So industries that see bigger cuts in output tariff are

seeing uh reductions in relative wages.

That's what that's telling.

Excuse me.

That might make sense because remember the change in the

variable is negative.

So the output curve is declining.

So because it's got these positive coefficients here.

If you go back to the main set of results

right.

Um where it's.

Kind of positive though you know, these ones it's not

significant.

The output type declines.

The industry wage is going.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But even for non exporters that's what I'm trying.

Yes.

Yeah.

So so yes I mean I don't want to overinterpret

that right.

Because these yeah.

Yeah it's kind of insignificant.

I mean interestingly though if you do want to push

that angle like note for the input tariff, it's a

negative coefficient which is saying that industries that see bigger

cuts in input tariffs, they're boosting wages, which is what

you'd expect to the extent that cuts in input tariffs

uh reduce production costs.

So they it's kind of that direction is kind of

what you would expect even if the magnitudes are, you

know, mostly not significant.

I thought before, but I probably forgot it.

Um, how is the endogeneity concern of, um, input tariffs

and output costs.

Uh, so they are instrumenting for them with initial industry

characteristics.

And you can see in the very small lettering.

So they have the start of samples in 1991.

Data on the industry.

Skillshare is still Skillshare is active with a five period

like export dummy.

It's a real initial tariff level and it's interactive tariff

level and kind of a measure that's about whether Indonesian

found tariffs in that industry.

So they've got some start of sample industry characteristics.

And they argue that these can explain the changes in

uh tariffs.

And because they're predetermined in the sense they start of

sample, uh, they're not endogenous to the future changes in

wages at the argument that they're making.

Right.

If you wanted to push back against that, I think

the argument you'd be making would be, well, if you're

using all this variation in initial industry characteristics, they're likely

to be correlated in some way with future industry performance.

Suppose in industries that initially have a very low skill

share, for whatever reason, grow quicker, right?

Then you potentially have a violation of your exclusion restriction.

So these are not there are ways you could criticise

these instruments.

Any more questions on this paper.

So the relative wages are driven by an increase in

wage for the exporters and the importers.

So is there any like do they address like the

other side of trade.

Openness may cause a decrease in wages for the non

exporters and non importers.

Yeah I mean so because their focus is just on

these on inequality here.

They're really interested in that relative wage.

So they're not trying to say I should have been

poor but they're not trying to say that wages go

up and exporters or they go down at importers.

Sorry non exporters.

They're trying to say that the ratio of the wage

is changed.

That's their their focus.

Yeah.

So keeping that in mind hypothetically if we were to

interpret them as not just the relative changes across exporters

non exporters importers model importers, if we wanted to look

at the changes the way we'd interpret.

Right.

If you look at the delta output tariffs those would

be the coefficients specifically for non exporters.

And then if you wanted the actual like the level

effect on the exporters, you would take the sum of

the coefficient on delta output and delta output with.

Yes.

The reason you want to be really careful when doing

that though is remember that you've got time fixed effects

in here.

So to the extent that this trade liberalisation increased average

wages in Indonesia or decreased it, that's absorbed by the

time fixed effects.

So it's perfectly consistent to find, say, using the method.

You just suggested that everyone's wages go up, but it

still could be.

The tariff liberalisation reduced everyone's wages because you don't know

what's in the fixed effects.

I mean, this is you.

Need to be careful about the interpretation.

If we assume that it's exogenous, this is like the

cause of hyper tariffs and not just saying, you know,

wages.

So no commenting on whether wages increased or decreased.

You're saying like counterfactual.

This is how they would have developed.

You're saying I mean this position is showing how they

changed exporters relative to non exporters.

And this patient is saying how they changed IT industries

that were more or less exposed to the shock.

But there is a general equilibrium.

What happened to kind of average wages in the whole

country that we're not identifying.

Right.

Another way of putting that, if you think about this

is a different diff, where estimating the kind of diff,

we're not estimating the intercept.

Um, and as you know that's important if you want

to do GE okay.

All right.

So let's take a break there.

Um and then we'll come back.

We just started working again.

In case you didn't see Moodle.

It works.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Maybe that's a good.

It's empirical.

What are you doing?

Now?

Yeah.

I was just thinking.

Yeah.

It's all, like, empirical, right?

Yeah.

Yeah, I remember.

We need support more.

You feel like that's harder to find.

And your.

Research projects.

Are like.

We want you to.

Engage.

Students on things.

Yeah.

I told the director.

I told you right about the.

Did I tell you about the girl of my undergrad

who did an RCT?

I mean, you also have to ask.

I told someone about this, but maybe.

Maybe I didn't tell you there was a there was

a girl in my class.

We had our undergraduate dissertation.

She was Bangladeshi.

She actually went to Bangladesh and Iran and asked, I

don't know how she built it up, but for her

undergrad dissertation and she got it published.

I mean, it wasn't like a big prestigious journal, but

like, yeah, she yeah, she managed to do it.

I was.

Crazy.

I didn't know her.

Personally, but I remember seeing it.

Well, actually, maybe.

Maybe it wasn't my.

I think she was maybe, like one of a few

years before me, but but but yeah, she did that,

which is like unreal.

How do you compete with that?

How do you how do you do a dissertation that's

better than someone writing an essay?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, I don't I don't think you're expected to.

Like our age on everything.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Oh, yeah.

Because I was guessing how many days you spent in

China.

You can run a paper.

Okay, let's, um, pick up again.

All right, so the second half of the lecture, we're

going to talk about this paper by Petya.

Topple over, uh, who is interested in studying the trade

liberalisation that happened in India in the early 1990s and

in particular its effect on poverty rates and consumption at

the district level.

Um.

So she is going to again, we're thinking about a

tariff shock here.

She's going to use changes in tariffs as the fundamental

source of variation.

Um, and we're going to then look at how that

affects, uh, different districts.

So this this kind of paper is in some ways

kind of closely related to the Kovach paper we looked

at earlier in that the unit we're interested in is

not individual workers or industries, but it's local labour markets

where here the local labour market is the, uh, it's

the district.

And we're going to ask, do we see differential effects

across the districts of the tariff liberalisation.

Right.

So a starting point, we're thinking about how we're going

to interpret these results.

It's just remember that if if there's free mobility of

workers across districts, then in equilibrium you would expect all

districts to face the same wage, to have the same

wage, and therefore the effects of the trade liberalisation shouldn't

vary across districts.

So even if the trade liberalisation matters in a kind

of mobile labour market scenario, we shouldn't see differential responses

by district.

So we're kind of here.

We're not just trying to understand the effect of the

trade liberalisation, but we will only find effect if there

are indeed some frictions to moving across district.

Right.

And that's the kind of same setup we had in

the Kovach paper that we talked about.

Um.

Previously.

All right.

So what's the background here?

Um, so sort of very brief and necessarily kind of

incomplete history of Indian trade policy is that after World

War Two, India was one of those countries that kind

of jumped on the industry protection bandwagon that we talked

about in yesterday's lecture.

We talked about why countries might want to have infant

industry protection to try and stimulate industrial development through substituting

imports of domestic production.

That was very much what India was trying to do.

Uh, post, uh, war.

Um, I think it is fair to say that it,

for the most part, didn't really work.

India did not develop a domestic manufacturing industry that was

competitive on global markets.

Um, and in the early 1990s, not simply because of

import substitution, but for other reasons as well.

There was kind of a there was an economic crisis

in India.

Fiscal deficits, current account deficit to the government.

You know, the country eventually needing to be bailed out

by the IMF and the the world Bank.

Um, and this was the time where IMF and world

Bank bailouts came with a lot of strings attached, conditional

conditionality programs as they like to refer to them.

And one of the conditions India signed up to in

return for the bailout was tariff reform.

And then so this reform programme led to very large

tariff reductions.

Also the removal of lots and lots of trade barriers.

And this kind of the impact of this at the

top of Labour wants to be worth stressing that we

are talking here about really big changes in tariff.

So remember in the Amazon Davis paper was about a

ten percentage point change here.

The average cap is falling about 40 percentage points from

very high initial levels around 80% to 1990 to still

quite high levels, 37% by 1996.

So this is a big shock right.

So potentially does give us a lot of variation, which

is quite nice in terms of an empirical setting we

might want to work in.

This graph just kind of shows the time, the sort

of average tab and how it declined over Uh, uh,

time.

So, you know, you can see in the early 1990s,

it's up here in the 80s and 90s and there's

this, this is the kind of big meeting of the

reform program was put into place.

And then we continue to see further declines till around

1997 when it, um, stabilised.

So the way Topple over wants to think about this

is it's an accident as a shock to import protection.

So India, as part of its import substitution policies, had

protected domestic manufacturing.

And now much of that protection is being, uh, removed.

And then we want to ask what the effects of

that were.

Now, just as we've seen Davis, we need to worry

about or why not just why we're tariffs reduced, but

why would they reduce by different amounts in different industries?

Because our variation fundamentally is not going to come from

the kind of average tariff reduction is going to come

from the fact that some industry industries saw bigger reductions

in Paris than than others, then clearly that's potentially endogenous.

So what Tableau wants to argue, though, is that it's

reasonable to think about the size of the industry level

tariff cuts as being exogenous.

And so we can argue that we don't need to

worry about kind of endogeneity in the tariff reform here.

Why is that?

Okay.

First of all, she says the timing was unanticipated and

externally imposed.

Right.

So I mean, this reform happened because of the crisis.

So it wasn't fundamentally the Indian government sat down and

said today would be a good day to do tire

reform.

It's like there's a crisis going on.

And as a consequence of that, we're going to do

tariff.

So that maybe gives us less, less concern than we

otherwise would have about, you know, strategic choice to cut

tariffs at a certain time, particularly as it was kind

of the IMF and the world Bank that were very

much telling them to do this.

Second, and this is probably the most important observation is

that the magnitude of the tax deduction by industry is

strongly correlated with three reform, uh, tariff levels.

Okay.

So you can see some of that in these next

two graphs.

So this graph we are showing tariffs for different industry

groups over time.

So we've got kind of uh some kind of mining

and manufacturing combination.

We've got agricultural and we've got cereals and oilseeds, which

as we've kind of come back to a slightly sort

of distinct pattern here.

But what we see is initially there is a lot

of dispersion across these groups in tariff levels, but then

by the end of the period, they've all kind of

converged, right?

So this is, you know, kind of what topple over

means when she says that the it is the industries

that have high initial tariffs that see the bigger cuts.

So she's kind of making the case that what happened

is initially there were lots of different tariff levels, and

then they kind of all got cut to roughly the

same level.

So that means that the magnitude of the cut is

just simply if you had a higher initial tariff, you're

going to get a bigger cut.

Right.

Here is another way of kind of looking at that

fact.

So here for different industries, we're plotting the tariff in

1987 on the x axis and in 1997 on the

y axis.

And again, we see, you know, a lot of heterogeneity

in 1987 that has mostly been flattened now by 1997.

So this is kind of again, evidence that they're taking

that initial heterogeneity and they are shrinking it and cutting

more for industries that had higher initial tariffs.

Now why does that.

Why is that useful.

That observation useful for arguing that we kind of have

exogenous variation here.

Right.

Because that's fundamentally what she wants to argue.

She wants to argue that the fact that this is

true means we can treat this tariff variation as exogenous.

How does kind of this chart support her case?

I want to yeah.

Yeah.

Data is uncorrelated with the tariffs as a whole.

Mhm.

Yeah.

So but so just to push on that a little

bit more right.

Kind of what what's going to matter for kind of

her identification is the change in the tack.

So what exactly is it that has given us that

the kind of change in the tariff we can think

of as kind of exogenous variation.

Change of tariff is the red line to the neutral

tower.

Now.

I think you're getting.

On the right lines, but maybe there's a bit more

to be said there.

Did you want to add to that?

So what we're.

Worried about is that the tariff changes endogenous to the

industry somehow.

Yeah.

You know, it's not endogenous.

But the idea is that if they're strongly correlated with

what the tariffs were.

So if the type change is strongly correlated with what

the tariffs were historically.

So high tariffs historically mean lower and bigger change.

Yeah.

And if we think that the tariffs you know, ten,

20 years ago were probably not set, you know randomly

they were set endogenously, but they're probably set up in

a way that was endogenous to industry characteristics many, many

years ago, 10 to 20 years ago.

And those characteristics might not hold today.

So if we think that there's not, you know, very

strong correlation and that the same reasons that made them

set, you know, 20 years ago would make them set

differently today, then we could treat it as exogenous because

those characteristics are now, you know, they've changed.

So yeah.

Good.

Right.

So that's the kind of additional part there.

What this means is that the magnitude of the change

depends on your initial level.

And so if we think that that initial level is

exogenous to what's going on in the industry today, then

we have our exogenous variation.

So that's the kind of final part of the argument

she wants to uh, to make.

And then there's kind of two points she makes on

that one is that it turns out that most of

these initial levels at the start of the 1990s were

basically the levels that were set back in the 1940s,

immediately after the Second World War.

And then for 40 years, they just didn't get changed.

Right.

So that's helpful for her, because it's not just saying

that the levels are in the 80s and now are

getting changes like they were set 40 years ago, right?

When we're in a very different world.

So that's helpful.

And then the other thing she shows is that the

the magnitude of the time changes, which is to say

the initial tag labels aren't correlated with a bunch of

initial industry characteristics employment, the concentration of the industry, the

skill intensity, or the all the way.

So she is kind of explicitly arguing that the the

level of the tariff change just doesn't seem to be

related to industry characteristics, which you think might, you know,

potentially be sources of where some kind of endogeneity or

major variable bias is coming from.

And so that's the that's the argument we're making here.

And note that to the extent we buy this argument,

it's just we've kind of got more plausibly exogenous variation

than we had in the Amity and Davis paper, where

they didn't have such a sort of clean story for

why the tariff changed by different amounts in different industries.

Okay.

So that's the basic data.

And then what is she going to do with it?

And the key point here is that her outcome is

region level, but the tariff industry level.

So we need to map from an industry level variation

to a regional level variation.

So how does she do that?

Well she takes the weighted average across industries with in

different regions where the weights are kind of region specific

initial employment shares.

Right.

So more specifically, she constructs what she calls the district

tariff G in period T.

And it's a weighted average across industries are of the

industry tariffs where she's using the share of workers that

are in district D in industry I in 1991 as

weights.

Right.

So if your district does a lot of textiles initially

you get a big weight on textiles.

If it does a lot of, um, you know, rice

production, you're going to get big weight on the rice

tariff.

That's the basic, um, idea.

So note then kind of what we're going to be

interested in is how this district has varied over time.

And that time variation is then coming from the interaction

of the national tax reductions with the composition of employment

across districts before the reform.

So the time variation comes from the kind of national

level tariff reductions, and then the district level variation comes

from the different weights that different districts are tariffs.

One question to consider why does why do you think

she looks at district level instead of industry level outcomes?

Right.

Because I mean there's an additional kind of stack of

work here at the industry level to district.

Why do this rather than just look at the industry

level outcomes?

Uh, if we consider this, we have always had that

if we look at workers mobility between districts.

Mhm.

Yeah I think that's right.

It's it's not that one is right and the other

is wrong.

It's just it's kind of testing different models.

If what you're interested in is arguing that there is

some factor specificity at the regional level, then you want

to study outcomes at the regional level.

If you think fact specificity at the industry level, it

makes more sense to study it at the industry level.

So she has a kind of particular model of the

world, uh, in mind here in mind.

And she kind of wants to to test that.

All right.

And so here is going to be her baseline specification.

So she's going to have some outcome in district D

in period T that we're going to regress on to

the district level tariff.

Uh we're going to have a time dummy.

We are going to have a district dummy.

And we're going to have interactions with the post dummy

for the post reform period with district level, initial district

level characteristics.

Okay.

So let's unpack a little bit what she's doing here.

First thing to note in doing that is that there

are going to be we've got T there, but there

are two periods.

There's 1987 and 1999.

So what we're looking at is the change in outcomes

between 1987 and 1999 by district, and how that is

related to the district.

Um, so then, you know, obviously what you worry about

is some form of omitted variable bias.

So the the role of the post time 1987 interactions

is to try and reduce our concerns about omitted variable

bias by showing.

So by including controls for other district characteristics that we

think might be correlated with changes in outcomes over this

period.

So for example, if you think that initially poorer districts

are likely to grow more quickly, you want to control

for initial, uh, levels of poverty.

You might also want to control for kind of the

industrial composition of the district.

Does it do more kind of agriculture or manufacturing or

or mining?

Because, you know, other shocks during the period may differentially

affect districts that have different patterns of specialisation.

Okay.

So that's what she's going to do that.

And then there is one additional thing is, you know,

we've already made the case for why this kind of

variation is potentially ecological.

I think she has a reasonably good case on that.

But nevertheless, she is still an instrument for this task.

Right.

And the specific concern there is to do with the

fact that, you know, those some industries are traded and

that are exposed to this import reduction, import protection.

Other industries are uh non traded.

Right.

So the non traded industries um yeah a tariff of

zero Throughout.

In this calculation, in addition, the cereal and oilseed industries,

which at the time only the government could import, also

get a tariff of zero.

So because of that, if you are a, say, a

district that specialises in oilseed, this, you know, tariff is

not going to change because you're not going to be

affected by the tariff, um, liberalisation.

And she is concerned that that induces a correlation between

the district tariff and three reform poverty rates in the

district.

And she's going to have poverty rates as her key

dependent variable.

So she's worried that this could generate, um, some, some

bias.

I think it is the case that, for example, districts

that specialise more in oilseeds on average are likely to

be poorer districts.

Um, so to address that she's going to instrument the

tariff, um, with an analogous power, but constructed using only

weights for traded industries.

Right.

So it's just kind of the same idea, but stripping

out any variation that could come from, uh, you know,

specialisation in non-tradable or in cereals and oilseed.

Happy with that?

Okay, so then here is what she.

Um.

Finds when we do this exercise.

So.

We've got two panels to this table.

The top panel, the dependent variable is a measure of

the poverty rate.

The bottom panel.

It's a measure of consumption per capita at the district

level.

In this table she's only focusing on districts in rural

areas, and you can see she has 728 of them

in her, uh, sample.

And then kind of as we go across the specifications,

uh, across the columns, we're looking at various different specifications.

So in column one and a baseline here, we're seeing

that as the tariff declines the, uh, poverty rate goes

up.

So sort of baseline finding there is that districts that

are more exposed to the reduction in import protection and

therefore see a decline in the district level tariff, see

an increase in the, uh, uh, the poverty rate.

And column two kind of has the reduced form where

she just uses the traded tariff, where the non-tradable and

cereals, and also you get a zero, you know, not

included.

And you see a similar, um, Same result.

Column three is then the IV version, um, and then

column four as controls for the initial district uh conditions.

Um column five.

Adds strict of region level controls.

Um.

Column six also controls for change in non-tariff barriers during

this period.

And then uh columns seven and eight include a bunch

of controls for other reforms.

So there's various different specifications we're looking at here.

But if you kind of look across that first row,

not all I mean column five is a bit of

an exception.

But in general we're seeing that kind of the reduction

in the tariff is boosting the, uh, the poverty rate.

And panel B then is a different outcome, uh, consumption

per capita.

It's a kind of a different way of measuring what's

happening in their estate.

And they're the results are kind of.

A little bit more.

Variable and less frequently statistically significant.

But again, the kind of balance here is showing that

when the type of declines per capita consumption in the

region, uh, declines.

So this is consistently this evidence, if we accept it,

is consistent with the idea that districts that were exposed

to this important liberalisation that led to worse economic outcomes

in that district over this, uh, period.

Yeah.

What is the poverty rate?

So it keeps changing what poverty rate means.

Right?

I suspect that's going to be a question that I

don't know the detailed answer to.

I'm aware that we've been India.

There are debates about that.

Um, I am not off the top of my head.

I don't know exactly how she measures.

It is that if the poverty rate changed.

The official report reported data would have changed, which would

then also.

I mean, I'm sure she didn't do it.

Yeah.

So I feel confident in saying that.

I'm sure whatever measure she used, she used a consistent

measure over time.

I can't give you the details of exactly how she

has.

She measured it.

Up.

Uh.

Other questions on this initial set of results.

All right, so.

That was rural districts.

Now let's look at the same thing for urban districts.

So kind of same specifications here.

But now um for urban areas.

If you kind of look at all the different results.

I mean, there's a lot of different results in this

table, but if you spend some time looking at them,

the key takeaway here is that in contrast to what

we saw for the rural districts, there isn't really a

consistent pattern of results that you can take away from

this table.

So she seems to be finding that the import liberalisation

led to higher poverty rates and lower consumption per capita,

more exposed rural districts.

But didn't you know, I don't think you can conclude

from this that it affected poverty or consumption per capita

in urban districts one way or the or the other.

So, crucially, there is kind of a difference in the

estimated effect between rural and urban districts.

Anyone want to speculate on why that might be?

Think of it.

Try and think of it in terms of kind of,

you know, what is the underlying model that she's testing

here and what might different results tell us about that

model.

Kind of the specificity of factors.

Yeah.

Could it be that workers in urban areas are more

mobile, and so they're.

More likely to move between urban districts to not be

negatively affected by trade liberalisation?

I think that's a plausible hypothesis here.

Right.

If we think that we would, we would only ever

expect to find effects under the assumption that there is

some limited mobility.

If we think that there is more mobility into or

between urban districts, that might be a reason why we

see kind of less of an effect there.

And I think it is it is reasonable to hypothesise

that there is more mobility in urban areas than in

rural areas.

Okay.

So let's kind of convert these estimates to some numbers

to get a sense of how big these effects were.

Um, so the average decline in the district level tariff,

once she's done the weighting is five and a half

percentage points.

Note that that is a much smaller number than we

saw.

The kind of average national tariff went from about 18%

to 37%.

I think it was.

Um, we're getting much smaller numbers here because we are

waiting by employment shares across different, um, industries.

And some of the industries are non-tradable where there's no

change.

Right.

So this just reflects the fact that, you know, a

lot of economic activity is in non-tradable industry.

Um, so her average decline, 5.5 percentage points to 3.9

percentage points, increase in the poverty rate.

For comparison, the national poverty rate in India, but over

this period from 87 to 99 declined by 13 percentage

points.

Now kind of question, what does this tell us about

how trade liberalisation affected the level of poverty in India

during this period?

How do we interpret the results in terms of that

question about what happened to the level of poverty?

It increased the poverty rate.

So a lot of poverty.

So let's be careful.

I think that's a very natural answer to give.

And what I want to think us to think through

is why we want to maybe not give that answer.

So what what exactly have we identified here?

Our poverty rate in the rural district and.

The.

Neighbouring dozens Gazans moved to the urban area.

So that's true, but it doesn't directly.

That's not the point I'm getting at here.

I want to get at something slightly different.

Yeah.

Um, yeah.

You go first, then.

The districts that were, um, more exposed to the tariff

reduction, you saw higher poverty rates.

Um, although on average there is a decline.

Yeah.

It's more like specific to districts that were greatly more

exposed.

Yeah.

Right.

So the key.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So, so in the rural area and this is all

for that.

But you know, what we're doing is we're comparing districts

that are more or less exposed to the tax reduction.

And we're showing that districts are the more exposed for

bigger changes in the poverty ability, right?

Right.

But, you know, we have this time fixed effect in

there, which is absorbing the national level trend.

So again, the key point here is.

This.

We think about this as a diff type specification.

We're observing the changes between the more and less treated

units.

We are not observing what happens to the level of

we're not identifying what happens to the level of of

poverty.

All right.

So implications of that.

You cannot map from these results to any statement about

what happens to the level of poverty.

And I noted here that it did decline during this

period.

But I was you know, this results don't tell us

whether trade liberalisation increased or reduced poverty.

They just told us how about how it differentially affected

poverty across different districts.

So a.

Key.

Keep on, really just sort of be careful in how

we interpret it, interpret these things because it's kind of

it's it's easy to sort of say almost like, well,

the natural thing to say.

But then you have to remember, okay, what we're doing

is relative comparison, but actually it's just what we're saying.

It went up in some district relative to others, but

it could have gotten, you know, on average up in

all districts or down in all districts.

We're not able to speak to that.

Yeah.

The, um, the assumption is actually increased.

Uh, I.

Mean.

Sort of like, not as.

Yeah, it's not as significant.

Yeah.

Um.

Yeah.

I mean, the paper very much focuses on the poverty

Yeah, right.

Result.

Um.

Maybe I'm being unfair here, but I kind of.

I didn't take away from the paper kind of clear

explanation for that, um, distinction.

One possible way you could think about it is maybe

it is the poorest people in society that are most

exposed to this.

So for poor people, there's a poverty here.

But maybe the, you know, access to cheaper imports benefits

other, uh, groups.

But I, you know, we don't have the doesn't kind

of have the evidence to kind of pin that in

that man.

No, sorry, sorry.

I just had completely the wrong thing.

It's about the size of the two things, so.

Sorry.

Scrap that.

Right when the district met, remember, the district hope is

decreasing.

So the fact that you're getting negative signs here means

that a decrease in the district increases the poverty rate,

but a bigger decrease in the district also decreases average

consumption per capita.

So sorry.

The whole premise of what I just said was was

wrong.

These are two.

These results are consistent with each other.

They're not inconsistent with each other.

Sorry.

That was my mistake.

Other questions on this this set of results.

Okay.

Um, so now let's come back to just sort of

try and a bit better understand what's going on here.

Let's come back to this labour mobility.

Uh, question, because the results are certainly suggestive of the

idea that Labour is is not mobile across these, uh,

districts.

And that's why we're getting different wage results across all

the different poverty consumption results across different, uh, districts.

So the paper also kind of tries to dig into

this a little bit more.

All right.

It looks at does, uh, business district level tariff exposure.

Does that affect migration out of a district?

up and shows that there doesn't seem to be any

correlation between the effect of tariff reduction on immigration.

It also shows that geographic mobility tends to be higher

from skilled workers relative to unskilled workers, and also for

workers that consume, uh, more, which is consistent with a

secondary finding that it's the workers that automate the consumption

distribution that are hardest hit.

So here we're kind of starting to, um, talk a

little bit more about kind of inequality effect across different

types of workers.

But just to show some of this evidence to kind

of see what we're claiming here.

So in this table, um, we are regressing um, migration

essentially on the district tariff.

So we've changed our outcome variable for the for from

the pole.

Impanel a.

If.

What is the share of people that have migrated into

a district and outside the district?

And do we see that the change in the type

of factor and kind of the results insignificant.

And in panel B, it's just what's the population of

the district?

So these are kind of two different ways of trying

to get at.

Do we see that the exposure to the tariff cuts

has changed migration patterns.

And they both suggest that there's kind of nothing going

on there.

Right.

By contrast, if you thought that the labour there was

high levels of labour mobility, what you would expect is

that districts that see a bigger car in the district

tariff, that that stimulates outmigration and reduces the population of

those districts, there doesn't seem to be any evidence of

that.

So that's kind of consistent with the fact that the

model is kind of suggesting that there is limited labour

mobility.

And then.

Um.

Here is just some of these kind of regressions, just

descriptive data on the level of, uh, labour mobility for

both rural and urban districts and for uh workers at

different points of the per capita consumption distribution.

So these are the deciles slash tiles or sorry, slash

quintiles of the per capita consumption distribution and the y

axis shown.

What's the probability of having, uh, moved within the past

ten years, excluding moving within the same district and within

the same sector.

So it's like what is the actual migration rate?

So, you know, couple of takeaways here.

First, note that the y axis is much larger for

the urban districts than the rural districts.

So this is confirming the argument we put forward.

Before that we would expect to see more mobility, uh,

in urban areas than in rural areas.

Uh, but then in both areas we see the kind

of richer, uh, Asians per capita consumption are more mobile

than are poorer aged.

So the kind of mobility increases as you move up

the consumption distribution.

This is almost a little bit tangentially related, but if

we think that based on the paper, it seems like

rural, um, workers tend to be less mobile than urban

workers.

And if we then also acknowledge that urban workers tend

to be more productive than rural workers.

Good part of the explanation for that be that in

rural areas, you have lots of more or less productive

districts, but workers are stuck in them.

Whereas in urban areas you have more or less productive

urban areas, but because they're more mobile, they can move

to the more productive areas.

And so there's more of a location towards productive areas.

And that would cause like a level difference in productivity.

Yeah.

That sounds plausible to me.

We are getting a little bit outside my area of

expertise here talking about kind of these are clearly sort

of more development type questions.

But certainly, you know, development economics is very interested in

how development is accompanied by transformation into becoming a more

urban society.

And typically migration out of rural areas, in into urban

areas is part of that, uh, process.

And part of the motivation for it is that they

tend to be better or at least higher paid jobs

in urban areas.

So I think the the ability to access good jobs

is linked to labour mobility in some sense.

Okay.

Yeah.

Is it always the case that you seem to be

willing to have some friction of mobility in terms of

labour and like in which cases would they be?

Um, like for which type of countries there will be

like less or more mobility and there are some policies

that we could encourage.

I think we typically think of kind of more richer

countries as having fewer frictions to mobility.

But still.

I think.

Like as, for example, the work order done, Hansen would

suggest.

Right.

There's still that work is still suggesting there are significant

frictions to labour mobility in the United States, for example.

So it's certainly not something that goes away as countries,

um, as countries develop.

And, you know, if you think about where frictions to

mobility come from, one of them is kind of supply

of housing.

So if you're in a country like the UK, which

has, you know, insufficient housing stock and imposes a stamp

duty tax on moving house, that's clearly going to limit

mobility in the UK.

You know, one argument people make is that part of

the UK's current economic struggle is limited, is related to

not having enough mobility across locations.

So you see that you know here as well as

in India.

Other questions.

All right.

Um, so then kind of last set of results from

this paper, building on these facts about mobility.

Um, she looks at the impact of the district level

tariff reductions on household consumption per capita at different points

in the distribution.

Okay.

Um, this is all for.

Rural.

Households.

Um, and she runs these regressions at both the district

level and the region level.

But if we just focus on the district level ones,

kind of going from the 10th percentile to the 90th

percentile, you can see she's finding a kind of significant

effect at the 10th percentile.

By the time you get to high percentiles, it's still

positive but not significant.

So the variation here is kind of suggestive of the

fact that the, um, Impact of the district level tax

reduction is concentrated on, uh, households towards the bottom of

the consumption distribution, which is consistent with the evidence from

the previous slide, that those households are less, uh, mobile

and therefore potentially less able to arbitrage, uh, differences in

wage and other income opportunities across this.

So this is this is sort of all further suggestive

evidence that labour mobility or the lack of it is

playing a key role in driving these results.

Consumption distribution map onto income distribution.

Like can we tell income based on the bracket.

Yeah.

So certainly not perfectly right.

And I think if she had, you know, good data

on the income distribution, she would be using it.

So it's kind of I think this data is all

coming from household surveys.

So kind of household surveys typically are better at measuring

consumption than income, which I think is why we're were

there.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Um, yeah.

In general, I think you can think that consumption and

income are likely to be strongly, positively correlated, but you

can think of reasons why they're not always going to

be the, uh, be the same.

Okay.

So, you know, summing up from this, we're seeing that

the more exposed districts in rural areas, um, see relative

increases in poverty rates and relative declines in consumption per

capita.

Um, this is consistent with the kind of argument we've

made at various points that when factor specificity is relevant,

you can't just rely on labour reallocation as a mechanism

for adjusting to trade shocks, but kind of price and

wage adjustments for more exposed workers or households also takes

part of it.

The burden.

Then, um.

That said, we want to be careful about, you know,

this is not a paper saying that India's trade liberalisation

increased poverty.

It really is about the kind of differences in poverty

rates across different districts.

And as we've already said, that the overall poverty rate

was declining in India during this period, though, again, we

don't want to say that because of trade.

Uh, okay.

Any final questions on this paper?

Yes.

Uh, not in this paper.

But coming back to my question about the various, uh,

that we if there are increases.

Yeah.

Um, I was last weekend, I was when I saw

a book about trade wars is Class Force and was

supposed to be about us.

Yeah.

Uh, and then, of course, like Trump regulations that that

he wants to, uh, raise tax, uh, like raise the,

um, yeah.

And therefore wants to like, for sure, Uh, protects the

industry.

And in the US.

Yeah.

And especially like Silicon Valley has the cost of having

higher consumption prices.

So therefore it would increase the inequality.

Does this relate to this, uh, that, you know, like

it's a bit of the elderberry around which is released.

Uh, because, um.

I mean, I guess it's related in the in both

cases we're talking about what are the effects of tariffs.

Right?

Um, and, you know, generically we think of tariffs, uh,

tariff changes as affecting the degree of import competition you

face right here.

The tariff liberalisation is increasing the import competition faced by

Indian manufacturing industries.

In the Trump case, he would be protecting, uh, US

industries from competition.

Um.

You know, when.

We talked, I kind of had the same question with

the Hamilton Davis paper.

Kind of my immediate reaction was, I kind of think

it would just be the opposite if you went up

to what you went down.

Um, it's actually kind of thinking about the type of

parish Trump might put in place.

Um, there's going to be a question of in the

infant industry argument we made yesterday, right?

That is an argument where it's not necessarily symmetric one

or the other.

Right.

Because once you once you're in the equilibrium where the

kind of the good equilibrium as we call the industrialisation

equilibrium, you can remove the tabs and you still stay

there.

So to the extent that the goal of the tariffs

is to kind of shift broader patterns of industrial development,

I think it's not necessarily going to be the case

that it increasing them is just the same as reducing

them.

But I'm not sure if that really answered your question

or.

Yeah.

I was just thinking, um, after I asked the question,

isn't it the difference that in the book, after surviving,

that it also considers a rise in consumption prices, which

actually force people in the economy or most, uh, worth?

Um, well, they only encountered the incomes without the, uh,

power purchase.

So, I mean, I think.

You're right that if we want to think about the

overall effect of tariffs, we need to think about both

what happens to income and also what happens to, um,

to prices.

Right.

And kind of the the type of welfare analysis we

would in terms of trade welfare analysis is tries to

integrate both those, um, those things.

And if you, if you focus on one or not

the other, you are getting a partial picture.

Okay.

Um, so that's kind of it for today.

Um, What are the key takeaways from this lecture?

I mean, I think firstly that there are lots of

different mechanisms through which trade may have distributional effects.

Um, and that leads to kind of a more nuanced

picture of how trade affects inequality than, say, if we're

talking about the effect of trade on aggregate, um, output

in general, we expect that there kind of can be

both losers and winners, but who the losers and who

the winners are is going to be, you know, differ

across different, uh, cases.

And then we in addition to the sort of the

famous and the specific factors models that were talked about,

we talked about this kind of within industry, uh, effects,

which can lead to weight inequality increasing in both skill

abundance and skill scarce, um, countries.

And, you know, we haven't spent a lot of time

in this course talking about the political economy of trade

policy, which is, you know, not because it's not important,

but simply because we had to be selective about what

we cover.

But clearly that's the key to a question you're interested

in.

The distributional consequence of trade are crucial for understanding the

political economy, because it does tend to shape who supports

and who opposes, um, trade, as we see kind of,

you know, the part of the rationale for the Trump

tariffs is currying favour with producers and workers in particular,

uh, swing states in the, in the US.

So you can see kind of how these effects are

going to continue to matter for understanding what happens, uh,

next year.

And it's a bit of a shame we're finishing the

course now because, I mean, I think next year is

going to be, you know, interesting in a potentially in

a bad way from a trade policy, um, perspective.

Just to finish, on one note, I was at a

briefing this morning about what to expect from the Trump

administration when they come in and the the line that

was being presented there was that when it comes to

tariffs, the talk about tariffs is not so much that

they plan to implement them, but that they want to

use them as negotiating leverage to to negotiate concessions from

countries in other areas.

So there you can see it's going to create kind

of a direct connection between threats about trade policy in

the one hand and negotiations about, you know, defence spending

and alliances or not, with China, on the other hand.

So it kind of open up another set of questions

about how exposure to trade policy affects what deals countries

should do with the US over that.

But, you know, we'll learn more about that next year.

Um, any final questions?

Yeah it is.

It wasn't like I think Trump always did this during

his career in terms of negotiations.

Mhm.

Uh, the only really much and then just for a

different purpose actually invented the ocean.

Yeah.

He certainly has an approach to negotiations.

Yeah.

I remember you sending an article a while back by

Paul Krugman on the Trump tariffs, and it made an

interesting argument linking sort of the the current account deficit

or the trade deficit to international capital flows.

Is that something we're going to have a next term?

Um, like.

I will certainly.

Cover international capital flows and current account deficits next term,

where the DMA intends to cover the relationship between that

and trade policy.

I'm not sure, but possibly, yeah, I don't know.

I don't know exactly whether he would cover that or

not.

It feels like the article linked the two of them

in a very neat way, and so intuitively would feel

covered by the course.

And then it's a bit of a shame if you

cover trade and you cover capital.

Flows.

And you don't cover how they affect each other.

Yeah, I think.

That's a.

Fair point.

You love oedema to.

Cover.

This.

I mean, I'm sure if we're seeing these major changes

in policy going on through next term that they are

going to come up in your elections.

Could you maybe share other elements if you have them

back for next year, especially with.

Yeah, I'm happy to.

Yeah.

All right.

Thanks everybody.

Have a good, uh, winter break.

Thank you.

Thank you.

And you fill out the course evaluations.

Please.

Next time as well.

Yes.

Yeah, yeah.

No, I'm I'm.

I'm I live in.

Um, a lot of.

Lecture 11:

I.

Yes I guess That How are you doing?

I own one.

I'm not enrolled in the auditing, yeah, yeah, no worries.

OK, I think we can start, right?

So it's uh free.

5 Um, OK, so, so this international microcourse, right?

It's the second part of the international economics.

Um, and, uh, to talk about, you know, my, my

first question is what is the difference between the first

international trade and that that's just, right?

So what are the top here.

And I'm.

On his own.

So what is the difference?

Why, why is that?

No, uh, so for example, I, I guess I'm almost

the only one in Macro LLC, right the economics department,

and I'm I'm not with trade, right, people, they have

their own, and international ma is always somewhere in between

international trade and macro, but usually it is combined with.

So why is that even though both parts are involved.

All right, yeah, yeah, exactly.

So in some sense, right, that you saw in the

first part of the course, right?

And so it's not it's it's more like in several

years, right.

It's not to say that there are no trade models.

There are some, but it's more like an exception, right?

There are some people, some, uh, people who decided how

firms adjust to, right?

And you can see that, you know how they adjust

the prices, but that is more like an exception at

most more, most, uh, questions that people start to trade.

In international international finance is more about high frequency dynamics.

I think we'll talk about exchange rate, uh, capital flows,

and this is, you know, it's by almost by definition

it's a dynamic programme.

There will be inter temperatures and somehow I don't know

why, but somehow capital most in temporals there you macro

in trade.

So that's right.

That's why that was the main difference, right?

But again, it's a little bit, but somehow maybe for

the reasons it happened that there are some other differences

between the two parts.

That's true.

That's right.

I almost never talk about prices and I would have

pushed even further and say that one of the key

differences between the two.

To to right is that international is much more obsessed

with international prices much time prices.

So much price in the international trade part.

You probably saw it, right?

And then when you saw the price there, but you

know it's kind of a sideshow.

What people about trade is about trades, right?

In the end, the dollar value of trade between two

countries, and it's getting a volume.

It's not about price.

And if you take the main, you know, workforce models

that people use in trade like Melis model, for example,

right, or even even quarter model, they are completely at

pose with the of the prices so they can replicate

the quantities, right?

They can replicate the trade flows, the kind of the

gravity, right?

They, they're very good at gravity that we see the

data.

But if you look at the behavioural process, it's actually

very different in the data.

OK, and so, I mean, is it annoying, right, that

the, the ultimate goal is to understand flaws, and there

the models work pretty well, but intermediate step doesn't work

very well, right?

So in particularly if you in most of these models,

if you increase let's say ts by 10%, the input

price will increase is also by 10%, and we know

that for for many countries this order is not the

case, right?

The prices will increase, but they will not increase exactly

by 10%.

They might increase by 5%.

In contrast, International America, we will talk a lot about

prices.

In some sense we will talk not enough, not, you

know, we don't pay enough in the attention to the

quantities.

So there are many, many, you know, papers which look

at all the prices and say nothing about quantities.

Which is also a bit strange because in the ends

and ants, but on the other hand, the models will

be much more realistic and they will reproduce the behaviour

of prices.

And so in particular in the exchange rate pass through

or pass through tariffs into prices, that's something that we

will talk about.

OK, very good.

So I think that's, that's kind of, that's exactly the

two main differences between the two parts of the right,

the aims and focus on prices.

Um, OK, so now before I, I, I, I go

on with, you know, with the main material, let me

just very quickly, uh, say, uh, you know, kind of

housekeeping rules.

So first of all, everybody will have a problem, right?

It's, I think the first one is already, and, uh,

I, you know, the deadline, the deadline is always money,

right?

So at the preset we're going to solve the problems.

At the time you try to solve it yourself, OK,

so the problem will be.

This is just, you know, versions of the model that

we discussed in us, but I will ask you to

download some data and do something yourself, right?

It's, you know, it's one step away from classical stores

essay stores, uh, more, I would say, you know, creative,

uh, or.

And then you know if if there is a problem

like that, there's a problem, you know, uh, find in

the dates like, uh, change something like that, then I

might ask you to show your slides, uh, you know,

here in.

Um, OK, so that's one thing, yeah, so in terms

of, um, in terms of, um, uh, grades and marks,

so programmes that are not graded, but you, but I

saw them so that you are well prepared for the

exam, right, because the exam will be, you know, and

at the end of the course you always ask me

to, to show, of course I will do that, but

you will discover very quickly that there are many problems.

So if you, if you have to solve the problems,

you should have no problem with.

Uh, and then there's an essay, right?

I guess you already talked about it with, uh, I

mean, I don't have much to say.

My only, you know, advice and, uh, encouragement is that,

uh, try to do it to do something interesting, OK.

So if you find it boring in the sense that

probably I will find it boring as well and it's,

it's just it's a waste of your time.

And you know, I mean, most, most essays are very,

I guess it's hard to skip at this stage, but

try to find something that you really interests you and

something that you think you can make progress, right?

So it can be very simple, very basic way it

can be very basic daily exercise or exercise, but there

must be some way to get it.

Don't just, you know, download variables and etc.

without thinking and then you get a positive negative.

And you spend half of your essay discussing which these

cos are significant.

I mean, say that in the matrix, right, but here

we are more interested in in substance, OK, so, uh,

it, it can be very simple.

It can be just correlation.

It can be just one picture with two times see

this that might be enough if they are really illuminating

if you, if you really are something from that picture.

OK, I would prefer that much more than having, you

know, very complicated, uh, econometric exercise but no economic substance.

OK, good, uh, and then 11 last thing I want

to mention so that unfortunately I will have to reschedule

one lecture, so February 13th.

I will reschedule, but I mean I haven't decided when,

but, um, I'm sure I haven't to do it for

one week so we will not be around.

OK, perfect.

Uh, any questions?

Is this clear?

OK, and by the way, after this, after today's class,

so I guess 5 right at 5 a.m. OK, good,

perfect.

So then we can move on.

And so today we're going to talk about change and

so we will start today, but we will also continue

next week because the, uh, most of the laws and

we will talk about that later on, but I feel

like are more interesting, more practical, and you know people

do discuss this, uh, in everyday life I think just

more interesting topic to start with.

OK, so why are we interested in?

So here are my three pictures trying to motivate you.

So the first one is.

So we have the US and the US.

It's out of here, right?

You compute US GDP dollars and you divide it by

the number of people in the US.

You get a GDP per capita.

You also compute GDP in Switzerland, right?

It will be presumably in Zoos, but then you convert

that into using rate.

You can divide by the number of people in Switzerland,

and you get a number which is right, and so

you do it in every single people.

So it's it's just normal GDP expressed in cars, but

what is interesting about the is that you can see

dramatic changes in in the relative right I mean that's

a recession here, but it's kind of smooth, right?

Well, for Switzerland, these huge swings goes up and down.

And so you, I mean, 11 nice way to think

about this is the whole.

I imagine there's a guy from Switzerland, a very medium

powerful from Switzerland, and then the median guy from United

States, and they in 2001, and it turns out that

they're at an equal age, right?

They can invite the same amount of who's in you

somewhere in the airport where they meet and then this

guy 10 years later 2011 the same right.

Again, they owe to GT and it turns out that

the guy from Susan can buy almost twice as many

as the guy from the twice as much, but 42

8 right, 80% more, right, it's within 10 years, it

looks like that guy became twice richer relative to the

US.

So what is going on here?

Why is that?

for the US we only see changes in output over

time for Switzerland we both see changes in output but

also exchange rate between you know so then I mean

I guess which one of these.

And of course you know GDP is growing very, very

smoothly 9, which is one of the largest that we

had recently small change here, right?

And so for the trend, right, the graph would look

very slow right.

Uh, well, yeah, OK, so that's exactly where things become

complicated, but if you look at the most trash, right,

of course they get, but another thing that I do

is like twice, almost, uh, 100%, and most of these

changes they become.

OK, it's kind of surprising how is it possible that

which it's kind of a reasonable, but compared to the

yes, but for some reason rate moved so much that

it twice as much, right?

So that's that's in some sense.

So that's what we're going to talk about most next

week the exchange rate disconnect, right, the disconnect between reality

and this large swing of the exchange rate.

Uh, so one other thing I want to say about

this is that it's a fundamental role, right?

So again in our course I'm not going to spend

much time on this, but if you take, let's say

it's all about comparing living standards across countries, and this

is a huge problem with this, right, because how do

you.

in almost the same but you know how in the

cross section whether you use it in 2001 or 200

right so that's that's.

And by the way, no, I'm a little bit ahead

of myself, but just right, no, I, I, you know,

it was on purpose that I said that these guys

meet in duty free, right, that they kind of go

to the same store and then one guy can buy

twice as much goods as the other one.

Of course, in practise they don't go to duty free

most of the time.

They go to the local stores and their price can

be very different.

And if you prices and who goes, then in real

terms the design is relative well doesn't change that much,

right?

I get that all these are very high, but also

the prices, the bases that stores are much higher, and

that's actually exactly what we see in the data, right.

OK, good.

So that's, that's kind of one cross country companies.

So now which focus on.

So this is just the dollar euro exchange rate for

the last 25 right here and it's since 1999 the

creation of the euro, right?

And I mean this is just to show you a

similar point that the rates are, right, so, uh, in.

Uh, we see this relatively smooth trends, but the rate

will change a lot, right, uh, went down to 0.8

almost right if it was 16 and so we see

things and even in the last couple of years there

were large things, you know, if you sold, I guess

sold dollars here, right, and bought them here, then you

could make a lot of money.

And so from maybe most practical perspective, the question is,

of course, uh, what this place is changing genetics and

can you kind of make money or at least you

know economise money uh by uh exchanging money at the

right time.

So we're going to talk about kind of the financial

exchange rates, uh, today, uh, and I mean, so that's

by the way, that's another thing, right?

So when, when you can talk about exchange rates in

the US, most Americans, they don't pay much attention to

exchange rates, right?

For them, I mean, they use, I mean the US

is kind of, it's as if it's a separate planet

from the rest of the world, of course also directly

affect households in the US, but it's such a large

economy, relatively close economy that people don't care.

Very much I believe that some of you are from

emerging from developing countries just like me and so I,

in these countries you know very well that people to

exchange rate a lot so sometimes people just on the

daily basis and sometimes when we see that it's one

of the main indicators for people in this country, right?

So people really care a lot about exchange rates.

Uh, OK, good, good.

And so my last picture here, uh, just to show

you, uh, to give you a bit of historical perspective,

right, uh, so in some sense the exchange rate for

Latin is the exchange rate regime is a choice.

In at the end, uh, the central bank, the government

can choose whether they love exchange rate to freely float,

and then you have, you know, pictures like this where

exchange rates are very volatile or in principle.

Governments can stabilise exchange rates, right, and it is, it's,

it's true that again if we think about developed countries,

the UK, the US, the, the Eurozone of the last

2030, 40, 50 years, then we see this, you know,

large exchange.

And by the way, this is, right?

So we didn't see this this large vote.

But if you go back you can see that there

were periods sometimes almost like maybe in decades, half a

century, when you change the world.

Right, so you know it is a very right is

all here there were kind of three main periods the

standard, right, which, which was remaining regime in 19th century

when the change was civilised against the world, right?

So you just said that you know is will, I

don't know.

and then there was, you know, then there was all

after the first World War, right, so the, the, the

left ended for a short period of time.

There was some, but then it went back, right, the

the years.

So then he went back to the last very long.

Why is that?

What was another shock for the which eventually made him,

uh, the standard was the great right?

And so I mean there was, there was a famous

debate between, uh, kings and other ornaments right so the

government is that it's interesting.

So in this period they get they went exactly to

the same ratio, right, the same private vote as before

the first World War.

And it was very painful, right?

It was it was no longer of 1930s.

It was not the same as the UK of the

19, right?

It was a much poorer man.

It was destroyed, it lost a lot of wealth during

the First World War, but just to, you know, to

reinforce the reputation of the, to the same.

And that was unsustainable and when the, you know, when

the Great Depression started, they just changed it depreciate and

change with vote, uh, then again they kind of tried

to go back, but then the, the Second World War

started, so they depreciated, right?

There was largely depreciation after the Second World War and

then eventually in the US, the UK, and most other

Western countries, they, they became part of the direct system,

right?

So the.

was was kind of designed by large and the US.

So what was different, I mean, it seems like it

was also stable, right?

It was just like in the 19th century.

What was the main difference between the brother and the?

Maybe some of you know.

I think the gold standard was based on the value

of gold, right?

It was a fixed rate between gold and lots of

currencies, ins, I think it was based on the US

dollar, a fixed exchange rate relative to the US dollar,

which I think was based on gold you know, so

the, the, the gold standard is like you have, you

have US here, right, and they kind of independently to

gold, right?

So because Britain was the system was different.

There was, yes, gold, and there were many other countries,

right?

And so all these countries, they acted to, to, to,

yes, to dollar.

Well, the US was was backed by the US to,

right?

And, but I mean, in some sense this link was

always weak and in some sense if you look at

this, right, it doesn't really matter the key part is

this one.

This is one I think it's the exchange rate, but

it was a very much, right?

So in a sense we will see that in the

models that you just decides to bring you a lot

of money.

That would naturally lead to the depreciation of the dollar.

So if other countries are obliged to, they also need

to bring their money right.

And so in a sense, the system makes other countries

import many shocks that generated right so it was much

more.

OK, and then so this is 1971, 1973, right?

So 1971 is the famous Nixon show when US officials

said that they will no longer change US dollars for

gold.

Right, so they kind of broke this news.

I mean they, they saw that other countries were kind

of exchanging dollars for gold.

And uh these three have enough resources to, to exchange

all these dollars for gold, and in 1971 and then

in 1973, this is the official end of the system

all these countries they allowed the exchange rate to be.

So then you see uh the right PDS, you can

see that there was gold and then and uh exchange

rates.

Again, I mean, US and UK, this is just one

example of it's relative, it's, it's, it's representative if you

think about Western countries, right?

I don't know, Germany or Japan, but I suppose it's

not a representative if you think about emerging economies.

Emerging economist features we could look very differently and.

Many Latin American artists, they tried to devise the exchange

rates even in the 1970, 80s and later on, right?

So for example, Argentina would be the in uh 90s,

early 2000s and uh and so they get to uh.

Um, OK, so my point is only that my main

point here is that, uh, countries can choose, right?

And so again we want to understand how exchanges are

determined also from a normal perspective, right?

We want to understand what is the policy for for

central banks.

OK, good.

Any questions so far?

Does this make sense?

Don't be shy, please.

OK, cool, so then now, OK, here comes the kind

of boring part, right, so before we proceed, let's now

kind of formalise what we mean by.

So when we say change, what we really mean is

a normal change, right?

OK.

There's also a real change, but what, what you kind

of see when you go to the same bank, right,

and exchange for dollars, this is normal, right?

And then in the end this is the price of

one in terms of the other currency, right?

So it's, it's, you know, just like there is some

exchange between pounds and, uh, potatoes.

There's also exchange between, uh, and, uh, US dollars.

So I don't know why I have an example for

euro rather than pounds, but uh so uh.

There are kind of exchange rates between the US and

the Eurozone, right?

So one is that you can say that the number

of dollars per 1 unit of euro, right, so you

see that this number is greater than 1.

So in that sense euro is kind of more expensive

than dollar.

Of course you can also define the inverse exchange rate

you can define the future as euros per $1 right?

And this is just 1 divided by the first exchange

rate.

Um, so what we're going to do later, right, so

you know during this course, let's stick to one because

otherwise we're in trouble and you will see we will

practise this during the first weeks.

Uh, it's it's really important, right?

So we need to remember this.

So we will define it as the price of one

unit of foreign currency.

In.

Right, so in other words, let's say, uh, of the

pound, what we, what we mean is that number of

pounds.

For $1.

So this is what we call the exchange rate.

This is the number of 1.

OK, so let's, let us, let's.

So when and then Google, by the way, right, Google

to know this.

So what when I see that the goes up, it

means that it becomes cheaper or more expensive.

It will take some time to, to get used to

this, but let's do this.

So when the bone goes up, it's depreciation or.

OK, OK, let's see.

Does the phone becoming more expensive or cheaper?

Cheaper exactly right because more bonds or bond because, uh,

cheaper, which is depreciation.

OK, right, when she goes down it means that now

we get less pounds or we get more 1 pound,

which means that the is more expensive and the establish.

OK, so, right, because I mean goes up, it sounds

like it's suddenly strong, but no, it's depreciation.

OK, so I would say like 90.9% of the whole

literature academic uses this definition.

Unfortunately, even in academic literacy textbooks which is the definition

and unfortunately you go to you know even that I

show you sometimes and uh you go to Financial Times

or the economist sometimes they they use those right so

be aware of that.

It's, it's annoying what what did you do, right?

Different peoples, uh, yeah, maybe I, I heard this several

times at our micro seminar here and at other universities

that some people say that they decided not to do

economics rather do something like, you know, labour market because

they always go to confuse with exchange rate direction.

So yeah, it is a bit of a barrier to

enter the field, but.

Uh, but it is this course and things will get

much easier later on.

OK, so that's, that's the first thing, um, yeah, so

when you know the first property, the second property is

the relation to bilaterals.

Um, Let me see.

Uh, How can I erase this.

So, right, so.

This is pretty easy now we have uh.

We have 3 countries US, UK, and Euro area.

Right, so we have Exchange rates those, you know, who

have found.

In terms of US dollar.

Right we have Found in terms of Europe.

And how can we compute the exchange rate between the

US and the Eurozone?

Well, it's just one, we just need to divide one

exchange rate by the other, right, so let's say we

want to get um.

Euros in dollars.

Then Right, so in other words, let me, I mean

this is just maybe a little bit confusing, but you

mentioned that, uh, what was the number, yeah, so suppose

we know that um.

OK this is not, uh, I might get, OK, this

is just, you know, this is not too crazy, but

these are not exact numbers.

So we know that 1 pound is worth.

$1.25 right, and suppose.

We know that 1 pound is equal 1.2 not not

exactly but close enough.

So then how do we compute the exchanges between euros

and the gold and dollars.

I want to get cheap rate money in terms of

dollars.

This must be, but.

1.25 divided right, so we have we have.

We have this is an amount of dollars per pound,

right?

This is yours.

Per bond, right?

So then.

We cancel out, right?

What is that, you know, 1.25 divided by $12 per

one per year, right.

OK, so I can just pull this between uh.

Dos and humans.

OK, good.

So one last thing last thing is that we will

work with local exchange rate rather than uh level of

exchange rate, right?

And then again I think you probably saw that why

do we like logs.

I ask you how much has changed over the last

quarter, but you will probably give me the answer in

percentage change.

So change in law is just, uh, to the, to

the first order is uh is uh in order to

percentage change.

Uh, and by the way, I mean, this is, this

is probably obvious, but many people get confused by that.

So people will look at the change between Japan and

the US, right?

And so what is the change rate there?

I mean somebody knows ours.

So $1 is equal to how many.

but it's like 300, right?

300 something, I would imagine so people will see oh

you see how strong the vote is, but of course

it is nothing, right?

One goal is equals 300.

I mean you can't say anything about this, right?

I mean, in terms of yes, it's maybe 300, but

you know what if I look at the changes not

the doer but but I say what I'm, what I'm

paying you, right, then the change would be very different.

So I mean this, this, this abs, they don't tell

you anything.

So what we really care about is usually percentage changes,

right?

So that's why we like working with and so I

will use small letters to denote, uh, local change right

so.

So E is just log of capital E.

OK, any questions?

Everything clear here?

OK, good.

So, so this was just, you know, notation now more

interesting stuff.

So here is the baseline model of the changes.

It's super, you know, this is probably my biggest innovation

this courses reality to the textbooks.

Uh, I really like this model.

I think it's, you know, it's super simple.

It will be a, uh, we, we will eventually show

how exchange rate determined in a, uh.

In a two dimensional space, right, using a standard, uh,

diagram, but you can kind of see, you can use

this model to think about most uh interesting shocks, right?

So in particular, and I think that's maybe now it's

especially interesting, what is the effect of tariffs on on

the change.

OK, but let's start with, uh, with, with the basic.

So this again, uh, nowadays people mostly use multi models

use the infinite models.

It turns out that it's very straightforward to generalise.

So this is just.

So you can think of this day and the future.

There are only 2 US and you know home which

US and the rest of the world.

So think of this as US exchange rate against uh

some basket of foreign currencies.

And here comes the most interesting part, right?

So what is, what is the most interesting of exchange

rates relative to, you know, price of, uh, potatoes?

It turns out that this is pretty unique.

It's the price which simultaneously equilibrates several markets, not just

one, right?

So when we see when we think about we usually

it's the price the supply and demand, uh, uh, overs

right, but here it's more complicated.

It's really one price which creates good markets and financial

markets and you know, in good and in financial markets

that are.

So it's really one of these real prices across which

clears many markets.

OK, um, and we already talked about this, right, so

good market part will be very close to international trade

except that they rarely talk about changes and prices of

course, right, and then markets, uh.

OK, so how does it work?

So there will be, you know, two mains, right?

We will need for who and who will need equilibrium

for ones.

So let's start with good points.

By the way, I did ask you, but I hope

you can see here.

Is it fine?

I will try not to go too, too, too low

here.

It's market.

OK, so let's try to see how affects food markets.

OK, think of this, uh, let, let me see this,

OK, you don't mind, let me just uh.

Let let me if you don't mind, let me make

you, OK, just because I mean I, I need some,

I need to sis here and I'm not sure which

one.

So let me use, let me make home you.

And then go and blue beer.

US Sorry.

OK, so then here is my first assumption.

So let me, let's assume that there is a price,

you know, kind of some aggregate price index for goods

produced in the UK.

And just for simplicity, I will normalise it to one,

maybe 10, but think about this is price index.

These are kind of the bundle of goods which are

produced in and they're also exported and sold in others.

OK, so the question is, what is the price of

this good, uh, in the US?

And here So this will be, you know, export price

index.

For for for domestic economy and here is my main

assumption.

If this is really an assumption, we will spend more

than one we're talking about the assumption, but for now,

let me assume that firms when they sell goods, they

set the same price in the US as they said,

uh, price.

OK, so we're going to talk about that later on,

but this assumption, this is what is called low one

price.

The price of the same is the same no matter

where it is sold, OK.

Low law of one price.

Uh, OK, so this is an assumption, and so let,

let, let us, let us keep it on.

So then what is this?

Even the exchange rate rise we have home economy has

some exchange rate in dollars.

So what is the price of this exported goods in

dollars?

And exchange rate.

Uh, of the.

So this is, this is, this is per dollar, right?

This is division.

So then do I need to multiply by divide by

divide right I need to divide.

Right, so I, you know, multiply now both by EE

will appear here which is $1 is equale which is.

OK, good, so that's that's uh.

So that's the export price.

So now why do we want to make this conversion?

Well the main reason is that when people know in

the US when they decide how many British goods to

buy, they look at price in dollars, right?

So they they domestic price.

They and they compare prices of goods to domestic goods,

and they compare them to.

So in other words you made.

101 diagram, so this is the export price in dollars.

This is the quantity exported by the UK.

There is demand for British goods in the US, right,

so this is.

US demand.

For your gigs.

OK, now we can think about change rate for international

trade and it's not that all depreciate.

As we said before that.

Right?

So then what happens?

I suppose this was our original point.

What happens?

What, what, what, what happens to prices that US consumer

space.

It goes down, right, the price goes down.

Which means that the goods becomes cheaper, which means there's

a demand for these goods, right?

So the quantities, quantity of goods exported goes up.

So this is what is called expenditure switching effect of

exchange rates.

Expenditures which you know.

The term that hasn't been used for at least 100

years, uh, so, so you can see that depreciating the

huge stimulates excellence.

Right, so that's exactly why, you know, sometimes we appreciate

the exchange rate.

This is the good news, don't like that we will

talk about it, but you know, when, when, when, uh,

you know, even Trump right now, uh, he would say

that, um, the exchange rate for China is too strong,

right.

They are too weak weak that the exchange rate of

China is depreciated and China depreciates the exchange rate to

stimulates that's why US cannot have veto right?

or, or again, President Trump would say that, uh, the

bad, right.

They should somehow depreciate the dollar to stimulate US production

stimulates, and I don't want to focus, you know, on

the US too much.

It's actually a very general phenomenon, especially during, during recessions,

you have recession in the country, it usually tries to

depreciate the exchange rate to stimulate.

And then, and then we're talking about this, right, so

that's why during when you have a global recession, uh,

policymakers are usually very worried about, uh, what we called

currency wars.

Right, so the, the trade wars, ts, but also, you

know, if you think about, there can be a currency

war, right?

What is that it's when all countries try to exchange

to stimulate their exports, right, I mean, if you, you

know, both depreciate by the same amount, if you change

it will not change at all because it's bilateral very

much that will have no stimulating effects, right, so, uh.

That can be a source of conflict with agreement between

countries.

OK.

Is this clear?

OK, good.

So just one last piece before we talk about just

to finish with, um, so, so this is, this is

what happens to price we said that the price goes

down.

We said that quantity goes up.

Now what happens to total experts what is total experts,

but this is the, the product of the tool.

Uh, we have price and so we need to choose

in which units to, um, we express experts, uh, we

can choose any variable, but suppose we decide to do

this in bounds.

OK, so let's, let's do this in experts in bounds

and then imports bounds as well.

Then we use.

Export price, right, export quantity, but the price is also

inbounds, so that's important.

So then what happens first of all, what happens to

the experts?

It doesn't change by assumption, the prices are relatively stable,

they're sticky, so they stay the same in which the

quantities.

They increase and so this, this whole thing with the

experts.

They demand positively on the.

OK, good.

So now let me just let me do the same

analysis for you, um, so now what happens on the

side.

So to talk about.

So let us assume that you know the price of

goods is 1 dollar's $1.

Then What is the import price?

In the UK, I'm going to make low one price

assumption, right?

So again, this is just an assumption doesn't, you know,

doesn't have to be true, but assuming that low one

price so that again now US earns when they sell

boots in the US.

And they sell them at the same price.

Yeah, in reality it is not true, right?

If you go to the store and you know, it's

some amazing wood, uh, like Coco, right, which is very

easy to compare and this, the price will not be

the same in the US and, uh, immediately, but we'll

talk about that later on.

OK, good.

So now, um, what is the price in the arts?

No we need multi.

OK.

injury.

OK, very good.

Now again, let's make the same type of diagram right

now in one of the imported input price that was

in demand.

Not Mhm For you.

they see domestic prices of domestic goods and they can

compare them to prices need to be in the same

path.

Depreciate depreciation of the.

The price increases, right, you see the price involves increases.

So the important goods become more expensive for the local

consumers and so they buy less of them.

Right So you can see immediately, right?

I was, I was kind of telling you why and

depreciation is good for the people like depreciation for the

red, because that's, but you can also see that negative

effects from the point of view of consumers, right?

That's exactly why developing others people don't usually don't like.

depreciate the exchange rate, right when they say that exchange

rate depreciates, they understand that, especially if they consume a

lot of foreign goods, their inflation, inflation rules are.

Right goes down as they consume less of these.

OK, very good.

So then what we need is universe and since we

measure experts involved, let's measure univors and bonds as well,

uh, to the end, so we have import price in

pounds multiplied by quantity to import.

OK, so here we have kind of two different types,

right?

We tell that mortgages go down, but the price goes

up, then what happens to the imports, you know, to

the, to the volume of imports right value of imports.

So what is the parameter which will determine which is

dominates.

Microeconomics are the ones exactly right.

And so when you can precisely so if the elasticity

of demand is what.

So what did you have to dominate, let's say?

What needs to be true about.

It's very elastic.

Yes.

I mean, what is, what is efficient sufficient is that

elasticity is higher than one, right?

So as long as the elasticity of demand is higher

than one, then what is more than 1 to 1,

and this is a conglomerate, and this is the, you

know, this is more or less than the assumption here.

I mean you probably know more about this by now

because you just took international trade part and there it's

almost kind of always the assumption that there's this.

And it is, it's greater than one, right?

I mean there is some if you have high frequency

is low, it's one, but it's not much higher than

one.

If you look at the long run, and this is

good that in international trade.

What is the liberation.

Approximately.

And I'm sure you you saw some numbers in the

first part of the course, when you do talk about

I mean it's one single main parameter in the whole

trade literature.

OK, OK, let me tell you that.

So something like 4 or 4 to 8, I would

say these are the standard if you, if you think

about high frequency, then it goes down to 1.5 that's.

So, uh, to, so just to summarise, we are going

to assume that elasticity of one is above 1.

Which means, which implies that this whole ink goes up.

And as a result, inwards decrease initiation.

before we we right, so, uh, by the way, this

is a natural assumption.

So what would be kind of wrong if you like.

From a normative perspective, what should firms or governments do

if they know that demand abroad is less than one.

So this I think from the perspective of a mention

that you are a monopolist.

You are selling goods in the foreign market and the

demand is is less than one.

What is the optimum price here.

than everywhere you just take the, the product of the

two, right?

So you revenues and of course your go to as

well because you don't.

I mean this is what it means.

Even if you don't locally, you choose the one you're

not doing something wrong, right?

You just from the perspective of firms and of course

even if it's, you know, maybe you say that there's

high competition between firms, but if you have a whole

government, right, the whole, whole country, you can just impose

very high export tariffs, and then again you will get

higher.

Pro, right, so it seems that.

OK, good.

Just let's, let's put these pieces together.

Uh, What is net experts, let's say we measure net

experts in pounds.

Well this is just experts by the words.

Right and we just said that experts are releasing the

exchange rates are decreasing, which means that that other experts.

Are increasing in the rate.

Right, that that's that in a sense, the main takeaway

from this side because of on the side, it's speech

on the import side on experts.

OK, very last piece, uh, so we'll do, we do

well, remember that we have a 2D8 model.

So eventually the equilibrium in the goods market is the

country's budget.

Right, I mean, I'm not sure how, how are you

that part, but I presume that most models that you

said they, they, the they assume that has to be

equal to 0.

In other words, that X has to be equal, right,

because it's, I mean, it's kind of all no equilibrium,

right, so.

Here we're interested in dynamics so we don't impose an

issue that has to be equal 0.

Instead what we require that an expert is equal.

This is this is that I can also write this,

you know, remember that the expert is just.

so I can write this as.

plus.

And that's what I was in the second equals the

sum of that.

Right, and so Even though we don't, we don't impose

balanced rate in every single year, we do require that

trade is balanced on every pros.

Uh, I mean, is it true?

It's very hard to say.

We, we're going to talk about that later on, uh,

but intuit right you mentioned that you have the experts.

Less than 0 is the experiment.

So then what does this country do in the international

financial markets, right?

So that you sell less goods then you buy goods.

Then how do you finance this, uh, trade deficit?

I got 1000 pounds for 2000 pounds.

Is that the only way to finance is borrow abroad

and then in the next year they will come and

they will require money back.

So what you need to buy in the next few

years.

I mean, not that we don't put interest rates here,

but this is just the first approximation can be derived

without interest rates, but no rate here as well.

Right, vice versa.

If you have ways that you exported more than you

imported in the 1st, 1st, right, and now you have

more money.

What can you do with this money?

I mean, you, you invest that money, right?

I mean, even when we say that you have all

money, it means that you have this money at for

on your account in some bank abroad, right?

So that's already some form of investment.

You keep this money and then in the next few

years.

Again, you expand this.

Right, uh, so what might go wrong, by the way,

when this, I mean, what is, uh, what kind of

assumptions here that we may begin.

So you mentioned that you.

What other tour the country go from then?

Please Uh.

So I, I, I borrowed a lot of money for

Argentina Argentina born with a lot of money.

So then in the next period.

It's gonna default, right?

I mean, it seems like right now Argentina is in

a very different port.

she wants to repay everything and the regulation is a

credible government, but historically we know that Argentina divorced every

something like 12 years, right, over the last century.

So you know it's really big investment for foreign investors,

right, uh.

Uh, you know, it just, this is something that is

not here, right?

I said, there must be interest rate here and you

have the rate which is very negative, right?

It's as if you are kind of confiscating investors, right?

So that would be more general.

OK, I think let's take a short break, 5 minute

break, and then we'll see.

By the way, I don't think there's any recording, right?

It seems like it's not recording.

It is a word.

OK, OK, I already report every year which.

Yeah Oh Yeah, good.

That that.

You're too excited about that.

what you wanted.

Yeah And macro in the morning.

I see.

I don't know.

That's true.

Michael?

Oh, you did my dance.

Yeah man Yeah, I just stuck with my.

This is my.

I stuck to Adam as well.

Oh no, but I, I didn't.

OK.

it down.

That's why I didn't choose the Martin.

Yeah, yeah, that's why I did not think I wanted

to come here.

I'm having quite a few people.

What did you choose?

Um, I don't remember the exact time, but I have

a barcode for Micro, which is I, and then, um.

Because I looked up, I looked up their profiles what

they specialise in, and he specialises in like business cycles

and all of that.

And my thinking was that it would be good to

have someone who specialises in that topic.

I don't know.

I heard, I heard you have to do good.

I love her.

I like her.

I like her.

She's smart, but she's not like over.

Marc, you went for Adrian as well.

I'm as well.

No.

I don't know what this is.

What did you guys go for?

You told me to go for castle, no, because, um,

yeah, he was.

Right, you said you could.

No, Adams.

No, no, no, I think Adam couldn't do it because

it was amazing.

I was in jail.

You do 4 to 7 So I do 45.

3 lectures from 5 to.

I think it's all the way down that last semester.

Oh, but I like.

I don't the 90%.

And then do the call until 8 on Wednesday.

How was he.

I like that one.

Actually until 8.

That's wonderful.

I was, I drank like a can of Coke beforehand.

It's like you can't drink too much caffeine you can't

sleep and then I had to balance.

I was like, oh what do I do?

and normal working days are like 9 to 59 to

6.

So why would a lectures start at 6.

I did It's like a night out.

Maybe that's you know you guys want a break or

do you guys wanna end early early.

We had no break.

Well, I would not be able to do that like

I need the day might have made it like at

that hour.

It I No, not really, because I'm American.

It's.

He's very calm.

interesting.

He's in the same class.

Yeah.

we lost our, uh, trio quadra was sad.

But you and the people that shakes it together.

We even had lunch and I were always together for

the past.

No, have I nothing.

Like he chose to he didn't.

Let's continue.

Any questions?

Do you realise something is unclear.

Um, so this was, this, this was for goods markets,

right?

Now let's talk about financial markets.

That's the second part.

And by the way, I should have said that, right?

So if you look at this, why is it not

enough to determine the rates?

Why is that not the end of the story.

Why is this condition is not sufficient?

It's always question Ho, just holding your nose.

Well, no, right, because this will depend on the exchange

rate in the first period.

This will depend on the exchange rate in the second

period, right?

I, I will switch works, right?

And so the part, right, just mat we see that

that's not enough to determine the, right?

So what, what kind of the goods market quilibrium tells

us that it imposes some discipline on average exchange.

It says that you know you can't have permanently.

you, you will import a lot.

You will not very much, right?

So which means that you will not be able to

have on average.

So the the rate level is determined by the uh

by the market.

But what it is meaning, right, is how do we

split between these two periods, right?

We have, you know, very depreciated change in the market

and, uh, depreciate and or vice versa, right?

How do we in the mics.

That's exactly where financial markets play a crucial role.

OK, so, so how does it work?

Well, Here is, I think, the easiest way to drive,

uh, the issue of the financial markets.

So imagine that you have one part, you decide where

to invest it.

And then again, one is just possibility you could take

any number, so you have to.

The first one is that you just keep this one

pound or maybe or maybe but kind of on average

what you expect in this case is that in the

next period you will get 1 plus 5 pounds right

where I rate.

Again, of course there is in the morning there will

be only one interest rate in in economy, of course

in practise there are many interest rates, as I said,

returns on deposits on government wants returns on other assets,

but this is kind of some average interest rate in

the economy.

In the end we know that this this interest rates

they can move quite closely to the interest rate set

by the central, right?

So when interest rate, it also increases, uh, interest rates

on all sorts of, uh.

OK, so that's, that's how much you get, by the

way, right, so in principle I can be the case

unless you live in Switzerland or Japan next.

Uh, OK, so that's one alternative.

Another alternative is that you invest in foreign assets, right?

So you invest in US, uh, uh.

Yes.

But to buy US Treasury, let's say you first need

to get, but you can't bring, uh, and, uh, buy,

uh, US bonds.

The first thing that you need to do, you need

to convert your pound into dollars.

OK, so again, that's practise.

So how many dollars can I get with one pound?

Once again?

one over exactly.

Uh, and this is because this is the first period,

right, so it's 1 over E1.

OK, so now I invest that in US, uh, bonds.

So in the next period, right, so this is in

a sense how many bonds I can buy.

So each bond pays one I star, right?

This is for an interest rate, and so this is

how many dollars I will get next period.

All right, so this is needed and this is needed.

Again, I mean, I don't really needs.

I will go to, you know, Tesco, Sainsbury's or Amazon.

I will order goods in pounds.

So what, what, what I care about is how many

pounds I get.

We need to convert these returns back into bonds.

So What do I need to do this?

Mhm by the exchange rate in the next period.

OK, so, so this is how, how much you get.

You can see that there are two investment strategies.

Both is as I started with 1 pound.

This is how how much I get in the first.

If I invest in the UK.

This is how much I, I get if I invest

in US, uh, bonds.

And so, you know, by no arbitrage condition, these two

things need to be late, right?

So the idea is that on average these two things

need to be equal to each other.

So why is that let's go through this, right?

So imagine that let's say that you know that these

returns, the returns on US bonds are higher than the

returns on US and what should we do?

What would you do?

You would only invest in this right and sometimes you

can bring this argument to, you know, if there are

no lies in the financial, what should you do?

would borrow in the US and.

In the UK, exactly as in principle again, if you

take everything literally, you can kind of make you borrow

a lot in the US.

You invest this all in the UK and you get

the difference between the between the two.

Exactly.

Of course, right, if you have the opposite situation, you

will do the opposite, right?

So then you go in in the UK and the

US wants and you can make as much money as

you want.

So, so that's why and he tells you that these

things need to be kind of approximately equal, right?

So this is more.

Um, Now, OK, before finishing the deliberations, let me ask

you at this point.

So what might go wrong?

Why is that if you measure these things in the

data, they will not be.

They will not be exactly equal and sometimes they can

give you quite a lot.

So what is what is already, you know, kind of

problem here.

What is fundamentally different from the perspective of the of

the of the investor between these two strategies strategies.

It's one for the mental difference.

I think that there's also risk involved.

You don't know the future exchange rate.

You don't necessarily know, even if though I might know

what the interest rate is, you don't know what there's

gonna be for.

Exactly.

OK, so the divorce is one thing and this is

important, you know, especially if we think about, but even

if somehow you get rid of divorce, right, maybe because

you really think that, you know, risk is very low

in the case of the US and the UK, right?

Or maybe there are some, uh, financial instruments to hedge

this risk.

What is fundamentally different here is that while interest rate,

you kind of know in advance, of course you know

the exchange rate, right?

You know onementally you don't know if at all.

This is, you know, almost by definition it's, it's something

that you don't know that will depend on, you know,

market conditions in the second period.

So there is clearly much higher risk associated with this

investment relative to this one.

By the way, remember again that exchange rates are quite

volatile, right?

Remember from the pictures that I showed you at the

very end, the change rate can easily move by 10%,

uh, or a few quarters, and that of course, you

know, if it moves by 10%, it will usually dominate

any individuals coming from the.

So this is much easier, right?

And so as a result, there might be between these

two and we'll talk about that, more about that, I

guess two weeks from now.

But now we will assume that these these links are

the same.

Right then, so let me kind of equalise these two

things and rewrite them so the change change and the

change rate.

Is proportionate to, you know, ratio of interest rates.

And then usually again, since it's more convenient to work

with logs, let me take log of the left-hand side,

log on the right-hand side, so then this thing becomes

just E2 minus E1.

Right, this is really small letters and sometimes I will

just call it between two areas.

What about this thing here?

So this is 1 minus 1.

Well, interest rates, they are usually close to zero.

I'm not talking about, I mean, even Argentina, they, they

went down quite a lot recently, right?

But therefore really very high inflationary countries, usually these interest

rates are close to 0, right, like 2356 7% points,

which is not that much.

So approximately this is just this is just.

Approximately the IR so you remember approximations of logs and

a small i and I this this is true.

So what we get is the following.

Should be equal to.

OK, so it's, it's still the same, but usually people

in, in international people call this.

Uh Let me write it somewhere there just.

Just because I don't have, so this is.

You had a.

You Once again, what is, I mean, we've said this

before, but what is the intuition if let's say you

a high interest rate than the US.

The only way to sustain this equilibrium where you know

as the higher in the US is for the for

the department to to depreciate or.

We we.

If the returns on pound are higher than the pound.

Depreciate, right, so then, then will be medicine that's to.

OK, now if you combine these two conditions, you can

see how we will be determined, right?

You could have this good market equilibrium which determines the

exchange rate and the level of exchange rate, and now

we have financial market equilibrium, the UAP condition which determines

the dynamics of the exchange rate.

Right, so from the perspective of investors, that they don't

care about the level of change at all, right?

The only thing that investors care about is the expected

change in the.

I said 300 years or 100 years, who cares, right?

The only if I know what is the change that's

all I need to know my levels don't matter.

OK, any questions about this?

Does this make sense?

OK, good.

So then let's now finally now we have all pieces

we need.

So we can combine them and so work will pretty

much change.

For this third part, so this is just the equilibrium.

You.

OK, so I will use the following diagram.

I will put the exchange rate in the first period

here and exchange rate in the second period here.

And then we have two conditions.

So one is UAP.

OK, so this is UAB and for equivalently you can

think of this equilibrium in financial markets.

Right, just in the interest rate differential in the slope,

right, it's 2 equals 1 plus interest rate differential.

This is kind of the interest rate differential right and

you have the slope the slope is just 1.

And then there is budget constraint.

Would you summarise, will you brings on it?

And this is just.

Some experts.

equals 0.

Now is it positively sloped the negative sloped.

No.

I mean if I increases, so this decrease how I

achieve it I need to change it to go down,

right?

This is a negative low line something like this.

Notice that I, I, I, I, you know, I put

it on purpose like this.

I, I can allow for negative ways of E1 and

E2 because this is, these are the box right there

is nothing wrong for E1 or E2 to be negative.

And then the intersection of the two lines gives us

an equilibrium.

This is the equilibrium change rate.

OK, now, I mean, why, why do we like this?

Why do we need this, uh, well, because we can

use this, uh, model now to think about to do

the competitive studies right now we can see how the

different shocks affect exchange rate.

Let's start, let's do a few exercises.

Let's start with, um, my reports, right?

That seems like the most natural thing to do.

So imagine that Bank of England decides to increase interest

rate.

OK.

So what is the effect on the exchange rate?

By the way, we will focus mostly on the change

it in the first period, right, because if you do

it some change it into the future.

What the exchange rate on when the shock arrives by

1.

OK, let's look at our equilibrium conditions now, which curve

will shift?

So we'll buy more because of the interest rate.

No, right to the first point again, I mean, as

I said before, the interest rate here, but this is

usually very small, so the shift goods markets don't respond

directly to the interest rates instead, it will be the

issue which changes, right?

Uh, so does it shift up or down.

It's up, right, goes up every even E1, E2 becomes

higher.

UIP conditions shifts here and this will be this new

intersection will be new agreement point of view.

So what do the change rate.

Well, we see that it goes down.

Right.

All right, so the bond becomes stronger.

So what, what is the what is the for this

result?

I mean it's nice to have this.

It's nice to see how it works in the world,

but you know, ask you to explain this after the

Bank of England interest rates.

Why, why did the change rate?

Is this on investing in pounds increases so.

Um Exactly right.

So it becomes more profitable to invest in the UK,

right?

So that means that foreign investors are now willing to

kind of to invest their money in in the UK,

right?

Once they give money to the UK, which happens to,

so they lend more money, right?

They lend more money into the UK, which means that

UK.

buy more goods, right, so that will deteriorate in the

first period, but that means that it will improve in

the next, right?

That's what and the background exactly because demand for increased

right now but the investment investors, it means that its

price needs to go up, which means that.

I mean we can, uh, we will all this in

a sense from the perspective of foreign investment, but of

course the same applies to local investors, right?

They will sell foreign assets by domestic assets, and that

will indeed of the bond.

OK, so this was first.

Any questions, by the way?

I mean, of course, if, if the Fed increases in

interest rates, the problem is that you, you will solve

that case.

OK, now let's consider something else.

So what about, well, I'm very tempted to all this

Brexit, but OK, let, let's, we will talk about Brexit

maybe next time.

Let's suppose that let's, let's focus on good news.

Sivity goes up.

And it will be a big surprise, but it moves,

you know, unexpectedly.

Suddenly there is some good news.

Uh, GDP increases more than people expected.

We see that productivity increases, then what happens to the,

uh, exchange rate.

Uh Which curve will shift in this case and why?

doesn't show up explicitly here, but let's think about this.

So will productivity have very good age.

No, unlikely, unless responsibility, but let's assume that keeps interest

rates, right?

And of course that's exactly what makes probably more investors

more complicated.

We always see how how central bank responds to different

but of course interest rates don't change, then what about

those?

I mean this seems like a natural place where stocks

should play a role.

So we don't have them right but if you can

think of, you know, the experts, they depend on the,

but they also depend on.

So why is it?

Let me make a small here.

So let's focus on U experts.

Right, so we said that we said that it is

equal to to have this whole logic of what happens

to the productivity goes up.

What will change.

What will happen to ask.

When the supervisor.

The good usually because of course you know it depends

on the response of monetary monetary policy is expensive there

is.

The price will go down, right, this is, you know,

a.

So when the DVT goes up, the price goes up,

the DBT increases, the price goes down, and of course

in dollars as well it will go up.

Right, so even for keeping change rate fixed, so every

or any level of exchange rate, we see that export

price goes down.

Which means, and then this whole thing goes down, which

means that what it is exported.

They will go up right by the same uh you

go down.

So so the keeping the rate change what we see

the net export will increase.

Right and then assume that this is right, and then

the.

Makes sense.

OK, now help me.

That's that's important and always a tricky question.

Now what happens to this?

What happens to the budget constraint curve?

Will it shift up or down?

So the way to answer that question is to understand,

let's keep exchange rate one constant, and keep it constant.

What needs to happen to the exchange rate in the

second period if that will be.

For this condition to be still true.

I mean we changed, right, but these two things, I

mean they, they become a positive.

So then we need to change the.

It needs to go down to the experts.

So for every exchange rate needed one.

We need the change to to go down, which means

that this budget constraint.

Yeah that's a little bit down, but it shoots down

in this coordinate it's not consumption or output coordinate.

OK, good.

So then we shift from point A to point B.

Right, and you can see that the exchange rate.

Appreciate, right?

the.

OK, so can you tell me story.

Behind this.

So why does positive productivity shock lead to appreciation of

the?

So if we export more in this period.

And next period we want to import more for the

budget constraint.

We want to import more in the next period.

We want our exports to be sort of less competitive

and our imports to be cheaper, and so that's what

we want the currency to appreciate to give us more

purchasing power, right?

I guess in some sense here we can even skip

this, you know, temporal thing because I mean kind of

exchange if you think of this or even 0 then

exchange has to be the same and the productivity is.

So we can just, right, makes us export more.

Now we export a lot, right, to restore budget constraint

to restore balanced trade, we need to change it, but

that's, you know, right?

So we make it even more, more simple.

So when we export a lot of our currency to

purchase our goods when you import of goods, needs to

buy goods it becomes much higher than our demand for

dollars and that will push the price of bond.

Does this make sense?

This is important, right?

I mean solving more of doing that isn't important as

well, but you should always be able to translate this

into economic terms because in the end, right, I mean

we always make a lot of assumptions here it's uh

I mean you always need to check whether it makes

any sense economically.

OK, so that's why, you know, usually when countries have

positive productivity, uh, growth, right, uh, fast economic growth, their

currencies usually appreciate, right?

I mean, uh, there are different stories for that, but

like if you think about, uh, Asian tigers or Japan

after the Second World War, we see that as these

countries were growing very fast, and they were kind of,

uh, catching up with the US.

We see that their, their exchange rates usually.

While which grow slowly they depreciate again.

This we will talk about this next bit, right?

In the end, it turns out that the rates at

the high frequencies, they seem to be completely disconnected from

this, but if you look at the rise of 10

to 10 years rights, and there is this.

OK, great.

Any questions about this?

Makes sense.

OK.

Then the last here comes the interesting part.

So I, I remember last year when I taught this,

this example, I always felt that I felt that like

come on, how I I should stop teaching this stuff,

and this year I kind of, I feel vindicated.

It's, it's good that I taught this.

So what adjustment text.

This was a big, big topic like 6 years ago,

maybe even 8 years ago, right?

So when Trump was president last time, so he was

quite obsessed with what it is but in the end.

So is that you have you impose on imported goods

and It's kind of imposes subsidy on exports.

Uh, the idea that even the good which are produced

abroad should pay, uh, just like the producers if you

export, if you, you know, you have good here but

you sell, then you are exempt from when you add

a.

But as I said in the end it's good and

right.

Uh, OK, so that, that's the idea, uh, and so

this was like 6 years ago it was, uh, one

important and there were a few papers, uh, written on

the subject, uh, with, you know.

But the, uh, I, I will ask you to read

one of these papers at home and you will also

let me just show you kind of the main result

about adjustment and uh rate.

So let me use the same diagram.

This will be my 3rd example.

ABC border adjustment tax.

So we have your condition, we have under this budget

constraint.

And now let's think what changes.

You need this one to.

That What happens when you impose on imported goods and

exported goods?

OK, so you will see that it's very similar to

our previous example, but let me just, let me give

you an analytical solution.

So suppose that, uh, this particular right it depends on

the exchange rate, but then it also depends on the

state about this border adjustment.

Right, so when you impose this, it increases and so

it increases, OK, I mean we can put some positive

coefficiency, but let me just, uh, um, use this.

So, OK, in the first period this is true, but

also we are going to assume that it is a

permanent.

right then, by the way, like 8 years ago there

was a big debate whether they would survive, you know,

when the next president comes into office in the US,

but we we actually see surprisingly that even under Biden

there was.

There was almost no relaxation right of of um sort

of like him in office and uh cancelled all the

so they say it's actually in some sense likely to

be a permanent, right, permanent at least over the next

decade.

OK, so, so let's make this assumption.

Unless again just right.

Exchange rate is just equal constraint we now have.

E1 + B2 + 2 should be equal 0.

OK, so.

It's kind of the same as the previous, right?

It's almost like the TV would have a positive shock

in the constraint so the budget constraints downwards, right?

So again we move somewhere here.

Point A to point B.

So again, kind of qualitatively, we already know what we

will get.

We will see exchange rate appreciating.

Moreover, we can, I mean it will appreciate permanent.

It will both OK.

Now, the reason I wanted to give you this part,

this simple example is because then we can not only

see what happens to the exchange rate, but we can

also see the effects on credit balance.

And there is something really interesting here.

So let's solve this model, so we can, we can

combine these two conditions.

Let me just substitute the budget constraint.

We get 21 equals plus 22 t equals 0.

Which means that In the response of these tariffs, the

exchange rate will go down, right, as we see also

in the future.

Now what, what happens to trade balance, let's say in

the first period.

And the whole idea of this border adjustment tax is

to close the deficit, right, to improve the trade balance

of the US, right?

That's exactly what, you know, the Trump administration talks a

lot about, and it sounds on the surface it sounds

like it should work right clearly if you impose tariffs

on foreign rules, they become more expensive.

People will buy less of them, so that should decrease

imports and increase exports.

But even now so the general equilibrium this model, right,

let's go back here to our definition.

So we get That exchange rate appreciates enough to offset

the effect of tariffs and in the end we get

zero effect.

Right, that's exactly you know what we like about partial

equilibrium effect can be very different equilibrium effect partial equilibrium,

sure, right, if you keep exchange rates, if you can

keep prices unchanged, then it will increase the.

But what was right and if you follow the news,

you know, especially Wall Street Journal or Financial Times economist,

right, uh, then it's kind of almost every other day

people talk about the effects of.

Of Trump trade policy on the change because you know

these people on the kind of the financial markets, they

try to make money, right?

They try to forecast and each time, you know, they

update their beliefs about future trade they respond and that

moves the exchange rate, right?

And, and, uh, in the end, and that's exactly what

I think maybe you can even see this here in

this picture from the very beginning, right, there's.

This, I mean, this is, I mean, it's not the

whole, but a part of this recent appreciation of the,

of the dollar is exactly related to, to, you know,

election of Trump and increased probability of, of, uh, future

genes.

And if the dollar appreciates enough, then it will upset

the effects of the tariffs, right?

So on the one hand, prices, but if dollar is

very expensive, then suddenly it becomes much cheaper for consumers

to buy, right?

And so that's, that's how we.

Uh, that doesn't make sense.

OK, good.

So then, of course, this argument, and I mean it's

the knife edge is the fact that there is absolutely

no change in relies on several assumptions.

In this, so in, in the, in the programme you

will, you know, there's, uh, first of all you will

need the paper which underlies this very nice, uh, there's

so and then they have, you know, do you know

this, by the way, have you heard about it?

No, I mean this is just a website where people

use their research.

They translate it into, you know, policy relevant questions, right?

They apply the, the, uh, results they explain it without

any equations, usually just, uh, using, and so, you will

read that one.

It's very short and then probably said you will study

when you deviate from from this page mark.

I mean maybe you can guess what are what are

important here.

What can go wrong?

I assumptions you can kind of break this result.

It's a very simple I mean you can see.

Yeah, what about this one?

Who already didn't discuss this.

So what is the assumptions here.

There's a shop, right that you will stay there in

the second period as well.

Again, the problems that you will solve is where the

is one period and then it disappears, right?

Then we will you will check that.

That's one assumption.

What about this one?

What can go wrong here?

The fact that you can have, you know, the difference

between the difference between the interest rates, if you implement

this, I suppose that it would be overall negative for

foreign companies, good for US companies, then I would go

up.

Um, right.

In principle, if there is inflation, which is if they

become inflation, then the rates.

And then another possibility is that there are many countries

in the world which actually have a different namely the

focus of the exchanges right that some countries have exchanges

regime.

So in this story we see the exchange rate, uh,

but what if many US trade partners do not want

the exchange rate depreciate, right?

But what if they intervene, they change their minds right

then there will be some, OK, that's what to do

at home and we'll discuss it, uh, on Monday.

OK, so in this case I just try to, but

then also try to tell a story, right, provided uh

economic intuition.

OK, good.

So that's, I think that's already, you know, just to

understand the fact of be, I think this whole thing

is, is was was worth it.

Now here's another application actually comes from you know from

this team.

So we wrote the paper now it's almost 3 years

ago about the effects of Sanchez on the exchange, right

again, it's kind of, but Sanchez were not really the

focus of international macro until very recently, but then 3

years ago, right when the uh.

Invasion Ukraine in Ukraine then there's people, you know, paid

a lot of attention to what happened to the and,

and I think it's it's too much to be honest.

I think people get too obsessed with the r but

on the other hand it's understandable, right, because, so you

know, the war started within like one month they were.

A lot of sanctions imposed on the Russian economy.

It always takes some time for these sanctions to show

up in output in prices in other variables, and also

Russia has stopped publishing many of these, uh, series, so

it became really hard to believe whether sanctions are working

or not.

And so people thought that maybe something about effects of

sanctions on Russia America exchange rate on the daily basis.

Every minute you exchange rate, so that's really easy to

track.

And so what it was before the war started, right

before the war began in February, um February 20th.

22, right?

So it's not the worst, then there is this kind

of financial sanctions, all this kind of panic in financial

markets in Russia that the exchange rate depreciates a lot,

and it depreciates by more than 50%.

And it reaches somewhere like 2 weeks after the start

of the war.

But what is interesting is that about 1 month after

the war started, it went down, you know, went back

to the pre-war level, and it is there, but it

kept appreciating and if you look at, you know, some

what happened in summer 2022, it was something like 30%

stronger than before the war started.

And actually again it's not like, you know, one small

leap year.

It's actually it stayed there for a very long time

till the end of the year and then it started

to depreciating probably would have created pictures now it's at

the level of about 100, right?

So it's kind of depreciated back to this level, but

it's like 3 years later after the whole high inflation,

so, you know, it's, it's, it's very hard to argue

that this happens because of the tax.

Most of sans were imposed here.

OK, so that was a fasting.

So people looked at the many of them are not

working.

Other people argued that it may be, you know, artificial

variable which is manipulated by the arm, but it is

not true, right, because it's really the that that, uh,

was in, in, in markets, right, that you really go

to this market and exchange currencies, uh, at this exchange

rate it's not like just the it's uh really the

price of the currency.

So the question is why did that happen?

Uh, OK, so let's go back to our.

Diagram.

OK, uh, I feel like I'm making the same, but

you see, I mean, that's the beauty very persimonious one

all these in different ways, but effects might be very

similar.

So what I mean this sudden depreciation is not a

big part.

I think there was there were, you know, the whole

season was, there was a lot of people now the

question is why did this deal of appreciation for appreciation

of the world.

So what do you think?

I feel like I remember having read about this, which

is the 11 of the war was that you know

you you have a war economy, so you, you, you

stimulate the economy by financing it's true, it's true if

you think about this what happened over the last two

years, that was definitely true.

I wouldn't say that in 2022 that there was much,

especially, you know, by you know July there was, I

mean it took a long time.

The idea I had in mind was because of, because

of the subsequent inflation or even anticipating inflation because of

that central bank increased the interest rate.

That, that is true, but interestingly the interest rate like

20%, but then the back.

And that most of this individual was actually relatively, you

know, more or less the same as before the war.

Now they went up again because it happened like last

year, right, much later.

OK, so let's look at in person.

So again, it's not really that important to understand because

of the interest rates they went down.

Now what happened to budget constraint again, right?

So we have this condition here.

So it's really down to the type of sanctions and

then it turns out that most of the sanctions that

were imposed on Russia, there were sanctions on Russian imports.

OK, so like in December somewhere here, right, there will

be sanctions imposed on Russian exports.

On the world whether they work or not, it's right

because I mean if you look at the quantity surprisingly

there's almost.

And then there's, you know, this that it seems like

that was also in US government was really worried that

oil prices would go up, energy prices would go up,

that would lead to higher inflation which would be really

damaging.

So what they wanted to do, they want to impose

such sanctions that Russia gets less dollars for its but

it's.

Right, so there was some you know it's not even

it's more or less they would call, but then they

would call agents in India firms in India and tell

them, no, no, don't worry, you should still buy Russian

oil, right?

I mean, we can hire so you can, you can

pay them less, try to pay them less, but you

should still buy.

You will not buy from Russia.

Precisely because they otherwise there will be a deficit of

the global markets and so that would be inflationary.

So, uh, but but it's it's a right so most

European most Russians somewhere over here, but the report that

the more sanctions pose at the beginning of the war,

they will, uh, sanctions on Russian imports.

Now what you have to stay the same.

Then, then you cannot import Russia cannot import goods, right?

And so even the change and export increases, right?

This is in the first period, but I mean, yeah,

it maybe it was more temporary, it was right and

there was kind of the losing of trade, but at

least.

You know, in the short run, we see, uh, increase

in net experts, which means that the gain, again the

same ship that we had before and again that should

lead lead to appreciation of the.

Right, so you, you, you keep exporting oil and gas.

You get all this during this period, right?

But there are much less goods that you can buy

from abroad because of this or you can buy them

switching away from and as a result you see this,

uh, and this leads to the exchange rate.

Notice that use some other colours red.

So imagine that you in that case.

So instead of, you know, it's you don't see how

much can import, but you don't buy Russian I guess.

falls, right, which means that in this case you have

shifted in the opposite direction.

And in this case you kind of move to point

C.

Right, so that is exchange rate if you have any

sanctions.

They need to change appreciation.

Well.

Lead to change depreciation.

Question, do you talk about symmetry in the previous.

No, OK, no, it's fine, but it's one of the

most beautiful results in literature which says that sanctions and

sanctions sanctions.

So it turns out that you can show that welfare

effects of sanctions and sanctions.

So if you really care about the welfare of Russia,

it's the same, but the exchange moves in the opposite

direction.

So why is it the same, by the way?

So what do we mean by welfare?

So if you think about

Lecture 12:

Oh yeah, that really would have.

I think the emails are going well, honestly it was

just like, you, yeah, I'm trying to understand I think

that's good, but you think a good chance people are

gonna like yeah, that was before me it was a

like um.

Yeah So Uh, just need to pick it up, but

it, it will come like now we're here things of

the, um, but sorry, I did want to, if you

still you, if you want I like just say, look,

um, I will, I'll send you some of my contacts.

I spoke, but like I will set that up now

I know what the channels actually are.

I can I can also like.

pick up the it's not, it's better for us to

get the speaker.

I can just quickly the vision, and I know that.

Yeah, you want to ask us about that, yeah, yeah,

and then I can that I'm not gonna overstep on

what they're doing.

I'm saying I'll so um.

OK, perfect.

I'll, um, I'll put them on the form and then

and then like her really, no way.

Great, cool.

No, I had more.

I've had a, a, uh, teacher in my school.

I take it you.

OK guys.

Um, are you, yeah, but yeah, so.

That's why we like are all, you're Kenya.

like that.

I Yeah, I, I went back.

like, uh, here we are.

It's uh.

Right.

I don't know, but in some way.

I tell you that in some way.

OK um.

You Of course when I arrived here and I felt

the the last little bit.

Can you imagine like coming from like.

Yeah, exactly.

I was a little bit.

I I think I.

right now we are seeing some great.

Yes.

You.

be like finish.

OK I I Just wait.

you did your exam but it's not.

Yeah.

Yeah.

It would be nice to switch into like, you know.

Anyway.

OK, good.

So I think this is where I was last time,

right.

Uh, so we're talking about exchange rates and in some

sense, right, so last week we kind of constructed this

benchmark, right?

We talked about the simplest possible model to understand exchange

rates.

It worked well in the sense that it allowed us

to think about different shocks and how they affect the

economy, right, about marketing shocks, productivity shocks, natives, etc.

So now, in, in, in some sense today we will

criticise that model, right?

So we will say what are the limitations of that

model and we will try to improve that model, OK.

Uh, so just before we start doing that, let me

just very briefly say, so I think again if you

just want to understand, uh, qualitatively the effects of my

shocks of productivity tariffs on exchanges, I think it's a

fine model right again, quantitatively it would, it would work

terribly, but qualitatively it's, it's reasonable.

The problem is that it turns out that this model

can't really explain exchange rates, OK, so how can it

be?

So how can it be that it explains well the

effects of let's say my shocks on exchange rates, but

if we start looking at the, you know, in the

data, the exchange rates turns out the model cannot explain

them.

So we'll spend much time talking in details, but just

logically, so what does it mean?

kinds of frictions right, but, but even before we start

kind of think about, so how can it be that,

you know, OK.

It's most of the shock, the model explains behaviour exchange

rates well, but if you just look at the exchange

rates in general.

The dynamics right there, uh uh fluctuations, they will be

completely at odds with this model.

Well, that suggests that probably my shop is not the

main driver of the exchange rates, OK?

And so in some sense our main goal is to

understand what is the key driver, right?

So it can be very well the case that, you

know, you know, it's perfectly more than let's say of

of Mer shocks, uh, uh, affecting exchanges, but it's Mer

shocks explain only let's say 5% of all exchanges activity.

Well, 9 95% comes from somewhere else, and then we

need to pin down this source of exchange expectations.

OK, good.

So this is the big picture, but let me start

with a few with a few basics in some sense

this is a roadmap for the rest of this whole

course, OK, so we said we said before, let me

just remind you very briefly, so we had kind of

three ingredients in the model.

So the first one that goods markets will exchange rates

generate exchange exchange rates the exchange rates then was imposed.

And there is budget constraint, the number of budget constraint,

and then finally we said that there is uh equilibrium

with rush condition in financial markets.

You look like this.

So if you just take these three ingredients that failure,

it turns out that they are largely violated in the

data.

OK, so starting with the first one.

OK, so let me let's numbers here.

So that was the first one.

How, how did we derive this condition, right?

We said that prices of who's exported from the stable

bonds and prices of goods exported from the US stable

in dollars, and that's why when consumers in other countries,

they see that the prices are gonna change, right, the

prices change.

So one way to test this assumption is to look

at what is called terms of trade, terms of trade.

So again that's like, you know, you can define this

one.

So one terms of trade is to look at the

ratio of import prices, price divided by the export price.

And in the they need to be in the same

units, right?

They can both doors, they can be both bombs, but

they must be in the same units, but otherwise it

just makes no sense, right.

OK, so Let's just to connect to what we we

said last time.

Let's think about go back to, well.

Uh, this is for the, let's go back to our

case right?

So let's think of the as the so the man.

What can the let's let's measure all of the.

OK, so you get prices in bonds.

Are they stable, more or less constantly according to the

model or they move to change rate?

How was that?

Are they stable, we will assume that this price for

the price of one, but it doesn't really see that.

Right now what about um import prices?

Let's think of import from the US.

Right, so those prices are in dollars, right?

And so the rate.

Multiply multiply, yes, so then it's right and so and

then we see that terms of trades move together with

the exchange rate.

Uh, yeah, OK, so in principle, these two things they

should move 1 to 1 in not just positively correlate,

right, but kind of the volatility should be the same.

They just, they should be just time series, uh, for

each other.

So now when you look in the, this is I

think for the US, right?

Yes, this is for the US, but.

The same so we have um trade weighted uh dollar

exchange rate right so it's not just the bond this

US dollar is uh so you can see this is,

uh, and then these are the terms of trade.

And even though, I think if you look closely at

this, there is some positive movement.

This is the point where both are low.

This is the point when both are high movement here,

so they are positively that's for sure, but there is

nothing like, you know, what we have here.

It's not only like, uh, they want one in the

data, right, just in terms of, you know, I, it's

clear that terms of trade are much more stable than

the.

In the end, but it falls more or less, uh,

for most at least developed countries, right, for developing countries,

there is a problem that, um, very often they export

commodities, right, and commodity prices so then there's some additional

standard and the course if you go to the limit

where, OK, you know, if you take this picture, it

means the terms of trade.

proportion to the exchange rates to some power where a

kind of 0 but it's a small number it's approximately

0.

Right.

Um, and then of course if you take the unit

where I goes to 0, right where I'm not moving

with the exchange rate, then you might immediately lose all

the rates.

And then this whole idea, right, that depreciate an expert

that might fail, so we will talk about it we

will have, you know, a whole class talking about assumptions

of the producer or they can be seeking the currency

of the consumer or they can be in some currency

the whole that is uh, this, um, uh, issue.

OK, any questions or comments maybe uh ideas.

OK, good.

So that's kind of the first, uh, limitation of the

model.

The second limitation people don't really need to try it,

right?

So the second, and this seems to be the reversal,

right?

It's just the budget constraints of the country.

And yet when we look at the data that is

when we look at the, uh, you know, data to

the US, uh, it's easy to see the budget constraint

being satisfied here, right?

So what this shows is the, uh, accumulated net net

experts, right?

Well, so, uh, so you know it's not accumulated.

This is this is just the for each year for

each year.

This just had efforts in that and you can see

that summers since early 1980s, every single year the US

has been right which is quite impressive, which is that

every single year the US has been borrowing from the

rest of the world.

Right, and that's that's it's not, well, I mean, it

depends, right?

There are some other countries which run a very, very,

uh, uh, uh, but I mean this is just, uh,

again in terms of orders of magnitude, this is very

impressive.

We discussed in the seminar case where the budget constraint

doesn't have to be equal to 0.

It could be equal to, you know, some other function

of like, you know, external liabilities or assets which I

explained part of that's a very good point.

That's a very good point.

So that's exactly where we're going, right?

So there must be something going on in financial markets

and I mean it is true that I mean to

argue with that.

If you look at the beginning of the period 1980s,

the financial positions were relatively small, so they would not

be able to explain this, but it's true that since

then things have changed quite a lot, right?

And again at some, you know, very, very high level.

So how can it be that the country exports less

goods and it imports goods?

What else can the country can provide to the rest

of the world?

Some assets, right, some, some, some, uh, some financial instruments

that other countries, right, and yes, we'll discuss it in

great detail that yes, it has, um, this very, uh,

special role in global financial markets, right?

So about again if there's a very nice.

I just saw it recently, uh, so like let's say

20 years ago, US equity, uh, accounted for 55% of

all equity in the world.

OK, given that the US share in the world is

something like 20 25%, right?

What was back then.

by about 20 2010 to 30%.

But if you look at 50% of all equity and

more.

But I think it would also be about half of

all, um, assets come from the US this is all

assets or like publicly traded assets publicly traded.

I mean, yeah, yeah, that's, I mean, equity is of

course only publicly traded, right?

And then to others, I mean it becomes more complicated.

That's exactly, you know, an issue I guess then it's

a biassed in favour countries which have a large share

of equity which is probably I mean biassed, right?

I mean.

I, I'm not saying that if you take, if you

take, um, I don't wanna say that, uh, yes, especially

in terms of the wealth, right, in terms of the

kind of total, uh, amount, I said, well this is

special about it it's in terms of the securitization, right?

I mean, suppose you know you live let's say in

India or in Russia, right?

OK, there are all these great companies out there which

in principle worth billions and millions of dollars, but if

they belong to a very small number.

For people and he privately for you it doesn't really

matter, right?

It's not like you can buy uh a share in

those companies if you want just to save, you know,

accumulate some savings, invest in some companies, you just don't

have the best opportunities so they benefit the most, you

know, a reasonable thing for you to, to do is

to look for, uh, publicly traded companies.

And so in that market, definitely US dominates.

Uh-huh, right, exactly, exactly, exactly right.

And even if you take, you know, if you take,

even if you assets, it's still the case that people

assets at some point they sell their money back.

The thing is that, um, the thing is that.

What what what really helps the US we're going to

talk is, is that, uh, because of very high demand

for US assets they're able to borrow at very low

interest rates, right?

And the principles, you know, in terms of real interest

rates they're often below 0, and if that's the case

then you know it helps to partly finance this, uh,

trade.

Then in principle, you know, if this, this affects a

large enough power just by, uh, borrowing a negative interest

rate, right?

I took 1000 pounds from you and but next year

I I only need to pay you let's say 9900

pounds, right?

Then of course I can buy more then, uh, I

sell.

Uh, although of course these effects are not large enough

to explain this, but yeah, OK, we have a whole

of global imbalances, right, and sometimes, uh, for a very

long time, and the special yes what people open for

a little bit.

OK, good.

Any other questions?

OK, finally, and this is going back to financial markets,

right, to the, I mean this is something that you

can test very easily in the data, right?

You have exchange rates, you have interest rates, and you

can test is satisfied.

Just give me one more thing, right?

So, uh, we mentioned this last time, so of course.

What this really means is that there must be, there

must be expectation here, right, because, uh, you make investment

immediate one, you don't need no change in the next

year, but there are some aspect to the huge exchange

rate, right?

And so that applies to to to to this exchange

rate, uh, but.

You know, these are the rational expectations, which, which should

be true that this expectation has actually change rate plus

some noise, unpredictable noise right that we didn't know about

in the first period.

So this is, you know, that is, this is such

that this term has to be equal to 0, right?

And so because of the opposition because of this thing,

what you can do, you can just run all the

lesser regression.

Right, you take the change, exposed to, uh, change in

the change and you run a simple or less uh

regression.

right, and then you and you can test that.

Right, so that, that's formal and it turns out that,

uh, this, you know, this is something called farm farm

was the first one and uh a few sheets and

people which is less than 10 sometimes it is even

negative.

OK, so this is just one picture which illustrates this

result.

It's a little bit, but, uh, let me try to

explain.

So in the sense.

So Uh, I will show you the, but now, uh,

the team is.

You know, uh, slightly different.

So I can take the QAP condition and revise it

in the following way.

Let's put all drugs on the right hand side.

OK.

So, so again, the same thing, uh, how to read

this well you have returns on domestics.

These are the total returns on assets.

Take into account exchange rate movements, right?

And so on average these should be equal.

So this is a kind of net return from the

foreign trade strategy.

You borrow in foreign currency and you invest in domestics,

right?

So this is that the returns.

So you can, you can estimate this thing for, you

know, you take two currencies, you take many, many periods,

and you estimate these returns.

Of course they will not be always understand this has

to be true only on average.

You know, unexpectedly depreciates, for example, you will change it

depreciates.

That means that you are more foreigners, which means that

you will have net and then you will have.

But on average this has to be equal.

So now, OK, let's take a picture.

Let's start with, OK, so these are just the distribution.

This is the, uh, all these returns to you.

I know, let me call this.

Just returns, OK, so you, as I said, you compute

it for many, many periods and you have negative returns,

but you can see that, you know, it's it's well

shaped.

So on average it's kind of close with you.

OK.

Now what about other, uh, lines here?

So those are also keys, but with two different types

of countries.

So you can, you take some countries for which interest

rate on average is lower than US interest rate.

Yes.

And you take countries for which interest rate is higher

than the US.

OK, so in, in principle, the condition should not depend

whether you know you have high interest rate or interest

rate.

On average, when you look at net returns, taking into

account the exchange rate movements, this should be equal 0,

but it turns out it's not.

So, OK, this is the dotted line, right?

It shows this for currencies which have relatively high interest

rate.

OK.

So this is, this is.

And you can see that on average this currency, right,

I mean if you look at I guess average this

over here, right, so you can see that this is

positive.

From the fact that these countries have high interest rate,

it doesn't follow that these returns should be positive, right,

because there are movements in exchange rate.

The whole idea of UAP condition that movements in exchange

rate, they, they are set many differences in interest rates.

And yet we see that the this is the systematic,

right, and you can do right you can also look

at these types of countries which have relatively low interest

rates and this this this line you can see that

for them.

Right, so it turns out that this returns on what

is called credit trade, uh, they systematically related to differences

interest rates.

Which seems to be, you know, to suggest that there

is some, uh.

Um, So is this clear, by the way?

OK, let me confuse you even more.

Let me ask you the following question.

So let's talk this guy which have relatively high interest

rates, right?

So we see that on average they have positive returns.

So it seems like it's a good idea to invest

in these currencies.

Uh, so why, why is that consistent with trash just

looking from, you know, this there's some suggested evidence here.

What is kind of different about this histogram of returns

for these currencies relative to other ones?

Hm, it's more flat.

And it's higher variance right and those as symmetric, right?

So you can see from the picture that it has

a flat tail right so this is right they have

but they are the ones which more likely to uh

initiate.

OK, right, or, or experience, uh, high negative, um, returns

on average they have positive returns, but it's not unlikely

for them to have, uh, large negatives, right?

And so sometimes they compensate for this risk and then

interesting if you look at this, um.

Uh, there's not right, this, this one, you can can

see that there's something similar, right, they have negatives so

they are rich, but they have this kind of, you

know, they on the right.

So sometimes you can actually get a lot of money.

I mean, depends, rights which position you take.

If you, if you don't invest in this if you

were in this, then it means that you, you have

huge losses here.

Right, and so that's what we discussed, I think last

time that, uh, uh deviations from UAE, they compensate uh

for for this.

OK, very good.

Any other questions?

This will be useful when we talk about UAPAG later

today.

OK, perfect.

So then let me know, OK, so this is just

the limitations of the model and at the same time

we know that, you know, people often say that all

models are on, but some of them are use, which

means that models the real world, right, sometimes simplification of

the real world, but some of them are useful in

the sense that they still help us understand how the

world works.

They can help us with some predictions, policies, etc.

So the fact that you know neither of these conditions

is satisfied it doesn't mean that this is the wrong

model change rate.

So what we really don't understand how consistent ultimately is

the uh the model in terms of the predictions about

the exchange rate.

And so unfortunately here there's also disappointment, right?

And this is what is called a change the disconnect.

It turns out that you know this um idea that

looking at shocks and relativity shocks, uh, we're gonna explain

the change.

It doesn't really work very well in the data.

OK, so here's the, here's the kind of one of

the most last papers in in this whole literature, uh,

maybe by, uh, from 1980.

So the idea, the idea was super simple.

So effectively, you know, it's, it's, it's almost like undergraduate,

uh, thesis or, you know, maybe even, uh, MBC paper

that you would write, right?

It's, it's, it's kind of, it's, it's surprisingly, uh, straightforward.

So the whole idea was that people wrotes even back

then in 1970s and 1980s, and this was predicted that

interest rates, inflation.

And so let's test this in the data, right?

Let's just run a regression regressive exchange rates on on

these microeconomic things.

I must say just just to be here right this

is I wrote this just for, but first of all,

it should be uh you should run in change because

most of that's one thing.

And another thing is that for each variable it's actually

not just X but x minus X uh usually uh

variables, so you, you should do it separately, uh, or,

uh, usually people just take.

OK, so that just to be more precise.

And so what was the standard mean Mr.

were not the first one to do that.

Many, many people ran distributions, different versions of distributions, and

usually they found some, you know, pretty good R square,

right, and are squared is just correlation.

So in terms of explaining the exchange rate moves because

this was usually to work pretty well and remember, by

the way, this is 1993, right?

So if you, so think about what we discussed last

time.

So when the exchange rates start moving really for these

countries.

I mean for the US, for the UK.

I mean when, when, when countries switched to a flow

to the exchange rate, we discussed this last time.

Uh-huh, which is approximately which year early 70s, right?

It's uh 1973, official end of the bread, right?

So, and, and at which frequency frequency can you run

this regression monthly, uh, quarterly, annual, what is kind of

the highest frequency at which you can run this?

How do you think?

It's a practical question also for you if you decide

to do some empirical work in this area.

I mean the change rate is not a problem, right?

You can see them at kind of middle frequency.

That's not an issue.

But what about kind of if you include GDP trade

balance these things they are measured at what frequency.

Usually quarterly, exactly right.

So if it means that, OK, so imagine people run

this regression, right, in 1983 or even earlier they had,

they have only 10 years of data and they only

can run a quarterly frequency, which means that they have

only 40 observations, right?

So if you have 40 observations and how many.

5 variables in the regression, it's not so surprising that

you will find high r square, right, yeah, yeah.

And so what the idea was is that even for

small sammas what might be a better test of theory

is to run it out of the sample, OK, so

how does it work?

OK, so let me just, I mean, I, I have

a pretty long slide explaining everything but technically, but let

me just uh make a picture, it will be easier.

So that is the following, right?

You, you, you have observation starting from 0.

This is just normalisation up to uh capital T, right?

So you, you, you, you have particularly you have serious

time series for exchange rate suppose it looks like this.

This is the last observation.

And you.

Now the idea of this out of sample for testing

is the following.

OK, so you take a sub sample of of of

the of this whole period, right?

So for example, sometimes people just take half you have

let's say 40s, this will be 2.

Then what you do, you use the data up until

this period to run the, OK.

And then so you get you you run regression, you

get some estimates of all these.

So I I I know them here.

So this is just your estimates of all these coefficients.

Once you have these cohesions, you can, you know, plug

them into your regression and use them to to predict

the change rate in the next year.

So you can predict the rate for the next period.

T 2 T 2 plus 1, right?

So you are here and then you predict the change

right for the next video is this number here.

Of course you will not perfectly possible, but you can,

you know, hopefully you will get somewhere close and you

can measure this distance which will give you the error

which is noted with.

This will be it, but this is an error of

your forecast.

OK so then what do you do next?

Well, you, you know, you move through this period.

You run against the same regression, you get your updated

estimates.

Of the same right but now you use more data,

the same data data for this period.

So then you make and then you make it for

the next period, right?

So, uh, OK, you will make more here let's say,

right, so the next period again you will make some

forecasting error you will collect that and then you kind

of do it by period right now you move here

again you use this whole sample you estimate coeffis again.

And so, and then you all errors as if the

I mean it's not the, uh, first moment that you

look at because on average you don't make any mistakes

but you want to see the mean squared, uh errors

the root of the square error.

Right, kind of the analogue of uh R squared in

a sense, but root of r square.

OK, good.

Does this make sense?

any questions, uh, so why I should say that this

is not really a true forecast.

So why it's not a true forecast it's out of

sample forecasting, but it's not a true forecast because when,

when, when people make this predictions about change to the

next period, they uses which are estimated using only past

data, but they usually use the videos of uh from

the data for the next period.

Right in the situation where you you are not allowed

to use future data to make provisions, but you're allowed

to use the future.

if, if, if you are somebody here, for example, you

know, um, your, uh, on January 30th, uh, 2025 and

you want to predict what change a little bit more,

of course you don't want to have information about tomorrow's

uh rate uh so you don't practise.

OK, so in that sense it's not really um uh

true forecast.

OK, so here are the, 011 more thing I should

say.

OK, so suppose now you estimate this, uh, news right

there.

So what can you do with that?

It's a number, right?

It would be like 20 or 30.

Is it a big number or is it a small

number?

Well, to answer that question, we need some benchmark, right?

So of course we will make some mistakes.

It's possible to do things, right?

But how, what would be the bench mark here.

So that's in some sense that maybe the main the

main uh contribution of that role, right?

So it's, um, if I ask you to predict if

you should change it and you don't know about economics

anything, right?

So what would be the, the most simple prediction that

you can make.

What?

Well, you can do that, but even simpler than that.

I mean, to draw lines.

I mean you have this serious thing you need to

do some small thing, right?

Uh, that's it's a bit like a you know, agnostic

thing to do or like what the people like to

give that example.

So if I ask you what is the weather, what

is the weather going to be tomorrow and you haven't

checked yet.

be based or even less it will be this, right?

The weather that you have today is gonna be the

best prediction, uh, that you can make naive right without

having any information for and the same with the change,

right?

You don't understand economics.

You don't even remember what was in the past, but

you see today's exchange rate, you know.

Makes some say more it will be the same, right?

And then of course you will make some forecast again

confuse the same object for that forecast and then compare

the two right of a sophisticated economic model and this

very naive, uh, forecast.

And so, here are the results of how to read

this paper.

This is the original paper, even though, you know, have

done this exercise so many times and there's a whole

field, which is, uh.

OK, so they looked at different exchange rates.

This is order against the HR, the other is in,

is out, and the way the exchange rate, they made

more of us a different horizons, right, for 1 month,

6 months, and 12 months, and they tried many different

models.

OK, so this is the random work.

This is the, the error that you make if you

make this most immediately for us.

Then they have different versions of the previous um regression

that I show you.

OK, so what is different as well is some models

you just impose the restrictions that the coefficients will be

zero, OK, for example, if, if you make forecasts based

on interest rates alone, then you only estimate AP and

all other coefficients could be zero, right.

Um, yeah, if you have univari, for example, you will

uh you from being, right, that regression it's more complicated,

right, than you, and then there are these kind of

which I guess more plastic to be honest, I have

no idea what.

they completely went out of.

It's just, you know, it's, it's kind of how, how,

uh, the field has changed.

I don't think, yeah, except for all the generations, but

I said what, what I, I remember I checked at

some point is that this is exactlyosing restrictions of these

equations in the.

Some models, for example, say that, you know, um, I

don't know, A1 should be equal to 8 or something

like that.

OK, good.

And so what we need to do, we need to

we can take one line, right, one currency for one

line and we can compare which model makes the smallest

forecast.

And I already did this when you, you can see

that, OK, there's some in Asia, but for for most

at most horizon, which is that the smallest error uh

is done by this uh naive random walk forecast, right?

I should have said that random walk is exactly this

forecast when you say that tomorrow is the same as

today.

I is this today.

And so yeah, so, so, so even you know, in

cases, for example, when other models perform well, they don't

perform better much more than here.

And as I said for most in most cases it's

actually which performs best in a sense it's a pretty

disappointing news, uh.

It means that all the sophisticated models that people wrote,

they don't really have to explain exchanges very well, right?

Uh, they don't add much way to saying that the

change is the same as today.

Um, OK, so I must say that there are a

few ways which made it a little bit more progress,

uh, which can, uh, you know, outperform, but first of

all, it's, it's almost like one or two models like

that, and it turns out that, uh, they, they, it's

not like they can most of the change, but it,

it's kind of a marginal world, uh, and so when

people say exchange rates is that they particularly mean that

the price of 2 months.

To about 2 years then it's almost nothing that I

can uh so in other words, what does it mean

that so how, how can it be OK going back

here, right?

I said back in the 1980 the problem.

One explanation for this was that that was just very

short.

Now basically we have more data, right?

We can take first of all, almost 50 years of,

of, of data and we can in principle include many

cards right, that will give you a and still usually

the R square in sample will be much higher than

this, uh this kind of thing that you get out

of the sample.

So what, what does that mean?

In a sense.

So in sample you find some high correlation between the

exchange rates in the micro credits and then you, you

test it out of sample and you find.

So what does it mean?

It means that this relationship between the future, right?

You, you, you can find that, you know, in these

10 years they can move positively, let's say, and then

in the next 10 years they can move negatively, right,

things like that.

So, so that there's just no stable relationship between exchange

rates and other macroeconomic variables.

OK, good.

Any questions?

OK, so then let me just, just to finish the

definition of the exchange rate.

So I would say that is the main part of

the exchange rate is, but there's one additional moment which

you, you, I mean it's hard to see from previous,

uh, table, but, uh, it's also part of the disconnect,

namely very high.

exchange rate, I think again we mentioned this last time,

but this is just a which?

OK this is yes this is changes in laws and

there are two variables here.

So the red one, the red this is production, OK,

and I say that I mean the reason I would

this is because of frequency rather than GDP, which is

a frequency and because it only reflects production, it's more

volatile than GDP.

Right, because it's kind of only one sector most sectors

of average out, uh, some, uh, so it's it's, it's

this red line is already quite it's more than GDP.

But then the blue line shows changes in, uh, bilateral

between the US and, uh, the eurozone, and you see

that it is, right?

So if you want to keep some numbers in mind.

And this is usually a good idea for economists.

It turns out, by the way, when you talk to

people, especially, you know, journalists, just people get much more

impressed by, uh, by people who love and wrong, but

if you can, you know, on the phone, you can

give some number you immediately think that you are an

expert in this area.

Uh, yeah, which is totally wrong.

So if you look at, at, you know, volatility, standard

deviation of GDP or consumption or even inflation, so it's

something like 1 2% points per, per annum, I should

say.

Right, so this year, uh, make some forecast of the

economic growth, and then you kind of make this mistake

of 1%.

Right, uh, if you, on the other hand, if you

look at the volatility of the exchange rate.

Yeah it's something something like 12%.

In other words, it's not unusual for the exchange rate.

It's not unusual at all for a change to move

by more than 100% per year, right?

And that's, of course, yeah, it's almost unthinkable that changes

by more than 10%, right?

Greatpression, uh.

OK, and so yeah, so this is, so these things

apart and the differences in this is what constitutes the

disconnect.

OK, good.

So this is, this is kind of the main change

this whole leadership about it tries to solve this, uh,

but, uh, tries to somehow at least understand, uh, where

this theory comes from if it's, if it doesn't come

from micro.

Um, OK, let's, I mean, I will offer you.

Um, the second one will be.

I think the first one the best attempt to save

the world that we discussed last time.

So how can it be moves even though you don't

see movement in macro.

Well, one idea that, you know, people entertain and try

to uh study is that uh maybe it's all driven

by new shows.

OK.

Uh, so let's, let me maybe start with the, the

same feature that we had last time.

and in principle we already discussed this, I think in

in in the past last time, right?

So how can you, what kind of change rate here

without affecting this GDDP consumption etc.

Well, remember we said that we, we talked about unexpected

or that relativity changes uh in the second period goes

up.

Right, or maybe you know, again, it will go up,

but at least people they anticipate that it will go

up.

Right, so what will happen in the world.

The industry will shift that.

Yeah, uh-huh, exactly.

I would say that if TP will increases more, it

means that the price of exported goods, right, will decrease,

which will stimulate the exports in the next period.

For we're gonna change, right, which is the budget downwards

or left exactly then we say that we move from

point A to point B.

Exactly.

So which in particular means that the change rate will

already move today, it will later.

So the idea here is that nothing really changed, right,

there is no change in GDP because hasn't changed.

There's no change in today's monetary policy, supply interest rates,

uh, and the only thing that moves the change.

OK.

So, so can we tell the things about interest rates.

Well, that's because we all have interest rates here.

And this, so in in this could be you know

interest rate, there are only rates there are no future

interest rates, but I mean you can, you can imagine

that in reality, right, so we, we can the the.

Uh, formulation we have had as much gross periods, uh,

the gross GDP is, and then in each period we

have GAP condition, right?

And then of course future interest rates will affect, uh,

the.

OK, so um, I will not spend time on this

right now, but you can, uh, I mean, he will

hopefully solve the problem, and so the first kind of

is closely related to that, right?

He will look at the, um, multipedia version of the

model, and he will solve a response, uh, you will

get a response of change rate today, uh, to future

expected movements and interest rates.

Kim Um, OK, so, so that can be part of

the explanation, right?

So it can be that, you know, uh, you have,

um, you know, uh, let's say the Fed, right, the,

the US Central Bank, it has this FOMC meetings when

they decide whether to change interest rates.

How many FOMC meetings are there in the year.

I don't remember exactly but maybe somebody knows.

I think it's 10, no, something like that, so they,

but doesn't really matter, right?

So imagine they have this kind of around monthly meetings,

right?

There is nothing really happening between them, right?

People know for sure that there will be no change

in interest rates between these announcements, but right, they, they

keep guessing what will be the policy in the future.

And so every single day they collect all the information

about, you know, the state of the economy, about, uh,

what each governor of regional settlement said, right, what, what,

uh, people who will the interest rate what they say

they got all the information and they make best possible

guesses about future changes in interest rates and then this

affects the exchange rates, right, because of course if you

can.

everyone else and you can make money out of this

so you have all very strong incentives to make the

best possible for us.

And so it turns out that so you can think

of this issue, you know, part of this coming from

the fact that that people will make some, you know,

some, uh, forecasts about interest rates, right?

And so one day they think that the central bank

will definitely these interest rates, but then they, they revise

the expectations and so on.

So there's one before we go into, you know, more

empirical, etc.

let me just make one point here.

So there is this one problem with this argument with

people just make a lot of random mistakes about expectations

about future interest rates or even productivities.

What what.

So can you explain volatility in the rate?

Let's start.

In principle, if I makes every day about interest rate

future product, I mean, and then in the trading in

the change it a lot, right?

Maybe we just, you know, the traders making all this,

uh, expectation errors so that the macro ris which you

think would be a lot less.

So like you think that productivity is impacted.

Based on you know not that much I mean that's

a hard question, right?

That's, that's so even if you take a model where

people behave fully rational, I think you, you can't actually

reject that because even though maybe you know, but you

know, maybe I'm making, you know, all these guesses.

So, OK, there are several things here.

So one thing is that you can imagine it is

very, very little, but the change is very very and

actually all the quantitative models which they usually have to

achieve the sort of, right?

So.

GDP in the UK will be 1% higher on average

than I thought it would be a year ago, right?

But we're talking about which growth rate, uh, you will

change the future, right?

So it's in other words.

In practise when people make guesses about where somewhere here,

right here we're making guesses about future GDP.

So it's not like we're talking when it will look

like this so it will shift up like this, right?

So, so this, this is a small shock.

It's a relatively small shock, a big shock instead this

is when we think that the economy will grow at

this rate or it will rate a slower rate and

so it will permanently permanently, uh, shift in terms of

growth rate, and then you can see that, you know,

the difference accumulate.

This is a big shock, right?

So it will change much more.

And it's kind of reasonable to think that people really

think about these things, right?

So it's not just the level thing, it's really about

this average growth rate in the future, right?

Like, you know, who would like let's say in 2007

that the US economy was so much of the rest

of the world, Europe and the UK in the next

1 or 20 years, right?

I don't know that over the last 1020 years US

economy was growing much faster than Europe.

So it's really like, you know, this difference.

OK, so that's, that's one thing, OK, um, so these

are big shocks.

They look like a very small shocks, right?

Like if you look at realised kind of GDP growth,

right, it's kind of very smooth, very nice, but if

you, if you think about the future, the difference between

these two is very significant, so you can change quite

a lot, uh, but there is a problem with someone

at the moment.

So if you're kind of switching your expectations are switching

between these two best you can what you can.

Even the, you know, evidence that we just discussed before.

Expectations In what sense?

Mhm.

Well, but they solve the model, right?

I mean, in the they take, you know, this world,

but more of this forecasts and this is right.

Uh, I explicitly or implicitly they do something like that.

What will be the dynamics of a change rate if

you kind of switch back and forth between, you know,

these two vessels expected for the.

OK, go up and down, right?

Well, actually not because we said that more or less

like you know uh.

Yeah, so you need to look at them.

Exchange rates are the same, right?

It's not like you go up and down, up and

down.

It's not like this.

Remember that this picture that I showed you, it's not

for the level of, it's for the growth rate.

The gold rate like this, which means um that the

key rate itself.

Moves much more it goes up on average will not

go down or up anymore, but the deposit, right?

So sometimes it goes up, sometimes it goes down, but

it doesn't, you know, it doesn't.

There's not.

It's persistent, in other words, right?

relation is closed, which means that it can't be just

switching between, you know, some.

Some random mistakes must be that OK if I switch

from this to this one, it's like that I will

go back here or I will go back.

I will actually, you know, my forecast will move somewhere

here and that's a bit more surprising, right?

And then I switch to this one and then I

again I'm not sure whether I will go here or

here.

It's kind of.

It's, it seems like like these growth rates should be

a little bit more, you know, in a sense.

That's why new is a little bit hard to explain

this.

But if you try hard, you can find of course

such growth for, uh, expectation about future shocks that they

will generates like this just maybe a little bit less

plausible.

In it's very hard to know what the expectations of

the people are, let me say this.

So I will show you some, but the problem with

this theory is that it's very hard to, right?

There are some where you ask traders or households or

firms what their expectations about the future of the economy

are.

But uh again, you know, I can ask you, doesn't

mean that your your probably not, right?

You don't every single day.

So you really want expectations of people who are who

are in the marginal buyers and sellers of the cars,

and this is very hard to get rates are pretty

good.

No, no, no, no, unfortunately no, right, we talk about

we did talk last time, right?

So I think it's, it's like you take today's interest

rates you take today's exchange rate and you compute your

forward.

It's, I mean if you.

You can have any expectations about future exchange rate, but

there's only one rate which you, you are willing to

buy and sell currency.

There is no of course all those equilibrium effects they

will depend on expectations of agents, but they don't reveal

expectations unfortunately it's very unfortunately it doesn't really work.

Right, OK, so let's maybe make a break and then

we will continue, OK?

Let's make 5 or 6 minute break and then resume.

Well Yeah.

OK I Which way, which way?

Um Then it should come, it's just that we won't

have it back at you.

It's Yeah.

Yeah.

And they just.

Yeah.

No.

No.

No.

Yeah, you should just send it to you so that's

actually true.

The boss.

Yes.

It's, it's still it's like there's nothing like.

Yeah Oh.

Yeah, um, yeah, oh yeah, I think, uh, I think

Marco was allowed to tell us how we work in

the exams like when are you going back March or

I'm not telling you yeah yeah yeah.

Oh my goodness, did you hear about macro, one of

one of the others something like 40.

students overperform expectations or for the next generation, right, for

the next year, I'm kind of scared like because they

haven't set the summer exam yet, so they can finish

you lot over exactly.

Yeah, yeah, but then, but then I don't know how

bad, you know, uh, I could because why he didn't

say what the grade was.

He said, don't worry, it will be scary the summer

exam would be better.

Don't worry.

Like this is not what I want to hear before

said what he said what you'd be scared.

Francisco is a nice guy.

It was a lot.

He was like, some people failed.

He gave the exam back to Francesco.

We just go.

Yeah I don't know.

Do you guys know why we don't have a march?

Is the first date.

It's a month away and like they already know how

pretty much everyone's going right.

I It's frustrating for them too.

Yeah, I, I think so, but I would have imagined

they already did that, right?

We're like if they're at the point where they're scaling,

surely it's already been double I'm not defending this.

um, but just maybe more but let's just write them

down.

So we're now considering news for all this exchange rate

puzzles, right?

And so just what is good about it is that

it can potentially more problematic right.

and then another thing that was said is that he's

hard to death because uh you know, few news show,

you know, expropriations all these things that are hard to

observe in the data, right?

Did you see anything else important things about news so

far.

Uh, OK, that's it.

OK, just a few, uh, a few things, you know,

a few examples where news probably are most, uh, appealing.

OK, here's the, you know, uh, uh, in 2016.

And it's uh June 23rd, right, and you can see

from the speeches, I think it's what the frequency maybe

the frequency, right?

And so this is a change it before the war,

this is after the war, and you might have that

it was very unexpected outcome, right?

People and then people who it was and you can

see that the depreciated by more than 10%, right?

So it was something.

7 and then 78, so more than 10% and by

the way, he notices that this is a very very

nice example of of kind of ran the book in

the sense that it's, it's very persistent jump there, it

didn't go back.

Uh, no.

And this is really a huge shock.

Now why, why you think this is a good example

of of uh new exchange because they change in terms

of microcred at that point, right?

So if you go, uh, you know, you somehow you

measure productivity, uh, inflation, uh, and interest rates here, and

then you change if you run on this.

Be able to explain this huge jump but we all

kind of I mean it's relatively easy to tell stories,

right?

So traders understood that it will leave the EU.

It will be to trade.

It will probably know, exchange of ideas, will have a

negative effect on the research and other stuff, so it

will slow down the exports like you have all the.

It seems like very different very nice article showing large

numbers, but those estimates it's really hard to judge.

What we do know is that, you know, the the

next 5 years just debating, discussing every single day, spending

a lot of effort and time on all these negotiations

with the EU clearly, you know, just in terms of

attention in terms of time, in terms of what people

really thought.

It was very, very right instead of talking about how

we promote growth, climate change, a lot of time just,

uh, and in some sense, you know, traders probably to

some extent that it would be a very positive thing

and they have the expectations and that led to this,

uh, depreciation of the pound back then, right?

So it's one of the most clean, uh, examples of

new stocks.

Um, OK, so then another thing, another much more standard

I think we already mentioned that, right, is that people,

uh, often look at money, money, um, uh, monetary policy

effects on the exchange rate, right, and, um, they look

at, uh, monetary prices the way it is and so

the programme said you are asked to do this.

This is one of the very few, uh, programmes where

you don't need just to solve them, but you also

ask to, to find some empirical evidence, OK.

And so next time, so next month, right, please, uh,

you know, either send me your slides, maybe that will

be easier.

Just send me your slides in advance, OK, I will

upload them and then some of you will just show,

uh, results here, um.

Uh, yeah, we have projected there, right?

We do, so we have screen in in that room,

so you, you will just show, so the, the question

will be very simple, right?

So the idea is that you, you are asked to

identify this, uh, jumps in exchange rates and infer that,

uh, how, you know, what, what part of changing the

monetary policy was unexpected.

So that the interest rate changes, but the rate.

Why that might be the case?

Well, because people anticipate this change in the interest rates

in, if everyone's sure that the interest rate will change,

then on the day when the interest rates.

There will be no change in the exchange rate.

So all this, you know, this is absorbed in and

adjust adjust before the actual change, right?

And so, uh, only on the days when there is

uncertainty there will be a response.

Uh, so here's just one example.

OK, this is, I guess, yeah, this is just like

in this Arctic, no, sorry, no, it's 2022, right?

So in January 2022, this is the period when, um.

Yes, so, OK, so what happened what happened back then

announcement was most likely in January 2022 we probably interest

rates because I don't remember exactly, but this was but

they were all, uh, um, they were fighting inflation, so

they probably increase interest rates and this is a rate

of the and so obviously that the.

on on that day, right it's not as much as

on Brexit, right?

You can see that 0.74 0744, right?

So it's is relatively small change, but you can still

identify that this act of, uh, unexpected, uh, theses, right,

um.

OK, so one thing that I want to say I

mean these two things, these two pictures, they are very

revealing, OK.

So this is, of course, you know, if we could,

you know, if we could explain more of more with

this it would be very nice, but this is really

an exception, right?

This is almost once in many decades it where we

know what news arrived and what move the so much

more, much more like this, OK, we know that this

customer, but haven't just, you know, a few days.

and after we see for example, there was this movement,

there were other movements, right, and then we don't just

we can't identify such news.

So probably we already start some expectation about policy announcements

in the future here, then probably they went a little

bit back, right, but we can also come up with

such news shocks which rationalises, but mentioning them in the.

OK, so there is effectively just one paper which makes

some products in this direction.

This is this paper by Rogo and Ross.

OK, so what they do, they, they select very particular

currencies, currencies for which it's relatively easy to identify new

stocks.

So those are, these are commodity currencies, OK.

This is, um, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Chile, and South

Africa, right?

So those are countries which export commodities.

And um, You know, it, it makes sense that global

commodity prices should have high impact on the exchange rate.

So potentially, right, you can explain exchange rates with the

commodity prices.

OK, so here's one important, I mean, both, but it's

an important, uh, let's, let me, I, I will take

it from the limitation there.

So imagine that you have a change rate for a

given country and let's analyse it in differences.

Then suppose that country exports commodity, I don't know, oil

or gas or wheat or something, and you, you also

observe price of, um, of that commodity and let me

put time subscript here.

So here's my question to you, so with this, the

rate is explained it is moved by prices and commodities.

I mean there are a lot of aggressions here, so

don't go there because this will only confuse you from

the side.

Just think about this.

So how can this that uh exchange rates are even

by.

To see how much extras uh.

Ex I mean we, we already have this data on

this we have data on this, OK.

We just want to test some, you know, some relationship

between these two series in the data.

When we regress one against the other.

That's right.

Now the question is, how I mean should we include

some legs and some, uh, you know, so let me

propose two types of regressions.

Maybe this will this will help.

So we can run regression which looks like this.

Oh, we can run regression which looks like this.

I mean, of course, I mean, it could be even

more provocative.

I would say that maybe we should run regression which

looks like this.

Uh, And all these OK, I think this regression is.

It's pretty obvious, right, because you're aggressing today, you're sing,

uh, today's variables on future variables, variables in the future,

I mean, if you believe this will be a small

res, but it's important because it's right, so.

So in a sense I think this is what we

would all agree, right?

This is what we would have in mind.

We would think that even expectations about movements in commodity

prices and this is expectation right so that from an

economic point of view this is exactly right.

Now the problem is that we can't be using this

regression, right, so this is.

So you look at uh.

Yeah plus some unexpected just like we were before, right?

we said before that we can always do this, right?

Any change is expected to change plus unexpected definition of

this part.

Uh, so then we can regression because we don't see.

So what we could do we could do instead, we

could kind of go from this regression to this one.

I just replacing expectation with absorb one, so just using

this thing, right, this is uh.

M I.

So what is wrong with this?

Why is it the kinematic point of view.

So with some noisy.

So that when we measure things kind of error we're

gonna get attenuation bias towards perfect right?

So that's right.

So when, when we have noise in the error, we

know that this will be over.

Right, so it's very likely that if you replace this

thing with a price, then it will be much closer

to than it should be.

So in the end, you know, usually you find computer

which is kind of you can't statistically you can't distinguish

from 0, but then you don't know whether because actually

your theory is wrong or is it because of.

That's why this doesn't work and this one doesn't work

either.

This one would be even harder to rationalise.

This is not, this is wrong, even though this one,

you know, is correct, this one doesn't work.

Now, OK, then we have a choice between this.

So then which, which one should we use?

By the way, did you um.

It's right now.

Did you talk about there.

OK, uh, so it's a really nice example I think

of this, I think, but before, before we use this

term just intuitively, so which regulation should we run.

exchange rate is affected by our expectations of the prices

way prices should already be priced into the exchange rate

and so we're not really interested in the other direction.

So we want to predict if The current exchange rate

movements in the current exchange rate accurately or like somewhat

reflects how prices will change in the future, which is,

which means very good.

That's exactly right.

That's right and right answer, right?

So.

And the whole idea is that exchange rate absorbs its

exploitation of ages, and as long as the explo have

some truth in them, right, it means that today's exchange

rate should redeems in commodity price, OK?

And so I mean this one is wrong and then

the second one is right.

And this is exactly what is called ganja causalal.

Right, so in the sense that even though we think

that it's actually price of commodity which affects exchange rate,

you still put this as if it's independent variable, and

this one you put on price so eventually our test

of this theory is that exchange rate, you know, course,

uh, come with future movements commodity prices in the sense

of.

It's not only but it's kind of it's a bit

of a misnomer because it's not actually causal effect.

It's not, yeah, yeah, but yeah, yeah, uh, exactly.

OK, but anyway, any questions, but Uh, I hope you

can see, right, so if the change is overlooking, if

it reflects expectations of agents about the future and these

expectations have, you know, some proof to them, then we

should be able to predict future right with the change.

OK, let's try to find this in here.

Let's start with this one, this one and the one,

OK, OK, and we're predicting commodity prices with today's exchange

rate but this is the and so they test that,

OK, so they, they test this hypothesis against the hypothesis

that the future cannot predict commo prices and commo prices

just all around the world.

OK, so this is, this is what.

This slide shows and these are some kind of, you

know, statistics, MSF differences and so if they are negative

and it means that this is more of a smaller

error than this one, which means that, you know, uh,

indeed is right and so what they find is that

for 4 countries out of this line there is this

very significant effect.

OK, so if you look at other panels, the difference

is there just the alternative, right?

So they always test that predicts future commodity prices, but

here they test begins work here and work with, right?

And then they they tested against, uh, moi prices following

some, uh, here autoressive process.

But at all specifications you can see that at least

for 4 for 4 out of 500 you get right?

And so that is, you know, as close as we

can get in terms of showing that, uh, this is

for some new talks expectations of error of agents about

future, uh, they affect, um, uh, education.

So this is, you know, this is classical paper.

It's published I think it's QG Journal of Economists, which

is one of the top journals in profession, but there

is one, criticism of this.

What is wrong with this?

How do you think?

I mean, the fact that we, it's not just some

variable, but it's, it's commodity prices what what what kind

of reservation you might have here.

commodity prices affected if you think there are lots of

things that mods, I mean if it were just that

you know.

I mean it's just price, right?

You just in season and I would say that's not

such a big issue.

But what is the price, for example, you can choose

how much.

Yeah, it's, it's, it's, it's a variable, right?

It's a forward looking variable, and if they hit it

with like just like exchange rate or any asset, right,

it depends on the lines in the future.

And in some sense when traders, you know, trade things

they take into account all the stocks, right?

In a sense, they simultaneously determine the exchange rate and

the commodity prices.

And so in that sense it's still unclear, right, uh,

but, uh, the specification is right, so.

I know some people also, you know, who spend their

whole careers who think that we shouldn't really take seriously

the evidence.

So that's why I'm telling you this, but you know,

I think it's still interesting, uh, interesting.

OK, good.

And then, OK, there's another paper by Charles and Ken

West, uh, from 2005.

So where they try to do something.

So now you already know what is right, they are

the same rate, so this is, this is for developed

countries.

Not for emerging economies, you know, like US those countries

which commodities.

So what are the other factors which determine the exchange

rate?

Well, those are the ones that were supply, inflation, interest

rates, etc.

and they try to move was using today's exchange rate.

And you, you see that some countries, some you, you

can find the right, so, uh, um.

Right.

Uh, the problem is that again it's, it's, you know,

it depends on it's, it's not very, not like all

variables exchange rates.

So what is the takeaway?

I think this is, yeah, this is, uh, OK, so

what is the takeaway here?

Uh, first of all, let me put it.

Uh, some empirical evidence, right, some supportive evidence.

Uh, using.

prices.

So I, you know, in one sense what is here.

So if you want to find evidence like in terms

of of statistic, right, significant effect of, uh, news you

will find that, right?

That's you can do what you can't show is that

it explains most of the change, right?

There is no, I didn't show you any like R

square result that most of the change can explain it

by some.

Measurable.

So in that sense, OK, new changes, but do we

explain 5%, 10%, 90%.

This is still a normal question, right?

And that's, I would say, you know, this is the

most unfortunate thing.

So if, you know, if I could make one, I

would really love to measure this, uh, use somehow systematically

and see change and this is very hard.

OK, so one last thing that I want to say

about this new theories, so.

On the one hand, it makes a lot of sense

that exploitations of Egypt.

On the other hand, there is some evidence that maybe

if you take the single mos they overstate how much

future effects today, OK.

So in particular, if you think about the economy that

is famous, uh, forward guidance, do you know what the

model is?

Maybe something of the human or not.

You never heard about it.

OK, so in the closed economy it works like this,

right?

You have, um.

Uh, so usually you have, you know, let's say, right?

You have interest rate.

And so usually when we think of monetary policy changing

interest rate to close output you have to bring output

close to financial level, right.

But then there are some periods when there when when

interest rates are very low, right?

You have recession, but interest rates are already at 0%,

right?

This is the GDP.

So every recession you would like to decrease interest rates

even further, but you can't because they are already at

0 and negatively.

They have many problems.

And what can I do in this situation?

Well they start they say that, OK, I can't rates

today, but I promise to keep interest rates at a

longer period of time.

So even in the future there will be no recession

anymore.

The central bank will keep interest rate and because people

are looking even future interest rates that affect the right

for example you know interest rates will be very low

for very long, you might want to invest more in,

you know, some, uh, rightly becomes very profitable to to

to make make some investment, uh, just because you you

lower rate.

that you want to take a mortgage this is if

I understand, right?

You're thinking of taking a mortgage right and interest rates

will stay at 0 and then mortgage rate for the

next 10 years will be much, much lower, right?

And so of course you know better for your decision.

Uh, and that was the, uh, this is.

It turns out that in models, models, this is very

powerful.

Changing future interest rates is almost as effective as changing

interest rates.

On the other hand, in the day it's just like

it, it doesn't really work that well, right?

So I mean, actually I think people overstate how much

we have about this.

I think it's just, you know, people who just don't

believe that if you, uh, low interest rates.

years from now that it's probably true, but I mean

it is really uh promise to keep interest rates, interest

rates in 100 years from now, but it seems like

our overstate this, OK, and so there is a.

Uh, but, OK, in this case, uh, so here, here

is how it works, right, um.

Yes.

Let me write just dynamic version of um UAP condition.

In the multipedia model, right, not in the two model

butia model.

OK, so what is this, this is just exchange rate

plus 1 minus exchange rate.

So we can use this to express.

So we we put this term on the right hand

side and interest rate on the left hand side.

OK.

This goes for every period I can write for C

plus 1.

I just shift all terms.

One forward, right, so then it becomes one here and

then if there's a and then I can plug it

in here.

Right, and then I get that, you know, we get

here, we get that.

Depends on the interest rates, but it will also depends

on future interest rates.

And then there is a change would be the master.

OK, you know, I can forward right and eventually what

you get is.

So rate today depends on interest rate depression in all

future years, and then there is this terminal, you know,

limiting term here that like period, you know, of ages

about exchange rate in the infinite future.

Right, so this is just the change and then so

what George says, OK, let's assume that this exchange is

kind of it's some wall around equilibrium which is relatively

awesome doesn't change.

So let's keep this constant.

Then it turns out that the exchange rate today depends

on future interest rates.

OK, and then it seems like we have exactly the

discovered according to a model, and effects of interest rates

on exchange rate are the same whether you change interest

rate today or you change them 100 years from now.

Actually in the model, uh, that's a point of interest

rates on the future should be very powerful like at

any horizon.

But it doesn't sound very reasonable and actually he tests,

uh, test this video.

By the way, I should ask how, how did I

write this?

Then, so how can you test this?

Well, the way it does this is the point, right?

You take the exchange rate and then you kind of

decision the two parts you take, um.

I abstract from interest rates.

Uh, so you take let's say J from 0 to

some capital M.

You take interest rates.

At the, you know, in the at the short horizon,

then you take.

Uh, all the remaining interest rates.

OK, this is just me, right?

This is short term interest rates and this is just

long term interest rates.

OK, so we said that this time we keep constant.

And what you can do, you can measure, you can

measure these interest rates in the next periods, right, in

the short term, in the long term, you can regress

exchange rate on these two terms that work and whether

the question is the same.

OK, does this make sense?

That seems like a very reasonable thing to do, right?

And of course you can experiment with different values of

different horizons.

So that's exactly what he does.

Uh, he, by the way, I, I, I should have

changed, right?

So I still keep this negative sign, but of course

you can, you know, you can change interest rates like

this, and then you will get positive signs, same thing.

Um, this is the regression.

OK, so this is the sum of interest rates and

the, uh, the short horizon.

This is the sum of interest rates at the longer

horizon you get and this to grows and then rolling

for, you know, for some, uh, time periods.

And he does this for equals 24 months, 16 months,

and I guess this must be 10 years, right?

And so you can see that in all these situations,

in all of these regulations, you can see that cohesion

or the short term interest rates is higher than the

cohesion or long term rates, right to our single that

really you should get in both cases you should getficient

people are, but that's not what he finds, right?

So he finds coefficient larger than one here and much

smaller than one here.

So it looks like again long term interest rates affect

less essentially today than short term interest rates in that

sense it's again for guidance but for open economy for

uh for for.

OK, do you have any, any response, any ideas about

this?

Does this look right or wrong or in.

Kind of makes sense.

OK, good.

So then again, one of the problems, one of the

problems in the problem set asks you to revisit this

result and check what happens once you use our model

rather than this iteration of the.

OK, so in our model you will have to extend

the model from one.

We have two periods to think about short of interest

rate.

You need at least 3 periods, right?

But what I want you to do, I want to

do kind of in, uh, long term change.

So even looking at this expression you might actually suspect

that there is something wrong.

So what, what is different from our model that we

discussed last time?

What is there something suspicious?

So if you think this thing is, right, if you

think that this is it's not affected by anything then

uh.

What is the clear connection to our model?

Qualitative qualitatively even.

Well, right, I mean, it's now to what it means

that exchanging in the first period is equal to interest

rate differential plus exchange rate in the second period and

you keep listening.

So what was it?

If you can change and if you, if you believe

in this, then all the last time about productivity, right?

So according to this equation, it looks like if you

keep interest rate constantly moving interest rates.

Would never ever sort of happens to you know which

is right there is something wrong with this, OK, so

why is that.

All these actually here in this equation and it's important

so it turns out that you take, even of interest

rates will be and I think this is an interesting

exercise.

OK, we will talk about it on Monday.

OK, good, um.

So I will put I will put 4 here.

Or.

Right that's puzzle just so that you don't I the

idea was that we maybe like new stocks in the

clearly moved a lot of the changes, but if there's

puzzle about the future don't matter that much for exchange

rate.

And then the question isn't really true.

There is a puzzle, but there's no puzzle.

And so I would say the question is still open

according to, you know, you will, you will check that

theoretically and see whether it is consistent in.

OK, good.

So finally I hope I still have some time.

Yes, we still have a good time.

OK, here comes finally maybe the most important part.

Here's the alternative video of exchange.

Uh, this was new shocks now we're going to be

about financial shocks.

We are today then kind of our next lecture, the

next week will be the deeper.

OK, so, OK, let me skip this for a second.

OK, this is, you know, shamelessly citing our paper with

my author, but you know, it is, it is kind

of, I mean, uh, the most, uh, or I can

also say that my some big prize in particular for

this.

But anyway, so here's what we kind of uh proposed,

and it seems like again I don't know maybe in

some sense I would say 20 people give us maybe

too much credit for, for, for bringing this idea.

I think it was already in the air and I

think it's just like many, many people in.

In the field working on this issue and converging to

this view that it's financial shock which drives the exchange

rates so we can decide one particular aspect of that,

but I think again people working in very, very different

aspects of exchange, they were all moving in this direction.

OK, so in the in the in the reduced one,

the whole idea is to reduced financial in the UAP,

right?

We already said today that the UP doesn't seem to

hold.

It seems like uh deviations from uh government space and

there are good reasons to believe that there is, there

is an additional term in this financial equilibrium conditions.

Yeah So let me go back I guess to to

be the model, right?

So what are the microphones where this sort of comes

from?

First of all, this is a very big open question.

But next time we will spend some time talking about

complementary theories of I think of this as some kind

of risk premium, right?

So, you know, depreciate, uh, rarely but have large depreciation

that there is some risk of investing in these currencies,

so there is this financial which kind of compensates this

this which compensates for taking this risk.

Yeah, so then we don't really need to spend much

time on this.

So we go back to our picture.

It's how this works, right?

So we have, we have budget constraint.

So what happens when financial shock arrives ify goes up,

let's say.

By the way, just.

Let me write this so if if you remember.

Oh sorry.

So we get if you're right, this is just the

same equation in a slightly different way.

So with this side.

This is equal to this return, so it's investors demand

high returns on domestic currency relative to foreign currency.

Right, so, you know, uh, people wake up and think,

OK, it's, you know, really is going on in the

UK.

Maybe they are, you know, just voting for Brexit or

other stuff.

Maybe the government is not gonna growth not, right?

And so I, I, I really want to be compensated

for taking risk for investing in this country, right?

So now investors demand this compensation.

OK, so then what happens in this in this draught?

OK, so is not moving, right, uh, financials in the

UAP condition.P up or down.

Do for every E12 needs to be lower now even

increase in size so.

downwards and so we move from point A to point

B.

And so you can see that the exchange rate depreciates.

OK, I think we already did this when we discussed

this, but let's put this in words without using any

complicated termin.

So what is the story here?

Why, why does the exchange rate depreciate.

Just like we did for other shows last time, right?

So tell me economic story that, you know, even, you

know, journalists or general public would understand.

OK, everyone is tired, I guess.

OK, so as I said, right, for some reason they

suddenly dislike, uh, bonds or investment in home, right?

So they if interest rates don't change, if we change

is not changing yet, so they just start selling, right,

the holdings of domestic currency, right, that demand of domestic

currency, in other words, and so that leads uh to

adjust right depreciates.

The loans is what happens is that the exchange rate

depreciates today and it appreciates in the future, right?

So it means that investors will be compensated.

So interest rates don't change, but exchange rate expected exchange

rates will appreciate.

Right between today and tomorrow to appreciate and that will

compensate investors for taking in the city.

Right, so that's what we need to investors don't.

They start selling it, but and then that brings equilibrium

in the future.

So I'm I'm that's passes through into uh.

OK, so, um.

So, um.

Yes, so I will write something here.

So first of all, I guess this is consistent with

very easy, right?

The UAB.

That's in essence it's, it seems appealing.

So the, well, yes, again it turns out that even

for this shock you need very high persistent, right?

It needs to be that investors, you know, they, they,

it's not like one period they decided to buy this

ones, but then the next was switch back to the

previous ones if you want high like you really need

the structures to be better system.

But the best fine, so you, you can generate hylaivity

it's not an issue.

And you well if not, then you can generate persistence

as well.

In terms of political test and measurement, that's another problem.

OK, I will show you, I think next time some

supportive empirical evidence, but the game is quite limited.

So just like with news from the data, this financial

shocks is quite problem.

But there is some still some.

Some component of this you can expect from the data.

OK, so let's, let me this part for next time.

So we will, I mean, this, the whole next week

is about, uh, what, what can be micro foundations for

this, uh, financial shock.

Um, oh, here, here are a few pictures that I

wanted to show you.

OK, so this is exactly what I was talking about

when I said that you need to see the show,

OK, so this is just pictures from our, um, so

yeah, here, here is how it looks like, OK, so

those are responses.

So the blue line here shows the names of the

change rate changes, OK.

And the red line shows the change rate levels.

So the here is when the shocks.

Suddenly investors don't like domestic bonds and they start selling

them.

So you see this large depreciation just like an out

model.

What is that what you can see from this period

which you can see out is that you can also

generate 5, right?

So what does the change needs to appreciate.

When understand that from the budget for the country's budget

to be satisfied, you always need that at some point

the change will move in the opposite direction.

You can't have really, you know, depreciation because then it

means that your experts will give new, right, and you

will never, you will also satisfy this budget.

So you really have this new reversion, but it turns

out that is highly reversion.

Very, very slowly, right, so even 5 years after the

show, she moved back by something like 60%, and actually

there's a special limit is if people are the very

patient, very patient, so they are very forward looking and

the shock is very persistent, then actually you can get

out of the depreciate and stay there forever.

Yes, in the beginning of this, you will get very,

very close to that satisfaction.

OK, and then another way to see this is kind

of the same idea you can compute what is, what

part of the exchange rate relativity is unexpected, right?

So you need 0, you can receive the exchange rate

in the future and, and, you know, uh, how much

of of exchange rate relativity can you predict and how

much you can not predic.

So if you want to predict the changes in the

short run, it's almost impossible, right?

Most relativity is, uh, unpredictable.

But if you want to make broadcasts in the long

run because there is this in reversion actually expected increases,

right?

This is kind of expected, this is unexpected.

So your your forecast become better if you think about

long term, right.

OK, so it turns out interestingly that there is pretty

strong empirical evidence in favour of this mechanism in the

data.

OK, so that's, that's, you know, another recent paper by

Ike, Johansson and Ribdo.

So I remember they, they came and, so I was

still a greatest student when we worked with my coauthor

advisor at Princeton, and they came and presented the paper

and it was kind of amazing because they showed these

pictures and they was completely in line with our theory.

So, OK, so here, here are the things that they

do.

So they they change, right.

right So, right, they were testing this how will the

change in the short term and how well you can

in the long run.

And so the way you do it is as you

take change in the exchange rate between today.

And let's say 8 years in the future, OK?

And you see whether you can predict this change using

today's exchange rate.

Mm So right, so according to this.

If you have exchange rate going up today, then in

the future exchange needs to go back.

So this thing needs to be negative, right?

It should be negative.

But this should be, you know, it should work relatively

well if you take long horizon.

And then it should almost not work if you they

they give you H H is small.

And so here are, here are the pictures for three

different parties, right?

This is for Germany, Canada, and Australia.

This is the regression, and they do it at horizon,

the horizon, horizon.

They have also a table and they have the pictures

with different horizons.

So if you look at one year horizon, there is

almost no correlation.

You you can't just cloud of points, uh, relations.

Then you go to 5 years and well I mean

maybe there is some that for Germany, but then once

you go to 5 year, 5 years 5 year horizon,

then there's unably negative correlation just exactly line with with

it.

R square becomes much, much higher.

OK, so here, here are, here are the numbers.

OK, many, um, and, OK, so this is slightly different

thing, right?

This is exactly going back to Mrs.

Roga, right?

Let's check.

Let's, let's, uh, this is, uh, redo.

And this is again this kind of means error, uh,

in, um, this model divided by this means error in

uh according to a number of forecasts, right?

And so for example if you look at the one

horizon, you see that these numbers are greater than one,

which means that this regression does not help to reform,

uh, removal, right?

This actually makes a larger error.

On the world, but then you start increasing the crisis

and to 56 years, and you can see that this

becomes less than one for all these countries, which means

that now will be smaller, uh, forecast error than forecast

rights as I said, this is one of these very

few cases where you can beat out, uh, beat around

the world.

And it's all about the right, right?

So in that sense, when we say disconnect, I already

said this before, but it's important, right?

It's 2 months to 2 years.

Once you go beyond that, once you go to 7

years, there is pretty strong, uh, uh, in exchange rates

and again very consistent with our theory of countries, uh,

budget constraint.

Notice, by the way, that if you believe in news

shows there is in some sense no reason to believe

that this has to be true, right?

If you just think that, you know, you, you have

permanent change in economic growth, people update the expectations, there

is no reason to, to go back.

Uh, to the initial values.

OK, and this is just some other ways to test

the same thing.

Alright, one last thing that Uh, one last, well, maybe

two last things that I want to say, OK, so

the big picture.

So you have exchange rates, OK?

You have micro variables.

You won the between the two.

There are two things that you need.

First of all, you need a particular type of shock

there are shocks.

So why is it that this connect because we usually

use in microeconomics.

What shops we usually have our orders.

90% of all microeconomics shocks and now we have, but

it is relatively new.

OK.

So what is the problem with this type of shocks?

We know that these shocks, they directly affect macroeconomic variables.

What do you mean?

What do I mean by directly?

So even if they close the economy, they will move

this variables, right?

So even though, of course they also move exchange rates,

right.

The the problem is that they will move both and

they will generate more relation.

That's why it's so hard to explain both shocks and

productivity.

What you really want, you want a shock which has

almost maybe even no direct effect on microeconomic variables, but

it affects the exchange rates.

That's that's a component number one that you need to

explain the disconnect.

OK, and so the reason these two types of precisely

because they have this property, right?

this new shocks they build a direct effect on, uh,

but it was and they, they, I mean this is

a particular financial shock, the which uh comes from current

market right?

so they exchange rate directly but not.

But then you need?

What else is needed?

There was a relationship between these things.

OK, we said let's say exchange rate.

Where Which one which yeah hm.

No, I mean interest rates this is the policy might

be, but the import export export, etc.

in principle, of course the exchange rate, whatever variable moves

there, right, will affect mic.

So what do you need for the disconnect.

The second kind of ingredient that you need is that

uh there is only limited pass through of exchange rates

into microwave.

I mean it's it's, it is, there is, you know,

of course you can completely kill this thing if it's

close, but it's open.

Lecture 13:

Yeah OK.

OK, I think we can start.

Uh, hi everyone, and, uh, just one, small announcement, right?

So next week the class is on Friday rather than

Thursday.

I hope you will, uh, an email about that, right?

The seminar is still on Monday and, uh, so thanks

again for sharing your slides for the 1st, 2nd, sorry,

second assignment, but let's, uh, finish that on Monday, OK,

let's not, uh, to spend the time today.

OK, good.

So, so we finished talking about change to disconnect last

time, right?

And kind of what was kind of one maybe a

main takeaway from our discussion last time.

So what kind of is the natural next step for

us?

What do we need to understand if we understand the

exchange rates.

I had to do the 4.

What is the main shock that we decide probably explains

exactly or in so what I'm going to do today

is dig deeper right instead of just want to understand

where it comes from and I you know it's.

An enormous interview.

So I remember when I thought this for the first

time I made a mistake to our, you know, all

theories of, uh, shorts, and I, I mean I spent

two weeks on that in this, in this course, and

then I think everyone was eventually overwhelmed.

So now I every year I dream and dreaming the

slides and so this year it's, it's, it's relatively short,

but still we will go through like 4 years.

OK, just to remind you, right, this is something we

already discussed, so not with that condition, right, about the,

uh, expected returns on the bonds and bonds should be

should be the same from the perspective of investor, right?

And I think we also this sort of how, how

can we test this right we can run the farmer

right and again let me write it here so you

can write it like this.

Right, so that's one option.

And in this case, what is the null hypothesis?

What, what hypothesis do we need to test?

So if you holds then.

Just very quickly, uh huh.

exactly right.

So that's kind of a no.

If it's not equal, if we can reject this news,

then it means that is violated in the data.

But of course, right, there are different ways to just

rewriting the same expression, the same regression.

I can subtract.

I on the left hand side and on the right

hand side.

And so then I get beta minus 1 here, right?

And, and if I did know this coefficient, let's say

it was gone, right, and then run a regression where

I regressed this left hand side on interest rate differential,

then what is the noness in this case.

Government should be equal.

You, you, yeah, it is equal to one, right?

It's the same as saying that gamma should be equal

and again I mean I just showed you kind of

formal derivation, but of course intuitively, right, so this thing

should be unpredictable.

So again, if you look at the UAP condition, this

initial condition, right, if you put all the terms on

the left hand side effectively, right, you can't kind of.

One currency in the other currency and on average make

money from that right uh if if you OK and

so the fact that in the data is not equal,

uh, 0, right, then it means that there is the

puzzle and as I said before, I mean we will,

we will mostly call this UIP puzzle, but sometimes people

call it harm a puzzle or forward puzzle, OK, and

so.

It's it, and the interesting, by the way, it shows

both the cross section of countries, right?

So you can just take, you know, many countries and

take every returns, but you can also do this just

for one pair of two currencies, right, and, uh, just

see how it goes in times and in all dimensions

you see substantial divisions from the.

OK, so this is just, you know, one of the

recent papers, uh, which just, uh, does this exercise and

when we got this, uh, by Roz Bev, right, so

this is, you know, different individual countries, all of them

are against the law, against the US.

Uh, and so if you run this regression using time

series, this is the coefficient that you get.

This is what I called gamma, right?

This is gamma, and you can see that, uh, it's,

it's, it's negative, right?

It's less than 0, and actually, no, you can use,

you know, panel dimension you can just run this for

all countries at the same time, including fixed effects and

and on average you get coefficient that is close to

-1.

So but yeah.

Alright, so this was the what was this?

While in the data, the estimate is close -1 here,

which means that be here is what?

I let me put Approximately, right, because of course there

is large variation, but on average, right, on average is

-1, which means that is.

Close to 0, exactly.

Right, so.

Again, I think we mentioned this, but let's let's, let's,

it's better to double check.

So in a sense, let's go back to this expression.

Given all other empirical evidence that we discussed before last

week, why I think you should not be surprised by

the fact that the estimate of weight is close to

0.

So you think of rate equal to 0, it means

that right, the interest rates.

Uh, and if uncorrelated with changes in the change.

So why is it in a sense expected from what

we discussed before.

What are the properties of you know.

Uh The disconnect, right, and then in a sense, I

mean this is e puzzle, it's a special case of

this puzzle, right, because it's the exchange rates are very

hard to predict using any microeconomic variables and interest rate

is just one example of such variable.

So I mean, OK, you can see this from, from

this estimate, but also you can look at uh R

square, right?

So the R square in this regulations and you can

see that it's just tiny.

Right, there's, you know, even if for some reason, you

know, this coefficient, uh, what we call 1 or 0

in the specification, right, it's just that, you know, there

is almost no variation to the exchange rate that you

can explain using, uh, past interest rates and it's, it's

kind of a corollary of this kind of.

OK, good.

So, but of course, right?

I mean, in some ways I think there's money on

the table, you know, if you, the fact that you

have coefficient equal beta coefficient equals zero here means that

exchange rates don't upset differences in interest rates, right?

And if you see the currencies one has high interest

rate, another one has low interest rate, it seems like

you should always borrow in a low interest rate and

invest in the high interest rate currency, right, because on

average you will make money.

Um, OK, good.

So then let's discuss, uh, why people are not doing

that, right?

And we kind of started this conversation again in two

weeks ago.

And the one thing that we emphasise is that maybe

it's all due to risk, right?

So even though, you know, you see this difference in

interest rates across countries, and maybe you can on average

make 1% return.

By borrowing in cheap currencies and investing in high interest

rate currencies, but the is very high, right?

We said last time that the standard deviation per annum

is something like 12% points, right, you know that on

average you make 1%, right, but the standard deviation is

12%.

So, uh, you know, you, you really need to wait

for a very, very long time to make, uh, money

with certainty.

Um, that can be one who will, who will study

that one.

So, uh, what else?

Why, why, I mean, OK, this is very natural explanation,

but what are the factors that can contribute to this

APlus?

I think we'll also one other thing.

So what do you need?

I mean, how do you explain, right?

This is not the trash conditions.

There's the issues from, from it.

It sounds like you might want to exploit it.

Why don't people explore this.

Everyone's too early.

Um, So how do you invest in one currency borrowing

in another currency, right?

So borrowing is usually harder than investing, right?

It might be the case that you want to borrow

in cheap currency, but actually you can't, right?

That maybe there are some constraints.

I was just gonna say so it's some kind of

constraint is much easier, yeah.

And one positions.

OK, good.

So then, OK, so this the more or less, you

know, the full list of, uh, other things that people

come up with.

So just to mention a few other things, I don't

think we will spend much time on this, but so

if you look at the data, even if you look,

you know, at large hedge funds, investment banks, etc.

it looks like they don't change the particulars very much

at high frequency, right?

And they do some trading, but still, if you, you

know, you measure the monthly frequency.

Portfolio shares they stay relatively stable and so it's very

possible and especially you know if you think about pension

funds like long run investors, they don't, it seems like

as if there are some costs of addressing these portfolios,

right?

So that again, maybe there is this temporary deletion from

UIP, but no one really wants to step in because

then they need to rebalance the whole portfolio.

There's some transaction costs of doing that.

That can also contribute partly to this thing, but.

I mean this alone I guess, I think this is

not enough, but it can be one of the factors.

And then, I mean, this is another story which is.

It, it somehow gained a lot of attention relatively recently,

um, and the idea is that there are some convenience

deals, especially on US bonds, there is something special about

US bonds, uh, and so they have, they, you know,

even though these bonds pay relatively low interest rates, right,

still people want to buy them because they somehow your

utilities and why is that?

OK.

It's not, it's not super deep explanation.

You probably the question is where this can come from.

And one explanation can be that this is just very

liquid assets, right, that you can, you know, even if

something interruptions happen in financial markets, you can always sell

this relatively quick and get some money if you need.

And then another one is that it can be used

as a collateral.

Right, so, uh, you know.

You want to maybe to borrow money.

You, you, you want to do some other financial transactions,

but then you need to provide collateral, right?

And there are, you know, that is kind of not,

not all assets are equivalent, uh, and some assets are

much better collateral, right, because of trust, because of safety.

People will think that, uh, US treasuries, private, uh, bonds,

US bonds, they provide better collateral, and then, you know,

when agents buy these bonds, they know this, they know

that they will be able not just to hold these

assets but also use them as a collateral and so

they're willing to pay a premium for that.

I know that some countries sometimes restrict being able to

buy and sell within their own currency like during liquidity

crisis or so.

Would that be an example of a currency which might

have a, uh, you mean like in the case of

like Argentina, if they say, OK, you can no longer

buy US dollars with our currency, the premium on the

Argentinian currency, would that be a liquidity premium?

Uh, lack of, yeah, I'm not sure how this is

just kind of capital controls, right?

So here just the government doesn't allow you to buy

or sell some assets.

I mean, usually it's especially, right, you can clearly see

that there is market, you know, I usually change right

and then there's kind of black market change or something

like that or black market price for assets and so

they can be very different because of these controls, right?

Uh, yeah, I don't know, it's, it's kind of a

type of capital controls or financial repression.

Uh, but again, the interesting thing is that, you know,

the CIP puzzle, it applies also to US bonds, right,

to, to the euro, to Japanese yen, where it seems

like there's not so much regulation, not so much this

government intervention.

So, uh, yeah, but for developing countries merging is clearly,

yeah, uh, policy plays an important role.

OK, good.

And then finally we'll talk about information and exportation errors,

although, you know, it is on the back it's kind

of closer to maybe uh new structures that we discussed

last.

So how would UIP play into countries that have more

than one exchange rate?

Yeah, yeah, you know, people usually look at the market

exchange rate, right?

I guess I don't think for example here.

So yeah, for emerging yes it's there's a very nice

paper by, by the way, our colleague here from finance

department, so it's Liliana Barrela.

So she has a paper with coauthor, uh Shabnam, where

they sign the executive UAP and um.

Uh, they cite it separately for emerging economies and for

developed countries, and they show that behaviour is quite different.

So all types of countries have deviations from the UAP,

but in some sense they argue that for developed countries

it all comes from the exchange rate.

For developing countries it sometimes comes from the interest rates,

and you know this, uh, uh, policy fictions play important

role.

So you can take a look if you are interested.

OK, good.

Any other questions at the moment?

OK, then let's move on.

So let's, yeah, I should, I should get that point.

So, um, so why do you have in some sense

all the series?

Why, there's so many of them.

So you will see this maybe, you know, soon that

in some sense this may be puzzle.

It is very similar in many ways to another classical

asset pricing puzzle.

I would say the most famous, the most famous asset

pricing puzzle.

What is the main asset price that people try to

understand to explain.

Hm, yeah, uh, well, stocks equity and right, and so

there's equity, equity premium.

Awesome.

Uh, and so, so this is really, you know, there

are a lot of similarities, right, because in the sense

as you said at the very beginning, right, so we

can think of this additional thing in UAP it's as

if there's a risk premium, right, but the risk premium

also what people think explains why equity has higher returns

than bonds, right.

And so, you know, so litery started, started somewhere in

the 1970s, right?

I think uh the first paper is Lucas, uh, he

was, and so, but at the end there was just

no explanation that's why it's a puzzle, right.

But then people started coming up with new ideas and

theories which can explain it, and you can clearly see

that, you know, some theory appears here, you know, maybe

with financial predictions, and then a few years later it's

also a similar paper appears maybe by other authors but

explaining here puzzle is kind of exploiting the same idea.

And so now we're kind of, for both of these

puzzles we have a very long list of potential theories

and Each of them has some er, right?

Each of them, uh, provides some moments in the data

which I suggested.

So for example, if you think about, uh, expectation errors,

do people make expectation errors?

Definitely, right, even if you look at the service of

professional forecasters, they often make errors, right?

And they, yeah, they they have, um, they, they don't

revise the expectations, right.

Even there is plenty of evidence that many agents don't

have access to borrowing like other agents and so on

each of these areas kind of has some some moment

in the data which supports it, but in the end,

the problem is that we want to understand not just

you know whether this is, uh, there is something to

eat, we want to understand whether it's, you know, 90%

of the whole puzzle.

Ideally we would like to decompose the UIP premium into

this uh service and that's very hard to do, right?

And OK, I'm already kind of generalising, but let me

generalise even further.

So what, what we kind of learn how to do

very well in the metrics, find some exogenous radiation, right,

looking for instruments and some natural experiment, and then we

estimate cohesion which has causal interpretation and hopefully is significant.

So that's, you know, and the fact of economics all

about that.

So what we don't do so well, we don't have

kind of established procedures is to estimating us.

Right, because you, you want to explain.

Let's say you have y, right, which is a function

of X.

So what you usually do, you find some instrument or

some exogenous component of X to find the effect, right,

to estimate the effect, but this would be only a

small fraction of total X.

I mean, it's very clean.

It is exogenous, and that's why we use it.

But what about all other variation in X, right?

And ideally we would like to, you know, have all

the stories and compute the total R square, and that's

very hard to do.

Right, that's it's, you know, I mean, you can write

the model which has all these components and then try

to identify in the data how much each of them

explains, that would be, I guess, uh, you know, the

only way to do it, that, that, you know, the

only method that economists use.

But then, I mean, then you really separate the stories,

uh, into quantitatively, uh, is there enough information in the

data to do that?

That's debatable.

That's, it's not clear.

And so that's, that's, that's a big issue.

That's, uh, uh.

Uh, so just one last thing, let me say we

will come back to that.

But all these theories that explain both equity premium puzzle

and GB puzzle, they have the same problem in a

sense.

They in the end they all rely on some kind

of dark matter.

You you will see it very clearly.

Each of them has some shock which you can directly

absorb in the data and you can only infer it

from, you know, asset prices, from exes, etc.

and so I mean.

A little bit, it's not really a proof of the.

I give you exchange rates a series of exchange rates,

and you can perfectly match them, but coming up with

such unobserved shock which according to a given theory explains

this exchange rate, right?

And so that's not really a test of the.

It's more like, you know, making out the shocks.

So that's the fundamental problem, right?

So like, you know, errors it will be exploitation error

itself with financial predictions it will be some but which

summarises how you know what is the stress in financial

markets, uh, in case of convenience is convenience and so

on and so forth.

OK, maybe this sounds a little bit, but I hope

it will become, uh, more clear once we go through

this series.

I kind of want to like take a step back

and just ask sort of.

What's the in terms of like the value of being

able to say what the source of variation is, is

that because, you know, from the perspective of a trader,

you want to, you know, if you figure that out,

you can trade and get an arbitrage, or is it,

you know, from a policy point of view, OK, I'm

biassed.

a trader, probably traders would also want to know that,

but I can't tell you immediately why for policy makers,

it makes a big difference because, for example, OK, I

will show you will just see it in different of

the policy prescripts will be very different, right?

So for example, if it's kind of Objective risk premium

in a sense it's kind of good, but it should

be there and there is no mispricing in the markets.

The government should not intervene.

On the other hand, if it's an exploitation error or,

you know, financial fre it means that there is room

for government intervention, then central banks probably want to.

You know, to intervene in currency markets, they want to

do tax interventions, and that's actually a great opinion of

this point.

So, yeah, from normative perspective it matters a lot.

That's exactly right.

So from a positive perspective, right, if you just want

a shock which explains this exchange the disconnect, puzzles that

we discussed last time, you don't care.

And that's kind of that's, that's exactly why you can't

identify the, the, you know, the microstructure from looking at

aggregate moments.

You really need something else.

OK, very good, that's perfect.

OK, so that was motivation, or I don't know, maybe

you should motivation, uh, because you know the is still

there and still we don't know which theory is, is,

is the most, but that was the most, right?

This is kind of consumption based model, uh, this premium.

So without any frictions, this is just, you know, you

have a representative household and the prices assets.

So it's just one slide or I don't know if

you take as pricing courses or financial, OK, no.

So then it's, it's, it's worth spending some time on

this.

So let's start with representative household with more standard preferences,

right?

There are preferences, uh, then marginal utility of consumption, right?

So if OK If U of C looks like this,

right?

What is the marginal utility?

Well, it's just the derivative of this thing, so it

will be just C to the power of minus C1.

Right, and think of stigma as kind of degree of

risk averse, right?

So in particular, there is a special case when agents

at risk.

That will be important for our analysis below.

So agents are risk neutral.

They don't care about risk.

You've seen with what?

Hm 0, exactly right.

So then they have linear utilities and they don't care.

So if you give them, you know, 11 unit of

consumption with 100 probability or you give them 2 units

with probability 50% and zero probability, right?

So they, they only care about average consumption.

But one stigma is not equal to 0, right, you

can see that they have decreasing marginal utility.

You prime, right, so then.

And some marginal utility is a decreasing function and you

know from this picture you can already see.

Right, so if, you know, suppose that in one state

of the world, you get this amount of consumption, in

other state of the world, you get this amount of

consumption, right?

So actually, you would rather prefer To avoid the cities

can get some average, right, so you get kind of

higher, uh, marginally on that.

OK, good.

So now what does it have to do with asset

pricing?

Well, it is the following.

So for each state of the world.

We will have there is an asset right that which

pays uh some dividends and this it, it's, it's state

dependent.

It's a stochastic variable, right?

So for example, you know, sometimes you have good state,

sometimes you have bad state.

And it can pay different amount, right?

So let's say the one here and the 2 here.

So like bond price, or your stock price can go

up, it can go down.

And so the question is, given these values, right, and

given, you know, consumption profile, what, what is the price

of this asset?

That's kind of the fundamental question of asset pricing.

So again, I'm, I'm a little bit oversimplifying, right, because

this is a static model.

It should be more dynamic, but kind of it's more

or less correct, right?

So that the price of an asset.

is given by this formula, so you have Multiply marginal

utility.

By uh payment on this asset and you get the

price of this asset.

OK, so what is the intuition here?

So D is how many units of consumption you get

in a given state, right?

And this thing is effectively the price, you know, how

much you value this, you know, these units of consumption

that you get in a given state of the world,

right, as usual, the prices are proportional to marginal utility

rather than auto utility, how much you value the last

unit of consumption in a given state of the world.

OK, so let's see how it works, I have an

example here.

Uh, OK, so we have two states, bed and blue

state.

We have and we have two.

And probabilities.

So the probability of each state is just 50%, right?

In that returns on these two assets are also symmetrics,

right?

11 pays in good state, another one pays invested, and

they don't, don't pay at all in other states.

If, if, you know, if I didn't give you any

information about, so you might think that the prices of

these two assets should be the same, right?

Makes sense.

But then there is still some difference between these two

states, right?

This is why they are called bad state and good

state.

The difference is that consumption is high in good state

and is low in bad state, right?

Think of that as recession and economic boom.

So then let's compute, um, the values, the prices of

these two assets.

How much agents are willing to pay right in the

initial period for these two assets.

OK, so for SE.

So there is one there is let's say, right, when

consumption is just one.

OK.

Yes, one musical one.

OK, so this is consumption and then it's one, right?

And then there is a good state.

Where returns are just equal 0.

OK, that's The algebra right so we get that the

prices should be 1/2.

And then there's asset B.

Which instead, instead doesn't pay anything in that state, but

pays in the good state.

And so we get that the price is 14%.

OK, so I mean, first of all, any questions because

there are a lot of numbers, but I'm just using

this formula, right?

So I take expectations by using probabilities here and here.

Then I compute marginal utility, which is 1 here and

1/2, 1/2 here, and then I just multiply it by

the dividends, right, the payments on this.

OK, so here's my question.

So why is it that despite symmetric returns between two

states, we get that the price of asset A is

higher than the price of asset E?

Mhm.

Exactly right.

So even though on average, so if we just computed

expectation of for both assets, right?

It is the same.

It's just 1/2.

But there is a difference in which state they are

paying these returns, right?

The SA based in state and S&P in good state

and we value returns in bad state more because agents

have high marginal utility.

So which asset is a safe asset?

Hm.

Which one?

It's this one, right?

The asset A, it is a safer asset in the

sense that it is being more in, uh, state, uh,

was, uh, but, uh, low consumption.

And so again, even the same average returns, we expect

safe assets to have higher prices.

OK, good.

So now let's, let's kind of, you know, let's make

one step towards our, uh, asset pricing obligation.

So this was just, just an example just to warm

you up.

But now let's talk about UAP, right?

So suppose we have two assets.

Uh, with the returns RH and RF.

OK, I'm not putting exchange rates yet.

I'm not putting interest, interest rates yet, but suppose that

right we have already kind of two different assets.

So eventually, of course, right, if it's domestic assets, it

will be a 1 plus I here, right, and returns

on foreign assets will be 1 plus I star, and

then we take, uh, we take, um, exchange rates, uh.

Changes over time, right?

So that's kind of the application that we're interested in.

OK, but let's first derive the asset pricing for this,

um.

Uh, more general case, right?

So what is R in general?

This is just d divided by P.

these are returns invested dollars today and next period you

get the dollars, right?

So this is, this is, these are returns and they

are sto for example here they depend on your movements

in the exchange rate.

OK, so then just writing again our formula, right, so

we said that.

This is our Asset pricing um.

Expression.

So then we can divide by P.

Right, and we get a good expression where this term

here is.

What we noted was R right those are kind of

gross returns.

And this is true for any asset, right?

So, it is true for asset H and it's also

true for asset.

So then we can take the difference, right?

We can take the difference between, so we apply the

same formula for asset H and for asset F, and

we take the difference between the two.

Right, so I can expectation, you know, it's a linear

operator, so I can combine these two termss together.

And I get this person which looks like this.

And then this would be equal 0 because on the

right hand side we have 1 in both cases.

OK, let me see here, uh, so far so good.

Then I'm going to use the, you know, the, the

standard expression that the covariance between two variables x and

y is just tical exploitation of x and y minus

exploitation of x multiplied by exploitation of y, right?

So this is your definition of.

So from this form I can express this term.

And applied, uh, to that expression that we have there,

right?

So there we have exploitation of, of the product is

equal 0.

Which means The covariance between the two animals plus the

expectation.

you know.

So I'm doing this right, what's our kind of ultimate

oh well we want to express this term, right?

We want to understand what explains the differences in expected

returns of two assets, right, because this will, you know,

eventually give us great condition.

OK, so let's derive it from this one.

OK, so I'm making progress, um, before I do one

last step, let's check maybe we can already see some

intuition here.

So in which case will we have let's say positive

terms when will it be that.

Returns on asset H are higher than its onset.

Well, this would be true, right?

This, I mean this thing is always positive, right, consumption

is positive.

The expectation of consumption marginal utility is also positive.

minus here.

The effectively what we need, we need, we need for

this to be true is that this covariance is negative.

Right, so we need that covariance between.

What is your TV too.

And the difference in the returns is negative.

OK, so then how do we put this in words,

what is?

What does it tell us about the properties of these

two assets?

So which asset is safe and which one is Modi's

scheme?

You would If you if you want, we can always

rewrite this connects into two parts.

So for safe asset, this covariance is kind of lower

or higher.

Uh, I have a uh.

RF is safe.

So how, how can you see this?

Uh, your so consumption is lower.

Exactly right, exactly perfect, right?

So this as pays more in the states when marginal

utility is higher.

Right, relative to this SF, which means that it is

safer, right?

So is safer.

OK, good.

And so then.

We get this result, right, because I'm going to have

a safer, which means that H is uh riskier.

And so according, you know, to the optimal um pricing,

investors, they require that they require compensation for taking this

risk.

Right, so if returns were the same, were the same,

they would just always invest in the same asset, right?

There's no reason if, if, if it returns are the

same, what's the reason of investing in all these cases,

right?

They would only invest in safe one.

So they need some compensation for AD risk, right?

And so on average there these cases should have higher

returns.

By the way, I should have those all those expectations.

Does this make sense?

OK, good.

So then one last step.

So this, I mean economic in you can already see,

but you know, just to, to, to get to our

UAP condition, then we kind of take approximation here, right?

So in a sense I can put this term inside

covariance, right, just divide assumption by this exploitation and then

take the first order approximations.

I'm not going to do this here, right, but Uh,

so we can take.

Ours and switching to.

Uh, the returns, right, so then, and then we have

minus the gradients here, so instead of consumption levels.

We can write it in.

This is a small C OK.

This is the consumption.

And then we gave that RHR.

This is just the approximation so let me approximate time

here.

Yes, so minus schools me.

And then finally, right, so in our particular application, what

is this is this is a general formula, but let's

go, let's switch back to, uh, once there.

What is local return on the I think one is

just local interest rate.

With the world as its.

Uh, interest rate was change in the exchange rate.

OK, so let's put it back into our expression.

And I will, I just change the science again, right,

so I will have.

you see this here.

And they would have Hope everything is correct, but let

me know if you see me.

those slide.

OK, so first of all, again, any questions about immigrations

are all steps clear here again, and there is some

hand waving when we go from here to here.

OK, we're not going to spend time on that and

I don't expect you to do this.

It's, it's not that hard but.

Not worth it.

OK, so intuitions is exactly the same.

Just one last thing that we need to do, or

we can do this, right?

So we have this expiration here and we kind of

simplify it a little bit.

You if you think from the perspective, you know, it's

we think about short term goals, right, or it was

just.

One period.

So what is, I mean, when we compute consumption and

this returns, but what Where the kind of, uh, randomness

come from?

What is the sort of fluctuations in the returns?

The interest rates, you know, in advance, right?

Remember when you invest, when you do credit trade, right,

you go to our currency invested that the interest rates

you already know in advance.

The only thing that you don't know is future exchange

rate.

And so you, in principle, you can kind of drop

this job, OK?

And so in the end, everything just depends on this

covariance between consumption and exchange rate.

Right?

OK, so and just to remind you, this is the

difference between RF and RH.

So in which is good investors require.

Um, for which purposes will, will investors require highs?

In other words, but let me write this here.

So this is again these are expected returns on doing

credit trade.

You borrowing domestic currency, you invest in foreign currency, right?

So for which currencies we expect this term to be

higher.

For which she was going to be lower.

Which.

I mean, for domestic, right?

I mean domestic currency is always 0 and I is

equal I star, so everything is 0, right?

But suppose you are American investor, let's say, right?

I'm preparing for the next paper, which that's exactly the

6.

You're an American investor, you're choosing which currency to invest,

right?

So you know, from which currency you kind of expect

compensation for taking the risk.

Out of several foreign cars.

So when this thing is positive, right, when this covariance

is positive.

And it's all.

Or at least no, no, no negative.

But what does it mean that this covariance is positive?

Hm.

best.

Um, Right, uh, OK, so this, let's see.

So this is the my exchange rate, right, this is

the my exchange rate, so which means that it goes

up.

At the same time as our consumption goes up, right,

so which means that when our consumption goes up, this

is that time that stays for us, our exchange, which

means that foreign currency depreciates.

So, right, again, currencies which depreciate when US investor has

uh low consumption should pay compensation for this.

They should have higher uh expected uh returns, and they

should get on average they should have.

Right, so if you think about emerging, right, usually their

finances depreciate during the periods of global financial crisis, not

even recession or global pandemic.

Usually we think that emerging economies right, their currencies depreciate,

so they should on average have positive, uh, risk people.

So what would be an example of the opposite cases

which currencies usually appreciate in bad times.

But which guys are safe.

So the goer itself, but again, the builder is not

so interesting what which is.

Uh, wis franc, right, Swiss franc is a classical example

of the currency which is usually stronger in and whatever.

And so for, for, for Swiss franc we actually expect

this, uh, term to be negative.

OK.

OK, so if there are no questions, let us now

show you there's this classical paper by and from 2007

which does exactly this.

We just checking the data what we we just spelled

out, right?

So they, they all currencies.

They compute the expected returns and deviations.

They sort these currencies into portfolios based on these excess

returns, right?

So there are some currencies which never returns and there

are some assets, some parts some currencies which have on

average negative returns.

OK, and then they check whether there's correlation between returns

of these currencies effectively the exchanges and, uh, you know,

US, uh, consumption.

OK, so in other words they.

They compute this object in the data.

Then they compute this covariance, OK.

Then they multiply this covariance to predict what should be

the the, um, this, uh, the screen and they compare

this this cream that they they get according to this

covariance with the one that they observe in the data.

So the next picture shows that, um, right so.

So I guess this must be the actual returns of

different currencies, right, and this is the pre that was,

uh, according to their covariances and OK, they have 4

different models.

I mean the models are in some sense, you know,

they, they kind of use different sigmas.

Really very loosey, right?

I mean they are a little bit more complicated than

that, but it's as if they're using different things, OK,

you can see that, well, there's some positive correlation and

actually for some models it behaves quite reasonable, right?

So if the model was correct, if the theory as

a pricing theory is correct, then all these portfolio.

Should be just on the 45 degree line.

The actually predicted ones should be the same, but even

if they're not, you know, perfectly aligned, there's still, it

still seems to be true that, you know, there's positive

correlation between the two, indeed currencies which have higher covariance,

they also have high expected returns.

OK, makes sense.

Now, so what is the limitation?

What is the problem?

Why is it's very it's very famous, but you know,

I think nowadays people don't really think it's a very

good explanation, and the problem the problem is quantitatively everything

works, but quantitatively it turns out that there is a

big problem there.

And so I can just use this formula, right?

So, OK, here is our expression there, right?

We say that, uh, this premium depends on this covariance.

Covariance can be decomposed into three parts, right?

The correlation and two, deviations, right?

This is a definition of correlation.

Now, what do we know about these objects?

OK, so standard deviation for consumption.

It is what?

Let me write this here, right?

We have correlation between consumption and exchange rate.

We have standard deviation.

And another standard deviation.

But then for consumption is.

Did we discussed this last time, no?

12%, right, something like that.

What about this thing?

But think about annual frequency.

Perfect, right, exactly, something like 12%, right?

You should know these numbers.

I mean this is, you know, we don't have that

many numbers in this course, but this is something that

you should remember.

OK.

And then what, what we know about this thing.

Is it I + 1 minus 10?

Not be direct number but just.

Closer to 0 to 1.

You connect the votes, you know, we talk about the

disconnect, right?

The disconnect is exactly about this kind of moment exchange

rates are not very correlated with microvas inclusion consumption, which

means that this thing is also pretty low, right?

So again, there is some debate in the literature, but

people sometimes say that it's -0.2 number and again with

the area that it's very volatile and it's, you know,

it's not clear that yeah, it is very different from

0.

OK, so then if you multiply all these numbers, clearly

you will get very, very low number, right?

OK, so let's take 2.

This misses 0.2% and then you get Another, so it's

something like this, I guess, if, if I'm not mistaken,

right?

So of the order, I mean there there's also a

sign here, but that's abstract from that, right?

So that's, that's, that's what can what you can generate

on the right hand side.

OK.

Now what about yours?

Let's see.

So here, here from this picture you can see I

think this is already 1% for this one, right?

So it's not unusual to have, you know, 24% VIP

deviations.

Right, which means that to go from this number to

this one, you need a very high sigma.

And the only way to get it, so sigma should

be something like.

50 from 50 to 100.

And this is a risk aversion.

And this is kind of a crazy number.

So, you know, some, some people put it very nicely,

if, if people had such a risk aversion, they would

never leave the apartment, right?

They would never go anywhere, take any risk at all.

Uh, so the standard, the standard calibration of sigma, something

like 1 to 2, right?

OK, you can in some calibrations people use 5, but

that's upper limit.

You can't really go above that.

I mean there is no empirical evidence that people are

dead.

OK, so I mean this is a big discrepancy.

I mean qualitatively theory works, but quantitatively it's completely unreasonable,

right?

It's just two orders of magnitude difference.

Um, that's a problem.

And In the sense, right, OK, so, uh, the next

thing what it does, it tries to put this risk

premium on steroids instead of saying that we have all

this risk of trading currencies spread across households, right, and

then, you know, give, give.

consumption.

There is just not much risk left for individual households.

Let's parts.

Let's say that Brexit, you know, 99% of people don't

trade, uh, bonds, and then there is, you know, a

very small fraction of population and even professional traders who

do that, and all these kind of things, it is

very much concentrated there.

OK, so because of that, these guys can have much

more volatile consumption and as a result, they will charge

you much, right?

And then you don't need such crazy value of.

OK, let's make a 6 minute break and then we'll

talk about uh 6 Mars.

I You.

OK.

I also.

I have an hour.

Yeah Yeah.

Um It I and it's.

Mhm It's Right.

Oh yeah.

the So he said The I think like.

Identify a few policies.

Inspecting that and and then just do it.

Mhm OK Yeah, yeah.

Oh.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, totally, I mean we are.

He is a bunch.

And it's a of And I.

Uh.

And OK.

Mhm Cars cars.

OK OK.

Yeah.

Actually.

Use it finish it up.

Yeah Yeah.

You Yeah Um, Uh right.

You have all enterprises and I think Mexico is a.

Yes.

OK, I think we need to resume.

Um, OK, I was thinking about your question, uh, about,

uh, whether it portrayed as I guess some, but I,

I want you also think about this maybe interesting theories,

right?

And my suggestion is that if it's about financials, maybe

then you know, some agents can trade on that I

think there were even some peoples in mind about that,

right?

So if you know that there are something.

To the world when others will be constrained and will

not be able to trash, then you might want to

prepare right maybe some buffers of funding and make money

from that right so I think, I think in previous

one that we just discussed, right, there's no opportunity for

the trash, um, if it is, OK, so let's talk

about.

This is again, it, it's kind of this one is

somewhere in between, right?

It's like, uh, you know, just exogenous convenience, but this

will be already a model with financial frictions.

So both from, you know, from the point of view

of traders and from the point of view of the

government, there are some that, you know, there are some

that they can potentially explode.

OK, so I, I think like the, the early version

of this idea comes from John and Rose, then this

was actually the micro foundation that we use now, I

believe I would say that it's it's much more relevant

for our people.

I will, I will show you the results from there

for the for the first.

OK, so here is the structure, um.

So you have two markets for simplicity.

You have all households.

You have foreign households.

They can trade freely in the goods markets, right?

So there's still, you know, budget constrained the exports still

depends on the future.

So everything that was said before about goods markets is

still the same.

But then the structural financial markets is different.

If instead of them just reiterating common quoting rules, and

it was in a sense assumption, this assumption that we

made before.

Now we will assume that these guys, they, these households,

they can.

Only trade local currency bonds.

So if you're in the UK, you can open deposits,

take loans, invest in assets which are denominated in local

currency, OK, as if you can't buy US, uh, treasuries,

right, US bonds.

Symmetrically in in the US, right, households can only trade

or maybe borrow using uh dominated assets.

Then how can capital flows right if there, if there

are no other agents, then it's clear then, you know,

this house of the country you borrow and safe from

each other because they use different currencies.

But the, the assumption is that there are some arbitrators

in financial markets that can trade both cars, right?

So all international capital flows, they will go through these

arbitractures.

Right, because you, you want to buy your own household,

you want to buy American goods, so you go to

a local bank, you borrow in pounds from that local

bank, right?

You kind of pay foreigners.

Foreigners want to save.

They save in dollars, and these are betters will take

short positions in dollars, right?

They borrow in dollars, and they invest in house when

they give you a loan, right?

That's, that's how it works.

OK, that's the first ingredient, extra ingredient, and then the,

the, the last ingredient which is crucial is, uh, noise

traders.

OK, so this will be the kind of the dark

matter part of this model that I mentioned before, right?

So, uh, measuring one of noise traders is.

Almost impossible and maybe at some point people will do

that, but right now it's, it's, it's, it's no one

I think has done that.

But there's this presumption, right, that there are some firms,

some financial institutions which just demand one currency in exchange

for the other.

So what can be the stories behind what what can

be the moods behind this noises ones where it can

be about the legal sector, right?

Imagine that you are, uh, let's say a UK corporation

which builds a plant in Brazil, so you expect that

in the future years you will have some stream of

income coming from Brazil, but you don't want to have

any exposure to fluctuations in real exchange, right?

And then you want to take this risk.

So you just, you know, you expect that you will

get 1000 riyals in the future, so you just, you

know, borrow rials and invest in loans as you kind

of undo your, your currency risk, right?

So what else that you will get, you will just

give you financial, and they will give you dollars instead.

So you can predict, uh, your ce of income in

bonds or in dollars instead of, uh, in in the.

Let's give me one thing, right?

And, and, OK, you, you just, you understand that, you

know, you will probably lose some mind because you're not

forecasting the future.

You're not thinking deeply, but we do it in a

second order, right?

You are mostly interested in just getting rid of the

c.

And then there are also financial institutions like maybe pension

funds, right, or other traders in which mostly think about

own current investment again maybe because of regulation or their

internal policy, they also don't want to to have this

currency risk, right?

And then they, they just upload it.

So in the end, as you can see that these

guys just just have exogenous demand and supply of currency.

These guys, you know, they are mostly motivated by trading

goods markets, demand for currency, and they create only arbitrators

who look at it, right?

They are the only kind of rational guys who try

to exploit their ration opportunities, right?

They try to grow in cheap currency and invest in

in expensive currency.

this is, this is the stuff now because again right

this guy is the kind of mechanical this is mechanical,

so the only, uh, programme that we consider is the

optimisation programme for the so this is how it looks

like.

So let me just use the same location, but let's

derive it together, right?

So, uh, we're going to assume, you know, this is

actually quite common assumption in, uh, financial literature, but we're

going to assume that these guys have.

Right they of course they, they want to get higher

returns on average.

W is is their future returns, future income.

They want to maximise expected, but there's some penalty for

taking the risk.

As it turns out that you can consider more more

sophisticated utility functions like there are utility and to the

second order approximation, it's kind of a good right so

there's a penalty for holding, uh, summaries, and all do

here is, uh, again a risk aversion.

OK, so then how does it work?

Uh, so you have, again, in this presentation, right, you

have, uh, two assets with returns RH and RF.

Right, so suppose you borrow.

Using foreign bonds, investors, invest in home bonds.

Right, so this is how much returns you get on

each unit of your investment, and you choose how much

to invest, right?

You choose, so these guys, they always take zero net

position, right, how much they borrowed in one currency, how

much they invest in the other currency, but they choose

the ski, right?

They choose the growth positions, how much they borrow and

invest.

Different currencies.

So this is, this is the, the variable G.

So this is different from previous model.

We will change notation because it's a completely different model.

OK, so this will give you, you know, their future,

future wealth.

Um, So what, what, so notice that they are allowed

to take negative positions, right?

So what, what does it mean if they take negative,

choose negative D?

It means that now they borrow in domestic currency, right,

and invest in foreign currency, right?

So we don't restrict you to be a positive number.

OK, so then let's substitute this expression into the objective

function, right?

We have So D they choose to do in the

first period, so they know D in advance.

So the only source of uncertainty comes from returns from

these two assets.

And then there is this penalty for taking risk, right?

And again, I can take the out of the variance

term because it is predetermined.

This will be just this squared.

And then we have.

All these returns.

Let's take the first order condition with respect to G.

Right, so did you with you?

Yeah.

And from this expression we can Get the optimal portfolio.

Yes, so this is um.

This is the solution.

OK, so let's, let's kind of pause here for a

second.

So first of all, what is the intuition for this

expression?

So when I mean the two competitive statics.

So they take larger position, he goes up if what.

If there is a bigger difference between expected returns, right,

so if they think that this difference increases, it means

that there are more opportunities for the rash, right?

They will be willing to take larger positions.

On the other hand, If this investment becomes more risky,

if the variance of returns goes up, then the size

of their portfolio decreases towards 0, right?

You can have either sign, but it goes to zero.

So in the limit, you know, if this variance goes

to infinity, then they always take zero positions.

And then, of course, the same logic applies for risk

aversion.

If they're very risk averse, then.

They will not take any positions.

Now what happens if it is neutral?

It only goes to zero.

Uh, yes, kind of from partial equilibrium perspective, what, what

do you think will kind of happen in the equilibrium

in the equilibrium.

right, they will not tolerate any DH, right?

If there's, they will step in, they positions, and they

close this deviation and so it will be always the

case that you know all assets have the same expected

returns.

Exactly.

OK, very good.

And so one last step, right?

So again, this was kind of for arbitrary RH and

RF.

Let's again use our expressions as before, right?

So we have um.

Difference in the returns between domestic and foreign bonds.

On here and let me instead of putting the full

expression, we already know that interest rates are predetermined, right,

so the only source of volatility is the exchange rate.

And in principle, we would even, you know, this is

just the variance of the exchange rate, right?

So we would just know that we're seeing a square.

This is, uh, this is just the.

So one more question to you.

So how, how, I mean.

Is there any inconsistency between what we have here and

what we had in the previous model?

I mean, I don't see any covariances here.

So why is that?

It seems like what matters for asset pricing here is

only expected expectation, which was also true there.

But then right now the moment which was relevant there

was covariance, and here is the covariance we have a

variance.

So why is that?

That's a difficult question, but maybe some of you can,

can kind of see it through.

Think about this.

I mean, this is really the, you know, this is

the fundamental difference between these two models, right, because we

kind of give up on this idea that covariance between

aggregate consumption and exchange rates would explain the change rate

given that there is disconnect, right?

But on the other hand, that one was very general.

We just said that, you know, agents just price, uh,

assets, uh, and require some, uh, risk premiums.

It seems like something like this should be true here.

How, how you kind of reconcile this difference.

So what about consumption of these guys?

So the difference was that we had households who care

about their consumption and they care about investment where people

who are investing, people are trading, they're not part of

the households.

They're just maximising that makes sense that's why that's why

household consumption doesn't appear here, right?

But what about I mean that was kind of for

any agent with some consumption, right?

So what about consumption of these guys, these traders?

I mean, it doesn't appear explicitly, but in a sense,

right, you can think of this as their consumption, right?

Of course I mean sometimes it will be negative, right,

because if they're really unlikely they will get negative returns.

They will have some losses, but you know, even these

preferences they can actually have negative consumption, which is a

little bit crazy, but I mean right again, as I

said, think of this as some approximation of the true

utility function.

And so in some sense this object here is their

consumption.

And the reason that we have variance instead of covariance

is because it's just covariance of X with X.

The only source of their income, the only source of,

you know, their income that they can spend on consumption

is this crate return itself.

Right?

So in the end, right, so loosely speaking, right, we

have, we have covariance of consumption with, uh, returns, right?

Again, as we said before.

This term we can skip price, we only have consumption,

uh, and exchanges, but consumption itself, right, this thing here

is effectively returns on their investment.

And so in the end this just becomes exchange of

relativity and this is, you know, again this is at

the heart of designated markets model.

So the only way to get this disconnect is that

instead of having agents who also trade many other assets,

get labour income, and so they, they, you know, SDF,

their marginal utility depends on aggregate consumption that these guys,

they only get money from exchange rate itself and so

then it's the exchange rate which matters for this.

OK.

So, here.

OK, the model to amplify amplify and make it disconnected

from aggregate micro right uh that's almost a of the

word, right?

You can concentrate this all risk.

On a very small part of the population, and this

population is actually the main source of income comes from

credit.

If I mean it's, it's a really big assumption because

if I put other terms here which are unrelated to

the exchange rates, right, maybe they trade other assets or

maybe they get labour incomes, then the formula would change

then you will get back your covariance of no this

income with exchange rate.

And then it will be much harder to get disconnect,

right, in particular, if it's you have labour income, there

must be no disconnect between exchange rate and labour income.

If you have other asset prices, then there will be

no disconnect between exchange rate and asset prices, and in

the data low correlation between the two.

So that's, that's important.

That's, that's really important.

OK.

OK, so then let's, let's kind of move on, right?

So, OK, we have this expression now.

I can kind of right.

I can invert it in a sense.

So from, from the perspective of the res, a portfolios,

but we, right, like when we solve the one that

eventually we won't understand what happens to the UAP you

know, so I can, you know, put this denominator on

the left hand side.

What I get is that expectation, right, the, the, the

UAP.

Is proportionate to risk aversion, of the exchange rate, and

positions of this this traders state.

In other words, if you somehow push these arbitrators to

take non zero positions, they will require compensation for taking

this risk, right?

Remember from our picture before, what they are doing the

brow with one currency and investing in the other, right,

always in a zero position.

So by definition if they if they take some on

the balance sheets and they require a compensation of it,

right?

So for example, by the way, OK, let's, let's work

for this expression, right?

So if they take, if this is positive, right, so

then it means that this whole expression will be positive

and so then you, you get, you know.

Uh, positive, uh, inequality here.

So then what is, what does it mean?

So foreign currency the currency currency which has which one

has higher returns.

V has high returns and why is that?

These guys invested in rich currency and it's going back

here, right, but remember, remember that depositive means that they

borrow in domestic currency and invest in foreign currency, right?

And so if they if they borrow and invest it

in foreign, right, they want foreign to have higher returns,

otherwise they say they can change rate is.

OK, good.

So, so that was the first part.

Um, Now finally This is what we had.

Now we have this extra premium term.

The, the, the last question is how, how is it

determined, right?

And so this this comes just from the market condition.

So the we going.

That this is the place where I always get confused.

So let's see if if I can do this.

Maybe you will help me.

OK, so these guys, they borrow in home currency and

invest in foreign, right from home to foreign.

Um, So then what is this thing, so I guess

I can rewrite it like this and plus equals an

experts.

You can see that N is this is uh no

trader in month for currency, OK, and so they do

the same thing, right?

They for noise traders we also have uh, they borrow

in home currency and invest in foreign currency.

This kind of total, right, total, uh, positions of no

are the treasors and no res and then on the

right hand side we have demand of households.

So what, when I say I get, I get confused.

So, OK, how what they do, so if that export

is positive, it means that they do what?

They save and they save in domestic currency.

Right?

Right, because I mean they don't have access to foreign

currency, so they say in domestic currency, and when they

save, right, they, it means that they, they give this

money to arbitrators.

So arbitrators are now borrowing in home cars, right?

And in which means because of the normality they need

to invest in it makes sense.

Uh, the export is how much households invest in, in,

you know, safe in, in home currency, and this home

currency that moves.

So in the end this is just kind of supply

of currency and this is the demand for currency.

You just need, uh, you know, get the, the signs

right, uh, in which parts.

How they're doing this.

OK, explain how net exports is related to saving, right,

so this just comes from this, this, right?

We said before that when a country has a positive

net exports, it means that it gets kind of more

money, right?

It exports, it gets more money than it spends so

it is saving right.

So in the next year they will use this extra

revenue to buy more foreign goods.

I say they can only save in domestic currency, so

they're pushing this money to a cas.

They, they kind of borrow this money, right?

They don't get it for free.

They borrow it, but that means that they need to

invest in foreign.

And of course, I mean, it's all symmetric, right, because

how can, I mean, foreigners, they have negative trade balance.

So they buy more home goods than they export, which

means they can only do it if they borrow in

foreign currency.

And so this is exactly what to do.

Hm OK, so now we have the full one, right.

OK um.

This modified UAP condition.

This is the first one, right?

We had before we had just UAP.

Now we have modified the AP.

We have market in in the asset markets which we

can always substitute here, OK.

And then finally the last piece is our standard, uh.

Budget constraint and this budget constraint, right in the temporal.

So that's in a sense again it's based on the

model that we discussed two weeks ago, right?

The only difference is that before we had 0 here

now we have this uh extra uh terms.

OK, so I think I have an example here, but

let me, I mean, we will discuss something very similar

also on Monday and let me also say this, you

know, for Monday.

So you are kind of encouraged us to solve the

problem first yourself, OK, but I mean, conceptually nothing different.

If you have two equations with two unknowns, you can

just mechanically solve it and then the only question is,

you know, to understand the economic intuition.

So instead of doing that, let me just go, uh,

show you some empirical evidence, OK, um, so this is

both, you know, and it also has important policy implications.

So let's start with the empirical evidence.

Uh, and this is actually our second paper with my

coworker.

So how can you test the model?

What was the very specific one that you usually don't

have in other models, even in other models.

It is this here, right?

So of course the best test would be to see

whether the UIP deviations are related to this, right?

So maybe you identify most the shocks, maybe you measure

directly the positions of these arbitras, and then you can

see whether there's there's correlation.

So that's kind of, you know, ideal test of the.

And unfortunately it's very hard to do, right?

So even if you have microdata, which is, you know,

a big if, so but actually Bank of England does

have this data, even if you somehow you get the

positions of all traders in the currency market, it's still

not clear which of them are arbitrators, which ones are

noise traders, right, which are maybe just representing the real

sector.

So in the end, it's a very hard, uh, you

know, very challenging thing to do.

There are some attempts.

There are some suggestive evidence, but in principle it's very

hard.

So, OK, now that you don't have the information about.

What else can you do to test the model?

Well, a much more realistic thing to do is to

test whether deviations, whether they are related to sigma square.

the exchange rate, right, and like you know which have

um and which have the problem is that most countries

with the most countries with the emerging, so there are

many differences between these countries.

So I think better evidence comes from, uh, from the

breads, right?

We already talked about breads, right?

So this is if you remember in 1973.

The US officially that the collapse and at that point,

most developed countries and developing countries, they switched from to

the because we expect that under PE, right when the

exchange of volatility is close to zero, there shouldn't be

much deviation from the UAP.

And then if you have a floating regime, then the

UAP premium is not zero.

Furthermore, right, so it would be, so according to our

previous model, we said that most of the change actually

comes from VIP shocks, right?

And VIPs here are actually shocks of noises, right?

So what you can see from, from our expressions is

that if you have For fusion Right, and you got

and moves and that moves you.

If interest rates don't respond and usually you know once

your policy keeps interest rates to be stable, then the

only way is to adjust for exchange rates to move

exchange rate.

Alright, and again we said that most of the change

in volatility actually comes from from these shows.

What is interesting is that if somehow you switch to

a regime.

Even if noise trade the shocks don't change, right, the

AP premium doesn't change this thing becomes zero, and the

change rate will not respond.

Right, so it's in a sense it's almost a self

fulfilling property in this model, right, that if central bank

somehow means credibly to a bank, it will immediately kill

the main source of volatility in the exchange rate, right?

So without even, you know, doing.

Anything else, it's not like they need to offset the

stocks.

They will not even need to change the interest rates,

right, to upset the stocks because the path of these

rocks into change rate becomes zero.

That's a very interesting which is, which doesn't, I mean,

in all other models that we discuss, I don't think

it's true.

OK, now let's look at the empirical evidence.

So this is, uh, as I said, right, end of

the presenthood system.

This is the exchange rate against seven other green currencies,

and this is the first difference.

OK.

And so you can see that up until 1973.

It was very, very stable.

There were, you know, occasional variations of, uh, in some

countries, but they were really rare.

And then once countries, uh, you know, deviate from the

bread and agreements, then you see this kind of crazy.

So let's just to show you that there will be

change in the exchange of volatility.

Now if you estimate, so what what this shows is

that for each individual country we we estimate this VIP

coefficient, right?

just the same regression.

Um, That we had discussed at the very beginning and

so we estimate this coefficient.

OK, so it's not true that this rate is equal

1 during the you don't get, you know, perfect, perfect

alignment with the, but you can see that for all

currencies that we have in our sample, the coefficient is

much lower, much more negative, uh, under the close fusion.

Right, so now the worst devis from the UAP, they

are much larger, uh, during the flow vision after the

end of the well, and the president was actually, it's

not that bad.

And if you look at the UK, yeah, so this

person even this thing is impressive, but there were some

papers which used, you know, a little bit better data,

and they, they actually show that the coefficient is really

close to one during most of the brand was speed

and then towards the end of the re woods it

starts going down and it becomes uh very negative.

So that that's kind of very much in line with

with the theory.

And one last piece of evidence.

OK, so this is a little bit more complicated.

It goes a little bit beyond our simple model, but

I hope you can see this.

So imagine that these shocks, these shocks more exogenous.

Then how can you have a pack if you switch

from a floating regime to a pack, how does the

main policy implement that?

You can see this from this equation also that wasn't

control this first step I think is easy to see.

What is the difference between back and float?

If you have strokes here.

You lose control of the policy.

So under flow you kind of keep interest rate.

You use interest rates to stabilise prices and employment, and

you allow all these financial shocks to go into exchange

rate, right?

Now once you switch to the bank, you keep this

thing constant, it becomes zero, and instead you need to

move your interest rate to offset these financial shocks.

But once, so which means that we, we, we already

said, right, this kind of problems they need to be

pretty large to expand movements and exchange rate under the

floor inclusion.

So now if you switch over the flow to a

bad, it means that all this volatility will go into

interest rates.

And interest rates, they have large effects on microeconomics.

I think there's some evidence on that, and I think

most microeconomists strongly believe in that.

So that means that inflation and consumption should really change

their property.

They should become much more volatile under the pack, right?

All this kind of risk which.

was absorbed by the exchange rate.

It needs to be absorbed now by interest rates and

by other micro variables.

And as you can see from the speech, it's not

what happened.

There is really no structural break in terms of volatility

of other microeconomic variables before the end and after the

end of the season.

So that's kind of really the big puzzle.

You see this crazy change behaviour.

But at the same time you don't see anything comparable

in terms of other micros and that's positive if you,

if you, you know, if this equation you make these

financial shocks exortion because they need to be absorbed by

somebody.

You can't have it, you know, not absorbed by anything.

But, but, you know, the, the kind of very interesting

property of this model is exactly that this pass through

of this financial it isn'tulence, and the policy is, uh,

commits to, to, to pack, right, this kind of feels

completely destroyed the equilibrium of the interest rates don't really

need to change very much across regions.

So, uh, does it make sense?

I feel like there's some confusion.

So let me make clarify two things, right?

So, if you commit to a ban, it might be,

right, whatever happens in the coin, whatever are the shocks

will not allow change to move.

Then sigma becomes zero, which means that whatever happens to

financial shocks, that will not affect anything.

It will not affect even the interest rates in equilibrium

doesn't need to respond to the shocks.

Now, what is kind of the care.

So, I mean, it's not completely free lunch, right in

the sense.

So in response to which shocks, the market policy will

need to respond.

You'll need to respond and if it wants to exchange

rate.

Well, any other shops, right, in particular, remember we talked

about productivity shocks, data shocks like that, right?

Everything that appears in the market changes that experts, right,

as we discussed before, in principle, that changes exchange rate

and multipolicies should not allow that to happen.

So they will need to change interest rates offset these

shocks, OK, that, that's kind of still the cost.

I mean, in that sense rate of is still there.

The only thing that, you know, is different in this

model is that they don't need explicit asset this financial

shock.

OK, uh, think about this, OK, I hope.

Ah, so that's exactly, that's exactly, you know, the key

policy prescription which is very different in this model from

other model, right?

So if somehow was really credible, right, if they can

markets that whatever happens, they will not allow should move,

then they can actually, uh, you know, they can, uh,

they don't even need to do much on the equilibrium.

That will be enough to eliminate a lot of noise

from the change, right?

This noise trader demand trucks.

So that, that, that's kind of the the implication of

the world.

So of course the price is pretty hard, and again,

as I said, sometimes countries have really large productivity shocks,

and they actually do want to move a future even

in the short run.

So that's why probably they still want to to to

allow some moves to exchange it, but they can, they

can try to bring this volatility down, right?

They try and that's exactly what you know.

Many countries are doing.

We see very few countries which have really flowing exchange

rate.

We see very few countries which have fully fixed exchange

rate, and most countries are somewhere in between.

They try to stabilise exchange rate partially, but they also

allow them to adjust, uh, sometimes, and I don't want

to say that's the only reason they're doing, but this

is very much in line with the predictions of this

model.

That's exactly what should do.

Uh, so ideally, and that's, you know, we have our

3rd paper or 4th paper with OE, so which is

about optimal policy and optimal policy, how can you implement

the first place, you need two policy instruments.

What you really want to do, you want to, you

want to use your interest rates to target inflation and

employment, but then you also want to have something like

FXI.

Uh, foreign, uh, foreign exchange interventions, right, have reserves to

eliminate noise trader shocks.

So if you have additional to, you know, which will

appear in this equation, right, this is the amount of

households of arbitrators of noise standards, and then you will

also have demand and supply from the central bank, then

you can directly do these jobs.

If you don't have this tool or maybe you have

limited reserves, then you might want to use your interest

rate to partially, you know, decrease this.

That's, I mean, OK, this is a little bit becomes,

you know, a little bit more more advanced, but, uh,

we should probably write the books you column on that

which I can that beautiful teaching, um, because I, I,

I don't really, uh, to, to, to read the full

paper it's too complicated.

OK, good.

Uh, OK, OK, we still have that good.

So then there are two more models.

So the first one is financial.

I mean, the previous one was already with, right?

It was already model with simulated market.

The next model.

Bring it to the and I must say full disclosure,

this 4 hours.

It's very famous in finance, the majority.

They also use segmented markets, but they have, they make

different assumptions about arbitrators.

So think of the same picture that I showed you

before.

But without no traders, OK?

So we still have, you know, home households.

We, we still have foreign households, then we have arbitrators.

Right, so we still have the same structure, but there

are no noise traders, and there is, there is still

this B&B stars B and D star.

OK, so the, the sort of the.

I mean they have some micro quotations, but I mean

in the end it doesn't really matter.

So you can just think, you know, you can just

assume that this is the amount of theses.

OK, so again you can see that it is very

similar to what we had before except that instead of

having this omega and gradient of change, you just have

exogenous parameter.

OK And sometimes people call this model because because of

this.

So the rest of the world is the same, right?

Without movies traders, we have market even condition in asset

markets which looks at this.

We still have inter temporal budget constraint, but the interesting

thing here is that shocks, the main shock that they

emphasise is the shock.

Right, so Gamma is kind of um, uh, uh, you

know, financial capacity of, of these arbitrators.

There are some periods when they have a lot of

hunting, they are willing to take a lot of risk

and then Gamma goes down, right?

Gamma goes.

Now so they take larger positions.

And then there are periods when there's kind of financial

stress, uh, they are very worried.

The value at risk, uh, becomes tighter, tighter, and so

then power increases and then they decrease their potitions.

So that, that's, that's kind of the main shock in

this model.

Um, OK, OK, let's look, let's go through this example.

There was something interesting here.

So we're going to assume that the interest rates are

the same.

OK, we are going to assume that the country has

What was it your productivity in the first period?

And negative in the second period.

Right, so this is just to generate, uh, intertemporal savings

borrowing.

OK, those are the only inputs that we need, I

guess.

OK, good.

So then let's let's kind of solve for the equilibrium

in this model, right?

So we have UAP condition.

Interest rates are equal to 0.

Then we have Gamma multiplied by Z, but Z is

just equal to net experts.

And just combining this equation with this one.

So that's the first one, and then we have um

intertemporal budget constraint.

OK, maybe I'm going a little bit too fast, so

stop me if something isn't here, right?

So we, this is the AP condition modify the AP

condition without the interest rates because they are the same

in two countries.

On the right hand side should be gamma multiplied by

G and D is equal to another X.

OK.

Makes sense.

If not, please ask otherwise hard.

OK, so then these things cancel out, right?

So we get from this that exchange rate in the

first period is just minus exchange rate in the second

period.

And we can kind of plug it in in the

first expression, so we get.

Um, minus.

To exchange rate in the first period.

And then let's put all terms with exchanges on on

one hand side, so we get.

His output, I guess.

OK.

Any questions?

Makes sense.

OK, so now let's discuss.

There are actually several things to discuss here.

So first of all, imagine that there were no financials

and what would be the exchange rate?

And why.

So what is the, I mean, what is the limit

here in this model when there are no high initials?

And we can somehow get back to our original version

of the model without any financial frictions.

There's not here.

There's not many, you know, what should we do with

God?

What should we think about gamma?

right then we have the, you know, your IP deviation

is equal to gamma multiplied by IP exactly.

So if we take gamma going to 0, we're back

to our original model, and as you can know is

an exchange it goes to 0.

Why is that?

Even though there are productivity shocks.

In this model.

Oh, come on guys.

Only the 3rd week.

Why, why is the exchange equals 0?

Why doesn't it depend on a?

Because A appears here and here, right, so it, I

mean you have high productivity today but low productivity tomorrow,

and these two things, they exactly upset each other, right?

On average, on average, the average productivity does not depend

on it.

It is always zero.

And as a result, you know, if you have this

AP condition with exchange rate being the same in two

periods, then you get that this thing is just 0.

OK, now relative to that benchmark.

We see that because government is positive, we see that

exchange rate is appreciated in the first period.

Right, so it is lower than it would be, uh,

without frictions.

And as you can guess from the budget constraints, of

course, it means that also in the second period it

will be depreciated, right?

I mean, uh, we have this, this condition here.

So it is, it is, I mean, even, even assume

that, right, let's, let's try if A is greater than

0, then.

In the first period we have appreciated the exchange rate

and in the second period we have depreciated the exchange

rate.

What is the intuition for this result?

Let me maybe show you in the picture.

So even though productivity is on average the same across

two periods, I mean on average is 0, sorry, on

average is 0 between two periods.

In this model, we have that the exchange rate is

um appreciated in the first period.

OK, let's just think out loud.

There are a few logical steps here.

So what happens?

I think it is high today and low tomorrow.

What will households do?

They'll say right, usually they want to smooth these things

across periods, so they want to save, which means that

what are the treasures will have to do.

Borrowing from they borrow in local currency and they invest

in foreign currency, right?

Exactly.

So they are, I mean, OK, they are not risk

givers here, but they are constrained, right?

There is this gamma which reflects that they, they again

want to, I mean, they, uh, require some compensation in

a sense for taking large positions, right?

Now, what kind of compensation do they want?

Which currency should pay higher returns?

Given the positions that they take.

So they remember they borrowed in domestic currency, right?

And they invested in the foreign currency.

currency should have higher return.

Exactly right.

They need, they will only take this position if foreign

currency higher returns, and how can you achieve this given

that interest rates are kind of the same, they are

they don't respond to all this stuff.

Change needs to adjust, right?

That's the only way to compensate this resource and foreign

currency needs to.

Appreciate, appreciate.

The next eat it.

It needs to right if if if foreign investment has

high returns, which means the domestic currency needs to depreciate.

Right, and that's exactly what we have here between these

two is the domestic currency depreciate.

OK, so that's, so, OK, that's, I think good intuition,

right?

Notice that if A is negative, if, if actually in

the first period home country has low productivity, then domestic

households will want to borrow, right?

Then arbitrators will take the opposite positions.

They will borrow in foreign currency, invest in domestic currency.

They will require compensation for that, so the domestic currency

needs to appreciate.

OK.

He does this make sense?

So that was kind of, I mean, the first part,

right?

This was kind of before even any show arrived.

uh, this is what we have.

Now let's think about gamma shocks.

So we will assume just again for concreteness, let's assume

that A is positive, OK.

And now suppose that there is financial stress in asset

markets, right?

Suppose that gamma goes up, so these are the retors,

you know, they want to kind of decrease their positions.

So then what happens to the exchange rate?

In the first period, according to our formula.

So A stays the same, right?

It's just productivity.

It doesn't change, but come increases.

OK, so what happens to this, to this ratio is

coming.

It increases exactly right.

So OK.

So this thing, I mean, it increases in absolute terms,

right?

But because of minus sign, it becomes more negative.

So exchange rate actually, um, appreciates even further.

OK.

So what is the intuition for this?

So, OK, maybe I should get, let me, let me

kind of maybe finish first formal analysis, right?

So this is for a positive and then for a

negative, right?

Of course the opposite is true, right?

We still have that this thing increases in absolute values,

but now it is positive.

Which means that exchange rate will depreciate.

So what is really interesting about this model is that

it critiques that, you know, it predicts that countries which

have, uh, um, which safe, right, which have current account

surplus in a sense.

For them, periods of financial stress should be, should be

associated with exchange rate appreciation while countries which run trade

balance deficit or current account deficit, which borrow, for them

periods of financial stress should be associated with exchange rate

depreciation.

That's, you know, it's kind of related to what we

said before, right?

So if you think of, you know, maybe Switzerland, uh,

this is a bad example, but I guess Switzerland, maybe

Japan to some extent, right?

These countries they have current account surplus usually, and indeed

the exchange rate.

Appreciate during periods of global crisis while some emerging economies

and other countries which borrow for them we expect that

the exchange rate will depreciate in the same in response

to the same shock, the same shock.

So what is the intuition for this result?

Why is it that exchange rate responses in the opposite

directions depending on initial positions?

And it's clearly related to the logic that we said

before, right, that.

Depending on, you know, where the country is borrowing or

saving, arbitrators are taking either long position or short position

in your currency, right?

And then when, when the shock arrives, they just require

high premium, right?

They require larger compensation.

And so the currency in which they take longer position,

right, that currency needs to, uh, to, to deliver higher

returns and so it will, uh, you know, it will

depreciate initially and has to appreciate, uh, eventually, right in

the, in the long run and the opposite for other

currencies.

Another way to see this is the problem.

So when gamma, you know, when gamma increases, think of

the limiting cases when gamma goes.

So what happens at these expressions.

Right, when gamma increases, what happens to G?

The absolute value of G decreases, right?

So if this, you know, if financial arbitrators, they panic,

they don't want to take any positions.

G will go down, but I mean if no one

is doing arbitrage, it means that no one is doing

this intermediation across countries, right?

And from the second condition you can see that it

means that net export will go to zero.

Right, I mean there is just no way for households

to borrow or to save if arbitrators are not willing

to take any positions, right?

And then you can see that if you, you know,

to bring net exports close to zero, exchange rate needs

to adjust, right?

That's the only way to restore equilibrium for households.

And then depending whether you had, you know, initially you

had negative value of net exports or positive, exchange rate

needs to adjust in different ways, right?

So for example, if a country was borrowing in the

first period.

It means that its imports were high and exports were

low, then what needs to happen to the exchange rate?

Lecture 14:

If you think 2 is a fair value, then I

think there's there's not as many drivers and rates.

There are a lot, it's a map but you can

kind of like you can insulate against the law.

Yeah and the only thing I, I think about rates

as well as you can play them so you can

hedge a lot of those factors or play a lot

of those factors uh so uh.

Is FX every single time, every single time I try

and call the syncratic story and I go, let's try

next versus check and you say this can be.

There's no fucking dollar to just wreck your I think

the dollar, the dollar is like.

You don't play an idiosyncratic.

If you're trying to play an idiosyncratic story, you know

right now you're gonna get, you're gonna get.

I tried I tried, I think one of my ideas

this summer was a twist and the Chinese I think

it worked out because the central bank was doing really

yeah, the only thing is probably like with that with

rates like what is their monetary policy.

that was, that was another dollar.

I think it was long, I can't remember.

This was long but I like volatility.

Oh, were you Max.

No, no, no.

Yeah yeah.

The thing that was really complicated is that that was

one morning, uh, like our meeting on Thursday and so

we needed to make a call on the day.

I had been saying that.

Mas it down 5%.

I wake up at 7 a.m. on Monday, pull out

my phone.

I max it down 5% watching the car.

Yeah and then an idiot Thursday.

I thought they were gonna prioritise my there's no way

they could range what currency is something they call ages.

I can't call them.

it's not like Mexico, but Mexico.

I I said right now.

Yeah, for sure.

I think that's like that's the funniest central in the

last 55 years, the Turkish one was.

I guess an emerging markets.

Yeah, we've been for ages.

Oh, you got the next class of that stuff.

Wow On the Tuesday we can say.

be ready I know 60% like pretty, but then it's

so pretty much it's uh.

Eastern actually.

Yeah, when I was in the Mhm You've never been

to this room.

It's a large one.

OK.

OK, finally.

So, I think this is where we stopped, right?

We talked about forward guidance puzzle, and then we will,

so we need to finish this topic and then we

will talk about exorbitant privilege.

Let me see.

Oh, it works very good.

OK, little bit intimidating.

OK, so let's see, uh, OK, so I believe we

talked about this one, right?

I think this is then we talked, no, this one

we didn't talk about.

OK, it's very good.

OK, so I mean this was an interesting model, right,

in a way because we said that even if you

have the same shock, right, the same financial shock, the

effects on the exchanges can be very different depending whether

the country runs, uh, current account, uh, debts or current

account services, right, whether it's trade balance, it's positive or

negative.

So countries which borrow, which have capital inflow, they might

respond very differently, right, and who remembers.

So what was the effect on the exchange rate.

So if you, if you have trade deficit, then Financial

crisis in this currency market, what will, what will be

the effect of it.

It totally depreci.

Uh, right, uh-huh, is more at risk, that's it, so

it's less, uh, it's less attractive to.

Finance in the uh in the country with uh trading

right they will kind of right exactly they will kind

of withdraw their financing, right?

They will try to deal them or to take smaller

positions so country will not be able to borrow, which

means, right, that it needs to to close its trading

balance.

And what is the way to do this?

Well, it needs to export more, import less, so its

exchange rate means to depreciate, right?

And countries which say for them if that was.

OK, good.

So then let's now talk about empirical evidence because in

some sense this model, right, the model and the one

that I showed you last time, they are very similar,

right?

So, I mean they use the same type of, uh,

or fully choice by a theors in the meetings, and

the only difference is that in that model this gamma,

right, we interpreted it as a risk aversion of financial

sector.

Right, and I showed you some if you remember, right,

the Bretton Woods episodes, what is called sometimes the Mussa

puzzle, right, that if you change the veil of the

normal change it, it, it, it looks like it is

consistent with the model changes portfolio decisions of the res.

OK, so this model has another important position.

This, if you take this government just as an exogenous

parameter, which is unrelated to risk, it means that even

if there is some kind of credit rate, which doesn't

involve any risk.

There must be some deviations from right.

OK, and so, OK, so I'm I'm going to show

you something slightly different.

It will be not UAP, but instead it will be

what is called CAAP.

So we talked very briefly I think in the very

first lecture about this, but let's now go a bit

more into details.

So remember, we talked about more trash conditions.

Right, and the way we derived, um.

The way we generate CIP was that we said that

OK, we have one right and then we have two

trading strategies.

One was just to Invest in longer bonds, uh, you

keep bonds right and then you get one plus I

next period or you can convert them into, uh, let's

say dollars right then on interest.

And then can go back, right?

And so in this case you can.

Um, one plus I start multiplied by the change and

the change, right, so that was the way we derive

the A.

So now there's another thing, another type of S is

there is, there are 4 performs.

Forwards With some prices we will do not with FT.

OK, so what is that right?

What is, what is a forward contract?

It's a contract which allows you to exchange two currencies

in the next year.

At the at the at the predetermined exchange rate, OK,

so we just sign a quarter that next period I

give you 1 pound.

Let's say, and he will give me $2.

So which, uh, exchange rate predetermined in the sense that

I mean the quarter specifies the exchange rate at which

we will.

Um, no, uh, I will give you pounds and you

will give me dollars next year, right?

So, I mean, I put index T here because this

is the period when we signed this contract, right?

When we determine this price, but actually, the change will

happen next period, right?

So.

Now of course what can happen is the following.

I take 1 pound.

I convert it into dollars like we did before, right?

So, uh, it becomes one over the UK exchange rate.

I invest this amount of dollars into again into US

treasuries.

Get some returns next year.

They're in dollars and now I need again to convert

them into dollar or into bonds, sorry, back into balance.

But what I can do instead of taking the risk,

you know, Without knowing what the normal changes will be

next period, what I can do I can in the

first period sign this forward contract and Exchange this amount

of dollars at this exchange rate, it will be.

One plus I start multiplied by F divided by.

Hm Uh, so this is kind of standard notation just

like for normal exchanges we usually use E for uh

forward because we usually use F.

Right, so what the fundamental difference between this strategy and

the one that we consider to be the GOP strategy,

is that there is no risk.

Right, I mean, unless it was your counterpart defaults or

you know when the US government defaults unless you got

from default case, there is no other risk, uh, in

this, uh, case because you know the exchange rate which

we will change that next year.

OK, so.

So then what would be the normal crash condition for,

for this strategy?

What should be true?

Right so I mean we before remember I mean we

polarised these two things and this is how we what

uh UAP current interest rates.

Now what we can do, right, again, we can equalise

this our baseline strategy when you just put money into

uh local assets and this strategy which move forwards.

And then we expect the city doors to be equalised,

right?

And this will be, this is a what what is

called cover interstate.

this is CIB Right, and in some sense, in contrast

to UAB.

There are good reasons to expect this condition to hold,

right?

Uh, QIP we said, OK, on average, but of course

there is much risk, and then we discussed all these

models of, um, risk premium, but this one, right, there

is no risk.

I mean, either strategy, right, the both strategies, they have

no risk.

So it seems like this should be true.

Right, in, in other words, I mean, so what is

in here?

So in the end, of course, general equilibrium, but um.

Yeah, I mean, interest rates, we usually think that this

is, you know, set by monor authorities, right, or at

least largely controlled by monetary policies.

So interest rates are in a sense exogenous, right?

The interest rate is more or less, oh sorry, the

exchange rate spot exchange rate in the first period.

It's something that is already absorbed by market.

Participants, right, so in the end, the CIP usually the

way people interpret it is that this is how this

forward, uh, rate is, uh, calculated, right?

So in other words, if you're sitting at the desk,

uh, some investment bank, right, and you are thinking at

which forward rate you should sign these contracts.

The most better thing to do would be to take

interest rates, to the export exchange rate, right, and get

this stuff.

So OK.

So, let's see whether this condition holds in practise or

not, OK?

Uh.

This here's a picture which shows CAP deviations for different

currencies against uh the US dollar, right just as usual.

So Australian dollar, uh, dollar bound, right, yen, Swiss franc,

etc.

and so you can see that, you know, and usually

the way people teach uh CA.

Yeah, uh, especially at the undergraduate level, but also even

at PhD level.

So usually it was something that people always, you know,

uh, said course very well in the debate.

This is a kind of a, a big, uh, very

natural example of nor ration, right?

And so this was true up until crisis in 200.

Right, so you can see that.

I mean, of course the issues, right, but they are

really tiny, right?

These are basis points, right?

So 100 basis points correspond to 1%, right?

So I mean deviations are something like, I don't know,

let's say 5 basis points, right?

And you can't really make much money of course there

are some transaction was right, and these deviations also they

are very short-lived, so.

Yeah, so in other words, I think the right way

to interpret this as soon as there are any substantial

deviations, then immediately some arbitrators step in and, uh, bring

this back to the.

No idea but the condition to say, OK, but you

can see that something changed in 2008, right?

And, OK, there are, there are two interesting things here.

So the first one is something that you would probably

expect, right?

So, you know, this is kind of the end that

the last quarter of 2008, right?

This is Lehman Brothers collapse.

This is really kind of the, the deepest point of

the whole financial crisis.

So in some sense it's probably expected.

That if you ever see any, uh, from the norm,

which actually they should have exactly that, right?

So in other words, um, the liquidity constraints was so

binding in the financial system that even though, you know,

investors saw some money on the table, they just couldn't,

uh, couldn't take these positions, right?

So, you know, this is kind of understandable and then

you can see that, you know, uh, there is then

uh these things uh improved so became smaller.

But the really remarkable thing in this picture is that,

you know, even 10 years after the crisis, we still

see much larger CAP deviations than before the crisis.

I said we never went back.

To the uh pre-2008, uh, period, and you can look

at individual currency, but it's kind of true for all

of them, right?

So, uh, again, there are some these things have become

some some become larger, and some smaller, but they're clearly

an order of magnitude larger than they were before the,

the crisis.

So how do you think why is that?

And I should say, by the way, right, I should

say that so in some sense this, this, this, uh,

figure right this evidence, it kind of supports this model

and actually, you know, it's a funny.

I, I still remember it wasn't that long ago when

this paper was read.

It was not published yet and you know some some

journals rejected it.

Some, uh, some people didn't like it, some people liked

and it it it was exactly, you know, the borderline.

So some people, especially in finance, that oh there's this

amazing empirical fact we need the model which is consistent

with it.

And so they like this one and then there were

people saying that, well, OK, we have these issues, but

you know, in then for most of the people they

were small, maybe eventually we will also go to the

state where they're small.

So, you know, maybe, maybe we should write models where

CAP divisions are large.

And according to this model, in some sense, CAP divisions

should be as large as UAB deviations.

OK, and in practise, UAP deviations are usually much larger,

right?

So even relative to this period, UAP deviations are still

larger.

So that's why, you know, some people like the small

like people didn't like.

But anyway, so how do you think what drives these

CAP deviations after the financial crisis?

So in principle, right, it's not like there's financial panic.

It's not like, um, uh, banks are insolvent and uh

they can't, uh, arbitrage away these deviations, but How do

you think what, what, I mean, again, if you just

look at the speech, if you think about these derivations,

it seems like there's a money on the table.

OK, and I, I, I mean, it's not a simple

question.

I, I think it's in some sense it's still not

fully answered question.

It's still feature which surprises people.

But still there is at least one thing that changed

relative to the pre-financial crisis, which might explain this.

Why banks, right, and other financial institutions, why they might

be still constrained, uh, in terms of exploiting CAPT issues.

Um, this is just a guess, but maybe the fact

that their credit constraints after the financial crisis, and so,

um, maybe like now that they have to cover and

hedge, um, which would be different from before that my.

So but what drives this why are they more constrained

in in a sense than they were before, like more

um checking risks and balancing their portfolio.

Yes, yes, that's true, but I mean, what or who

makes them check them?

There is a regulation, right?

That's no, you're absolutely right.

uh So in the end it's, it's, and most people

would say that it's because of much heavier government regulation

than before the uh financial crisis, right?

And so this is this is really remarkable picture like

uh do that and so um.

I mean, no, no what are these days, these, these

are the ends of quarters, right?

The end of the first quarter, the end of the

2nd quarter, 3rd quarter, 1st quarter, etc.

and these are CAP deviations and so the, I mean

the different figures, you know, uh, for forward contracts of

one week maurities.

One month maturity, 3 month maturity, but you can see

that they're all highly.

And so what you can see from the speech is

that on average this CPT, they're not that large, right?

Most of the time they're still something like 10, let's

say, basis points, but you can see that they become

much larger in the last kind of days, uh, hours

of each quarter, right?

And so why is that?

That's kind of prima facie, right, exactly of the government

regulation.

Why is that?

Because it's exactly the period where the government regulators when

they check uh bank's balance sheets.

Right, so banks have to report what they're holding on

their liabilities on their assets in that moment, then regulators,

they check whether all all leverages value of these constraints

are satisfied.

Right.

And so even though it seems like this, right, we,

we said that before that even though this CAP condition

is not with trash condition, it, it doesn't involve any

risk, right?

In some sense, it seems like.

It should be even kind of regulated, but still, to,

to, to, to exploit the AP divisions you need to

take positions both on your asset side and liability side,

right, in the sense as we said before, right, you

need to kind of borrow in one currency investing in

the other.

And once you do that from the perspective of re

regulation, right, like basal free, that would be, would that

would that would imply that, uh, this bank takes uh

higher leverage and more risk, right?

And And once you take this position, right, if you

want to satisfy this constraints, you then you need to

give up on other investment or other, uh, you know,

borrowing, and, and as a result, it corrupt.

So other investment and of course then it becomes, you

know, a trade group for, for, for these financial institutions

and so you can see that they, they kind of

unload their positions at the end of quarters and even

if, you know, if there is kind of pretty large

deviations, they don't exploit this arbitration, and they don't.

They don't intervene in this market.

OK, uh, this is probably the most, by the way,

finance topic in this whole course.

So yeah, for the tradeoff that also means that this

is, uh, not a very valuable arbitra opportunity, not videos

like a valuable, available, yeah, it's not.

Really good investment and if they trade off instead of

investing the credit card, yeah, yeah, exactly, no, absolutely, absolutely

right.

I mean, yeah, I mean it looks like like like

3%, but it's a very short-lived, right?

And no, it's exactly that's the whole thing, right?

So it's.

It is profitable, so we usually think that if there

is kind of free lunch, right, free money on the

table, somebody should take that even if there are kind

of pennies, right?

But yeah, once there is some trade-off because of this

balance sheets constraints, then of course they will not, uh,

shut down their other positions just to get some more

money.

Uh, OK, very good.

Uh, any other questions or comments?

And, and I must say, right, I, I hope this

also goes without saying, right?

I mean, then you might ask why don't want to,

you know, what are we doing here and then working

and making money from CIP.

I mean, of course, again, the, the whole idea is

that if you want to take to larger positions, I

mean, first of all, it's even in very.

In this discuss and buying this uh derivatives is not

that easy, but on top of that, of course, then

you need to kind of borrow, right, if you want

to exploit this and no one will give us uh

money at the same interest rate as uh.

Large banks.

OK, good.

So then let's move on, um.

So one other application of the same model is uh

this I would say it's kind of a story Brunel

Meyer Mel and Petersen emphasised long time ago to notice

that this paper was written even before.

Before, uh, the majority paper and so they don't, don't

have a formal model, but in some sense, you know,

it's it's, it's a very similar model that they had

in mind.

The main difference is that they think of government as

something endogenous, and that story goes like this, like this.

So imagine that you have two countries, one has high

interest rate, another has a relatively low interest rate, then

there will be the credit trade, right?

So then.

Investors step in they will borrow in the currency, the

currency with high interest rate, so they, but then at

some point some relatively small fundamental shock might arrive right

like we said before, productivity shock or maybe shock and

then and if it goes against the sc against the

positions that this took, then it means that these traders,

they will experience large losses.

And once they lose money, they will have kind of

to exit that market, right?

It's just that they don't have any, you know, enough

money to do the supers.

Not necessarily they default, they just, you know, they scale

up these positions and then it will take some time

for these arbitras to, uh, to take the larger positions,

right?

And during this period, we might expect that.

exchange rate will actually uh move.

Right, OK, oh, I have it here.

OK, good.

So then it's, it's, it's kind of the same thing.

That's why I was not even sure whether to write

that, right?

It's kind of the same thing that we had before,

right?

So the same model.

So we have the same solution as before.

There is the interest rate diffraction, let's say that I

is higher than I.

Right, then, uh, it means that they will take, you

know, as usual corresponding positions so that they make money,

but once something just small shock interest rate shock or

productivity shock that goes against them, they will have to

deliver, right, which means that gamma will go up.

They, they decrease their, uh, gross positions, and that will

need to exchange rate depreciate it.

Right?

And which means that that's exactly the currency in which

they borrowed.

Which means that you know, they will have even larger

losses and so they will have to scale down even

further, right?

So in a sense, um.

How can we write this down, right?

So we have this expression for.

Their growth positions.

Sure Right, so this is one equation that we have,

but imagine that you know, you, we have, I mean,

it's, it's a static model here, right, like two period

model, but it is kind of the negative model, and

then gamma becomes time dependent, and it depends on profits

that these guys make, right?

And so, and what are these profits?

Well, this is exactly, you know, their position multiplied by

the realisation of the returns.

Right, so these are their profits in the second period,

right?

This is the positions that they took.

I mean if, if the returns are positive, then they

will get positive, uh, profits.

And then the, the idea, as I said, is the

there is some shock.

It may be productivity shock which doesn't appear directly in

the system, right?

Imagine that it leads to.

Uh, exchange rate depreciating.

Of and as I said before, that's, that's important, right?

So we assume that.

This is positive, positive, negative.

I suppose that this is negative.

So then if for some exchange rate depreciates, then it

means that the profits will go down, but as the

profits go down, they withdraw from this market, so they

take smaller positions, right?

Um Gamma goes up, let's say, right, financial distress or

D goes down, and as a result, the machine trade

will depreciate even further.

Right, and then, then you kind of get started again.

Right, so these areification mechanisms.

So by the way, I mean, it's, it's kind of

a very standard, uh, mechanism in, in financial markets, right?

So, so have you talked about financial crisis in other

courses maybe micro courses now.

Uh, OK, so I mean, probably one, I mean there

are like two most famous models, right?

One is the Dibu, which recently received the Nobel Prize.

Another one, and that's the model of banking crisis.

And then there is another very famous model which is

Ketakimo, and it's also about fire sales, right?

That, OK, you know, uh, investors that take large positions

in some assets.

Right, then for some social shock, you know, maybe house

prices go down or uh a farmer releases uh mostly

favourable, uh, outlook, so the price starts going down.

But then constraints time become binding this abitar jobs they

have to sell this asset, but once they sell the

asset, the price goes down even, even further, right, and

that amplifies the initial, uh, shock.

So this is kind of a version of, of this

story of fire sales for, for a currency market.

OK, so, but why is this interesting?

Why I'm mentioning it here?

Well, because in some sense it means that exchange rate

risk, the risk of the even currency becomes a symmetric.

Right, so depending whether again whether these traders take long

positions or short position in a given currency, they will

respond differently, right?

As again this kind of goes back to our discussion

that if you have the show, but, but, uh, agritraors

have, um, short positions in the currency, and it will

appreciate in bad times.

OK, so there must be correlation between interest rate differential

and this what these guys call currency crashes, right?

How likely is the currency to have a large, uh,

depreciation?

OK, and this is, you know, uh, uh, just illustration

of this idea that in the.

There seems to be some suggestive areas.

I don't want to say that that's the only way

to interpret the data.

You can write very different models, but at least, you

know, it's, it's kind of supportive.

And so, OK, let's look at this picture.

So this is the 3 month interest rate differential, right?

So get currencies like Australian dollar, New Zealand dollar, which,

which have relatively high interest rate, and at the other

end, uh, is.

Japanese yen, which has relatively low interest rate and low

returns, and this is humanless, right?

So this is the measure exactly in that sense, um,

how likely is that large appreciation or large depreciation, OK?

And so, OK, so the way to read this right,

if you have high skills, it means that your currency

is, uh, likely to have large appreciation and these currencies

that are likely to have, uh, large depreciations.

OK, so that, that, that's exactly what we would expect

from, from this model.

And this is a picture that I already showed you

before, right?

But let me just remind you, so if you, if

you look at, um, where is it at dotted line,

OK, these are the currencies which have high returns.

Yeah They on average they have higher return, but sometimes

they have very low returns when the cell phone is,

it doesn't come from interest rates, of course, right?

Interest rates are relatively stable.

This abnormal, uh, low returns, they come from exchange rate

depreciation.

OK.

And so if again, if you take positive position, so,

you know, there.

This interest rate differential, so arbitrators on average take long

positions in these currencies.

They get on average returns, but occasionally they get very

large uh losses very large because of depreciation, right?

There's nothing symmetric on this side for these currencies.

And then, OK, if we look at That's fine, right,

so these are the currencies like Japanese yen which have

on average uh low negative returns, but you can see

that, you know, there's this kind of tail, right, that,

uh.

It happens quite relative to other currencies quite often they

appreciate.

And you can rationalise this as an indigenous outcome using

this uh Gabbema model.

OK, good.

So any questions about this?

So I guess it's a little bit overwhelming, right, but

I mean that's why, you know, it's, it's a bitch.

So, uh, I try to prepare you for this, right,

that we don't have the model of, uh, financial, uh,

markets, uh, for currency markets, right?

So it seems like each of these models that we

discussed, it can explain some empirical things they all, they

all have some interesting predictions which, uh, you know, explain

empirical effects, but They are different and there's no uh

no one model which explains all the states.

OK, then the very last model that I want to

talk about, uh, today, and you know, at least on,

on this topic uh of markets, this is a pretty

large class of um models with information features, right?

And so there are models with asymmetic information, right?

So that I get some signals, you get different signals,

and then we trade based on the signals, right?

So there are models like that, um, then behavioural models

where We just, you know, I'm just more optimistic about

some country or some currency that you are more pessimistic,

and again we show it based on these expectations.

So I will show you just the simplest version of

such model, OK.

OK, so we will still focus on segment markets model.

So we still have kind of portfolio choice.

OK.

So the, it's in a sense, it's exactly the same

model that we started last time, uh, right, so position

of investor I depends on expected returns and expectation now

has index I, right, because expectations can be different across

agents, and these positions depend on risk aversion and the

various, uh, of, of returns.

Yeah, for simplicity, let's assume that the variance is the

same.

So all investors agree on the volatility, right, on the

second one, they all think that if you do get

a trade, the variance is determined by the exchange rate

volatility and we all agree what the exchange rate volatility

is, OK.

So the only remaining difference across investors comes from the

fact that um that they have different uh expectations.

OK.

And in particular, so let's assume that expectation of agent

I is equal to the kind of rational expectations, right,

the correct expectations plus some uh error.

And again, uh, uh, it can be just behavioural thing

or it can be because we have different information, right?

I talked with some policymakers, you talked with other, you

know, uh, maybe you know something, maybe you, you, you

are a bank and you have clients which come to

your office to exchange currency, so you have some idea

what is the demand for currency.

Well I don't have that information, right?

And you can, there are many good reasons to believe

that people have, uh, different information, uh, sets.

By the way, how do you think, what is the

main thing of challenge?

Why is it, and behavioural models are easy, right?

You just assume like, like we do here.

What is, what is the problem is with these models

where we have different information.

So imagine that each of us gets some signal.

Abo, right?

So we, we don't know exactly the expected editors, but

this was get some signal.

But we are, right?

We get different signals, different information, but we are rational.

So then what should we do?

When we make forecasts, when we decide how much, what

positions to, to, to take, what should we do?

And of course, we should take into account our signal,

right?

That seems like natural thing to do.

But then what else should we do?

That you can consider that someone else doesn't have the

same information.

the same information, um, OK, uh, but what should I

do about that?

I mean I don't know exactly signal issue here, right?

So you mentioned that each of us get some signal,

right?

And of course they will be correlated because they all

depend on the true value of uh returns, right?

But I mean, there are many people in the right,

but they mentioned that there are many even more traitors.

Then what should I do?

and each of us has some signal.

You shouldn't fully reveal your signal.

Um, well, OK, revealing is hard because I'm just saying

some positions.

Yeah, I guess, uh, people, maybe some people can observe

my position, uh, but we, we can see, I mean,

it doesn't really matter that it turns out it doesn't

matter whether we see positions of each other or not,

but what, what should I do?

Should I just, you know, look at my signal and

that's it, or maybe I can do better than that.

As a rational agent.

Consider what other people's signals are and then make a

decision from all of.

Exactly, if I knew all the signals and measures, you

know, there are thousands of us, it gets imprecise signals,

but of course if you take the average of the

signals, it becomes much more precise, right?

In fact, you know, if you have continu of agents,

you actually learn the true value.

Now, suppose I don't know your signals, right, because, you

know, I mean it's private signal.

Can I still do something to extract.

Uh, information from you.

Indirectly, very indirectly, but So if you get positive signal,

you will take larger, longer positions, right?

If you get bad signal, you will take short positions.

But you will all think they you press.

And in general, right, this price, it will kind of

accumulate all this information about your signals.

And actually, what I should do in place I can,

I put some weight on my signal, but I should

put also weight on price, right?

By just seeing the market price, I should be able

to kind of get your average signal.

And if again, if you go to the extreme where,

you know, there are thousands of us, each gets an

independent signal actually, then why should I care about my

signal if the prices if the price, equilibrium price doesn't

about thousands of others.

Right?

So actually, you know, in the limit, you can go

to the case where you completely disrespect your signal and

you just rate based on price.

And this is a famous Grossman Stiglitz, uh, paradox that,

uh, how will the signals be even revealed, right?

How will, how will the price even, um, reveal information

about the signal if every if all traders, they don't

look at their signal and they just, uh, trade based

on the equilibrium price.

OK, it's, it's a little bit, it's more kind of,

kind of a mathematical paradox, right?

But that's what you get in this model.

But even if you don't go to that extreme.

What we what we really learn from this uh food

irrational model is that.

I mean, it's really hard to make people put much

weight on their signal, right?

So even if, OK, suppose that there are only 20

people in the room, right, then we will put some

weight on our own signals, but it should be relatively

small, right, given that there are 1919 other people who,

who, who trade based on their signals.

And in the end, uh, the fact that we see

people trading so much in financial markets in some sense,

it's a, it's kind of a paradox, right?

If they were fully rational.

It's very hard to explain why they're trading against each

other.

So in a sense, the only way to understand this

is that, uh, people are kind of overconfident.

You need usually some kind of overconfidence to explain why

people are agreeing to the best against each other.

Right, there are, I mean, there is, you know, it

was a very big topic in finance and in micro

theory in the 1990s.

I don't, I'm not sure, you know, I think, I

think I told you kind of the main conclusion of

the literary show.

So when I was a behavioural thing, uh, it's really

hard to explain these things.

You fully rational people, they, they kind of listen to

each other, right?

They, I think there were some papers with titles.

We can't disagree forever, right?

In the end we should kind of converge to the

same beliefs.

And that seems to be not with what we're seeing

today, right?

OK, I wait at one step ahead of myself, but

let me just since we started this this conversation.

So one of the main advantages of this model relative

to the previous ones will be that it can explain

large volumes of trading.

Right.

And if you even look, look just at the FX

market, currency market, the volume of trade is enormous, OK,

so the, the, um, turn turnover in currency market is

like two orders of magnitude larger than the whole global

trade in goods, right?

So if people were buying foreign currency just to, uh,

buy foreign goods, you will only be able to spend

12% of all trade in this market.

OK, so which of course suggests that people are also

buying currency for speculative reasons and probably because they disagree

with each other, right?

They have different expectations about what is going to happen

to currency.

Yes, we assume that the same?

Yeah, no, of course you can go even further and

then say that, uh, we also have skills.

It's just this is just a simplify algebra of course

it's because people have very different risk aversion, right?

Some will take larger positions, and they will take smaller

positions.

Yeah Just to simplify things.

OK, so then, uh, but let's, yeah, let's look just

at this.

It's, it's more like an example even rather than a

serious model.

So now, OK, we need to solve the model, but

as usual, we have, you know, countries' budget constraints, we

have net experts.

Now we just need to aggregate all this.

Uh, traders demand, so we take the sum of individual

TI's and so there is SI.

This is just the share of edges of type I,

right?

And uh, so that the, the sum of SI is

equal to one.

OK, so then, OK, multiply this by SI, take the

sum, right?

So this is exactly why we made the assumption that

the variance is the same because uh we can, you

know, it's the same for agents, so, uh, denominated is

the same.

This part is also the same for all agents and

the only difference comes from sci I don't, you know,

it's different size from what we had before, uh, and

then you take the average site, right?

This is just Uh, made the average of expectation errors

made by individual agents and then you impose, uh, the

same market feeding condition that we had before, right, that

household demands should be equal to supply of these potentials.

OK, so very simple, right, so I mean.

There's a simple example here.

Imagine that there are only 2 types of agents.

Right, there are pessimists and optimists.

So optimists think that size is equal and a plus

one, or eps whatever equals plus 1, let's say.

pessimists think that i is -1, and you have the

same share of optimists and pessimist, right?

So let's start with such example.

Then what will we get here?

What will be the value of, uh, say Ale bar?

How about Asians think that it is -1.

I think that uh it's plus 1, then the average

is just 0, right?

So in other words, in this case this thing completely

drops out and we're back to the same model that

we had before.

OK, so the model can explain large volume of trade,

right, because again, pessimists will trade against optimists.

They will trade with each other every year, but that

will not move, you know, that will not systematically exchange

rates.

Right, and that's exactly.

So you have all these expectations, uh, but it doesn't

affect the aggregate outcome.

So that.

When will the, so, right, these assumptions are not enough

and the question is, under which additional assumptions will this

expectation errors start moving the whole world?

I mean one answer is kind of trivial, right?

If we all make the same mistake, then of course,

it becomes systematic, right?

Then we we have set up a bar, you know,

either positive or negative, and that will affect the equilibrium

machine.

Right, so that's kind of, that's fine, right?

That's, that's easy to imagine.

But when else under which are the assumptions will this

kind of dispersion of expectations matter as well?

It's actually maybe a little bit less interesting in, in

the, uh, for currency markets, but it clearly is very

important for other assets like equity and stocks.

What do you think?

let's stay still, you know, uh, within the same example.

5 agents think that stock market or currency will go

up, half think that it will go down.

But these things don't average out really, don't uh upset

each other and which assumption.

Realistic assumption.

When you know, pessimists and optimists start having different effects.

equilibrium prices.

And the share of pessimists and optimists is not equal.

That's true.

OK, that's, that's definitely true, but that's kind of similar,

I assuming that there is kind of systematic error.

It's assumed there's systematic error.

Uh, why is it that sometimes, especially pessimists, they can't,

you know, they are expectations and only not fully priced.

They might not be able to take positions that they

would like.

So if you're a pessimist, right, what would you do?

Do you invest less money.

Well, you less, but suppose you have very negative expectations.

You are pretty sure that, you know, Tesla is overpriced

and you want to make make money out of this.

Uh, how would you do this?

You would short sell.

You need to short sell, right?

And it's not easy, right, because I mean it's again,

it's a bit like borrowing, right?

You need to borrow, um, stock, sell it today and

promise to buy it back tomorrow when you to have

the.

Price, right, so there's again this in temporal damage stock

like you pay money today and hold stock.

It's the opposite order, which means that again you need

trust, right?

You need to have a reputation and uh you will

probably be asked to have some to have some collateral,

right?

So it becomes hard.

And Many countries, stock markets, actually there are explicit rules,

explicit regulations which constrains short sales, right?

U, especially during financial crisis, usually, you know, stock exchange,

they step in and they say that no more short

selling, uh, right, no.

So you know, if you, when you have this Black

Friday or whatever, right, when you have a collapse of

the stock market, then they would try to stop this

collapse by not allowing to sell stocks.

But of course it means that, you know, if the

business is at this point they, they can't really um.

The expectations will not be priced because they just can't

take, uh, positions that they would like, right?

OK.

And so this is just a version of this model.

So again, let's suppose that we have only two types

of agents, the same shares, but there's short sale constraint,

right?

You can only take positive positions in in a given

asset, maybe currency, right?

So then, what is the aggregate deal?

Well, we still want to take the sum of individual

TIs.

Right, but there's kind of GI is what you want

to take, but you can't take negative values.

So we take the maximum between your desired portfolio and

zero.

Right.

And in this case, as you can guess, right, uh,

as soon as the, uh, narrator here for business becomes

negative, they, they're constrained and they take zero positions, and

it will be only optimists who, uh, take non-zero positions

and whose expectations will be priced, right, will be reflected

in equilibrium price.

So you, as you can see even from this situation

right now, the value of epsilon matters a lot, right?

So before Epsilon didn't matter because we took this, the

average rate of minus epsilon and plus epsilon.

So even if, you know, you you have crazy optimistic

expectations I have crazy pessimistic, we take the average and

uh neither of us really affects the equilibrium price.

Now there is this a symmetry.

I am super super pessimistic, but I can't take positions

that I want.

You're super optimistic and so that will, that will effectively

price the asset, right?

Price uh currencies in particular, and that will, uh, affect

equilibrium exchange rate.

Does this make sense?

OK, let me ask you one of, you see, it's,

it's a bit of a detour, right?

We're kind of talking about a lot of doing a

lot of finance today, uh, but it's a very brief

overview of of some interesting ideas from financial markets, uh,

and, um, financial economics.

So here's one more question.

This is another one of the most beautiful reason that

results in the situation from 1980s, I believe.

So you mentioned that you have two traders, two types

of traders, pessimists and optimists.

Each period they trade with each other, OK?

And here's the claim.

You might actually get and think of stocks for simplicity,

right, because currencies is similar, but stocks is just easier.

Uh, so you have, you have expectations of agents about

future dividends.

OK.

And so here's the claim.

It turns out that in this model, the equilibrium price

with short sale constraints, equilibrium price might be even higher

than expected huge dividends from the point of view of

optimists.

OK, maybe I should have said it, right.

So, OK, let me say it again.

Every period, right, there are some agents who are optimistic

and some who are pessimistic, and they can change the

expectation, by the way, that's important.

They can change, right?

And you take an optimist who thinks that tomorrow, dividends

will be high.

OK.

And there's the pessimists who thinks that dividends will be

low, and kind of they then, then they think in

the future that dividends will be kind of the same.

OK.

So for each of these agents, you can compute the

discounted sum of future, uh, dividends, and that would be

kind of the fundamental price from the point of view

of that investor.

OK.

And so what I'm saying that the liberal price will

be even higher than what optimists, uh, uh, optimists think

in a given period.

So why is that?

What additional effect will will be in this dynamic model.

And they described it, but sorry.

So when, when, you know, when investors decide, uh, how

much, you know, these assets to buy, what do you

think they will do in the next period?

What will be the, the, who will determine the equilibrium

price?

Let's start from there.

According to all the.

Each period who is the one who takes no position

in the asset.

optimist, right, and as we said, the expectations will determine

the price, right, large.

Now take one step back, right?

So now, OK, I know that the next period will

be optimists, right?

So then.

Who will the today?

You give the optimists, right?

And so even though and it will happen every single

period, right?

So even if, you know, optimists and pessimists, they just

have different expectations about next period, about dividends in the

next period, but then in all future periods, they have

kind of the same average expectations, right?

They know that it, it kind of doesn't matter because

in the next period, they will sell the asset to

the most optimistic guy who he thinks that the assets

will have higher returns next period, right?

And so every single period is actually that guy who

thinks that the next period will be, you know, will,

will have higher returns, right?

So in the end, uh, you, you get that the

price, uh, you know, is even higher than, uh, expectations

of, uh, um, optimism in a given period.

Right, so that's just the name version of this, uh,

short circumstance, right, that it, it amplifies optimism of optimists

in a sense, right, uh.

It only matters who is the marginal buyer, uh, who

will determine the price of things.

OK, good.

And of course, I mean, there are models which try

to indigenize the expectations, right, and then the agents, you

know, they, they, you know, if you mentioned that they,

that's a confirmation bias, right?

So if they see the price goes up, they think,

oh, I was right, that I was optimist, right, and

then, and this kind of become more and more confident,

but then at some point the price starts going down.

At that point they realised that they were mistaken and

they can switch the expectations.

So there are complicated behavioural models.

We try to model age expectations, but in general, I

must say that, you know, it's, it's economies are good

in many things.

They understand that in general equilibrium effects will, uh, opportunity

cost, but in terms of understanding people's expectations, I'm not

sure, you know, where I really, uh, have done so

much progress, right?

And this is very active area of researching in finance

and in macroeconomic, uh, uh, right now, but it's hard

that this is really hard.

Um, OK, good.

So, yeah, one last piece of evidence and then we'll.

You can have a short break, right?

So this is a very nice old paper by Eras

Alliance, which, so it's from 2002, and they had, uh,

daily data from In deal platform, right?

So it's kind of, uh, you know, it's not easy

to get this data, but somehow, I don't remember for

their friends I think colleagues, they, they got this data,

and it is the following.

You can measure with this data you can measure all

the books, so you have this platform.

And you can look how many agents um.

Kind of want to buy currency and how many want

to sell currency.

Here they so they submit their bills and then markets,

markets here and so what they effect so what they

can do they can measure the difference right this order

flows.

This is the difference between the number of agents who

who want to buy currency and the number of uh

agents who want to sell currency, right?

And of course in equilibrium it would be the same,

but you know there are some trades which were initiated

by buyers and there are some initiated by.

So it does fluctuate, right?

Uh, and so, Interestingly, this, this is kind of days,

right?

So I think the whole sample is something like 3

months.

It's a very short one.

But you can see higher movement between exchange rate and

this border flows.

So let's see, solid line is the exchange rate and

um mative water flows are the dash line, right?

So we, we talked about the exchange rate disconnect.

In some sense you can say that this is, you

know, uh, deviation from the disconnect there is clearly super

high correlation between exchange rate and this order flow.

Uh, there are two problems here, right?

So the first one is that you can see that

this is a baby frequency, right, and it's, it's, uh,

and we say that exchange rate disconnect is very pronounced

between 2 months and 2 years.

And another bigger problem is that it's, it's it's as

if correlating, uh, prices and quantities, right?

It's not, uh, it's not an idea that.

We have some exogenous shock which explains movements and exchange

rate and they just say that uh if you have

more people who want to buy currency, the price will

go up, right?

Which, which isn't, which is interesting, but I don't think,

you know, it helps very much in terms of understanding

the shocks which drive the exchange rate.

Uh, so the, the, the, I'm just showing this to

you because you know, all our other models they have

very little to say about buyers versus sellers, but more

with expectations, different expectations, uh, can, you know, you can

use it easier to think about this asymmetry, right again

there are during the periods when there are more.

Optimist for buyers, right, then exchange rate, I will appreciate,

uh, and the view is when you have more pessimists

and the guys will initiate it, uh, by selling the

currency, you will have depreciation of the currency.

OK, and this is just a regression, right?

OK, they take, uh, mark, uh, against dollar, they run,

you know, uh, where is it?

OK, so this would be our standard.

Yeah, I mean, yeah, this is kind of similar to

our UID regression.

They do it in differences, but similar, right?

So if you only include interest rates, then you get

very low R squared, right, as usual.

And I guess this is standard error, so you can

see that coefficient is not significant, but then once you

do the order flows, right, whether you do them alone

or you include them with interest rates, they are always

significant.

And you can see that the R square becomes remarkably

high, right for for exchange rates that are almost uh

no regressions which can give you such high R2.

OK, good.

So that, that's it.

Um, any questions?

I was wondering, um, I think you touched on it,

but this the order of knowledgeism it's very endogenous, like

it's very, it's very.

It's not, it's, I mean, when, when, when they just

wrote the paper, people got super excited.

They thought, OK, finally we can solve the disconnect puzzle.

We just need to go one step further and relate

the.

Or the flows to some microshocks, and I think they

they wrote several papers they were even a whole book

about that, but unfortunately this whole agenda kind of failed.

So people were never able to, uh, relate other flows

to I don't know interest rate shocks or productivity shocks.

I mean.

I think that there's more and more data now.

There is some chance that now so the bank of,

for example, they have data on all um currency trading,

right?

So all these derivatives, sport market, everything, and it's kind

of mean by minute they know uh who.

Who is buying, who is saving under what conditions.

So in principle this data exists, uh, of course, if

you could, you know, connect that data, merge that data

somehow with, uh, maybe other positions of these traders or,

uh, the expectations, then you can, uh, connect this thing

to, uh, fundamental shocks, but there's still a normal question

here.

It hasn't do that.

OK, good.

Any other questions?

OK, good, so then let's make maybe a 5 minute

break and then we will talk about different, completely different

topic.

Uh a bit unrelated, but um since I'm an environmental

economist, quite different than the finance, of course, and the

capital flows, although I think it's really like an interesting

combination I said.

Um, I was thinking about like buying a book or

so like just a nice book to read, which inspires

a bit and motivates a bit in this I guess

no, no, exactly, like just know before sleep or something

about, about what exactly that was you were teaching like

international stuff, yeah, OK.

So there is a classical book which, to be honest,

I never read which I should probably read but.

People, I think that's the most natural one.

This time is different is called by um Rogoff and

Reinhart.

This time is different.

It's, it's, it's, yeah, it's uh about financial crisis with

international dimensions and kind of right as the title suggests

that is that every time people think that, OK, now

we're living completely new times, uh, you know, there's there's

technology.

Transform the world.

Let's invest a lot, and then each time it turns

out to be a bubble, and it ends with some

financial crisis.

So this is a classical book, to be honest.

So out of the books that I really like, I

like a couple of books about 2008 financial crisis.

Yeah, uh, I'm not sure, you know, how others, others,

how much you would be interested in that.

I really like the textbook by not textbook, sorry, but

the description by Alan Blinder.

How do you spell it.

So it's one And the book is called When the

movie.

I think I had heard about it.

This one is really nice, uh, especially if you don't

know much about it.

Yeah, so increasingly is really for, uh, broad audience.

Then also, I mean, there is, there's good, good, I

think by, uh, Ben Bernanke and his recollection of this,

uh, evolved and how, how he and his team made

all these difficult decisions on whether to bail out others

so also failed to uh the courage to act.

Not very modest and um it's nice and I can

just, uh, yeah, because I was looking a bit with

so much a good fit uh so but, but yeah,

uh, so those are the books which I actually read

twice in good and, and they're different because I really,

uh, enjoyed them, but, uh, what else you more international.

Yeah, I'm Yeah, I'll, I'll think about it if something

else.

Yeah, please, um, I'll make you, uh, but yeah, for

financial crisis that reference, I think this could be like,

I don't know how, uh, uh, this could be also

interesting, uh, interaction, uh, environmental economics like if we suppose

that climate change indeed would have such an effect.

Like a domino effect in terms of the economic decision

you can have such a, you know, such storm at

the end I guess if tipping point will be reached,

then we can come but indeed it's quite prob that

it would not uh affect the developed countries.

That much and then it isn't maybe I just thought

it kind of becomes worse, worse, worse, but there's no

one tipping point where everyone stand and they realise it's

just because impossible to escape.

But yeah, it it goes like this and then uh

they things or it's actually the best thing that is

it's very exponential.

So if the people are starting to agree to each

other, uh, then we, I see, I see, I see,

I see, yeah, then, yeah, OK, um.

But yeah, and it also touches upon the great economics.

Right, no, I read a few economics books last year,

but I would not recommend.

Just too much time left and I read like at

at least the actually suggested um from Joseph Stevli uh

which one Stage uh-huh I'm still yeah uh about globalisation

and its post connect yourself.

Uh, OK, I know S6 has a lot of books.

I'm not sure.

I read one of them a long time ago.

OK, it might be good, especially if you're interested in

climate change, but SI is kind of extreme.

I would say quite extreme left there in the profession,

and I think, I mean, still is maybe the greatest

one life right now.

In terms of his contribution, how he changed macroeconomics in

particular, but I think most people, most people in the

profession would not take seriously what he's saying right now.

It's much more politically motivated, you know, just ideological views,

you know, for example, activity is also very left.

That's true.

This is true, actually about equipment.

Sure, yeah, no, I mean, and there's a particular reason

why there is distribution of people.

I just think that PPT at least provides some data.

There is, and, OK, I mean he can say that

I, he believes we should take more rich people, but

that's, I mean that's kind of fine.

Yeah I think it would kind of, you know, um,

say wrong statements if they are support.

His, uh, beliefs kind of right, I know it's one

thing to see that.

I just have such preferences.

I, I you push the text.

That's one thing.

Nothing is to say that or look at that country.

It's absolutely clear from my research the start to happen

because we didn't impose enough taxes officials, uh, so that's,

I think why I think people don't take sticks.

in the in the profession, yeah, uh, but, uh, no,

of course I'm right, like from the young generation very

left and the church is very well expected, right, yeah,

um, I read the part of the and I but

I actually was quite amazed about it like I was

quite convinced.

Yeah, well, larger, I mean, both, you know, this idea

of what R versus G, how much that changes for

access for well evolution people have cited a lot again.

I'm sure, uh, probably the, the state of the art

now is different, but unfortunately I just didn't follow that

debate very close so I can't give you good references,

but that was super stimulated for the profession.

I remember, yeah, there was a beautiful and everyone was,

yeah, um.

Yeah, OK.

Yeah, thank you.

I will.

Thank you.

OK.

Right, so let's continue.

Um, OK, so I like this one.

This one it's a little bit lighter on the theory,

but it has a few interesting features, and this is,

I think, something, uh, that is relatively easy to understand

no matter whether you are an undergrad, a master's student,

or a PhD student.

OK, so we're going to talk about what is sometimes

called exorbital privilege.

So this is, it's, it's kind of a term which

people use when they say that US has a special

role in global financial markets.

OK, that's, that's maybe the highest level education.

So somehow US benefits from its central role in global

financial markets.

In the end, it means that it can borrow more

and cheaper than other countries.

I think that's.

The people.

So where does this term, this phrase comes from?

It comes from, um, actually I think Minister of Finance

in France through under, uh, Charles Leaulle, right?

So, uh, he, he kind of coined this term.

It was still bread and Woods system, right?

So it was, I guess, uh.

And end of 1960s, um, years back then, remember we

talked about that system, right?

So other countries were supposed to back the exchange to

the dollar and the dollar was supposed to be back

to, to vote, right?

But this asymmetry between the US and all other countries

that was already creating something.

Disagreements, let's say right and by close to the end,

just a few years before the collapse of the Breton

system, France was actually taking away its gold from the

US because they thought that was, you know, uh, the,

the.

Uh, its price was, uh, clearly distorted, right?

It was, uh, overvalued, and so they start selling their

dollars and buying gold and taking it out of the

US, right?

That's, uh, that's, uh, that, that's exactly what they introduced

this job.

OK, but let's now make a step up and kind

of just do a bit of, uh, accounting.

So why does it matter?

That's exactly the thing that we're kind of ignored in

our baseline model, right?

So in some sense if you think about our three

equhase model, right, we have instead.

Well, let's him combine into one right, so before it

was said something like this.

This was then with uh UIP condition or modified UIP

right?

we started with with UIP then we introduced all this,

all sorts of financial frictions that what we discussed last

time and uh in the previous lecture, right, so it

becomes.

Modify the UP, right, but we kind of took this

equation, I got this budget constraint has given, and that

was our cornerstone.

So now we will relax for let's say generalise this

condition.

Uh, so in particular, and this is, I think, where

it's more convenient to use, uh, index, uh, team for

that.

OK, so if you think about balance of we, right,

you have NFA which is net foreign assetization of a

given country, right?

So this is the value of the assets, foreign assets

held by the country minus the value of its lies.

I just like for each agent, you can compute how

much you have, uh, money in your bank account, how

many property you have wealth and subtract, let's say your

mortgages, your, um, uh, credit, right, and you will get

net position.

So you can do the same for the country as

a whole.

OK.

And so how does this network has a position evolve?

Well, every period you get some returns on your position

in the previous period, right?

If you have negative position, means that this will be

negative, right?

So you, you borrowed, now you owe owe even more

money if the interest rate is positive, right?

So this is kind of your inherited position from the

previous years and then on top of that you, you

sell goods, you buy foreign goods.

This gives you some, uh, additional income, right, or maybe

additional losses and this is your net finance position at

the beginning of the next, next period, right?

OK, so let's just do very simple, uh, account decomposition,

right?

It won't be structural model.

So let's just use this notation, right.

Uh, big o just one plus small artifices.net returns, then

I can rewrite the change and the fade.

As follows, right, I just subtract NFA T minus 1

from both sides of this equation and I get expression

which looks like this.

You know the shows, right.

How can a country change its net for position?

Well, it means either to, uh, export more right than

it imports and that will improve its position or potentially

can get some income, uh, on its previous positions, right?

It can, uh, just by investing abroad, it can get,

uh, positive returns.

OK, so what we will do, so in some sense,

again we right here, right, and I think one of

you pointed out that in our very first lecture, right,

we did not interest rates here.

We didn't discount net exports of the second period or

we did multiply, you know, the, the, the net export

trade balance or you in a, in a sense this

was, um, NFA at the end of the first period.

We don't, we didn't multiply by RTR2, right, uh, to

get position at the beginning of the next period and

so now we will do that.

Uh, right, and so which means that the change in

in the thing and we decomposed into this evaluation effect

and trade well and, and we completely ignored the evaluation

effects before.

Now we will discuss whether it is important or it

is not.

Right so notice in particular that we can iterate forward

this country's budget cuts, right?

a Let's, let, let, let me do it here, right,

so we have.

Yeah.

The NFA equalsation effect in period T plusnet experts in

period T, right?

This is just And the and the 3 T minus

and the 311.

So I can express, let me put this on the

right hand side and this drops on the left hand

side.

OK, and then we can iterate this form, right?

So, OK, this is an expression for NF 180 minus

1, but of course the same thing.

Applies for BT.

I just need to shift videos.

Index Once one get it forward make sure.

And then I can substitute this here, right?

And if you do it many, many times, right, and

then you kind of impose some speciality and, uh, like

we did before, we said that eventually the country needs

to repay its debt, right, or needs to spend or

accumulate position so that this term eventually converges to zero

as as T goes to infinity then.

What we get is that NFA T minus 1 is

just equal to the sum of future variation effects and

future net experts.

Right, we just take the sound across all future videos.

So in the end again we can decompose today's position

into Maliation in the text.

Right, so I mean we, we, we kind of said

this before, but let me reiterate this, right?

Imagine that NFA T minus 1 is negative, which means

that country.

owes money to the rest of the world, right?

It's, it's, it's a net borrower.

Then what this equation says is that in the future

it needs to repay its debt either by exporting more

and positive trade surpluses, or it needs to be somehow

I like you or make good investment and has more

needs to have a positive radiation in the future.

OK, and so.

Um, and so the question is how important these two

terms are right now a baseline model we said that

all borrowing or, you know, SS needs to be balanced

by that, but, but in principle, you get the evaluation

effects.

And so there's a classical paper byri Andre which kind

of started to revive this whole literature, which, which shows

that for the US variation effects account for about 30%

of total adjustment.

Yeah, I mean, it's a little bit oversimplification because, uh,

they kind of extract trends, but if you look at

the kind of high frequency of volatility, they claim that

about 30% of all, uh, adjustment is explained by evaluation

effects rather than trade balance effects, which is a logic,

OK, which means that, you know, in the realistic model

that is for the US, we should not, uh, we

should not ignore thesecalation effects.

OK, does this make sense?

OK, let me now a little bit, maybe even simplify

this.

So this statement is about kind of total volatility, right?

You have, you have these fluctuations in NFA.

The question is how do you, uh, satisfy contest but

because and and this is about radius decomposition.

Now we are going to look at something even simpler.

We're going to look at, um, um, at, OK, so

let's start with the US.

So here are two pictures, two lines.

One is, uh, it's, it's a bit confusing.

People use different things like, uh, current accounts, but think

of the red line is the sum of net exports.

OK, so, you know, we start from 0.

It's not 0, but from 10%.

OK, that's from 10% and then every year you, you

have a trade surplus and you take the sum.

In other words, think of this red line, this is

how NFA of the country would evolve if there were

no valuation effects if you only have, uh, um, uh,

trade balance effects, right?

So in other words, you ignore valuation effects and you

can you compute compute.

Evolution of And the faith Based on trade balances, there's

no interest rate here, no valuation effects, so you just

accumulate trade balances every period, OK, so this is, this

is the red line.

Now the blue line is the actual NFA, the one

that we see in the data for the US.

And you can see that there is a gift, right?

It's kind of, I mean they start and normalised in

such a way that they are kind of the same,

but then you can see that they, they merge and

systematically the blue line is above the red line.

So what does it mean?

So one effects are positive, negative.

With the yes.

OK, let's make a step back then.

So red line goes down.

Why is that?

It goes down, by the way, by 2010, it goes

down to -60% of countries' GDP.

So what does it mean?

If drugs are higher.

Every single period, US was running a trade, uh, balanced

deficit, right?

So we accumulated eventually US owes a lot of money

to the rest of the world.

Now, when we actually in reality in 2010, the NFA

was only 20, 20% of GDP.

So it was much more.

It was still negative, but much less so.

Which means that how how is that possible?

They are earning from.

Pro variation effects, right, it's the only way to kind

of reca out this is to, to, um, resume that

the US had positive variation effects.

This gap comes from systematic positive valuation effects.

Somehow US was able to get positive returns on its,

uh, assets or maybe pay low returns on, on its

liabilities.

OK, so I want to decompose this into.

Uh, separate effects.

But before we do that, let's look at other cars.

I mean, is it, is it typical?

Is it not typical?

So we will look at other developed kinds like the

UK, Germany, Japan, right?

You can see that there is not much there.

I mean, again, right, that these things, you know, effects,

they are unstable, they can be positive, they can be

negative, right?

So there's some validity there, but in the end, over

this period of 40 years, we see that for other

countries, uh, the, the blue line and the, uh, red

line, they are kind of close to each other, right?

So on the average variation effects are close to 0.

Now if you look at developing countriess here, there are,

there are some divisions, right?

So, maybe not for Brazil, but if you look at

Russia and China, you can see that there are pretty

large relation effects, but they have the opposite side right

now red line is above the blue line, which means

that variation effects are negative.

So how do you think why is that?

I mean, first of all, if one country has positive

relation effects, it's going to be expected that at least

some other countries need to have negative relation effects, right,

because in the.

I think the the NFA of the whole world should

be equal 0.

Yeah, trade balance of the whole world should be equal

to 0.

So, uh, variation effects should be also equal to 0.

But, um, so, so in a sense, right, when we

think about, um, US liabilities, for example.

We will, we, we, we'll take a closer look in

a second, right?

But you can imagine that.

Uh, US borrows come from emerging economies, developing countries, in

particular China and Russia, right?

So they kind of, uh, invest in the US and

if somehow, right?

US gets positive re but then these countries need to

have negative rea.

But what is kind of remarkable, and that's what you

know this whole litre I says is that there are

countries which have negative relation effects, but there are almost

no other countries which have positive variation rights.

So the US is really unique, uh, in, in this

respect.

That's why it kind of earns this exorbitant privilege.

OK, good.

So just another way to see this, this is from

Handbook chapter by Guri Andre.

I mean, as I said before, they have a series

of papers about absorb privilege.

So most of the evidence comes from their papers.

So if you look at, so this this is just

um overview.

Of many different papers which tried to compute this variation

effects for different periods, right, breaking them before the end

of the Breton rules after the end of the Breton

wars, and then, you know, I mean, it, it all

looks very simple you know when you look at these

equations in reality, there is a lot of measurement issues,

right?

It's, I mean.

You look at one country, it's assets turns out for

other countries, these assets don't appear as their liabilities.

There are some additional measurement, uh, errors in this equation.

And so people made slightly different assumptions about how to

allocate this, uh, uh, additional effects.

But in the end, you know, in some sense, no

matter how you do, do this, in the end, all

the studies they find what this evaluation effects again, so

what is this?

This is returns on assets min.

Sorry, Returns on US assets abroad minus returns on US

liabilities held by foreigners, and you can see that there

are systematic positive effect, right?

And again, it kind of varies across periods, but, uh,

in long enough samples, it is positive.

In other words, The takeaway is that US earns higher

returns on its assets, foreign assets, then it pays uh

on its diabetes.

OK, good.

So, so how do you think why is that before

we?

forward to some decompositions.

What would be your first reaction?

So in principle, there can be two different.

Um, channels.

Uh, for which this can be true.

Uh, it's suggested since emerging markets might grow faster, uh,

the return time they grow faster and that's why.

Uh, it's, it's interesting.

Um, That's a good point.

I agree.

I mean, the question is, of course.

Uh, why then they somebody invests in the US, but

why not everyone right investing in, uh, I mean, the

small discrepancy between growth and returns is that even if

Different countries grow at different rates, right?

But we invest, when we invest in them, what kind

of priceless assets and the price prices already reflect expected

growth.

And if you just expect how high growth, price will

be high, but that will kind of equalise the returns

on invests.

Right, because one just will have much higher price than

the other one, and in the end, we can still

explain the territory is not the same.

But OK, ah.

So This is kind of aggregate numbers, right?

Just in the accounting sense, there can be two different

ways to understand this result.

One is, it is possible that US holds different assets

from the liabilities that it issues, right?

It can be that it invests, I don't know, let's

say in equity, while it issues mostly debt, and equity

and debt have different returns, right, so that's one possibility.

Another possibility is that OK, it invests in bonds, it

issues bonds, but there is something special about US bonds

relative to foreign bonds.

Yeah, and that's, that's the factory what people often call,

um, let me skip this, we'll come back to this

later, uh.

Let me It gives Uh, so, so.

This is what sometimes people call return effects and some

and uh composition effect, right?

So composition effect, it's really more about that you hold

debt versus equity.

Uh, in principle, of course, there's also FTI foreign direct

investment, right?

They can be gold and other stuff, but, uh, usually

most comes from debt and equity is usually bundled with,

uh, FTI, right?

So the reason is these are, these are relatively risky

investment and this is a relatively safe.

Is that that's the composition and then you can look

at the return effect when you just look at US

debt versus uh foreign debt.

And so, uh, let's look at this, this, this thing.

I want to show you this first because this is,

you know, what you will also have to do in

the problem set.

You will do this decomposition and then on Monday we

will discuss, but let's look.

So what are the numbers for the year.

So the total again total difference in returns, let's just

focus on this period, right?

So this is kind of high returns that, uh, all,

uh, yes, relative to its like images and where does

it come from?

OK, so it comes mostly from the return effect according

to the table, right?

So it's not so much from composition but from the

returns.

Um.

So I think this result is highly debatable.

Yeah, so if you go with different people like.

Going back here, so for example, yeah, OK, there's this

paper which I think very strongly disagrees with Boris and

rate and so this is where there is no unique

concept and the problem in a sense is the following,

right?

So the termss effect and composition effect, they are very

sensitive to the level of aggregation.

So if you go to the extreme where you have

really each as a separately, then it's all what, what,

which effect?

If you, you have just, you know.

The most disagreed level of microdata then everything will be

explained by the composition that what effect.

It will be all composition, right, because almost by definition,

the ability that you hold will be different from assets,

right?

When you hold, I don't know, bond, uh, some European

bond and you issue US bonds, right?

So at the very segregated level it's all composition, of

course, once you aggregate, the return effect starts playing the

same, right?

If you say that this is just all bonds.

Right, so the effect will be, will be much larger.

So that's why it's kind of a hard question.

I think kind of got main consensus in the literature

is in the end that it's mostly composition, OK, and

where it comes from, is let me now show you

the, uh, my name.

OK, so this is the balance sheet of the yes

and let's start with the liability side, OK, again, I

mean, I.

The reason I'm showing you these pictures of 2010 because

they really illustrate the point well and then I will

show you what happened afterwards, but let, let's start with

kind of classical interpretation.

OK, so these are, again, these are like really just

as a share of US, uh, GDP, OK, so there

are several things.

Uh, striking things from this.

First of all, of course, this trend, right?

You can see that this is 1952, right, that then

growth in the US were only less than 10% of

GDP and now they are more than 100%, right?

So why is that?

Why do you think that the growth positions have increased

so much.

Many things have changed, right, but one of them is

that financial international financial markets have been liberalised quite a

lot.

So you talk about 1950s, this is still bread and

worlds period.

Co most countries had pretty strict capital controls, right, to

sustain this exchange rate, countries actually didn't allow, uh, capital

mobility across, uh, economies, right?

So even, you know, if you.

If you do, if you're just a normal citizen who

wants to go to another country to tourism, it was

actually quite hard to buy foreign cars, right?

And of course, there were no global investment banks which

would shift as easily capital across countries.

And then, you know, starting, starting from 1970 already, but

mostly in 1980s, there was a huge financial liberalism.

Right, most capital controls were eliminated, right, you know, uh,

there was a liberalisation of, uh, financial markets and eventually

kind of financial globalisation, right?

So I, I just want to emphasise that it's a,

it's surprisingly recent phenomenon, right?

It's, it's really took off in the end of the

20th century and growth was really massive, right?

It's completely a different scale than before.

OK, so that's one thing that comes out of this

figure.

So now, more, more, more to our point, let's look

at the composition, OK?

So I mean, again, in some sense you can say

that, you know, it's, it's all, uh, all, all different

assets, uh, are presented kind of similarly, but let's try

to a little bit, right?

So let's look at debt versus, uh, risky assets.

So direct investment equity, those are risky investment, right?

I think we talked about FDI.

Do you remember?

What is MTI?

What is direct investment?

Yeah.

Oh, we did talk about it, yeah.

So if a, uh.

If if your company opens a new location, exactly right,

exactly.

And if you build a new plan, this will be

FDI, right, and equity is kind of it's portfolio investment

when you just buy foreign stocks, right?

I mean, of course, there's a big difference because FDI

usually is very illiquid, right?

Uh, you don't just sell plants every day or buy

plants every day while with the equity you can trade.

Stock exchange, but those are kind of risky investments.

OK, so.

This, I guess this, this is right, this is the

risky assets and then this is debt and this is

debt, and then there's this mysterious uh other assets, but

you can see that on the I need just said

about 50% or even more comes from that and I

think something like 13 or less comes from risky assets.

Mhm Uh, by the way, you can see that there's

also a, a retrenchment around 2008 when there was a

financial crisis, of course, all asset collapses and so of

course grows positions went down as well, but this is

just sick.

OK, so a lot of it is, uh sorry, a

lot of, uh, debt and less, uh, risk, yeah, assets.

Now what about the assets side just quickly, uh, there

was also a case.

Before, right, yeah, yeah, it's kind of more or less

systematic, yeah, yeah, um, yeah, I guess maybe the here

it's 1/3 and 1/3 again.

I'm not sure how to split this other things, uh.

OK, let's compare that now with the asset side of

the US dollar sheet.

OK, uh, you can see, by the way that I

mean this trend increase is here as well, not surprisingly,

you can see that the absolute numbers here are a

little bit smaller.

Again, expectedly because NFA for DS is negative, right?

It has more liabilities than it has assets.

But the most interesting thing is about its composition is

now let's again, uh, look at risky assets, right?

So these two, and then there's that.

OK, so you can see that there is a very

small fraction coming from that.

There's huge parts coming from equity and FDI, right, more

than 50%.

OK, and that's kind of the key style aspect here.

So yes.

Issues a lot of debt brows in terms of in,

in, in the form of debt and it invests abroad

uh using uh riskier ass.

So which makes, you know, and this, this is, I

think the title of one of the first, uh, good

interest rate papers.

It was, uh, something like the, the US as a,

as a global venture capitalist, right?

So in a sense, the US does a global, global,

uh, Level what standards venture capital is, but also like

standard banks, right, even commercial banks I usually do.

They are raising capital using deposits or issuing debt, so

in the form of safe assets, right?

And then they invest in the assets.

Give loans to companies or so they would be single

to FDI right?

or they just invest in equity and usually we think

that risky as as they have higher returns.

I remember what we talked about last week, right?

So we, we say that uh investors, they require compensation

for the increase.

So on average, if you take long enough serious, long

enough period of time.

USS should have higher returns on its assets than it's

based on its liabilities, right?

And that's kind of, I think, to the first order,

this is the main explanation to this potation effect and

that's really the main, uh, source of exorbitant priage for

the US.

OK, so I showed you this that's, that's number one.

Um, OK, uh, so that's, that's, that's kind of the

first thing.

So then there are a few other things.

So as I already said before, there is, uh, returns

of that.

So even if you look at only debt, right, only,

only bonds, let's say, and compare US issued bonds and

bonds issued by other countries, they.

Seem to have different returns here as I said before,

this is a little bit debatable, right?

Uh, in a, in a very narrow sense, some people

when they say exorbitant image, what they really mean is

that US government can issue bonds and, and pay very

low returns on these bonds, OK?

And this is debatable because, uh, you know, again, if

you compare to let's say safe, uh.

Of Switzerland or Germany, other European countries, then the difference

is not so large, right?

The fact that, uh, you know, debt of Argentina pays

more, that's not surprising because there's, there's a lot of

risk.

I mean it's, it's almost like quoting equity, right?

There must be a risk premium.

So that's why this is debatable and uh let's not

put too much weight on this.

OK, then there's another thing, maybe the currencies.

So I showed you this decomposition in safe assets, relatively

safe assets, and 3, but another, you know, profound difference

between US assets and liabilities is the currency in which

they are nominated.

OK, so let's look at the staple, uh, this is

from 2004, uh, so if you look at the currency

composition on the asset side, right, we see that there

are a lot of foreign currencies, right?

So about one third of total assets are in dollars

and 2/3 are in foreign currency.

On the other hand, if you look at the site,

right?

If the number is higher than this, but you said

it is predominantly in US dollars.

Yeah, I mean, I think this table it's not my

table.

It comes from good.

I think it's a little bit overstates the case because

uh it classifies like equity also based on the currency

of inquisit which is not exactly right because, you know,

equity can go up and down, uh, from the exchange

rates, but even if you look at only at that.

This is still true, right?

So even just for bonds, uh, and loans, you will

find that most of these bonds and loans on the

side, they are denominated in foreign currency.

And of course, you know, when the US government or

US corporations, when they issue that they issue it most

in dollars.

Which means that there can be interesting evaluation attacks coming

from fluctuation in the exchange.

So let's let's just.

For here Spend some time Discussing this um.

So sad, right, that one equation that we might still.

So you, let's the negative and the effect of the

country and then we have vaation effects plus net effects,

right?

And this is already inter temporal thing.

This is the initial position and this is what you

need to do in the future.

OK, so now what happens when the exchange rate depreciates

for the US?

So imagine the change a deeply appreciates.

What happens to its assets and what happens to its

liabilities.

And let's measure both in dollars.

It doesn't matter.

I mean we could measure it in foreign currency, but

let's just measure it in the same, in the same

currency.

That's.

So liability in others, how do they respond to moments

and change it that nothing else changes.

If they dollars.

They don't change, right?

I mean, you have a, you know, foreigners hold, I

don't know, uh, bonds worth US bonds worth $1000 I

mean change and fluctuates, but in dollars the value doesn't

change, right?

it keeping everything else abilities don't change.

Now what happens to assets, right?

A, US assets, the US invested in foreign equity or

foreign, sorry, foreign bonds, right, which, you know, like you

give bonds, they are denominated in pounds.

So in pos they are very stable, but what happens

to their dollar value.

If depreciate.

If you appreciate.

So the value in dollars goes down.

So the other currency appreciates, so the assets like increasing

in bonds, the value doesn't change, but each bond is

now worth more dollars, right?

So in dollars, the assets increase.

Right, so which means that.

Country experiences a positive evaluation effect.

Right, so actually, depreciation of the dollar is a good

news for the US in terms of its radiation effects.

It's, it's as if there is a transfer to the

US from other countries.

OK And maybe explaining why the uh the movies don't

change.

What are our liabilities because they.

So in all the really doesn't change.

And I see your confusion, for example, we could, right,

we, we could measure these things in bonds.

Then let's say suppose they only invest in, in, in

UK, uh, bonds.

Then the value of assets won't change, but the value

of liabilities in bonds would decrease because in dollars, right?

It stays the same.

And so in the end you will get exactly the

same effect, the variation effect.

So that's really matter which currency you choose, uh, the

net effect will be the same.

OK, so which means that that kind of goes back

to where we started, right?

So that you ask adjustment, external adjustment, the way it

kind of repays its debt, it happens for both channels.

But what is interesting is that when the change rate

depreciates, it will generate positive uh variation effect, right?

and depreciate.

What will be the effect on that experts given all

our previous discussions?

Come on.

My dollar depreciates.

It increases 3 pounds, decreases.

Increases, right?

This is where we started, no, OK, so exchange and

depreciation turns out it improves external position of the US

through both channels, trade channel and financial channel, right?

I mean creation effects and the exports.

Uh, which is interesting.

I mean, one way to, uh, you know, you can

kind of invert this logic.

Imagine that, OK, so you have supported a lot, right?

It accumulated large debt, suppose now it needs to repay

back its its debt.

So you can say that in the smaller exchange rate

depreciation is sufficient to do that to the case where

you have no variation effects at all.

Right, so if, if, if they had to repay all

the debt only for the experts, you would need larger

depreciation.

You would need to export more goods, right, and import

less while, you know, because of this composition, a smaller

depreciation of the exchange rate allows you to also have

positive effects and so to repay your debt.

OK, so for the years, both channels work in the

same direction.

It's not just, you know.

To contrast this with other economies, think of um.

Uh, you know, think of other countries, I guess, what

would be a good example, uh.

Um, let's see, would, would work for China, let's say.

Yeah, sure, but let's check.

It's easy to check, right?

So, uh, what will happen to assets and liabilities of

China?

Uh, if you, if Chinese change depreciate, so, uh.

And let's measure this again in dollars.

Simplicity So, OK, let's let's kind of think of China,

uh, holding its foreign reserves in US treasuries, right?

So they, they actually financing uh the US, right?

So then what happens to their assets?

Increasing value.

OK, OK, but, but I already put dollars in here,

so let's measure them in dollars, OK, just, yeah, so

in dollars they don't change, right?

Now what about their liabilities and suppose that they, you

know, people invest in, in, in equity, uh, denominated in,

uh, yen, so then.

What will happen to uh Chinese food libilities.

If they exchange and depreciate.

So, in your, yeah, sorry, in Yuan in renminbi, right,

the ability to stay the same.

But what about the the venue?

The dolls or, or the, I think I can choose

and myself as well.

No, you, you, you want to appreciate, right?

You want to appreciate it.

So in yan stays the same but in dollars.

It goes down, right?

I think that's right.

OK, so for, for China, we get that that exchange

or depreciation also gene positive, right?

If I, if I do, but I think it's right.

OK, so then there's also a case of Argentina, but

let's, I think, I think I have it in the

programme set so that I don't want to discuss now.

Let's discuss it on Monday.

So.

I, I, in principle, at least, right, it is possible

to have a country.

I think in terms of it it will be like

that.

So for countries for which you have negative effect when

depreciate.

I think, I think it's Argentina the problem said when

you get negative variation effect.

So then of course you have a very different situation,

right?

You might get a situation where, OK, you depreciate your

exchange rate.

You, it helps you to increase your net exports, of

course, but.

Your kind of net debt increases because of that, and

in that case, you actually need much larger depreciation to

have external adjustment, right?

Given that part of the increase in net effort will

be upset by variation effects, it means that you need

even larger exchange and depreciation to restore, uh, external wealths,

right?

And, and this is of course still assuming that variation

effect in absolute terms is smaller than effect on trade

loans because otherwise even the sign of.

So that's why it matters quite a lot.

OK, good.

So does it make sense?

Any questions?

Yes.

OK, so this is again evidence from original paper by

Andrea.

What is interesting is that they actually find that they

they test.

this mechanism and they find pretty significant evidence.

OK, so the idea is the following.

Imagine that you see periods when the US has large

debt, right, large, uh, negative NFA.

We know that according to this, I mean, it's not

in the it's just an accounting identity, right?

We know that this should be compensated by future positive

variation effects and experts.

So in a sense, you can predict future variation effects

and the experts with lacked ways of NFA, right, like

give this gradual causality thing and so.

So this is exactly what they test in the data,

OK, we see it.

They look at, they look at different forecast horizons in

quarters if from one quarter to 6 years, right?

And they, so they, they put, um, they put NXA

on um there for a nice position they call it

NXA on the right hand side and on the left

hand side they put different ways.

For example, they look, they look at, uh, change growth

in net experts.

Right, and, and they get a negative coeffi.

Negative because, right, must be negative.

And you can see that the coefficient is significant at

all horizons and it is, you know, it is significant.

They also look at um exchange rate, right?

This is.

Um, trade weighted, uh, sorry, FDI weighted exchange rate, and,

OK, the negative sign, let's think of this.

So when you have high NFA, you expect exchange rate

to appreciate in the future, right?

To go down, which means appreciation.

That makes sense, right, because high NFA today means that

countries saved a lot.

If it saved a lot, then you might want to,

uh, consume more in the future, have higher, uh, trade

balance, sorry, no negative trade balance which corresponds to exchange

rate appreciation.

Right, and yeah, OK, so then there is also on

the returns of the portfolio.

Uh, so one thing to notice here that again, I

mean this is maybe in sample, but they also do

it out of sample and it turns out, turns out

that you can't predict the exchange rates with FTI.

So it was NFA was not quite a nice position.

So this is one of again one of these exceptions,

one of these very rare studies where you can beat

the random walk, OK, uh, using NFA you predict future

dynamics of the exchanging.

At the same time, I must say that it's a

relatively good evidence because they do a lot of different

case they take exchange rates and dere them.

They take NFA and dere them, and in a sense,

it's all kind of about this high frequency component.

So, uh.

If, if you don't do that, then you, you, you

can, you can't be uh a random walk, right?

So not in another way to put it, uh, much

of the right, you, you can't predict the little bit,

uh, deviations from trends, but, uh.

Uh, in terms of real forecasting, it doesn't help very

much.

OK, and so I guess one last thing here.

Well, she made it.

So, OK, what is the When we, we said, we

just said, right, that that this is open privilege, it's

largely the same thing that commercial banks or investment banks,

uh, how they make money, right?

You, you borrow, uh, using deposits and you invest in

the risky assets.

Now what is the big side of this, right?

So this is a kind of exorbitant privilege, but there

is also exorbitant duty.

So why, in a sense, why don't all of us

do this business?

I, I mean, if it's you know that easy to

earn this money, why don't we just hold up commercial

investment banks.

I mean, this, this difference in returns on liabilities versus

assets is What This compensation for But they increase Right,

you said that you issue safe as it, you invest

in the risk case, which means that you're taking risk,

right?

And so there is this another concept which also introduced

by Unniire is that there is exorbitant duty in the

periods of high uncertainty in the periods of uh global

crisis.

US will suffer much larger losses than other countries.

And so there will be an implicit trust from the

US to other countries.

OK?

So just again to emphasise, well, let me show you

the picture and then we can clarify this.

OK.

So.

There's this short but very nice paper by Ray and

Trembler where they computed implicit transfers between countries in 2008,

2009, right, during the global financial crisis.

And you can see that US is kind of the

largest um.

Do donor uh.

In this period, right?

This is the country, so I will show you the

exact numbers, but the, the red colour means the countries

which had negative transfer and the green colour are the

countries which had a positive transfer.

OK.

And China is really a bit of a mystery here.

I'm sure they also struggled with this, but who would

expect China actually, which holds a lot of US efforts

to receive some positive transfer, but that's not the case,

surprisingly, that's not the case.

Another surprising thing is that out of all these countries,

the one with the largest positive transfer is the UK.

How do you think where it's come, where, where it

comes from?

So maybe you know a little bit what happened in

the UK in 2008, 2009.

It was an international adjustment.

It has to do with the exchange rate.

What happened with the bound in 2008, 2009?

It was a big shock.

I mean, OK, I didn't live here.

I was like, I didn't, you know, um, follow UK

uh economics back then, but Turns out that there was

30% depreciation of the bond, which is dramatic, really dramatic,

30%.

And remember, right, that I mean you get is just

like for the US, but the most of its port

liability is there in bonds.

Right, so effectively like 30% of the value of this

liabilities it was kind of wiped away, right?

And so that, that's what generates, explains most of these,

uh, huge, uh, positive transfer to the UK, right, uh.

And for other countries like if you think about Russia

or Brazil right or India, those are countries which for

example hold uh US, um, assets, right, US, uh, bonds,

treasuries, and first of all, treasuries, they didn't go down,

but like, like equity for example, but also for if

it's, you know, long term, uh, bonds, more, many of

them actually their price went up, right, because again it

was full, uh full, um, flight of safety and US

Treasuries, which are considered among the.

assets, their price went up and that generated this trust,

right again, so don't think of this as, you know,

Bush or Obama sitting there and writing checks to Russian,

uh, uh, Brazil, right?

That's not how these transfers work.

It's just that each country holds some portfolios and portfolio,

the price of the portfolio changes, right?

So if you hold a lot of US equity, of

course, your assets will go down, but if you hold

US, um, treasuries during this period, right, then your assets

will increase.

And of course, for example, you know, if US investors,

as we discussed, they hold a lot of risky assets

coming from other countries, right?

If they hold Russian equity and equity even more than

US equity, right?

Then again, it will be an implicit transfer from the

US to Russia.

OK, so in some sense you can think of, you

know, US acting as an insurer to the rest of

the world, right?

In, in normal times, US gets this is she gets

compensation from other countries.

So on average it gets positive transfer.

But then in, in this really bad times, it provides

insurance and it generates positive transfers to other countries.

So here are just some numbers from the same paper,

right?

Uh, so this is measured in 2007 before, right before

the crisis, right, you know, during the crisis, measured in

percent of GDP and so this is, uh, change, yeah,

and this is change in US external balance sheet, right?

And we see this massive deterioration of US NFA right,

going down by 20% of GDP during this period.

And, uh, OK, so we see that the value of

liabilities went down, right, because part of these liabilities are

equity and of course, you know, equity went down.

So it's not surprising that gross liability that they decrease,

but if you look at gross assets, US assets, they

decreased even more.

Right.

And again, why is it because on the liability side,

we have higher representation of debt, you know, and the

value of that actually even went up and expectedly, I

think especially for government debt, right?

Government debt, debt as safe asset, its price increased.

While on the asset side, right, OK, that is good,

that's not very interesting, but if you look at equity,

for example, or FTI, right, the, the their value really

uh went down a lot.

And that's what's generated this transfer.

Uh, yeah, OK, and then they also have effects coming

from exchange rate, uh, reevaluation, right?

We can look at this total numbers.

This is just, I think just in billions of dollars.

Lecture 15:

You never I Go.

Maybe Oh.

OK.

Thank you.

stones.

I go like a trip.

I don't how much I like that.

Yeah, actually, I'm going.

I'm going to the college.

the group because I really want to.

I wouldn't recommend as a course.

Hard to know.

Oh, so I'm gonna go visit some friends back now.

My friend is the president of the union, so you're

like a search and stuff, but like a tourist city,

like the main ones like Oxford.

I don't like.

Uh, which I haven't been to Canterbury, although I had

a friend in Canterbury said there's a cathedral and so

I was just confused yeah.

Yeah I don't.

Yeah, that's just it.

Yeah, if you want.

She It's uh chest.

I I I used to live.

They might have, yeah, yeah, the the problems but yeah.

Yeah, that I had yesterday, so hopefully.

I was.

like a few pictures after.

I Uh I.

Yeah.

I.

Mhm I mean.

I I quit.

Oh.

OK, so makes sense.

Um OK, so where were we?

Who remembers?

Where did you stop last time?

Uh So that's, that's right, uh, so we're talking about

with the, right.

Um, so in particular right we discovered the fact that

yes seems to have, right, and we talked last time

that it acts as a global venture capitalist as the

global bank which issues safe asset and pays low interest

rate on that, right, and invests abroad, uh, risky assets

that's so on average.

Uh, it gets, right?

I think this is where we saw, well, this is,

this is the advantage of being here playing this, uh,

role in the global economy.

So what is the disadvantage we said last time?

I think this is where we stop, right?

So what is that?

Uh, side of the coin it extra bad in the

US right so it's a very leverage position so the

increase in the times um the assets go down.

So that's one thing.

And then there is another one which is kind of

new.

So I mean, I think this is the first time

I teach this paper because I think it's forthcoming at

ER, but it's a very recent paper by Aerium.

And so the kind they have, you know, very provocative

title in the paper which is the.

And er, OK.

And so here is their main argument.

If you remember, all pictures most pictures I showed you

before, they were up till 2014, something like that, right?

So the the privileges that I, I showed you was

before that.

So what they do, they kind of analyse what happened

in the last decade or so, and they argue that

things have really changed.

OK, so let's look at this picture.

Uh, so it's kind of the same series that we

had before.

OK, so this is the NFA F.

OK, then there is accumulated what they call I think

this is just accumulated trade balance.

OK.

And then, There is a green line which is the

variation sum of uh variation.

So ignore the red line.

The red line is just, you know, measurement error.

So if you take the sum of, um, let's see,

but if you combine variation effects with current technology, you

should get the NFA, right?

Remember this is the conversation we talked about last time.

Do you remember?

Yeah, I hope you do because this is important.

Otherwise, right, so we said that change in NFA is

the same sum of, uh, trade balance net experts, plus

um variation effects.

Yeah, I mean, but please stop me if something isn't

here or maybe we went too fast last time, so

if there are any questions, you should ask loud.

OK.

And we also did the calculation kind of forward looking

right, kind of saying that the NFA that you inherited

from the previous period will be spent in a sense

in the future, offset in the future by futurene experts

and variation.

This is kind of backward looking exercise, right?

You just accumulate you normalise things to zero in the

very first period.

And then you accumulate these things.

Oh thank you.

And so what they say is the following.

So if you, I mean, imagine for a second that

we focus on the period up until 2014, right?

This is approximately, I mean, the first people by Binus

Andre was written somewhere here, right?

The handbook chapter was written here.

And so if you look, you know, during this period,

you see that valuation effects, the accumulative variation effects are

positive.

Right, not, you know, in different, you see that NFA

is higher than accumulated credit balances, right?

So part of the debt, you know, part of the

debt that the country has from the goods markets, it

is paid by, uh, positive relations.

Is this clear?

OK, good.

So, but what they say that since 2014, right, in

the last 10 years, things have really changed.

So current account didn't change that much, right?

accumulated current account hasn't changed that much.

OK, so it kind of stays constant, but at the

same time, valuation effects start going down and at some

point they even cross zero, and in a sense if

you accumulate all variation effects over this last, I guess,

30 years, you can see that they are negative.

OK.

So they were positive.

They were quite positive here, but then they, they turned

negative and even the accumulated sound becomes negative range.

OK, and so you can see that, you know, in

the last, how many 5 years, we see that actually

NFA becomes more negative than accumulated trades.

Right, so again, if you remember the pictures that we

had last time, right there.

And the persistent feature of the data is that, you

know, during all this periods, the US had a way

higher humanitarian balances, well, not anymore.

And of course it depends what is the starting point,

but, but, uh, so it's clear that in the last

10 years, uh, US had pretty much negative radiation effects.

OK, so now the question is why is that.

And so they show several of decompositions.

So this is the first one, the key one, I

would say, right?

So they look at equity versus normal equity.

So you look at the equity of the asset side

and liability side.

And you look at the loan equity, mostly that bonds,

as you can see again that in terms of loan

equity there is not much going on.

OK, so in terms of bonds, this thing is pretty

flat, right?

There are not much, uh, variation facts are relatively small

and more comes from the equity.

OK.

And so you, in particular, you can see that the

smoothest evaluation effects in 2000s, they were driven by equity,

which means, which means what?

how to interpret that.

The equity in the US when, you know, was, was

growing faster or equity in the rest of the world

was growing faster and equity prices.

We last last time was everything was we spent much

time on other stuff, but I thought this was.

So if you uh has positive valuation effects from equity,

what does it mean?

Exactly right, of course, right?

It means that foreign equity that has its price goes

up more than the price of US equity held by

foreigners.

OK, so right, this is the source of this.

But then something changes, right?

And in the last 10 years you can see dramatic

negative radiation effects coming from equity, which means that US

equity grows faster.

OK, so here's the next picture from the paper which

just shows this more explicitly, OK, um.

OK, so this is, OK, so this is the first

period, you know, from 2002 to 2007, this is kind

of good interest rate, uh, period when they wrote their

papers.

So, right, this is the blue line which shows the

price of US stocks in dollars, and these two lines,

they show the price of foreign.

Uh, stocks in dollars and in their local currency, right,

but again, we will be most interested in comparing stock

prices in the same cur.

So let's focus on dollars, OK?

You can see that, OK, so this is, there was

a decline in all stocks, in particular in US stocks.

Why is that?

What is here?

I have here.

He has it all this uh.

Exactly.

dotcom bubble, right?

So it, it burst and so the prices went down.

But then there's kind of this recovery, right, and equity

in the US is growing, uh, sluggishly, while in the

rest of the world, right, especially once you take, you

know, convert this foreign stock price in dollars, you can

see much faster growth, right?

And it's largely driven by emerging economies growing faster.

Notice that I and looking at this gap and then

this gap, you can see that a lot comes from

machine trade.

Uh, right, so which means that, you know, uh, dollar

was what?

Let me ask you, was the dollar depreciating or appreciating

during this period?

He had to figure out, but.

Right, so the stock market was growing like this in

local currency.

OK, let's peso pesos.

But once you get $10 you actually get much more.

Which means that foreign currency was.

$40.

No, I think appreciating foreign appreciate this is foreign, and

then you convert that into dollars and you get even

more, right?

So foreign was appreciating and the dollar was depreciating.

I think that's right, yeah.

Uh, I hope I'm not making any mistakes, right?

So you can see that a lot comes from exchange,

right, but, but also the stock prices.

OK Let's look at what happened afterwards.

So this is post 2010 and up to 2021, and

again this forthcoming version they probably already have a few

more years, but the partners haven't really changed even more.

OK.

And so you can see what you can see here

is that no matter whether you measure in local currency

or in dollars, you see that foreign stock market was

not growing much.

That's, that's, that's quite amazing.

And while the stock market.

was moving like crazy.

It's, it's really, I mean, just compared the magnitudes, right?

So over like 12 years, the stock market increased, uh,

maybe even 5 times, right?

Well, no, it's, it's, it's not percent, so it's 4

times, right?

It increased 4 times.

That's, that's quite impressive.

Uh, of course, nothing like that happened in the rest

of the world.

By the way, I mean, let's compare, right?

So the rest of the world went up by something

like 50% in the previous, OK, in the previous it

went up more.

Well, global currency went up, went up by the same

50%.

So I'm just saying that right over this, I guess

6 or 5 years in local currency, the stock market

went up by about 50%, and this is very much

comparable to the growth here, although the period is a

little bit longer here, right?

It's 10 years.

So this green line is also, well, it's about 70%.

It's not like the rest of the world was not

growing very fast.

It's mostly coming from the fact that the US stock

market was, was really growing like crazy and exchange rate,

if anything, was working in the opposite direction, right?

And it, it, it kind of decreased returns in dollars.

So the dollar was appreciated this.

Right, but again, I think again, that is interesting, right?

For the stock market is interesting, but you can clearly

see that the main force in the US stock market.

So why is that?

That's a good question.

And the authors try to answer that question, right?

Um, I don't have a slides on that.

Uh, maybe I should review them at some point, but

they, they, I mean, they build the structural model.

They do something like, you know, an accounting model where

they have not enough shocks to rationalise all cities that

they er in the, and the main three shocks that

they have are the following.

So they have interest rate shock.

They have, uh, I think of that as, you know,

just, you know, in a sense, it's, it's demand for,

it's a shock which reflects demand for assets.

The way they model it, and they have growth rates

into two economies.

So this is how fast the economies are growing.

And then finally they have markup shocks.

OK Do you, I mean, have you seen markups in

any other courses that no, no, OK, but the idea

is, right, that markups is, um, they effectively they determine

what fraction of output goes into firm's profits.

So given output, given growth rates, and the markup.

Determine how much goes into wages and ransom capital and

the remaining part are just profits.

When markups go up effectively, it means that higher share

of GDP comes in the form of corporate profits.

And so what is interesting, so their main finding is

the following.

So the growth rates are not that different.

They haven't changed that much, and they can't really explain

these patterns.

They, they even argue that demand for assets hasn't changed,

right?

So I mean, you would imagine that maybe it was

just like US assets and so that's why you see

this, uh, increase in demand, but they argue that's not

the case either.

And you know, in particular, uh, the fact that other

stock markets are not growing that fast, it also indicates

that it's not like people just want to save more

and invest in more assets.

And what they argue is that the main driving force

behind this trends is markups, and in particular that US

markup, right, whole markup, it went up quite a lot.

And I mean, there's a separate very large macro literature

which documented rising markups in the US over the last

30 years, let's say.

So that's consistent with that and And there is this

increase in markets on average in the whole economy, but

in particular, right, it, it is true for large firms

which, uh, which are the main, you know, um, public

firms, right, which are the main drivers of the stock

market the US still has this like the same competition.

Were you in the portfolio as the port.

So that is, well, OK, so it's still true in

the sense that OK, so in terms of the number

of stocks, I would say the first one is the

same, of course, the share of equity in the liability

has increased enormously, but not because, you know, Americans were

buying foreign, foreigners were buying American stocks, mostly just because,

you know, if you have such dramatic increase in the

value, even if you don't change the number of stocks,

right, you will, the share will increase, the value will

increase.

So that you can see, that, that you can see.

it's actually even more strange that Trump is destabilising, well,

um.

I mean, it's a bit hard sometimes to rationalise Trump

policy, right, because on one hand he wants foreign countries

to invest in the US economy, which makes a lot

of sense, but he also wants to close the current

deficit, right?

But imagine foreigners invest this money in the US, of

course, you know, it will show up as an investment,

but then you get this money and you spend it

on foreign goods, right?

In the end, how much money comes from financial markets

will be how much is spent in the goods market.

It's just an accounting identity.

What else can happen with money, right?

And so you can't simultaneously want foreigners to invest a

lot of money in your country and also lose trade

in.

So it's hard, it's hard.

I mean it's, uh, you know, it's not, uh, it

would take a whole course, I guess, adding Trumppanomics, but

um.

But I think it's, it's a very interesting property, right?

It's a very interesting, and I mean, this is a

very interesting fact, uh, of course, as I said, right,

you see very fast growth here and if you look

at in the last few years, you would notice even,

even higher growth, right?

Pro but it has to do a lot with, uh,

AI with the fact that really US is.

The very of this new technologies, whether this is a

bubble or not, who knows, right?

We learn in the next few years.

I mean, who knows, right?

I mean, if you're very piece of music, you can

say that it very much resembles the bubble, right?

And if you look at these companies, index, it went

down.

I mean, OK, so this.

S&P 500, I imagine, right, or oh sorry MS MSCI

index, which is aggregate of many companies, but if you

just look at high tech companies, right, like as index,

it, it's, you know, it and you compare it to

the peak in 2001, it actually took a whole decade

for that index to be out, so it was really

a very big bubble.

So who knows what will happen, but so far it

looks like this and.

Yeah, the negative effect.

I'm curious how much of the rise in value in

equities and also in terms of the markups is driven

solely by the tech sector because they they have a

very large share of like I imagine it's a very

large.

Um, no, exactly.

So then there is a question.

What are, I mean, I mean, so, OK, it kind

of overturns this that we discussed before, right?

Uh, but then there's a question, what are the normative

implications?

Uh, I mean, of course exposed, it looks like a

bad news for the US, right, because, uh, the fact

that foreigners.

Purchase this, uh, US stocks means that they, they got

some fraction of these dividends, right, of, of these creditors

and so this is really a negative of, of, uh,

transfer from the US to to the rest of the

world from the perspective it's not so obvious.

Right from the perspective, it's not clear whether you actually

want to share this risk or not, and that really

depends on the source.

If you look at the paper, the most recent version,

they spent like the last maybe two pages in the

whole paper to do some ex ante analysis what is

the option for.

if you have these types of shocks.

So they argue that in the end if you have,

you know, more shocks, most valuation effects come from markup

shocks, then they actually observed portfolios are close to the

optimal one from 1% right when you don't know what

will happen to these markups in the future, that might

be actually optimal and, you know, in some sense, US

was just unlucky.

Uh, doesn't look like they're unlikely, but just, just from

this international point of view, uh, they were just unlucky

that they had, uh, higher returns and they had to

share thes with the rest of the world.

But right, who knows, maybe things will change and then

in the next decade we'll have like this, and then

again the market will will grow fast, in which case

they will get some dollars on that.

Um, so that's, that's kind of, uh, was it hard

to say.

Um, OK, good.

Right, but I mean, again, so in Macro, this is

a very big, there's now a big leadership which thinks

about this, right?

So some people say that it's just the change in

technology.

Some people would say that, um, we now have all

these high tech companies which usually mostly use intangibles, right,

uh, exports, and then maybe they just need these high

profits to cover their R&D, uh, and other expenses.

So this is maybe, you know, a wrong way to

think about this.

But yeah, it's, it's, it's just hard to say at

this point.

OK, good.

Any questions about this?

OK, so here is the last thing that I want

to talk about, uh, about, uh, in terms of exorbitant

privilege.

So this is no this is less of it's more,

but it's still interesting, um, and I think in practise

it's important.

We'll also talk about this later when we talk about

global imbalances.

So there is, it seems like part of this might

actually come from.

So what, what do I mean by this?

So you just one example.

I mean, it's a very specific example, but it's still

interesting.

OK, I, I must say that you know, uh, Zukman,

uh, Gabriel Zucman is one of the main people in

the school literature, so he has many, many papers.

I will just show you a few, uh, interesting, uh.

Empirical evidences from his believers.

The first one is this one.

So where he, where he argues that you can't disentangle

the from geoeconomics.

I mean, when he wrote the baby in 2018, I

don't think there was this, but this is what people

now call it, right?

So kind of geoeconomics where you really think about strategic

interactions.

In practise, OK, so I mean, don't push me on

defining, uh, geoeconomics hard right and really like geopolitics, very

old term, and now people start, uh, also think about,

uh, economic dimensions called geoeconomics, um, but, um.

I, I would say like, you know, half a year

ago I think it was still very controversial.

There were already papers and socioeconomics and you know, and

the US was a hegemon which uses different economic tools

to extract trends from other countries, but also it benefits

other countries by implementing global order and things like that.

So it looks a little bit, you know, like a

conspiracy, I must say.

I always.

a little bit uncomfortable with seeing people presenting the sleepers,

but you know, the world has changed quite a lot

over the last half a year.

It just, you know, it became much more explicit, and

now it's really hard to push against these models in

a sense, right?

It's, I mean, maybe it was always there, but more

implicit now it's just much more explicit that you kind

of combine, uh, economic motives with political motives at the

international stage, right?

Uh, it's not just like we, we commit to some

rules and we never break them no matter what happens,

but we will, we can solve, um, make arrangements, uh,

based on the current situation depending on, uh, what is

good for countries.

OK, this is what just said, you know, introduction to

this literature.

So this is just the tax that US companies, oil

companies had to pay, uh, in, um.

Abroad in the Middle East countries, OK, and you can

see that there is kind of struct, almost like a

structural break in 1990, right after the first war, so

you can see that before that they were paying tax

on average equal to 70% and afterwards the tax went

down to 45%, which is a lot.

And so, you know, these are, these authors, they, they

argue that this is kind of one example where there

was this kind of transfer, right, exchange of military help,

political help, uh, in exchange for uh economic transfer, right?

It's not like they were paying, but instead US companies,

they just got preferential tax rates.

OK, that one you can how you can potentially explain

part of exorbitant, right?

So remember part of, part of the assets, right, uh,

are FDI.

So if American oil company, uh, extracts rent somewhere, uh,

in the Middle East, right, that will be counted as

part of this FTI.

And so once the tax rate.

For these companies goes down, it means that they will

get higher profits, so they will have higher returns and

then that will contribute to the sort of big issue.

OK OK, and this is just um.

Right, so this is kind of a generalisation, right, so

you can see, uh, let me see, uh.

OK, so this is the average tax rate paid by

US companies to foreign countries, and this is what foreign

companies pay, which operate in the US, what tax rate

they pay, OK?

And so, you know, from this picture you can see

that there's kind of this downward sloping trend.

I mean, it's true that taxes went down everywhere, but

In a sense, the gap between the taxes that US

companies pay abroad and the tax rate that foreign companies

pay in the US, it has increased, right?

And that can contribute to this difference in the returns

on FDI in on the liability side and as a

side of US dollars.

Game.

OK, so now, uh, OK, so now this is, this

is not any evidence.

This is just.

Now let's talk about more interesting stuff.

Let's talk about more.

So this is, you know, these days.

It's important for political reasons, uh, so, uh, you know,

Biden administration, they, I, I remember it was one of

the very first thing things that they tried to push.

They wanted to, uh, you know, have some agreements with

the other countries to stop countries from doing profit shifting.

Now, you know, we have exactly the opposite tendency, but

for that again, going back to Zul, so he was

one of the most prestigious, uh, prizes in, um, economics,

uh, note for working on this, right?

So it's, it's, you know, again, it belongs more to

public economics, but we will just, uh, spend a few

minutes on this.

So what is profit shifting?

Let's go to.

The exercise when you try to shift profits into tax

jurisdictions like from away from the US to Ireland.

Exactly, perfect, perfect, right?

So now, OK, so that's, that's great.

Now how can you do this, you know, some people,

uh, some work for, uh, large companies helping them, uh,

to do that.

I mean, but I mean we, we need to be

clear, right?

Uh, that's, uh, avoiding that tax evasion, it's a crime,

right?

You go to prison if somebody proves that you're doing

that.

If you are, but you can do taxation, which is

not a crime, which is a very well paid job.

Right.

And so this is a big difference.

And of course you don't want to break the law,

but within this law because of the lack of cooperation,

coordination across countries, right, you can kind of explore the

differences in tax rates across countries.

So everything that we're going to focus on is not

about breaking the law.

It's not criminal.

It's just, uh, it's within the law, but it is

done by many firms and, uh, yeah.

I mean doesn't, you know, it doesn't help, um, government

budgets, but you know, it is, there's no, uh, nothing

kind of wrong at issue with it.

So how can you do this?

Mhm you can like intellectual property from another jurisdiction so

any any money earned based on that property would go

there.

Very good, very good.

So, OK, so you, you, you, I mean this the

main thing you can do as we mentioned you uh

Apple, right?

You produce goods in China, let's say, although probably it's

a little bit outdated.

I suppose you uh iPhone in China and then you

sell it in the US, right?

The cost of producing.

This iPhone in China, let's say it's $100 but then

you sell it for $1000 in the US, and then

there's this kind of profit $900.

The question is how do you achieve this $900 of

profit across different countries, right?

You would say that, you know, the whole value was

produced in China.

Then you will have to pay a lot of taxes.

Yeah, you can say that you know it was produced,

the idea came up and, uh, R&D was done in

the US and then you will pay taxes in the

US or you can try to say that actually most

of where you added was, you know, came from Ireland,

right?

And so the indeed the easiest way you can do

this is that you, you open a subsidiary there, you

have some people working there, and then you kind of

put intangibles there, right?

So in particular, something like R&D.

So here is a iPhone, most of the video it

comes from, you know, marketing, design, etc.

which is really hard to, you know, pin down where

it was done, right?

You have 100 people in Ireland, I don't know, a

few 1000 people sitting in California.

How can you, right, uh, say that?

How can you determine, uh, who, who exactly produced the

most valuable thing?

And so you can always say that it was mostly

produced in Ireland.

That's, that's, that's one example.

That's, you know, the, the cheapest way to do this.

In principle, you can do two other things.

Right.

One, the most costly thing to do would be to

ship goods.

In principle, you could ship goods from China to Ireland,

then just repackage them and then from Ireland to the

US, right?

Again, uh, it is not that much because there are

additional transportation costs, right?

But you can again, you can say that, you know,

this repackaging is really the thing that creates this $900

value.

And then the third one.

If you don't want to use this intangibles, you don't

want to ship goods, if you only want to move

on, I'm looking for the English word like you can

probably replace your hands and then you only have to

yeah, I would put it in the same pocket as

uh intangibles, right?

That's kind of the same thing more or less.

So then the last thing that you can do in

principle, you can open a subsidy in Ireland or Cayman

Islands, and then you can, you know, it does something,

maybe it will even sell some goods there and then

you lend money, so you borrow money, right?

You borrow money from that, um, uh, that's and pay

some crazy interest rate on this borrowing, right?

And then, you know, all your profits will be spent

on this interest.

While that subsidiary will get a lot of profits from

just lending money to you.

And so again, all of these profits will be shifted

to Ireland or Cayman Islands, right?

In this case, you don't even need to open an

office.

You just more money in a sense, right?

That's not a scheme that is done.

Um, I mean, China is a very special case, but

it's, it's completely for different reasons.

It's not so much about profit shooting, but more because

of the legal structure, but it's got something similar, right?

So in the case of China.

So for foreigners to invest in Chinese firms, you can't

do this directly, and the way it's usually done is

that in Hong Kong, there is a company which lends

a lot of money to Chinese firms.

It has so much money on the paper that, you

know, if it takes this loan back, the company in

China will go bankrupt, right?

So effectively, effectively this company in Hong Kong, we kind

of owns Chinese car.

Then this company can own any issue equity and debt

and sell it to foreign investors, right?

So that's, that's, I mean, again, it's, it's for different

reasons.

It's not about profit shifting.

It's not because all these capital controls, but that's, you

know, a similar scheme in a sense.

OK, great.

So, and how can you measure this?

I mean, it's tricky.

It's not easy to do, uh, but this is one

clever way to do this.

So what you can do, it's a complicated picture.

Let's try to unpack it step by step.

So let's first of all focus on, um.

Yeah, Uh, so what you can do in the end,

right, you can look whether this company, which has a

subsidiary in particular jurisdiction, whether it, it actually pays a

lot of uh wages or it only has this property.

That, that's kind of the basic idea.

So in particular, let's look first at non-tax haven, uh

countries.

So if you look there.

You can look at the share, let's say of wages

or tangible capital as a percent of total income of

the of the company.

OK, so you can see that these things are pretty

stable in time.

OK.

So, again, you look, you take a company, right?

You look what happened to the wages and the spending

on, uh, tangible capital in tax havens and non-tax havens.

OK.

And so what you can see that for these two

categories, which are really hard to shift, right?

It's hard to shift tangible capital, physical capital, and wages,

you can see that their shares was pretty flat during

all this period, right?

Nothing really changed.

But then you look at what happened with the pre-tax

profits of, of the same company, and you can see

that the share of profits that they, uh, assign to

this non-tax haven, it has decreased massively.

While the share of profits that they register in this

tax haven, it has increased a lot, right?

That's, that's exactly, you know, an indicator that, uh, there

is a lot, uh, there's increasing profit shifting towards tax

havens in the data.

OK, total, you take, you take this company's earnings of

sales, right, total of them revenues, and then you look

at the share of your costs on wages and eligible

capital in non-tax havens and in tax havens, right?

So, and the sum should be close to 100%, I

guess, right?

And then you look at the dynamics also of, of

taxes.

Right, so they get this revenue, and then they split

them between wages, uh, spending on physical capital and profits.

Right, and so, so in some you you get 100%

and you can see that these things are the composition

changes.

Right, OK, let me show you some cross sections, OK.

OK, so for each individual country, we now look at

the ratio of pre tax corporate profits to wages that

they pay.

OK, so you divide, you take a firm, firm's profits

and divide them, uh, by, um, wage bill.

OK.

So you can do it for local firms in each

of these countries and of course, there is some variation,

but it's not that much, right?

I mean, these black bars, they are the same, more

or less the same across all countries.

I mean, there is variation right, but it's, there's no

clear part of kind of systematic part.

Now what you can do, you can now measure the

same ratio but for foreign firms.

Not local firms, but foreign firms, kind of multinational companies,

and you can see very clear, right, clear quadrant.

So for some countries, you see that this ratio for

foreign firms is actually lower than for, uh, local firms.

And then for some countries, this ratio is actually much

higher, right?

And I mean it just explodes there.

And this is not just random countries.

Those are exactly the countries which have relatively low debt.

I show you the second, but this is going to

be examples like Ireland, Switzerland, uh, tax havens, which means

that, right?

I mean, if you know, if, if foreign firms behave

like local firms, right, they should have the same parts,

but they don't, right, and there's clearly this profit scripting.

Uh, again, for local firms, well, you know, if you

take all local firms, most of them don't have any,

um, subsidiaries in other countries, which means that, uh, they

can't really do profit shifting, right?

I mean, if you have, you know, uh, how we

call it and pop store or if you have a

local, um, restaurant, right, it would be just too expensive

for you to do this proper shooting.

And so these companies, for that reason, you know, they,

they have relatively low share of profits to wages, right?

But of course, if you're a multinational company accordingirm, then

the reason you open subsidiary in Ireland is mostly because

you want to ship their process.

It makes sense.

I ask about sort of the countries in the far

right end.

Is this suggesting that, you know, countries like Italy and

Germany that companies are like extremely profit, you know, shifting

compared to like US, Belgium, so on, yeah, they're shifting

away more so than other countries, or could it also

be a story of they just have low profits for

the amount that they like local firms have low profits

for the amount that they pay.

I think that maybe, maybe they're not, if you talk

about markups, maybe they're not good at making markups, right?

Like all of them, all of the revenue they make

goes to wages.

Yeah, no, but Yeah, it can be absolutely.

I mean, this paper is not very conclusive in this

respect, right?

I mean, most, I mean you can't really, uh, it's

very hard to measure these things, especially within the firm

in different in different countries, but I would still guess,

right, that it's very possible that in terms of sales,

in terms of making wine in these countries, they're kind

of the same as in other countries.

It's just that they report much less profit.

That would be my guess that it mostly comes from

there.

Uh, there is no reason, right, if you take a

foreign company, let's say a US company.

It's very hard to imagine, let's say that in Germany

it is less profitable than in France.

Why should they, it's the same company, why should you

have kind of lower productivity and low markups in this

particular context.

Um, yeah, I, I, I would imagine that these companies,

they mostly produce not in these countries anyway, right?

Most of their production takes place somewhere in this value

chains in Asia, let's say, right, and then they just

ship goods and sell them in these countries, uh, and,

and then it's just, you know, I don't know, because

they have some local expenditures, but they are relatively small.

So it's hard for me to mention that this is

the key driver of this difference.

But yeah, so, you know, somebody told me, you know,

all these papers like they're super interesting and they have

some interesting facts, but they're never fully conclusive, right?

I mean, it's not like, uh, they have great data

where you can measure these things exactly.

So that's a limitation.

OK, just, you know what I already said just to

eat right, right, this is more or less the same,

uh.

Let's see, this, this line is more or less the

same again.

Profits divided by wages and so this is left scale,

right?

And on the right scale, this is, this is the

effective tax rate that companies pay in these countries and

you can see this very clear negative correlation, right?

So countries which have the highest taxes, tax rates, right?

So they are this ratio is really low and, and

then there are these, um, tax havens, uh, Luxembourg, Ireland.

Bermuda, right, and so there you can see that uh

this ratio of profits to wages uh explodes.

Uh, OK, very good.

So any questions about this or any comments?

Indeed, no.

OK, so I think that's all I have here.

I want to do the following.

I will.

I want to um continue talking about these things and

how they affect uh international accounting, OK, so how much

that affects the position of of different countries, etc.

But let me kind of, you know, switch to next

topic, and then we will come back to this measurement

issues.

Because yeah, I think it belongs there.

And another thing, by the way, so I showed you

this, this was all for firms, right, for corporations.

So for Zugman, I think actually is even more famous

for his work on, um, uh, savings of rich people,

right?

It's not just firms which shift their profits, but also

rich people, uh, to avoid, uh, income tax.

They also shift their, uh, income, right?

And so that, that, that's not, uh, interesting aspect here.

OK, see.

OK, good.

So if there are no questions, let's move on.

So we're going to talk now about current accounts and

global balances.

This is not a, it's a closely related to the

topic actually, you know, some other courses I usually start

with global and then talk about privilege, you know, I

never know what is, but they are closely related.

OK, so this is one of the courses, right?

I should say, uh, we already mentioned this, Trump policies,

uh, it's really, you know, if there is topic of

the international is all about, right?

Suddenly the US has become obsessed with the idea of

closing current deficit.

Um, and then the question is how we can do

this.

Is it even good or bad, right?

So you really, we really need to go to before

answering these questions we need to understand what drives this,

uh, kind of, right?

And you will, I mean, maybe you, I hope you

will notice it, but in the sense in the background

there is this question.

Uh, who, whom to blame, right, because what you see

is that save a lot like China or Germany, which

borrows a lot, right?

So this is just quantities.

This is just flaws.

It doesn't tell you is it the US who wants

to borrow more or is it, you know, let's say

China which wants to save more, right?

Both stories can be true, but depending which stories, you

know, is, is, is the right one.

It is kind of either up to the or it's

up to China, right?

So the question is who to blame in the sense,

right?

We will, we will not talk so much about, but

of course you know you start making this in politics,

suppose it.

You, you always have in mind this question.

On top of that, because there's a very natural question

if there's anything wrong with savings, right?

Some countries are borrowing efficient outcome, right?

After all, you know, uh, it's not, it's not obvious

and in the most standards, we will start with actually

it's always a good thing, right?

It's, it's like international trading boots is interoral trade in

capital, so there is nothing wrong with that.

Um, one thing, one, I, I strongly encourage you to

watch this interview by Paul Kruman, and then you can

click click, OK, so this is, uh, linked to YouTube.

Uh, so he gave a recent interview to Marcus Gruelweis.

One hour long, uh, but it's very nice.

I was actually very positively surprised.

I mean Krugman is a genius, but it's just very

impressive how he, uh, combines, uh, different, uh, aspects of

this imbalances, um, together.

So very highly recommended if you're interested in the story.

OK, but let's start with kind of basics, right?

So we need to define what we mean by global

analysis.

This is just a snapshot of current account with different

countries in, uh, let's see, in October 2024, right?

So this is kind of the latest data it comes

from the IMF.

And this is all in billions of US dollars, you

know, countries are put in this different category, which is

a little bit unusual.

You notice that the green light means that the country

is borrowing, right?

It has negative current account and the red red colour

means that the country is saving, again, we talked about

this, but just to remind you, right, so changing in

the NFA.

I, uh, is effectively, um, current account, OK?

And so when if current account is positive, it means

that the country is saving, which means that it's net

foreign asset position is increasing, right.

OK, good.

So what do we see here?

Let's let's discuss this.

Let's stare at this picture for a minute and discuss

what we see here.

So let's start maybe with borrowers.

So which countries borrow?

It's just for one year, right, and this is a

change in time.

We'll talk about dynamics of how these things change, uh,

in a second, but which country is bro?

effectively who is the largest borrower.

The US, right, so that's expected and you will see,

I mean, of course, it's a very large economy and

the largest economy by some measures, but you will see

that it's kind of persistently over the last decades the

US has been warming every single year as it has

a negative.

OK, then what are the kind of groups of countries?

developing Developing countries, that's true.

So, um, yeah, I guess it's a good way to

put it.

Most developing countries are boring, right?

In particular, OK, Argentina is very special, right?

We know that they had very interesting over the last

two years or so.

I would guess that if we looked before 2022, 203,

it would probably also be green.

And so most Latin American countries, they are usually green,

so which means that they mostly borrow internationally, right?

And then sometimes they.

Repay back the debt, sometimes they justold, right?

But, but these countries, I mean, OK, Chile is another

exception, I guess, but most Latin American countries, they borrow,

and it's actually mostly the government, right, which borrows quite

a lot in these countries.

OK, good.

Uh, then there's African countries, of course, right?

So here, uh.

Again, we see that most countries are negative to some

extent.

It also comes from the fact that these countries get

some international transfers which will be counted as if they

are borrowing, right.

No one expects them to repay if this is just

a transfer, right, but it means that the capital is

flowing to the country.

So that's why they might be here.

On top of that, of course, there is also government

borrowing private sector.

OK, good.

Another interesting fact, by the way, I mean, uh, it

became hard to think about East Europe, but let's say

the Southern Europe, right?

It's, it's also in greens of these countries, uh, which

joined and some of them joined recently, some of them,

uh, are not even members of the EU, right?

So they are also kind of developing countries of, of,

of the Europe.

They also.

And then there is the UK which is also among

the largest borrowers.

OK, good.

So then who is sleep?

By the way, I'm not talking about India so much

because to be honest, I don't know the quarters.

I'm not so sure whether it is very persistent, uh,

fact that they have current account deficits.

I, I, I should check at at some point.

It's really interesting.

Uh, I wouldn't be surprised at, uh, if there are

some years when they actually have surpluses, but I'm not

sure.

OK, so which countries safe?

China, right?

Exactly.

China would be one of them and Japan and other

East Asian countries, right, like Asian tigers, so the countries

which grow fast right now or grow fast, you know,

a few decades ago, like, like, uh, Japan, we see

that they run current account surplus and you know, especially

in the case of Japan, it has accumulated huge, uh,

not net foreign asset position right positive net.

Just amazing.

I just saw recently these numbers.

I was actually very surprised.

I didn't know this.

So with China, so just, you know, I mean they

have the total current account, the total, but how much

they invest in US treasuries US government bonds.

So it went down from 1.5 trillion to.

Something like 750, so 50% reduction over the last 10

years, right, but it's still a lot.

Interestingly, UK has almost the same number right now, so

75 billion, but this is mostly because other countries invest

through the UK, so it's not like it's a different

story.

And then there's Japan, which is the largest.

It's close to 1 million votes.

I remember reading that back in the 70s, 80s, I

think Japan has such a strong position that people were

afraid that they were going to buy the world exactly,

exactly, exactly.

So we will talk about that in a second it's

in the next slide, but you're actually right, just like

you know.

stories that we hear right now about China and other

countries, Western countries, they have to impose some bans.

They would allow some companies to be sold to Chinese

investors, right?

It was even more so before for Japan, Japanese investors.

OK, OK, so this is kind of one group of

hands.

I mean, I don't know, maybe we should treat China

separately just because of its role in the global economy,

but yes, uh, East Asia.

So then what, what are the group of country that

oil exporting, right?

You can see it even in Latin America, you can

see it, of course, in the Middle East, you can

see it in the case of Russia, right?

North African countries, so most commodity exporters, especially, you know,

energy, oil, gas exporters, they also want persistent on the

counter.

So that's probably makes sense.

This is one of these facts which is not probably

that surprising, right, even from the perspective of a simple

neoclassical model, it makes sense at least to some extent.

Why is that?

the oil exporting countries of course a commodity, let's try,

but why don't they spend this will be the question.

Why don't they buy more imports if they have so

much revenues I guess if, if, if you think of

this as a model, you know that they have a

massive, you know, um.

competitive advantage now and exports because they have the oil,

but at some point the oil might run out and

so they know that in the future they have to

import lots of goods, but that's exactly right, and you're

gonna tell two stories.

One is that they might run out of their resource

of gas, but it seems like, I mean.

Right, but some people would argue that even more that

the price of this commodities will go down, right, and

because of the green transition, uh, eventually demand for oil

and gas will, right?

And so then it's better for them to export this

gas and oil now rather than later in the future.

And of course it means that in the future they

will be over, so they need to save more and

they need to invest this money.

At home and abroad and they will kind of that

will allow them to sustain this high consumption.

Almost going into the topic, but I remember reading about

like I think single hypothesis, right, which is sort of

a lot of poor countries that specialise in commodities are

are locked in and the argument was that they're locked

in poverty because the price of commodities goes down over

time with the price of manufacturers and goes up.

Would wouldn't if that argument held up, would that mean

that a lot of export commodities like those exporting commodities

like in Latin America, would they be?

surplus historically because to compensate for falling you're saying that

they should behave the same way as the Middle East,

yeah, that's right.

I mean, but again, I mean.

I kind of emphasise the fact that for all sporting

countries it kind of makes sense.

I would say this is an exception for most countries

that we see here like China, US, Europe, Latin America,

what they are doing is actually will go against standards.

So the fact that you know these commod exporters, they

don't have that will be surprising.

Uh, but it's actually true for most countries.

On the other hand, I also want to say that

even if you think about commodities squas like Brazil, for

them commodities play much smaller role than oil for Saudi

Arabia, right?

They're still more diversified.

It's more complicated, but yeah, uh, absolutely, we would not

expect them always to, to work, right?

They should say sometimes.

OK, good.

So, OK, so we said, uh, then there's one last

thought, a group of countries.

We save Western Europe, I mean, it's mostly Northern Europe,

right?

It's Germany and Netherlands, Belgium, right?

And in these countries, it turns out that now even

southern Europe, but but that's a relatively new phenomenon, OK?

And so, OK, this is just the same picture, but

it's percentage of GDP, so.

OK, OK, so let's make a 5 minute break, I

guess now, right, and then let's continue because it's interesting.

It will take some time to figure this out.

We'll talk about more.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah OK OK, let's continue this, right?

um.

Yeah, and I might need to go, you know, a

few minutes earlier before the end of the class and

maybe not have office hours today.

I'm sorry about that, but there's a faculty meeting today,

uh.

So sorry, but if you have questions let me know

we schedule an appointment.

OK, cool.

So we were talking about, so this is snapshot, right?

This is just, you know, uh, what's happened here.

Invisible, right, as we said, it can be very well

be the case that is sometimes more, sometimes they switch

between, and that will be exactly what our standard models

predict right what countries should do, right?

I mean, when you have a negative control, you just

borrow and then if you have a positive in control,

you see.

Now it turns out that that's not exactly what we

see in the data, and that's exactly what people mean

when they say global imbalances, rights mean that there is

something in the data.

So let's start with the US.

This is just size of US current account as a

percent of all GDP, OK, and the fact that it

is negative means that it is negative, right?

And so what is kind of amazing here is that

it has been negative starting from the 1980s almost every

single year, right?

So during the last 40, 45 years, every single year,

has been war, right?

And again, it's not like, you know, it's not like

it's not in a fail, right?

It's not that.

like I owe money to the rest of the world

all the time.

No, you know, I, I owed some money at the

beginning of the year.

By the end of the year, I now owe even

more, right?

Every single year I borrow, yes, not I, but the

US borrows on top of that what you borrowed before.

That's quite impressive.

Maybe, you know, there's 1 year when it is 0

or maybe mildly mildly positive, but otherwise it is always

negative, right?

It was particularly large before the financial crisis then you

see, it became a bit smaller, but it's still impressive,

right?

That's, that's the balance.

OK, so I mean it's a bit hard to see

who else is borrowing here, right?

I mean, OK, it's interesting that in the 1990s oil

producers were borrowing, right?

And it's probably not a coincidence that it was a

period of relatively low oil prices, right?

And then you can see that oil producers, oil exporters,

they kind of started from end of 90s, they move

here and they stay there for the next 20 years,

right?

So this is exactly the period of high oil prices.

commodity prices more generally, and these countries are saving every

single year as we discussed, if you, if we think

about very, very long, low frequency cycles like there are

decades or maybe hundreds of years when oil price is

high, then it will go to zero, and we can

rationalise such behaviour.

And then let's see what happens to other countries.

So what about Japan?

OK, so Japan must be this one, right, dark blue.

So that's another country which has positive current account throughout

all this period, right, for 4 years, and as we

discussed before, right, it was especially pronounced in 1980s, so

you can see that.

You know, the US is borrowing, but who is lending

to the US?

It's Japan, right, other countries, but Japan is really the

main country, the main lender to the US.

You can see that its role can decreased relative role,

right?

So US runs even larger current account deficit, and Japan's

current accounts.

It also decrease became smaller in 2008 is kind of

part of this um economics and attempts by the government

to depreciate the currency and to have some stimulus, uh,

but, but it still remains at least, you know, late

2010.

OK, so then, so who else lended money?

OK, so Japan was said right, oil exporters, and then

of course there is China.

Right, so China was relatively small in the first decades

of this period, small in terms of global capital markets,

but then in 2000s, 2010s especially, right, we see that

it becomes one of the major creditors, lenders to the

US and other countries.

OK, so then.

What, I mean, the only country shown in this figure

which has a meaningful switching sides is the European Union,

right?

We can see that the 1980s and 1990s it was

mostly negative and it became positive, right?

It switch side and then it became positive.

So that's something that we would expect.

And so the European Union as a whole seems like

it's not it it doesn't have imbalances on average.

But it's also a little bit misleading.

So let's unpack what is in the EU.

OK, so let's look at the, uh, current account positions

of individual countries, which members of the EU, euro area

I should say, um, so right, so this, this solid

line shows the total, the net effect.

So this is right, the part for which we see

that it's changes sign, and then we can see the

sign from 2011, it becomes, uh.

Persistently positive.

So why is that?

Well, OK, if we look at, no, let's say pre

2000 here, right, or even 200, 2011, we can see

a very clear pattern, right?

So Germany was a negative current account in the 1990s

and then a positive current account afterwards.

Why is that?

Why, why was it negative in the 1990s?

Why was during war?

The very big exporting or manufacturing industry, so the cars.

No, but that's that.

Right, it, it exports more than it, uh, imports, and

that's exactly what we have here, right, but in 1990s

it was it was borrowing, uh, the sort of rebuilding

of East Germany, exactly right.

So there was huge investment in East Germany and so.

this explains mostly this thing, and then, you know, OK,

it takes some time.

They do all this investment and then they start to

save and yes, you can see that most of savings

time by individual currency comes from Germany, right?

Germany, and if you look even at this picture that

I showed you before, it's kind of amazing, right?

So you can see that Germany is in the same

market as China.

Despite, you know, it's kind of, it's not been done

right, it's probably 20 times small in terms of population,

but in terms of just absolute billions of dollars, it

had comparable, uh, current account balances.

I mean, the result was different, but, uh, it's quite

amazing.

Right, OK.

Now what about countries which borrowed in 2000, right?

So since the creation of the Eurozone in, in, in,

uh, year 2000, so which countries borrowed?

Which countries had negative current account?

Spain, it's usually 4 countries, right, Italy and Greece, right,

exactly.

So this is, you know, uh, yeah, this is exactly

the Southern European countries, they board a lot, right.

And what is interesting, what we can see from the

speech is that around 2011, and this is the start

of the Eurozone crisis, the euro crisis, we see that

they cut their borrowing a lot.

It practically went down to zero expected, right?

So many of these countries, they either defaulted, I mean

they never defaulted the fish, they structured their debt.

But effectively they were very close to the vote like

Greece, and even if not investors just stopped lending money

to these countries, right?

And so the main dramatic shift that happened here is

that Germany keeps running on the surplus more than Europe,

like Netherlands, right?

Where is it?

Yeah, Netherlands is green and yeah.

Yeah, Northern, uh, um, northern Europe keeps running currently on

surpluses, but southern Europe is no longer borrowing, right?

And some countries, let's say like Italy, they actually sleep

and they start saving.

Right, and so this, this explains this large imbalances in

the extent that the effect of, you know, being like

a very competitive exporter like China versus you're just an

uninvestable economy.

No, so, OK, so, OK, so this is right, so

that's kind of how we usually think, you know, how

I guess most people think about this, but this is

wrong in the sense that even if you're an amazing

exporter, amazing producer, what you should do, you should just,

you, you will, of course, export a lot, but then

you should just buy a lot of foreign goods.

I think, if you think about all these trade models

that you had in the first round, I imagine you,

you look at the case of the trade.

Right?

And what, what will happen is that the exchange rate

will appreciate enough so that you can buy a lot

of foreign goods, of course, you can buy a lot

of foreign goods.

There is, there is no need to have current accounting

balance because of that.

Right, in Germany you can in principle afford just buying

much more foreign goods, and China can do the same.

And and it brings the right if you somehow enforce

them to balance their trade on a yearly basis, the

exchange rate will appreciate and they would houses will buy

because everything would be very cheap for them, right?

For goods would be very cheap for them.

And the fact that that is not happening, that's exactly,

you know, the puzzle, right?

It means that either the government has some particular policy,

maybe households or firm, but they just despite their high

income, they decide to postpone their consumption, particular consumption of

foreign goods in the future, right?

Uh, well, US kind of does the opposite.

That's, that's the core of the puzzle one question.

What would be the scenario if will include uh the

UK.

I mean, I know that uh before 2020, uh, this

must be kind of uh.

The European Union was included in the UK.

I don't know if, uh, if you include like the

UK would be like different kind of history that you

uh that we have.

So that's a good question.

I clearly mys my knowledge I never saw pictures where

explicitly show this, this.

I don't know about the UK is we said divorce,

right, divorce, uh, I mean the reason I guess why

we have this.

because it's not just EU but it's actually euro, right?

And it was never part of the euro.

So some people look at this issue and they say

that for the end of the story actually has to

do something with the euro.

They would say that the fact that this country started

borrowing more has something to do with the creation of

the euro, and then some people would even say that

the fact that these countries didn't have their own exchange

rates, they couldn't adjust to the stock, and that's why

it also affected this.

So.

I think this is wrong.

I think this is deeply wrong, but you know, one

story for Germany would be to say that, oh, they

have a fixed exchange rate.

They can't appreciate their own currency.

So that's why they don't consume more.

I think this is just wrong because there is a

difference between normal exchange rate and the real exchange rate,

and even if you have fixed normal exchange rate, the

real exchange rate will adjust eventually, right?

They run the current account surplus was so low.

I mean, even if you have city prices, we need

to adjust at some point.

OK, so at some point, uh, let me see, so

German German price should go up relative to the rest

of the world.

That would, you know, bring real, real exchange rate down,

appreciate the real exchange rate.

In other words, it will make food in good shape

for them anyway.

And so you know, I, you know, when people see

that at the beginning of the eurozone crisis like that

idea, but I, I, I think just looking at what

worked very hard with this.

Uh, but your question, yeah, it's definitely interesting to look

at it, you know, it can be a good topic

for, for this, uh, to do some comprehensive analysis for

for the UK.

OK, just to summarise, OK, so what we see from

all these features, they are kind of freestyle aspects.

One is that current account.

They became much larger.

So this is kind of in this picture, right, they

were relatively small as a rush of global TV and

then they kind of expanded.

They became a little bit smaller after the 2008 crisis,

but in general there is this tendency for them to

become larger.

That's fact number one.

Fact number two is that they are very persistent, right?

For most countries we see that they, they, they don't

switch the design of the current over several decades.

Which is the third thing is the main one is

that in some sense.

So from the perspective of the theory that we're going

to discuss, they kind of have their own side.

The company has their own side.

Uh, for example, we will see that countries which grow

faster like China, they should actually borrow, not safe, and

countries like the US which borrow, which, which grow slower,

right, they, they should actually save, and we don't see

that in the data.

So that would be the I think this is the

most positive part, right?

So for persistence said, um, yeah, let's, let's just very

briefly talk about these two things, OK.

Let me start with the persistence.

So we said that for Kuni it makes sense that

they they save, um, for many years just because oil

price stays high for many years, right?

That can be one.

So what is another relatively low frequency trend which can

explain maybe for some countries why they are saving.

In general, if you think about very, very low frequency

trends, right, like, so that it would be one which

are other.

Uh, important determinants for countries saving decisions, the average age

of the country, demographics, right, exactly.

So if we think about Japan or even China, right,

we think about these countries at some point they had

a relatively big young population, right?

And then the population starts ageing and they are kind

of converging to new situations where most people are old,

right?

So then we also kind of expect these countries to

save more.

And if you have a lot of young people, they

save and then.

Because they want to to spend this money once they

become old, so that can be part of this explanation

means for Japan, for China, you can't tell the stories

and say that this part of this large savings come

from that.

But then even this kind of billions of dollars of

NFA, they don't look that large, right, if you divide

$1 trillion by, uh, more than 1 billion people in

the country which want, you know, to retire in a

few decades that it kind of makes sense.

Uh, I'm not so sure, but that's really the main

explanation, but it probably contribute, um, to this.

Uh, the problem is, of course, that, you know, like

in Europe, for example, you also have this, I mean,

to some extent you have this in the US.

In the US it's a little bit better because larger

inflow of, uh, immigrants, right, but in principle ageing happens

everywhere, uh, so it's not so clear that, uh, you

know, countries which borrow like the EU or the US,

there's no ageing there, right?

I mean, I'm not sure it's a quantitative question, right,

because to what extent migration offsets the fact that there

is also ageing in this country.

Um, OK, so that's, that's about right now.

What about why have, uh, current accounts increased since 1980s,

1970s?

Well, in there are two possible explanations.

So one is very natural, right?

I think this is I ask you why now have

larger than they did 4 decades ago, you would probably

say that it probably has to do with financial frictions

in this financial markets, global financial markets, and this is

clearly true.

So remember the pictures that we looked at last time,

right?

This, um, total liabilities and total assets of the US,

almost exponential growth relative to 19 since starting from 1970s,

right?

1970s total liability and total assets, the growth positions of

the US, they were tiny and now they are more

than 100% of annual GDP.

Right.

That shows that international capital flows, they have increased, and

so also countries can now borrow and save more.

So what is perhaps more surprising is that trade liberalisation

and falling trade costs can also contribute to large current

accounts.

But that that's, that's, that's not, you know, immediately here

and there was, you know, a student, I think 2

years above me.

I was a student there who wrote his job market

paper, but I believe he was the first one, but

then there were a few follow-up papers that did similar

analysis.

So, so, OK, why is that?

What is the intuition for the citizens?

Why is it that if international trade costs go down?

The can become larger.

I guess trade becomes more sensitive to actual productivity shocks

across across countries, right, it's it's, it's similar, but from

the other direction of when we talked about financial constraints,

uh, the more financial constraints you face, uh, as an

arbiter, right, the less you can actually buy a lot

of real goods, and we put the constraints on the

other side if you have trading constraints, you can't, it,

it's basically more costly to transport goods, on the other

hand.

Yeah, I guess, yeah, I guess they must be right.

I would, I mean, it's not about arbitrators, of course,

right, because I mean they might live in the US,

let's say, and they only consume local goods, but it

is true, right, that if you were in one period

you need to return money in the future.

But in the end, right, it's about.

What does it mean to borrow?

Because you borrow money, right, but it's not like you

keep money.

I mean, keep the money, they will not need current

account imbalance per se, right?

The fact that bors, it means that it exports less

goods than it imports goods, right?

It's all about the goods in the end.

And so if, if you take the limit where trade

wars are huge, right, maybe you have very high tariffs,

or maybe you're just very costly to ships across countries,

there is no room for any imbalances in a sense,

right?

I mean, take the because sometimes in economics mentioned this,

think about the imbalance between Earth and Mars.

Right, even if there are frictionless, uh, asset markets between

two planets, right, if you can't ship goods between the

two countries, you will not be able to have trade

deficit or trade surplus, right?

It was you can think about ancient civilizations, right?

I don't know.

Latin American, um, civilizations and let's say Middle East civilization,

right, they trade with each other, so there is, there

is just no way for them to smooth consumption in

time to war or save against each other.

Uh, as we know, right, and I, I, I hope

you saw some examples in the trade part of the

course and trade was gone down, right?

There was another wave of, uh, uh, globalisation of trade

in 1980, 199, 2000, right?

And that can continue to this increase in the in

as well, right?

But if you can in some sense, even you can

say that even if you know in advance that it

will become cheaper to ship the goods in the future.

You can already start borrowing more today because you and

the problem is to pay more in the future.

So this is just from one of these papers, you

know, did you talk about Eor model in the previous

term?

Maybe not.

This is, you know, this is World course model in

modern international trade in some sense almost all models that

are used in trade, they are, they are with some

modifications of this even important model, um.

The idea is that you look at the data, you

see GDP in each country, you see all these bilateral

trade flows, you can invert this data for the lens

of the model and back out productivities in each country

and trade costs between all countries, OK, and you can

do this, you know, for every single year and then

you can do kind of counterfactuals.

So what this figure shows is that, OK, this is

already familiar to you, right?

So what is this right now, remember.

This is so for the US in the 80s it

was particularly negative, then it goes to zero in the

90s and then in 2000s again it deteriorates.

So this is the data and then you can kind

of use this model to compute what would uh current

account be for the US if trade costs, you know,

if there were no trade shocks, which means that trade

costs were today the same as they were in the

past.

I suppose that you just exclude this all in trade

costs, various in trade costs, and then you can see

that, you know, this, this is this red line, you

can see that even though, you know, in terms of

cyclicality is the same, so this theory doesn't explain that,

but you can see that the magnitudes would be much

smaller.

It would be impossible in the sense for the US

to borrow as much as it did if trade costs

didn't go down.

So I, I find this quite convincing.

I, I mean, I, I believe that, you know, both

stories, uh, are important.

They contribute to rising, uh, balances, but just, yeah, don't

forget about the second one.

I think it's, it's, it's interesting.

Uh, OK, so this leads us, we talked about, I

think, yeah, it's easy to understand why, why they're growing,

why they're persistent.

The main question of course is why do they have

the wrong, uh, sign.

OK, and so before we talk about that, what we

need to start with some benchmark, right?

So what does it mean that they are wrong?

Uh, what would the simplest model predict?

OK, so let's go over this, I mean, it's important

also because you will need this theory to solve the

problem.

OK, so let's, as always, right, so it's a good

idea usually to start with the simple as possible model

and see whether it works or not like we did

with the exchange rate, right?

We wrote the model.

We said that it can explain some facts like effects

of malities on the exchange rate, and there are some

facts that it couldn't explain like it should disconnect and

then we started augmenting that model with some additional.

We are going to do something pretty similar here.

Um, and now we will completely abstract from exchange rates.

OK, so we will, we will shut down that channel.

Instead, we will assume that there is only one good.

OK.

Remember, in our first model of exchange rates, we said

that there's own goods, foreign goods.

The prices are stable in different currencies, and that's why

exchange rate movement can generate expenditure switching.

So now, you know, this world, there will be nothing

like that.

In that there is only one good and all countries

produce, produce the same wood.

So why is that?

Because we will be interested in this intertemporal dimension, right?

So it's the same wood, but there is good in

the first period, in the 2nd period, and we do

this in the temporal.

I give you more roots in the first and you

give goods in the 2nd period.

As it is in some sense it's a really equal

one, and instead we will focus on the mergeless interest

rates that will be the main price adjust.

OK, so, uh, yeah, I guess you, you can write

this in different ways.

The is the full week, right?

So now we will take really seriously, uh, country's budget

constraints.

So before we said that it looks something like this.

Right, so this was our old version.

Now we will deviate from this and we will think

about interest rates.

OK.

So in particular, suppose that you have positive net exports

in the first period, right?

That means that you accumulate, some, uh, savings abroad and

you can spend this in the second period, right?

You enter the next period with Some returns on your

savings and this you can, you can spend, right?

It will be negative so that um in total.

Right, so that, um.

right this um.

OK, let me just see whether they use the same

notation.

Yes, OK, um.

So that in the 2nd period, Right, uh, you know

exports will be negative.

So the most common way people usually write this budget

constraint is the following.

So this is the intertemporal budget constraint of the country.

It's almost the same as before, but now we adjusted

by the interest rate.

So the interpretation here is it is discounted some of

net exports, right?

Net exports in the first period we don't even need

a discount.

The net export in the second period we discount by

the interest rate.

Of course, right, we can use now definition of net

expert.

And right, I mean you can say that this is

exports minus imports, but in this simple model, this will

be total output of the country minus total consumption.

Right, because there again there's only one good.

This is the endowment of the economy in the first

period in terms of that good, and this is consumption

of that good.

So if we now, you know, substitute this into this

budget constraint.

Then we can write it like this.

Right.

Or going even one step forward, right, we can come,

you know, good consumption on one.

Side of the equation and endowment on the other side

of the equation.

So of course this is completely equivalent, right?

You could, you could write it either way, but this

one has also a nice interpretation, right?

This is the present value of total expenditures of total

consumption across periods, and this is the present value of

your income.

Right, and, and again, the budget constraint of the country

tells you that this discounted sum of your spending should

be equal to the discounted sum of.

It makes sense.

Uh, any questions?

OK, so if this is clear then.

So we will, so let's start, um, let's now discuss

household problem.

So households, they face this constraint, right?

So as usual we think that there are kind of

thousands or maybe even millions of households.

Each, they are all symmetric.

They have the same preferences.

They have the same income, so they all face the

same constraint, and then each of them decides how much

to consume today and how much to consume in the

future.

Right, so again, I mean, I guess it will take

some time to establish this mapping, but you know, the

budget constraint replaces the old one, and now instead of

instead of these financial markets, we will think about households

choosing how to allocate their income between two periods.

And no households have standard optimisation problem.

They have utility.

Which depends on consumption in in two periods, right?

And they, and they have the budget constraint, so they

maximise utility subject to this resource constraint.

OK, good.

So the simplest, I mean, right, so this is a

simple problem.

Uh, we can try to solve it in general form,

we can, you know, solve it, uh, a special case,

but imagine, right, so this was specification that we Use

most often that utilities separable across periods, right, and then

there is this discount.

I think we, we discussed that a lot in math

camp, right, uh, and you probably saw this also in

other courses.

So can you tell me the optimality condition or the

optimality condition looks like this or do we need to

derive this.

How is optimising?

Hm.

Then The question, yes, exactly.

The question, exactly.

OK.

And so, OK, so you remember the name, so hopefully

you also remember how it looks like.

Right, so it looks like this.

Right.

And in particular, so you know, most usually we use

some kind of CRRA utility, right?

So something like this usually 1 minus c here and

we will actually look at the special cases when it's

just log C.

OK, let's focus on that case just to simplify our

life, in which case, OK, derivative of log C is

just one over C, right?

So this will be a 1 over C1 and this

will be 1 over C2.

So let me put this on the opposite side.

This is the equation that we get.

I have.

Yeah, it feels like I'm doing a one step backward,

you know, hopefully it's 2 steps forward, but I'm not

sure, relative to our math camp, right, because there we

had infinite horizon with two period model, very special, but

still, OK, so what is the intuition for this, but

just to make sure that we're all on the same

page, right?

So we probably discussed this, right?

There are 22 motifs to do saving which come from

the oil equation, right?

So if you think about beta multiplied by 1 plus

R is just 1, then consumption should just take.

How how do we call this?

Motive are the kinds of things equal, households decide to

have the same consumption across the.

That's consumption smoothing and mathematically it comes from what property

of the utility function.

And gravity, right, which means that marginal utility is decreasing,

right?

So I bet I don't want to consume a lot

in one period and then they can't be in the

next period, right?

I'd rather consume less today and consume and save something

for the future.

Exactly.

So there's consumption.

and in all these discussions that we had before like

why Middle East countries or you know, oil exporting countries,

why they want to accumulate current account surplus, it's exactly

this motive, right, that they think that they have very

high income today.

Why one is high, but maybe, you know, because of

green transition this will be zero, but they don't want

to consume everything today.

They try to smooth consumption.

And then there is beta 1 plus R, which is

called.

What's it called?

That's temporal substitution motive, right?

And in particular, if we are very patient, so weight

is high or if interest rate is high, right, then

we shift consumption towards the future.

Other things equal right, or shift it towards the future.

I mean, more generally, there must also be this institution.

So this beta 1 plus R will also, you know,

lead to the power of 1 over sigma, right?

And depending how elastic preferences are, you might want to

respond more to interest rate or less.

Right, so kind of, it tells us that um if

interest rate, global interest rate goes up, then the country

might want to save more.

OK, good.

And then we just need to combine this with the

budget constraint to solve explicitly for the equilibrium consumption, right?

So we can plug it back into our, uh, to

the, into the budget constraint.

And then solve for equilibrium consumption.

If 1 plus R goes away.

This is what we get, right?

OK, I mean this is, by the way, quite special,

right?

I mean, there are several things to see here.

I mean it's a little bit repetitive because we talked

about this before in me, but still, first of all,

right, even permanent income, you don't care whether it happens

today or in the future, it will not affect your

consumption decisions.

That's again, consumption is mostly important, right?

Another thing is that notice that again given this current

income, your consumption in the first period doesn't depend on

the interest rate.

Why is that?

So this is very special, and this comes from, this

is only true for logarithmic preferences.

Huh?

Exactly, OK, I mean that's it, right?

But what is the back here and what is the

back here.

Increase in Like Mm So the substitution is easy because

we just talked about it, right?

So other things equal, we want to increase consumption in

the future and maybe save more today.

That's the substitution effect which would push us to consume

less in the first.

What is the effect?

Like you're busy.

it's like you you have more income.

Right, so the way I explained it to myself is

the following, right.

Suppose I want to achieve some level of consumption in

the future, achieve that level of consumption, it's actually cheaper

for me to do if interest rate goes up, right,

because, you know, for each unit that I save today,

I will get higher returns in the future.

So I actually need to save less today to have

the same consumption in the second period.

Right, I need to sacrifice less of consumption period, which

means that I can increase my consumption in the first

period.

And as you said, exactly right, uh, so these two

forces, they upset each other.

And in the end, I don't take it, you know,

as a general result, it's only rule for preferences.

Otherwise, depending on whether, you know, the signal is greater

than 1 or less than 1, income and substitution, one

of the, you know, these two effects will dominate, and

then you might have increase in consumption in response to

high interest rates or decrease.

And once again, to reiterate, there is the third effect

of the interest rate, which is sometimes called wealth effect.

I noticed that even in this, uh, case of logarithmic

preferences, interest rates still appears in the still affects the

uh consumption in the first period because it affects the,

uh, permanent income.

OK OK, so again, this is kind of wealth effect.

And there is this.

Substitution effect.

Right, so it appears here and it is this one

plus R here and then then then there's this one

plus R here which cancelled out but this is income

effect.

Right, yeah, maybe I should have used this expression.

I mean, this is also wealth effect, right?

Yeah.

Um, OK.

OK, all this, OK, we will fast this.

I like this.

um, we will not do medical example, we will do

it, you know, it's a problem.

OK, right, um.

So English is all this is clear.

OK, good, but I mean, the main takeaways from here,

right, is that, you know, your pattern of Y1 and

Y2 will determine whether your consumption and then just, you

know, to finish.

So what will be the current account in the first

period, right?

So current account, this is, given that this is only

a two period model, this will be just in how

much you save in the first period.

So we're already solved for consumption.

We just need to substitute it in.

We get.

Right?

So that's, you know, that's, um.

Solution and you can see that depending on the values

of Y1 and Y2, the country might either save or

borrow, right?

So I mean, another way to, to, to look at

this is that this is your temporary income.

This is kind of your permanent income, right?

This is your average income across.

Who periods and depending on whether your income today is

higher than this average income.

All over, you will either save or you will or.

OK.

OK, very good, so then.

Just, you know, for completeness, let's discuss how we this

is a very simple model, right, by the way, I

should have said this.

So there are several things that simplified our life.

So the first one was that it is we implicitly

assume that this is a small open economy.

So what do I mean by this?

We effectively took the interest rate as given.

And this is, OK, so this is one specification.

In principle, there can be two others.

OK.

One specification that you know very well is closed.

So, right, I mean, household problem doesn't really change.

This household problem is the same for closed economy, it's

the same for small open economy, it's the same for

large open economy.

But the way we close the model, the channel equilibrium

will be very different.

So let me, let me write it down here.

OK.

So this, this consumption and current account expressions, they are

the same.

They don't change, but you can make three different assumptions,

right?

So closed the economy.

Small open economy and large open economy.

OK.

So then how do we close all internal equilibrium in

each case?

Let's start with the closed economy.

And what is the additional equilibrium condition?

Exactly right.

So I mean you can write it in different ways.

You can say that consumption equals the endowment.

This is market gearing for goods.

You can also say that the current account has to

be equal 0 because there is just no one else

to borrow from or right or lend to, but they're

completely equivalent and of course, you know, I mean this

will you will get trivial solution for uh.

a solution for consumption.

So then what is endogenous.

In this model, I mean, it seems like everything is

exogenous.

No consumption is just equal to exogenous endowment, but actually

there is one more variable which is endogenous.

The interest rate, right, so interest rate from these conditions

you saw for the interest rate.

In a closed economy, in a closed endowment economy, consumption

you solve 3 million, and what household problems allow you

to solve for is the interest rate.

In other words, I mean each household takes interest rate

as given, but in equilibrium, the interest rate needs to

adjust in such a way that no one sleeps and

no one borrows because there is just no one right

to borrow from.

So do we assume that households are not borrowing from

other economies or other countries, they're like borrowing from the

government.

There's no government here.

That's important.

So when we say closed economy, it's the following you

have a million of households, each one of them takes

the interest rate as a given because you know you

have to affect the interest rate.

They think that they that interest rate, they think they

want to save it as much as they want, which

is true.

But in equilibrium, because they all make exactly the same

decisions, right, they're all symmetric.

It needs to be the case that no one borrows,

otherwise, right, you will have.

I mean, there, there is no, there are no other,

no other households, and so in the end, you will

get these conditions.

And what, what ensures that these conditions are satisfied is

the indulgences of the interest rate.

Right, so, OK, it's a little bit informal, but the

idea is that you have, you know, you have interest

rate here, you have current account here, right?

If interest rate is very low, let's say, um, country

borrowers wants households want to borrow, right?

So it's negative, and then for some interest rate it

is positive.

Right, and then there is this interest rate.

Which we call water interest rate at which current account

is exactly 0, right?

Uh, households don't want a safe, they want, don't want

to borrow, and this, this will be the equilibrium interest

rate in the cost.

OK, very good.

So this is how we close the model if we

have closed economy.

OK, now what about small open economy?

Well, we kind of said that, right?

It's a small open economy, even though it maybe has

a million households abroad there are, you know, billions of

households, right, and effectively this this country can borrow and

save internationally as much as it wants at a given

interest rate.

So R is exogenous in this case.

And we use this household problem to solve for consumption

in two periods, right?

This will be endogenous variables.

in terms of our figure here, in no case, you

know, suppose that the global interest rate is at this

level.

Well, that means then that the country will run current

surplus, right?

If the global interest rate is over here, then the

country will run on current account deficit.

So depending whether interest rate is higher or lower than

global interest rate is higher or lower than the interest

rate, that will determine in which direction capital goes in

the first period.

So, so small open economy is almost like a, you

know, almost like a partial equilibrium because you take prices

as given.

This will be our favourite case.

And then there's the case of large open economy.

In which case, both consumption is endogenous and the interest

rate is endogenous.

So then we have three endogenous variables.

Right, we really don't have enough equilibrium, and the way

to solve the model is also to assume that there's

the second large one the rest of the world.

You have the same problem, a problem for the rest

of the world, you know, households abroad also get some

endowment, not the same, but some other endowment in niche

period.

And then there's an extra equilibrium condition which tells you

that in niche period.

Uh, sorry, in each period.

Total consumption in the world, at home and abroad should

be equal to total endowment.

Again, at home and abroad, and the same for the

second period.

Right, so there is this is global resource at the

global level.

And so once you impose that, you can solve for,

you know, these variables and there will be also good

in consumption.

So you have 5 unknowns, right?

and uh.

Uh, 5 equilibriums.

So that's a little bit more difficult we will talk

about that.

But I mean the problem is that we can.

Uh, discuss it.

OK, so any questions about this?

So then one last piece that I want to show

you, um, so, so far we focus on a simple

model where there are only half of right, there are

no firms and then there's no government.

So what changes if we introduce this other agents, right?

So we kind of know, we know that, uh.

GDP is given by consum plus investment plus government spending,

but net net right we already have net exports.

This was our current account.

We have consumption.

We have, of course, GDP, but we didn't have anything

to say about.

Investments to introduce agents.

Well, it turns out that not much changes, at least,

you know, in the simplest possible version of the one,

you can, you can kind of put these things on

the left hand side.

If you think that investment in government are misogy, they

just change the net income, but they don't change anything

else you can think of this as.

That all this right.

Uh, Like, this is net income and then, you know,

you just get exactly the same expressions.

But instead of the you know Y1 and Y2 you

have Y12.

Let me do the, let me show it to you

a little bit more explicitly, but just for government spendings.

Let's abstract from investment, but do it for, for, uh,

government spendings.

Then the model looks like this.

So we have households, they still maximise utility.

Not due to budgets.

But the budget has changes a little bit.

OK.

This is total value of of, uh, credits, but on

the right hand side now we have that income of

this household and the way it looks like the, OK,

so this is how much they get in the first

period, but then they also pay taxes.

This would be government revenues.

And the same in the second year.

you solve this problem.

You can guess that you will get exactly the same

way equation, right?

It will not change this image looks exactly the same.

The only thing that change is that once you substitute

it into the budget constraint right instead of Y1 and

Y2 you have that of taxes.

So you can imagine but then there's also a government.

And for government we have also budget constraint and let

me write those in present vague terms, then what are

the sayings of the government.

Alright, so again, we have discount on spending.

And the government.

I'm from Texas.

This is how it looks like.

Right, the government spends.

Just.

As it taxes.

Mhm.

It will be there will be no borrowing saving the

government, right?

Yeah, I think what I want to say is if

the government behaves, if they say the same proportion as

households would have, and the end result would have been

the same as without having the government at all, right?

It's only when the government differ from households that it

actually changes the net consumption in period.

I mean, yes and no, but let's see, let's see.

I mean, we are very close to answering that question.

Then what is the basis of the country as a

whole?

Well, to get the country straight, you just need to

aggregate budget constraints of all agents in the economy.

In this case, this is households and governments, right.

You need to combine this consent with this one.

OK, so you have C1 plus G1.

Look what you do.

Now, what do you have on the right hand side?

Well, you can see that the axis will cancel out,

right?

So.

So the total income looks like this.

And now remember that we have the older equation right

here.

He OK.

We're running out of time.

But I want you to look at this and get

impressed.

So we have two this is small local economy.

Interest rate is exogenous.

Our spending that we will also treat that as exogenous.

There are only two indulgence variables consumption.

The first period is consumption.

The second, and we have these two equations, OK, and

you can see that from these two equations we can

solve for consumption in each period, which means that we

can also solve for current.

So what is impressive about this?

The impressive thing is that the exes don't appear in

these two equations.

I don't need to know what is the text in

the first period and what is the text in the

2nd period to determine household consumption and current account.

And this is regarding the convenience.

So it turns out that current account will depend.

It will be a function of, you know, of course,

it will depend, depend on, you know, net income in

this period.

That will matter, of course.

It will depend on the interest rate, other stuff, other

parameters, but it will all depend on timing of taxes.

So in other words, if the government decides to borrow

more to decrease taxes in the first period, to borrow

and then increase taxes in the second period, it will

not change the current account.

That's an impressive.

It's regarding the equivalence.

So once you know regarding equivalence, maybe it's not so

surprising, but it has very important implications.

So for example, if you think that the government can,

you know, run this wealth funds.

Uh, according to this baseline model, it will not work,

right?

So imagine the government, OK, government thinks, OK, we have

very high revenues in the first period, maybe because there

exporters, right, we have high income.

Let's accumulate, uh, let's create wealth fund, which means that

actually it means that we will, uh, increase taxes, right,

so to accumulate government, uh, in the first years, and

it turns out that that will have absolutely no effect

on the current.

So why is that?

Question uh-huh.

Well, I mean, what are the assumptions we, we need

to talk about the effort, right, but in this world

there is equivalent.

Given these objects, I don't need to know T1 and.

so for the kind of country.

That's the definition of the the regarding.

But, but, so I'm asking you, why is that?

Why is it that if you, if the government decides

to save more, that will not, you know, increase current

account surplus.

Well, the answer is that households will completely upset whatever

the government does, right?

So if you increase taxes in the first period, people

understand that it means that in the next period you

will have high wealth.

The government will have high wealth.

It will decrease taxes in the future, right?

Which means that households understand that, OK, so today I

pay high taxes, but my future taxes will go down.

I just need to kind of smooth out the spendings.

I can just borrow against my future.

Uh, higher income, right?

And so whatever the government says will be what the

households, uh, will borrow, and this will I say exactly

upset each other, and in the end, it will not

affect the, the total savings of households plus the government.

OK, so the country as a whole runs exactly the

same current service.

OK, I think it's, it's a very it's deep inside.

It's, it's not trivial at all.

So let's, you know, we will, we will discuss it,

um, in the programme as an exam and then we

can talk more about the underlying next time.

Oh, and we, we don't meet next week, right?

We meet in 2 weeks from now, on the after,

OK.

Lecture 16:

Yeah.

Oh, happy Monday.

I know, I, I want.

How are you?

Yeah Yeah Oh no.

Oh.

Wow.

3.

I.

Right Yeah Oh I.

I think, I think.

No Yeah, we're making for the collaboration.

I But actually it's actually like larger than study like

economics.

Oh yeah.

Oh my gosh Like in the real situation like there's

no right answer, so we have to look at.

I don't know why I got pretty bad.

I sound like extremely tired.

Cre power through this lecture.

Um I.

No.

Oh.

I Yeah.

And like.

I have work at that time, yeah, I do, so

um, yeah, but it's like all of my Fridays I

do it on Fridays so I can never do any

of the department or yeah, so it's with my undergrad

and I just kept it on in the US, yeah,

yeah, we just kept it on like a yeah.

I I took a gap here, right, and I did

that working full time.

Oh yeah, I, I know what it's like.

But um, and then like the time difference as well,

so all my meetings are at like 7 p.m. which.

Yeah.

What was it?

It was, um, the effect of education and the term

mortality and lack infant as well.

Uh, yeah, the, the researcher I was working with, she

was also at my undergrad.

Yeah, yeah, no, uh, she was really specialised.

She's really good, um, but it was a very like

independent project, so basically.

Basically I did she just said like I want you

to do this and then I had to do it.

That's, um, it was, it was yeah, the basically the

project progressed as fast as I could work.

I feel like I always have deadlines.

I'll always be like, I'll hand hand something in by

Friday.

OK.

I some parts, you know, it's a lot.

Are you thinking of doing a PhD?

I'm a PhD after that maybe we'll see, but I

feel like I, yeah, because I wanted to get into

a good PhD and now need a predoc so I

was like let me explore what research is like and

then.

2 years.

Yeah, yeah, that's what I have, so um.

Oh, we have an offer that you got.

Yeah, I just accepted it today actually, but.

OK, so how are you guys doing?

It's OK.

Any questions?

OK, so then I think this is where we spoke

last time and we also have a quite interesting uh

seminar on Monday, and we will use some of the

things that we discussed there, OK.

So, um.

If you remember, right, one of the main motivations for

us.

From last week was to understand the global imbalance, OK,

so global imbalance just to remind you, right, that if

we look at the US versus China, for Japan, Asian

tigers, we see that the US is borrowing borrows a

lot and it borrows every single year, right?

for the citizen borrow.

So, you know, if either you or me try to

replicate such behaviour, it would be quite difficult, right, to

borrow every single year, uh, over 40 years.

Uh, and never to repay back and so we want

to understand why that happens, right?

And so the right so it's just to begin to

say, so current account to GDP.

Just in absolute terms it goes up.

So that's one surprising thing, and we talked about that.

That's, you know, we can understand that maybe because of

financial liberalisation, trade liberalisation.

So we see that for the US current account is

negative for 40 years.

That's already quite surprising.

And then the third fact is Many years and then

kind of also implication of this is that capital goes.

Let's say from China.

To the US, so those are kind of three stylized

facts, and each of them is puzzling, right?

OK, so this one we already discussed the fact that

it is persistent, we need to understand it goes a

little bit against our model.

But then I want to ask you about this, right?

So I think we talked about this briefly, but let's

remind ourselves.

So according to our neoclassical model, would we expect to

go from China to the US or from the US

to China?

And Alright, so we had.

There's more right to be.

Let's forget about investment and government spending just in terms

of output.

from the US to China because China is going to

be presumably richer in the future so they want to

borrow now right so just let's make the pictures, right?

So, OK, we think that let's say this is US,

this is China, this is time, right?

And so for yes, of course, there is some economic

growth, but it is the growth in China is much

faster.

Right, um, so even though there's now some slowdown, it's

still higher than in the US.

And so if we just believe in this, uh, smooth

logic, right, so US should be behave like this, right?

China should behave like this.

And so given that the faster growth, we would expect

that, you know, I mean this is, you know.

This is future, right?

And so we would expect that even this larger discrepancy

for China that China is borrowing from the US, right

here it's closer to this average.

Exactly.

Uh, so countries which, which grow faster, they, they should

borrow.

Uh, by the way, what about investment?

I mean, in this model, it's not very interesting because

investment is completely exclusion, but suppose you write a model

where investment isn'tlugenous, then, can that, you know, change the

logic or it actually alifies this mechanism.

So even the China grows faster.

What should they do in terms of investment?

Exactly right.

So if they think that, you know, there's still, uh,

they're still lagging in terms of productivity, right, they should

invest even more in human capital, in physical capital, right?

And so they should borrow even more from the US.

So you know they're using investment doesn't really solve this.

OK, so that's exactly, you know, this is what exactly

what people mean when they say that there is a

passing global imbalance.

OK, so, so then why is it the case that

US borrowers in China say?

So there are two perspectives from the past, OK, and

in some sense, even, you know, let's start with a

big picture, right?

Uh, there are two families involved.

In the end we will have the same laws, but

you can always think in terms of supply and demand,

right?

So one story is that it's supply is in a

sense China wants to see.

Uh, they're looking all over the world, and it turns

out that most of, um, assets that are supplied by,

uh, the US and China invests in this asset.

So that's why capital goes from China to the US.

alternative story is that the US wants to borrow, right?

Maybe households are very impatient.

They just like consuming, they spend a lot.

Maybe it's government which doesn't save enough, right, and borrows

in the international markets.

And so there is kind of a pull factor, not

a push, but a pull factor.

And then they look who is willing to lend the

money and it turns out that in the end it's

China who wants to do that.

OK, um, so I mean we we'll discuss both, but

even before we go there, so how can we discriminate

between supply and demand?

It's kind of, you know, it's intuition of the same

as in microeconomics.

Right, another picture, right?

You have supply, you have demand.

We see that quantities like capital in pieces, right, we

can rationalise it as a, as a shift in supply.

We can rationalise it as a shift in demand.

Right, how do we discriminate between those stories?

increase or decrease the price will respond differently depending whether

it's supply or demand, right?

And so let's, let's, let's go through this because it's,

um, demand.

It's, it's the US which wants to borrow more and

what should happen to the interest rate.

must become more expensive, right?

So the interest rate needs to go up.

So that's kind of the story.

Uh, while if, um, it's just China, uh, that wants

to save more, the supply of funds, and so it

must become cheaper to borrow, so the interest rates go

up.

So we will, we will use this data to discriminate

between these states.

OK, the, I would say the, the, the view which

come from 1990s, uh, which, and, and this is often

called doing deficit records, that is the problem that the

government occasionally wants to borrow more, right.

increase taxes decrease, so they want to borrow more and

as a result, not only the current deficit becomes larger,

but also the current account deficit becomes larger, right?

So borrows locally, it also borrows internationally, right?

And that, that, that, you know, that's exactly this kind

of, uh, factor, right?

OK, so let's look, uh.

So this is kind of empirical evidence, right?

OK, so then, uh, let's see.

OK, so this dashed line, let's start with it.

This is private investment, OK?

And there is, I mean, you can see that it

kind of fluctuates, but it doesn't really change very much.

So we will focus instead on savings.

OK.

And so these are private, this, um, black bars, they

show private savings, kind of household savings, OK?

And these white bars, they show public savings.

So when they are negative, it means that the government

is working.

Right.

OK, and so what you can see from this picture

is that you know the private savings.

Approximately equal to public borrowing up until 1980s and then

in 1980s we see this large increase in government borrowing

right, despite borrows and simultaneously we see that the current

account deteriorates, right?

We see that private savings are not enough to offset

this increase in government borrowing, and in some sense it

looks at least consistent with this twin hypothesis to hypotheses,

right?

Makes sense?

So let me ask you then the following question.

So given the model that we discussed last week and

what we discussed on the Monday.

Um I mean, is this evidence consistent, right?

So we see that.

Government deficit.

Increases And simultaneously we see that the current account deficit

increases.

But what can drive government deficit, right?

In principle, there are two forces.

So one is increasing government spendings, and another one is

decreasing government in taxes, right?

So let me, let's start with this one, right?

So it's 1980s.

I mean, just, just, you know, to to review in

the 1980s, both things happened, right, because on the one

hand there was Reaganomics when the government decreased taxes, but

at the same time there was an increase in military

savings.

Uh, so in a sense, you know, both factors contributed,

but to the government.

But what about current account?

So if the government decreases taxes but doesn't change government

pays.

And according to our models which happen.

To the current account.

Nothing.

Or Increase or decrease.

what we talked about on Monday.

Decreased taxes, um, in the model we saw a change

in consumption.

Is that affected and that affects the current account deficit.

But is there a change in consumption?

That's the question, right?

equivalent because it doesn't matter when you.

So if, if there's no change in GE today and

tomorrow, right, if agents don't expect that the government will

change its spendings, they only see decrease in taxes.

They understand that eventually the government will have to increase

taxes, right?

And so their permanent income, the household permanent income doesn't

change exactly right.

And so actually, at least if you take that model

seriously, right, there should be no effect on our economy.

Because our consumers don't change current account, right?

It's kind of.

Um, this thing, so we said that the government spendings

don't change, so the output doesn't change.

So the only way for current account to change is

to, um, is for consumption too.

Uh, increase, right, but it does not respond to taxes.

In this model, OK, so I mean, of course, right,

it's kind of a benchmark.

I mean nowadays it seems like there is pretty strong

empirical evidence against the regarding equivalence, right?

And so if we, of course, if you don't have

regarded equivalence, then it's quite possible that there will be

such a effect.

OK, what about government spending's the question why do we

call it a government deficit.

OK, I mean, so the government borrowing, right, the government,

so the, the amount the government borrows is just how

much it spends minus taxes, right?

Right.

And so if taxes go down, it means that the

borrowing, I mean, yeah, yeah, I hope, I hope it's

correct, um, and as we discussed last time, right, so

if you have this thing, it will be fully upset

by additional savings by households.

That's exactly why in the end, there is no change

in the current account.

OK, so now what about government spendings?

If government spending goes up, that would increase the deficit.

It would also, as you can see by the YT

GT would affect the.

It it would affect the current account.

It would also affect consumption because governments, but it falls

in this period less than the government spending.

Very good.

So why does consumption less?

I mean, yes, it seems like intuitively should go down,

but why?

because of consumption smooth, right?

So if, if this is a temporary shock, not the

permanent, right, if it's a permanent shock actually.

Then there will be no change in the current.

But if households think that this is a temporary shock,

right, then they will try to smooth consumption.

They will not decrease their consumption immediately as much as

government spending.

Exactly.

Very good.

OK, so this, this kind of works right in our

model, at least for temporary shock.

To be honest, I mean, maybe this is you can

argue that it was temporary, at least the government even

saved in the late 1990s under Bill Clinton, but in

general, I always feel like, you know, if the government

increase the spendings, it's very unlikely that the Spanish will

go down in the near future at least.

Um, OK, good, good.

So everything is clear about this deficit about this, right,

um.

OK, good.

So, uh, no, by the way, even people will start

looking at the interest rates, right?

Look, so if we, if we, so in 1980s, the

evidence seems to be consistent, but once we look at

2000s, right, we can see that the current account deteriorates

even further, even more than in the 1980s, even though,

as we said, just said, right, the government was actually

saving, uh, in late 1990s, I mean.

If we started worrying again in 2000, but here the

burden is much less clear, right?

And it seems like, I mean, we can see that

most of current account deficit was driven by private borrowing

rather than government borrowing.

OK, good.

Um, let me just before you let me quickly show

you this picture.

OK, so we said that to discriminate between this theory

and something about China wanting to save more, we can

look at the interest rates, right?

So here's the picture again, almost the same period starting

from the 1980s but going all the way to 2019,

and you can, and these are different measures, right, for

different countries of interest rates.

I mean, of course you want to look at interest

rates, not.

One, it's a little bit hard because then you need

to subtract inflation expectations like some countries like the US

or the UK there are real bonds, inflation adjusted bonds,

and so then you can relatively easily measure real interest

rates for other countries is a little bit harder.

But you know, again, I mean we can debate, yeah,

but it seems pretty obvious that there is this downward,

downward trend, right, that interest rates have been decreasing over

the last 40 years.

And that of course was very much against, uh, the

tin deficits, right?

Again, if, if some countries just want to borrow more,

we would expect interest rates to go up and we

don't see that at all.

And in contrast, right, if we have a model where

some other countries want to save more, that can well

explain this all in the interest rates.

So that's why I think, I think this trend doing

deficit with this, it's kind of describes well what happened

in the 1980s, but once we start thinking about, you

know, the last 30 years, I think it's, it doesn't

really work.

It's it's not really the main factor.

OK, so then what is it that?

Well, that is the savings headquarters.

It's actually quite interesting.

So the idea comes from, even the term itself comes

from speech by Ben Bernanke, right?

So Ben Bernanke was, was a professor at Princeton, then

he left for Washington DC, right?

So there he became member.

First he was just a member of this, you know,

monetary committee, right, not the chairman, but just for a

few years he was.

and back then during that period he gave a quite

famous speech where he said that we see interest rate,

interest rates going down.

Why is that?

Well, because there's this global savings that many countries in

the world like this exporters, China, even tigers, they want

to save more and that pushes interest rates down.

And then later people you know, from academic they formalised

this idea in a general equilibrium model.

OK, so as we said, I mean, it's a bit

fast, right, because Chinese is growing fast.

Everyone knows that it will become even richer in the

future.

Households should move assumption that they should borrow.

Of course it's true that in China there are also

capital controls, right, the government intervention, it's not that easy.

But I mean, OK, maybe China is not doing that,

but then there are many other countries which should try

fast growing countries which should also borrow, and we don't

see that.

OK.

So how can you, how can we rationalise this?

And so I'm going to, I'm going to show you

this one this is one of my favourite models, you

know, it's, I, I actually think it's more useful for

you than for students because, you know, it's, it's a

highly cited paper, but very few people use this model

in their own research, right?

It's like, you know, almost like a dead end.

Almost no one uses the same model answers and other

questions, but in terms of how much you can learn

about the world, I think this is one of the

best papers.

And so let me digress into the matter.

I mean, even you are a very strong group.

I want to show you a little bit, you know,

more advanced version of this model.

So you can check the sites we will discuss also

the problem set on Monday which uses a simplified version

of the model, but let me show you kind of

more dynamic version that's OK.

Um, OK, so how does it work?

The idea is the following.

We have, let's start with one country and then we

will extend it to an open economy.

The key idea here is that there will be kind

of overlapping generations instead of having one representative agent who

lives forever and who expect that it will become very,

very rich, you know, 1000 years from now, so it

needs to increase consumption rates today, we will think about

people who live, you know, they, they are born, they

get their income, they consume, and then at some point

they die, and in some sense they don't care about

what will happen a million years from now, right?

That will be the key idea.

Um, so if you look at some, you know, at

one individual agent, I, then, you know, OK, it is

born in some period, let's say small t.

We will make an extreme assumption that this is exactly

the period when it gets it's all income, labour income.

And then you know.

The later is probabil.

Of death?

OK.

And so at some point the agent dies, that's what

we call it capital T, right?

And just, you know, a second period, uh, before the,

before the agent dies, it consumes everything, all accumulated.

So consumption happens here.

OK, so I mean it's a little bit crazy, but

it captures very, you know, important thing from the real

world that people work when they are young, right?

They get their income and then they kind of they

don't get additional income when they retire, but they still

consume.

And so there is always this motive that right, when

you're young, you want to save to smooth consumption in

time later on.

And this is just an extreme version that you get

all your income when you are born and you consume

in the very last year, OK.

This just simplifies a solution.

That's the only reason they make this assumption.

OK, so now.

Uh, yeah, OK, I will use, I guess slightly different

notation.

So let me call X.

This will be the, will be output in this economy.

And this output, it is divided into two parts, OK,

so fraction 1 minus delta.

labour income.

Right, so in some sense, you know, you, you give

something to workers and some fraction will be profits dividends.

So everyone gets their income and T equals 0, T

equals, but it will be OK, OK, it will be

different to reach agent because once the agent dies, it

is immediately replaced by a new agent.

As we said, you know, some and then like plus

capital T, they die and they spend all of that.

So the money in between do they invest it so

we're coming to that, right, exactly.

So they will invest, right, because I mean they don't

value this money here at all because they don't consume

and that creates exactly that creates this demand for assets,

right, for savings.

So this is exactly where we're going, right?

So this, no, we, we divide this output into two

parts.

This is labour income.

These are dividends.

OK, so this labour income is kind of the same

labour income as here.

This is the part which goes to young generation, which

is just born in PT.

But these dividends, they, they, I mean, it means that

you can buy kind of right, you can buy equity

stock which will pay you these dividends every period, right?

And agents, they use exactly this asset to save.

What they earned at the beginning.

of consumption in the very last period.

So you can already see, I hope, right, that this

is exactly what will kill the mechanisms that we have

in a representative agent model, right?

So there, I mean you get income today, you get

income in the future, you get income 100 million years

from now, right?

You and until you can just smooth consumption in time

here, no matter how high income will be in the

future for the future generations, every individual agent wants to

save, right, because they only consume at the very end

of life.

Makes sense.

Yeah, please stop me if you have questions.

OK, so it turns out that the equilibrium is in

the smallest described by two equations.

So the first one, this will be, you know, this

will be a Asset prising equation.

Uh, so what is the value, right?

So if you buy this 3, this, this equity, how

much should you pay?

Well, this is the standard asset pricing equation, right?

The price today is equal to the price tomorrow plus

dividends tomorrow.

OK, let me, let me use our notation.

Divided by uh interest rate.

Uh, let's, it's, it's the price before the asset pays

dividends today, right?

So once again, this is, I mean, suppose you buy

this asset, you pay this amount, you get dividends today,

and you will also be able to sell this asset

in the next few years, right?

And you just discount this by the gross interest rate.

Right, so in particular, I mean, this is, you know,

this is exactly how people usually.

So for this thing right, then you can also.

You, you, we will be able to reiterate this, but

I mean, let's do this a little bit later.

OK.

So this is the first equation.

The second one is the, what happens to the aggregate

wealth.

In this economy.

Right, I mean, we will not describe wealth of individual

agents, but in the end.

So let's denote it with you.

OK.

So, OK, so agents start with some wealth, aggregate wealth,

right?

They invest this, they get returns one plus R.

These are returns.

So then these agents also get labour income, not all

of them, only young ones, but once we aggregate across

all households, there is this labour income, and then fraction

3 of them dies, right?

And when they die, they just consume all wealth that

they have.

Right, but, so every single period in this, in this

world, there is kind of, um, there is no legal

distribution of people, right?

There are some people who were born many years ago

but somehow survived.

There are some agents which were born relatively recently, of

course, the ones which were born a long time ago,

they, they accumulated perhaps higher wealth, right?

But again, even the the probability of bank is the

same for everyone, for young, for old.

In the end, right, we just need to, to, to

take, um, we just use the aggregate, the average wealth

in this economy, average, uh, per household.

OK, so just to confirm, aggregate wealth is the wealth

for the entire economy, not for just agent I.

It's it's the aggregate one and again think of this

as of agents from 0 to 1, right, and we

integrate across all of them, and this is this.

It's both the integral, but given that it's measured from

0 to 1, it's also the average.

OK, any other questions?

OK, so one last assumption, we're going to assume that

this XT, it grows at the rate 1 + G.

So you will see that this, this is actually important.

So in this world doesn't have economic growth, but if

you really, you know, want to derive.

Or get all the results, then you need to assume

that there is some growth.

So now, I mean, OK, let me write it down

here.

So Xt + 1 is just 1 + g xt.

OK, very good.

Now we will make our life a little bit easier.

OK, so in principle you can even solve this.

I mean it's a two equation model dynamic model.

It's not very hard, right?

But we will make our life even simpler by focusing

on the balanced growth path.

So what is the balanced growth path?

Well, there are some transition dynamics.

Right, so again, imagine that we start with some w

with some B with some parameters, and so then you

know maybe there are some transition dynamics like this, but

then eventually we will, you know, we will be on

the balanced growth path when all variables grow at a

constant rate.

So we will, which, you know, so the wealth will

grow at the same rate as output.

The value of stocks will grow at the same rate

as Output and the interest rate will be just constant.

The interest rate is not.

OK.

We we can that such solution exists and we will

focus on on on on it.

So they're endogenous, but then in the balance will grow

by a constant rate right, right, right, right.

And so what we what we still need to solve

for is the object that we will be interested in

will be WT XD and VT XT, right?

So this ratios kind of.

You know, stock market to GDP and wealth to GDP,

this will be good to solve for them and they

will be cost.

Exactly, exactly.

Any other questions?

OK, good.

So then just, I mean, just, you know, let's substitute

this balanced growth path into these two equations, right?

So, uh, let me put interest rate on the left

hand side.

And instead of VT plus 1, I put 1 plus

GVT.

And similarly for W.

Yes, this is the system that's simplify it a little

bit, right?

So some terms just cancel out.

Um, And some space.

You can see here, um, OK, so let's just solve

for you.

So we get.

VT or XT R minus G.

Alright, and then the same for W.

Yeah.

OK, so this is the solution.

This is the.

Yeah.

OK, so let's discuss, right?

As always, it's a good idea to try to understand

whether these intermediate steps they make sense.

OK, so when, so what do we see here, right?

So when data goes up, we see that the price,

the kind of equity stock market to GDP increases.

Makes sense, right, because the highest data, the highest share

of GDP comes in as dividends.

So then what about the effect of interest rates that

would be important.

So why is the, you know, stock market decreases in

interest rate?

The high interest rate means that we will discount the

future dividends at a higher rate, right?

So in a sense, I mean if you look at

this result closely, you might notice, right, that it's kind

of what is called more than formal.

I don't know whether you saw it in finance, right?

But you know this is the discount rate which you

discount future profit and G is the speed with which,

you know, the growth rate for these dividends.

And so it's, you know, it's, it's kind of, uh,

appears quite, uh, often in asset pricing.

OK, now what about wealth to GDP?

OK, so 1 minus 3 again, it makes sense, right,

because this is labour income, uh.

Right, so then what about I mean G here, yeah,

so here we see that G has negative effect on

this ratio.

So why is that?

That that's a little bit harder, but maybe you can.

Um She is the growth of output.

So if um output is growing at a faster rate

than wealth that would automatically decrease.

Kind of right, kind of, exactly.

So the idea is that, OK, wealth is kind of

determined by the previous decisions, right, the income in the

past.

But then we normalise it by today's GDP.

Right.

And of course I mean to some extent the GDP

also contributes to, but I mean, right, it's a smaller

fraction.

It's not all wealth.

Most of the wealth comes from previous years and so

if your GDP is growing very fast, that will decrease

this ratio.

That's exactly right.

OK, so then it also decreases in theta, which I

think makes sense, right, because the highest data, the highest

consumption, and so people just don't accumulate.

The economy doesn't accumulate much wealth.

And then the interest rate, so OK, the interest rate

actually increases this thing, but this is just because that

increases the returns.

OK, very good.

So notice that we can make a picture.

To illustrate.

This thing So let's put interest rate here.

this Yeah.

And we have OK, let's be careful now.

So which one is supply, which is one is demand?

I mean, depends the supply of what and demand what?

So let's call this supply of assets.

And this is demand for assets.

So why is it that demand is up for sloping

here?

Usually you want this downward sloping, right?

Think about prices here in this model.

First time you return That's right, right.

So if it, I mean, the price of assets, the

price of stock here, it's kind of the inverse of

the interest rate of the returns, right?

And so if instead of R we put kind of

1 over R, right, if we put the price of

stock, then it would be downwards, but we'll put the

interest rate, right?

So I mean, intuitively again, if you have um a

higher R it means that the stock price is, is

lower, right?

OK, good.

So, so this is, OK, so this is the diagram,

right?

And then we just need to close the model.

So the first case is closed economy.

If we have closed economy, then In uh let me

write it down here.

I might still need this, so, uh.

What was the economy then?

Supply equals demand, right, for assets.

There are just no other sources of assets, no other

sources of funds.

So the market, financial markets need to be, and then

this intersection will give us long current equilibrium.

And as we discussed, right, I mean we can do

competitive statistics, let's say you know G changes in the

curve shift right or data increases, so you can easily

do this comparative statics and see how that affects interest

rates.

I mean, obviously, I mean just for as an example,

right, suppose data goes up so that.

Schools become more impatient.

I mean, in this world they just die with high

probability, so they consume more, right?

But I mean it's not either related to death, of

course it's just uh consumption shifter.

So if data goes up, right, then this thing decreases.

So for every given interest rate, we now have smaller

lower demand.

Right, so the curve shoots like this, which means that.

The interest rate will go up.

And as a result, right, we move along this supply

curve, so as a result, the value of assets will

decrease, go down.

That households consume more.

They don't need, uh, so many assets to save and

as a result, the price of assets goes down, which

means that the returns on these assets, the interest rate

goes up.

OK, OK, good.

So that's just one example.

Any questions, by the way?

OK, good.

So then, now, look at the more interesting case, right?

After all, this is an international course.

So now what about open economy?

Well, and the simplest assumption is that we can look

at small open economy.

this is the economy which takes international crisis even so

in this case.

Interest rate is just exorbitant, constant and.

In other words, right, the economy is so small that

no matter how much it saves or, you know, uh,

supplies assets, that will not affect global interest rate.

Right.

And so, for example, imagine that this is, so we

will call this what your interest rate, right, the one

when you don't have capital mobility and suppose that the

world interest rate, uh, is higher, right?

So then what will happen?

The interest rate is higher, which means that demand for

assets, right, increases and exceeds supply of assets.

Right, and so What is the difference here?

All right, so, OK, let me write this down here.

So wt minus VT divided by XT.

What is this?

I mean this is demand for assets, right?

This is the wealth of households.

Some of this wealth is spent on domestic assets.

And the rest is spent on what?

Foreign assets, right?

And so how do we call this?

This is net foreign asset position, right, and the way

of the country.

Net foreign asset position.

The GDP.

Right, this is the wealth that the country accumulated abroad.

So you can see that in this case the country

will, you know, save internationally, right, and the country will

run current current account sorts and strictly speaking, what is

current account?

Well, it's, you know, it's the same thing but it

changes.

Um, And once again, this is the, this is the

stock, right?

This is the stock.

This is the position in a given period of time.

Current account is how much countries take additionally in a

given year, right?

So going back to the picture that I showed you

for the US, we said the US is growing additionally

every single year, right?

So now the current account, uh, let me put C+1

here and here.

Um, Let it That's again by GDP.

OK, on our balanced growth path, right, this will be

just.

You will have 1 + GT minus.

Let's see here.

Right, so one out.

And I would get.

you should take this right, so in the end.

This is again.

Right, and as you can see that, you know, the

country which has positive and the, it will also in

the long run have positive current account, right?

So I mean this is not the US clearly right.

This is what we think about China.

China is growing and it every single period it kind

of increases its, uh, position abroad.

OK, so before we move forward, before we talk about

many other interesting things, let us understand the main issue

because this is, you know, really the key.

So why is it possible in this model that the

country will permanently have positive NFA and will permanently, you

know, save more and more and more, something that we

thought originally makes no sense.

What, what, what is the economic?

It's not a simple question, but through.

And by the way, I mean this is exactly what

I said before, right?

So to get this effect, you, you really need, uh,

economic growth.

If there is no G is equal 0, then you

don't get uh this effect, right, in the long run,

if you have, you know, negative growth, you can even

have the opposite effect, but let's focus on G greater

than 0.

OK, is there no I will give you some time

to think about this, OK, because I really want this.

Let's then the third is.

Maybe that will help somehow, right?

So in the third case is two large economies.

This is kind of China and the US.

Two large economies.

Right, so we will assume that these countries, they have

the same.

Uh, same G this is important, but in principle they

can have, uh, other parameters might be different.

So why is it that if you, you focus on

it kind of makes sense to assume that G is

the same for Uganda.

To do this analysis, why, why we can't really assume

different here.

I mean, we can, but will be kind of one

of them grows faster than the other, you know, in

the limit, one of them is going to be exactly.

And we already assume that we focus on the long

term, right, because we focus on the balanced growth path's

equilibrium.

So in that limit, right, the country which grows faster

will kind of dominate, right?

It will account for the whole global economy, so it

will become effectively close the economy again.

Exactly.

So that's why we kind of need to make this

assumption.

Of course, you can always look at transition, right?

You can assume that one country grows fast and then

see what happens during transition period.

But just to simplify, let's assume that she is the

same.

That's When a picture, so this is what is also

called when I learn them.

OK, so this is going to be let's see.

Yes.

Uh, OK, so.

I will still, you know, I will think of the

US as home economy.

And then China will be.

It stars.

So the same features in each country there is watery

industry.

OK, so it is.

OK Yeah.

Uh.

This is um home water rate and this is for

water.

Sorry about that.

Um, right, and so this is, this is what, this

is kind of the if there is no capital mobility

if each country, uh, is closed, our schools will open,

we allow for free capital mobility, then what will happen?

Where will where will capital go from which country to

which.

to look at the interest rates.

I lost you.

Uh, OK, OK, maybe I should go slow.

These are just the features that we had there.

Any questions about this?

I just use exactly the same expressions.

I, I assume that countries are different in some parameters

other than G, and as a result, the other interest

rates are different.

OK.

Now I imagine that you are, I don't know, in,

in China.

Before you could only investlow early at least interest rates.

I don't suppose there's free and kind of, you know,

uh, you see that the interest rate in the US

is much higher.

So clearly you will invest in the US, right?

And similarly, you know, people in the US will borrow

from China than from local and so of course, you

know, there will be capital flow from China to the

US and In the end we will have a team.

The interest rate is the same, right, so we assume

that there are no capital controls, no predictions in financial

markets, so this will be a global world interest rate.

I'm not sure if it can be exactly right, but

so 11 equilibrium condition is that the interest rate is

the same in two markets, which is the second equilibrium

condition.

I mean, right, I mean I can, I can put

all the interest rate here.

I can put it somewhere here.

So what, what else needs to be true.

The markets must peer exactly.

And so in a sense, right, how much you know.

The the NFA or current account of one country needs

to be equal in exercise to the uh NFA or

government in the other country.

So not the words, right, um.

It's time we See this.

Alright, and the should be equals 0.

Of course, in the equilibrium, it's, I mean this is

kind of from the perspective of financial markets, right?

From the perspective of the goods markets we can rewrite

this condition and what needs to be true is that

So this is consumption in one country.

This is consumption in the other country and of course,

you know, consumption should be equal to output.

What is output is just XT plus X star.

OK, so in the closed economy it was said that

Who said that w should be equal to V, but

again, you know, if you use our expressions, you can

check that it's, it's the same as saying that consumption

is equal to output.

OK, so any questions about this future?

I mean this is should look very familiar to you,

right, because this is also how usually people uh think

about trade between two large economists.

Maybe you you saw it in the previous these pictures.

OK, I'm going back to what the probability of an

individual dying, that's what it means, right?

But we kind of think of this as the consumption,

is that because, OK, just, you know, one age period

there data of people who died.

So on average, this is the wealth of each individual

person, right, and fraction 8 of them die.

But again, it's, you know, you should think of, I

mean, this is how, how the model is written, but

more metaphorically think of that as, uh, impatient, right, uh,

of agents.

It looks like consumption equals.

Would that mean that there's no savings?

No, there's there's no saving, but again, think of this,

right?

So each individual agent can save, but the economy as

a whole cannot save the global economy because there is

no capital.

There's all kind of that's an assumption if you don't.

within each time period but they can't can save temporarily

because you know you write a contract where you give

mine today to another country.

You give goods to another country today and you hope

to get some goods in the future, right?

But the global economy as a whole markets need to

be.

I OK, so then going back to my question, right,

so we just said that it seems like you give

goods in one country gives goods to another country today

because it wants to get these goods back in the

future, but it looks like it's not happening, right?

It looks like every single period one is staying in

another country's border.

So what is going on here?

I feel like.

Um, right, I mean, yeah, that's the way I see

it because China has a lower interest rate like you

if you like lower than uh world price and you

become an expert.

So it's, it's, it's, it's an interesting argument.

There is one problem with it, right?

So and in micro or international trade that would perfectly

work because we would just focus on one or one.

But this is just equilibrium model.

If you take trade models that I think you decided

in the first term, usually the the trade is balanced,

no, that it's true that individual goods you either export

or import.

But once you aggregate across all markets across all goods,

you have to kind of balanced trade.

So what is surprising here indeed there's clear analogy, right,

but analogy is not that different goods.

It's just like, you know, first period and second period

and other periods, and usually we think that you can

go in one period, but then you need to save

in another period, right?

So it's, it's perfectly OK to have comparative advantage in

one period in terms of borrowing, but you can't have

a comparative advantage kind of in all goods, right, or

in all periods.

So that's what is surprising about this school somehow.

We had managed to to always say.

You know, so, so let's say I'm the US, I

owe money to China, and that amount grows by G

every period as well.

also my economy grows at at so I can always

roll with that forward and in equilibrium.

I'm always sort of it's growing in absolute size but

in relative terms, definitely sort of continue because the ratio

is constant kind of, I agree, I agree that's the

important part, but why it's still the case that you

borrow, right?

I mean.

I, I, I want to go kind of back to

what happens to individual agents in a sense because there

is no representative agent in this economy anymore, right?

So to understand what happens with aggregates, you really need

to tell me what happens at the individual level.

So people who bought assets before and still will be

still like next year, they are bad, right?

They just the assets they don't do anything.

So the only people who can actually participate every year

are the ones who die and the ones who are

born.

Right, so the people who died in the war.

Because they sell their assets, right, uh, so let's think

from the perspective of China, OK.

So in China you have old generation, they want to

consume today, so they say sell their assets, right?

That, that, yeah, on the other side of the market,

there are young people, newborn, right, and they buy assets.

So if you know these two forces were the same,

right, they they have the same absolute magnitudes, they would

cancel each other and there would be no international capital

flow.

Like all people would just kind of sell their assets

to young and who would stay there.

And that's actually what happens when G is equal 0.

So what, what happens when she is positive.

people are richer than the old people were they were

young but then at the same time the assets have

been invested, so the old people's assets are worth more

and they're worth proportionately to how much, right, right, but

I think the first part is key here, right?

So people who died today, they, they were.

When GDP was lower, the initial wealth, you know, initial

income was lower.

IRS, right?

Well this is high and so in a sense we

always have this positive net demand for assets in, in,

in, uh, China, right?

And so every single period, you know, you want to

buy more assets from, from the US, uh, and in

the US you have kind of the opposition.

And I mean what determines that's on on on others

in the model, but that's exactly how you can generate

this growing demand for assets, right?

So when you the household, it would make no sense,

but because those are different generations of households, right, you

get this.

So that's quite interesting and that's, I think, I mean,

that speaks a lot to, I think, to, to, to

what we see in the data, right?

So no one is again, so we said that with

G equals 0, you kind of gets to affecting each

other.

What about the case when G is less than 0.

Then the education will be poorer than the old generation,

right, which means that, you know, the wealth, the assets

sold by all generations, they will exceed the amount of

energy generation, right?

And then you get the opposite and now you actually

want to survive assets in this country.

Right, that's how the model works.

Um, OK, just one last thing before we have a

break, right?

So that's the main competitive statics that the regional paper

has is that if you have, so what, what, what,

what determines whether you see or all right, what is

the main source of heterogeneity between these countries?

Looking again at these expressions, right, we said that OK

G will keep constant, R is endogenous.

So the only things that are left are theta and

data, right?

And so, OK, the, I mean the would be the

story about the US being impatient and wanting to borrow

more and probably there is some truth to that, right?

So you can think of the theta being lower in

China, what would be kind of micro foundations, what would

be the story of why fate is lower in China.

Why that?

Why is it the what we see that in microdata

that right uh households in developing in training, particularly they

usually save more than households in, uh, developed countries.

Less unlikely.

I mean, I mean, I don't know about China, to

be honest, but on average I would imagine that households

in developed countries is one, right?

But what else?

What is another?

Very good, very good, but what is sort of uncertainty.

It it actually speaks well to our overlapping generations model.

I mean, what, what, why is it that there's more

uncertainty in emerging economies or individual households?

Has to do with income and output.

But why, I mean, it's that even a negative level

it's look at how the emerging point.

That is true, but there is a additional source of

kind of syncratic uncertainty.

Uh, Texas.

Uh, yes, but I would say kind of transfers, the

opposite thing in the sense that usually the government provides

pretty good insurance, right?

So like Social Security, I mean, you know, unemployment benefits,

also retirement plans.

So usually in emerging economies it's really up to you,

right, to self-insure.

You really need to save.

You can't count on the government or society to help

you in bad times.

And so that can again like in this very stylized

model it would mean that data is lower in the

emerging, right.

There is, by the way, another paper by different authors

but published in the same year, another model where it's

much more quantitative, and that's exactly how they model the

source of heterogeneity across countries that there is just more

individual risk.

OK, good.

So that's that's data.

And then what about data?

So that will be now a key thing.

So why is it the case that it's arguably data

is arguably much higher in the US and in China.

I will check with that.

Answer my question meanwhile.

You are in general richer, so more to.

Uh, I mean, richness with terms I think in terms

of value, right, it's kind of endogenous, right?

But data it's more about share of dividends.

Um, Mhm So that captures the fact that in.

In the US it is exceptionally good in terms of

securitization.

Right, so in terms of converting um.

Output into assets which you can buy.

OK give me just one second, sorry.

Uh.

To show you one picture.

I have also pictures in in in my slide, but

this one higher capital share of.

income.

Capital share.

Yeah, more capital intensive.

That's probably true to some extent, but as we discussed,

right, so even even the same capital share in principle,

you can, you know, the firm can take loans, for

example, from banks, or you can issue bonds, right?

And in the first case it will be only between

banks and companies.

Well, if you issue the bonds or even more so

if it issues equity, then you know it can much

wider the public can participate and use assets to save.

Right, so here's the dramatic picture, really dramatic.

So I, I have, you know, I had some version

in my slides, but I just saw it like two

days ago.

And so, OK, so this is, um, this is the

share of world stocks.

OK, so nowadays about 70, more than 60% are spokesmen

from the US, 2/3 of all stocks in the world,

those are the stocks in the US.

And of course there's a question that this is, you

know, listed the place where this company is listed.

This can be a foreign company, but it decided to

issues.

In the US there's some, but I just compare this

to other countries, right?

I mean Japan is number 2, this is like 65%.

Japan is less than 60%.

China, which has GDP comparable to the US, its only

for 3% of total supply of equity.

I mean the UK has a higher share than China.

Yeah, a very deep irony is a very deep irony

about China being like 50% in Taiwan in terms of

yes, yes, yes, yes, it's it's really my time in

Europe.

This is Asia, and this is the US alone, and

you know, within the US, this is just.

This high tech companies, right, so in some sense, you

know, if you decide to save and you just decide

to invest in equity, which is I think a good

idea for young people who have long horizon and you

just locate this randomly right or proportionately to the supply

of, in the end 2/3 will go to the yes.

Right, so in that sense, if you decide to save

there is, it's almost inevitable that this money will go

to the I mean of course you can just open

a deposit at your bank.

And then the question is what will the bank do

with that money, right?

And again, if it wants to buy stocks, then the

money will go to the US, right, OK, so they

have comparison 2010 was actually this is, this is kind

of the, you know, boredom, right?

So US share went down.

It reaches 1000 and then then it's recovered.

Um, There were actually some other interesting features in this

article, um, right, so this is again, this is, this

share of the US and UK and Japan.

So at the beginning of the 20th century UK share

was comparable to the US, right?

It was an interesting moment like late late 1980s when

Japan had comparable share to the US, right, but after

the financial crisis kind of went down a lot, so

you can see this is what I said, right?

This was.

Now US is again above 60%.

Uh, yeah, OK, so I mean you can check.

Let me actually just show you the title if you

want to.

This is quite impressive.

OK, good.

Any questions?

Let's make a 5 minute break then, then we will

continue.

Uh-huh.

Yes, yes, today it's planned.

Uh Oh It's just, it's just different.

And And it's important.

Descriptions.

Mhm You have to work it all that.

Oh Mhm Mhm Yes.

OK.

OK, let's continue.

Um, OK, so a few more things.

This is such a powerful model it would be a

shame not to spend a bit more time on it.

So here's this is what, what the next thing.

It's really advanced.

I mean, I don't expect you, for example, to, to,

to be able to derive these things in the exam,

but maybe some of you can see and help me

with this.

So imagine that we what happens on the transition, right?

So suppose we, you know, look, let's start with this

small open economy, suppose we start with this point right

where the economy is closed, but then suddenly capital starts

flowing.

The country faces this global interest rate.

So what will be the dynamics?

Actually, actually we can see it in this picture, we

can illustrate it in this picture.

So what happens immediately when, when the country, you know,

faces this global interest rate?

As we said that, you know, you open the capital

account.

Our requires that the domestic interest rate jumps to this

level immediately, right, because otherwise you can just make money

by attributing resources between countries.

So then what will be the impact, right?

We can't use these conditions anymore because this is, right?

But in the short run, what will happen according to

these situations?

What do you think?

Let's start with with sorry, with asset price.

What will happen to asset price?

So interest rates adjusts immediately, right?

It jumps up, I guess in this picture, right, it

jumps up immediately.

And so we're kind of discount all future dividends with

this new interest rate, which means that V goes down,

right?

So in fact, right, so OK, V was here, now

it immediately goes down to this level.

There's no transitional dynamic because the interest rate jumps immediately

and permanently, right?

So in terms of view we end up here.

Now what happens to the public?

To be What will happen in the long run, right?

But what happens on impact?

I mean, again, think, think in terms of economic intuition,

right?

So V is the value of stocks.

So who owns the stocks?

Usually Households, right?

OK.

So now there's capital maimity, but the, the stocks, they

still belong to households, right?

It's not like they give them up immediately, right?

So this, so what happens to that, I mean, in,

in the initial equilibrium, as we said.

You know, wealth of this agency is just the value

of stocks.

So stock prices collapse, and which means that also the

wealth collapses.

So you initially it also goes here.

Because there's just no other assets, right, and all these

assets belong to local households.

So that goes here, but now households see that the

interest rate is higher, returns are higher, right?

And so they start accumulating wealth.

So in fact, what happens here is that you jump

from, let's call it point B, you jump immediately to

point B.

But then, you know, OK, so this stays here, doesn't

even move, but double use, you know, starts accumulating gradually

and eventually it reaches this point.

Right?

So that, that, that's what happens.

This is how transition dynamics looks like, um.

to make a picture.

All right.

So this is the what happens to B right?

it just goes down and stays there.

I mean, uh B over X of course.

Right, so what happens to you?

You should have you goes down the same way, right,

but then it recovers, right, and actually it overshoots, right,

it goes.

So I mean 0 here is initial value.

I just normalised it to 0, right?

So it it goes W goes down the region, but

then it, it, it goes up above the initial value.

And then you can see right the difference between the

two will give you the uh the part of the

code and a favour for the of the country.

that broth, would it be that the the line WT

over XT shifts to be?

Um, and then shifts back or how do we, I

mean this graph, right, it's already for balanced growth path,

so it's, it assumes that, uh, yeah, assumes that W

is growing at the rate of 1 + G.

It will not grow at the rate 1 + G,

so it will, it will grow faster, um.

Right, so I guess you are, you must be right.

So the, the way to think about this is that

this thing kind of shifts here, right?

And then even this interest rate, it kind of gradually

shifts exactly.

Right.

For for V over X, right, we only move along

this line.

There is no, no shifts in this curve.

That's right.

Um, Yeah.

Other questions?

No.

OK, now, finally we can talk about welfare implications.

So we'll talk about 22 implications, right.

Given that this model can explain the global imbalances much

better than the single model that we discussed before, it

is also reasonable to think about, you know, costs and

benefits of these imbalances to the rest of this.

So the previous would tell you a very trivial thing,

right?

That will affect, you know, exactly this competitive advantage countries

which have low.

And today they will borrow have relatively high now and

they will say in the previous model, of course, everyone

benefits in that model it's just like your classical trade

model.

It is, it is no matter whether you borrow or

save, it always increases your welfare relative to.

Now what about this model?

So let's, I mean, let's focus on the small open

economy here because it's a bit easier.

And so we said that this is, this is the

picture for China, right, essentially.

Because the global interest rate is higher than the other

interest rate.

So Comparing financial order here to this dynamics, right, uh,

is it beneficial to open current account for China or

not?

Do households benefit or lose.

I mean, what is our here?

What is our criteria, right?

It's obviously consumption output is exclusions they don't work.

So the only welfare relevant link is consumption.

So WT over XT is increasing in R in new

equilibrium open economy R is higher.

So WT over XT is higher because consumption is proportional

to WT.

That means that consumption is gonna be higher for a

given level of output.

You know, the output growth is output is the same

under both financial and exactly.

It's almost right.

It's like 50%, right.

But there's one important detail here, right?

So I mean.

You should always remember that it's true that uh equilibrium

is informative, right, but when you do welfare, you need

to take into account also transition.

So everything that you said is right, but it's right

about this growth path.

What about transition dynamics and that's exactly why we discussed

it.

Like immediately uh we decrease so it will harm, so

we said that this consumption is proportionate to and this

is the name of it will go down exactly right

so in this model there will be redistribution between generations.

They, you know, the, the, the first generations.

They will actually lose their consumption will on average be

lower them without open um.

On the other hand, the future generations, they will benefit

because the country will accumulate large wealth, right?

And yeah, so it will get, uh, it will be

able to sustain higher consumption in the future.

Yes, it will be the opposite, right?

The younger generations, they will benefit from opening a capital

account while the future generations, they will lose.

Right, because what the US picture looks kind of symmetric

right now is high initially and then it goes down

and becomes negative in the future.

Right, so, so that's exactly the thing.

And I mean, again, it's, it's one model, but most

models, uh, you know, or models in an open economy

they will have this issue that there is this redistribution

between generations, right?

And so, so in the end, you know, the answer

is kind of ambiguous.

So whether the country benefits or loses really depends on

how much weight the weight you put on younger generations

versus future generations.

I guess all generations versus future generations.

Um, OK, good.

Any questions about this, that this makes sense.

OK, that's one thing, right?

That's interesting.

That's something that we have a representative agent.

So finally, there is one more thing, and this is,

by the way, what the second paper by the same

quarters is about, uh, kind of going back here.

Right, so Um, They have the second paper in 2021.

Uh, which is much more involved, so I'm not going

to talk about it formally.

We will not formally, but let me just try to

illustrate the argument here, right?

So the idea is the.

This was the interest rate.

The fact that now China enters financial markets, right, it,

it saves a lot.

It's a very large economy, so all this money goes

to the US.

It means that the interest rates now in the US

will be lower.

And usually we think that's a good thing, but the

problem is that it also means that zero lower bound

might be more binding in bad times, right?

So kind of switching from this long equilibrium, think about

recessions, right, like 2008, 2009 recession, usually the way.

My report tries to stimulate economies by lowering interest rates,

right, but imagine that there is a zero lower bound

and how to think about this, OK, this will be

very informal, very stylized, right, but think about tools that

there is.

You mentioned that you are interest rate to below this

level, OK, and before.

Financial integration.

This was not really biting because what period was over

here.

Right, but now I suppose that you have this constraint,

so interest rates cannot go below this.

Level.

So then what will happen, what, what has to happen

in equilibrium?

This is.

It There's lot of lading here.

But how can it be that you know the interest

rates cannot, so that we know that this is the

equilibrium interest rate, right, but we now say that the

interest rates can go and go below this rate.

I mean, obviously now it seems like at this interest

rate, US borrows less while China wants to save even

more, right?

So how can we clear the markets?

What, what needs to adjust?

How do you think?

It's not everyone is taking a macro plus it might

be a big change, right.

But with sticky, right?

I mean, I'm in I'm assuming sticky prices.

Once you have seen the prices, which variable becomes endogenous.

Uh, right, that's exactly the idea of equality affecting output

and equality.

So in some sense X becomes endogenous, right?

So what needs to happen is that to a.

So suppose that this will, this is the equilibrium interest

rate.

So this is the kind of maximum amount that can

borrow, right?

So it means that this is also how much China

needs to see and how can you rationalise this at

least interest rate is that you know this X or

X star needs to go down.

Either X needs to go down or XR or maybe

both need to go down.

Right, um, and, uh, in, in this model that we

have, it's actually indetermined.

OK, so we, we know that, to create the markets

we need to have a global recession, we need global

output to go down, but how to speed this recession

between two countries, that's ambiguous.

OK, and so what we determine this is the trade

and you may end up with with what is called

uh currency wars, uh.

Here it is, right?

So the exchange rate, and we don't really have the

exchange rate in this model, but you can imagine, right,

the exchange rate we talked about is major switching mechanism.

So you can depreciate your currency to stimulate your economy,

but that means that foreign currency appreciates and the recession

will be even worse in foreign country.

Right, you kind of have this fixed pie which is

too small relative to, uh, optimal level of output and

you kind of shift resources between two countries by depreciating

your exchange rate, right, so all countries might want to

depreciate the exchange rate, uh, in this case, and, but

of course, right, I mean, it's impossible for all countries

to only one, exchange rate can depreciate, right?

And so, so that that can lead to this great

equilibrium, uh, in, in, uh.

It is of globalisation.

Is that, that's, that's not the potential cost of having,

uh, big capital mobility in, in this model.

Uh, in other words, right, again, going back to the

picture that I showed you before.

So even, even if we think about 1990s, and we

think about even more so about 1980s, the 01 was

not a big issue, right?

And the three, starting from 2000s that the interest rates

became, uh, you know, dangerously close to zero, and that's

exactly what makes it, you know, it makes, uh, hard

to, to face this problem, uh, of overbound.

I mean, of course, yen, so this, I mean the

model is real, so it's about real interest rate.

Right, so this is future expected future inflation.

Right, and so if you have.

Interest rate going up and inflation is kind of stable,

right, so it's about 2%.

The last few years were really an exception, right?

So as the real interest rate goes down and, and

we know that normal interest rate cannot be negative, then,

you know, the probability that this constraint binds, uh, increases.

So that's, that's the problem.

Um, OK, good.

Any questions?

OK.

OK, good.

So then I mean we will talk also about more,

you know, a simpler version of the same model, uh,

on Monday when we saw the progress.

OK, so then, then the, the last thing, let's see

how we're doing that I want to talk about today

is about measure, right?

So we're completely switching years we just talked about this.

Now we will question whether it actually it is true

that the global balances are that large, OK.

Uh, so I think in the end the, the fact

that money kind of goes from China from emerging economies,

I think this is kind of indisputable, but the magnitude

might be less dramatic than we usually think, right, than

the, uh, first issues that I showed you, uh, show.

So why is that?

Well, it turns out that there is a lot of

mismanagement problems and this, you know, as our discussion before

when we talked about, uh.

OK, so this Financial Times a month ago, right, uh,

so even, you know, nowadays when you, uh, has these

negotiations with the US about tariffs, uh, and the question

depends on whether you know from Trump's perspective, the question

is whether the US has bilateral, um.

the UK, right?

And it turns out that we don't know the answer

to that question.

So in some sense if you use that is, um,

yes, so which means that they probably don't, right?

Well, if you actually there is for the US.

So in this case you know you.

Actually undermine his position of the key in these negotiations.

And so why is that?

Well, it's exactly, you know, it depends a lot on

whether you do this, um, the British islands, right?

And so why is that because you know it's, uh,

I mean this is not exactly, but it has this

way right a lot of investment, a lot of trade

flows they go through this, um.

Islands and as a result of such thing might be

very.

OK, so this is just one key, but let's now

talk about more systematic evidence.

So this is this is a nice paper by and

uh quarters, they do adjustment for profit shifting.

So if you remember what we talked about like 2

years ago, right?

So what was the indicator of profit shifting in the

data that I showed you?

How did we know that it seems to be kind

of very common in practise?

grammes.

So we looked, remember we looked at, you know, like

Caribbean islands, right, like Luxembourg, Ireland.

What was abnormal about these countries in the data.

There are few employees, the rat of profits to wage

bill for international corporations, right?

It was very high in these countries.

Exactly.

And so what this paper does, I mean, I will

show you the math, you know, how they drive this

kind of pretend that.

Out of the model, but assumptions are very, very special.

But in the end, basically what they're doing, they're just

reallocating these profits, assuming that this ratio needs to be

constant for all countries, right?

Just let's assume that, you know, markups or these profits

to wage bill, it's the same across countries.

Then we can recomput right how much profits generates in

each country and then we can adjust all aggregate statics

accordingly.

So it seems like a very simple exercise, but it's

interesting.

And so there are a couple of moments which.

Quite significantly.

So this is, you know, US trade deficit, for example,

goes down from 2.6% of GDP to 1.8.

Again, it's not like, you know, you change the sign

or you change completely the dynamics, but quantitatively the difference

is huge, it's how much is that?

It's 0.8% of GDP, right, almost 1% of GDP.

So in that sense, uh, US is not doing as

badly as, you know, some people might think.

And by the way, I notice that, you know, things

became this gap, right, between unadjusted and serious and a

just one kind of increased uh recently.

So, OK, 2 questions.

Why is it that for the US things become kind

of better.

once you make this adjustment.

Why, why does, why does it make it even worse?

but explain.

So what is kind of under underestimated in in in

the data.

In the So think of US exports, right, didn't know

at all.

So they sell abroad.

He's sitting the region of the employees in the US.

Or sorry, I didn't followed in the US, a large

share of the value that comes from the US and

hence the The proportion of profit that actually goes to

the US is higher.

Exactly, exactly right.

So Apple sells goods, let's say in Europe and the

US exports, right, to companies selling goods in another, uh,

but in the data they are shifted to Ireland, right,

and so they're not counted as part of US exports.

But once you make the adjustment, once you take into

account that a large share of where you ate was

produced in the US, right, of course, some of that

produced in China or, uh, you know, uh, South Korea,

right?

But, uh, part of that is also produced in the

US.

Once you take that into account, the exports of the

US go up, and that's exactly why adjustment trades is

more, it's less negative.

OK, very good.

Uh, so that's fact number one.

Then the second interesting fact is that we'll talk about,

right?

So we said that US sage, and part of that

comes from abnormal returns on US FBI abroad, right, um.

Right, uh, so in a sense, right, uh, we said

that, let's, let's make it.

We said that US borrowing GDP in terms of safe,

uh, debt, but then it invests in these cases abroad.

Part of that is just equity, but part of that

is also, US FI opening a new factory abroad and

it gets very high returns on opening the factories.

So you know, if you look in the raw data,

it seems like they're making 12% return on this investment,

but it turns out it's actually not that high.

And why is that?

Because again, some of these FDI is something like opening

a headquarters in Ireland, right?

And, uh, it's not like they generate a lot of

returns.

It's, it's just that, uh, you, you park your profits

there, right?

And so, OK, um, let's see.

So hm.

OK, so this is US.

FDI abroad and adjusted right, original.

This is what foreign companies, when they open subsidiaries in

the US, what is the returns for them, right?

So the gap between the two kind of gives you

part of this exorbitant privilege, right?

US companies abroad earn much more than foreign firms in

the US, but once you make adjustment for the fact

that, you know, part of this.

You know, profits of US companies are just profit shifting

rather than actual, uh, production, right?

Then you see that once you adjust instead of this

uh upper uh solid line, you get this blue line

and then especially in the recent periods, the difference is

not that large.

These two things, right?

Mixes.

OK, um, what else, uh, here, yeah, and this is

just another way to see this, right?

So if you look.

If you look at non heavens, non heavens, right, and

whether you make adjustments or not, you know, it's kind

of the same thing.

But if you look at tax havens, they have originally

really high, high returns, right?

This FTI has higher returns, and once you adjust, it

actually goes down and lower than the average returns.

Indeed it must be in some sense costly too.

So if you lose money on and if you if

you how much you economise on the probably it's just

a waste of money opening the headquarters in Lux and

uh holding the stuff.

So it's not surprising that its are close to 0

or even negative.

OK, then I mean just for computers, they have some

other implications for productivity and here I think the results

are much less striking, not interesting, but in principle, right,

US productivity also changes because again once you take into

account the the firms in other countries, growth rate can

be different, right?

So.

OK, this is unadjusted series.

This is adjusted.

You can see that, you know, numbers are not that

different, but there are some periods, for example, here, right,

when growth was actually higher than official statistics shows, but

then, you know, in the, in the next period, it

kind of goes the other way around.

Uh, by the way, why, why is it the case

that it can change kind of flip?

And you guess that I think for that.

Right, so you know, these 6 years, you see that

you have, uh, higher growth once you adjust, right?

And that makes sense, right?

You kind of, you take these profits, which are counted

as, as, uh, foreign growth and put them into the

US and that increases growth.

That makes sense.

So but why can't you have a reversal in the

next period?

Because this is growth rates, right?

And so you mentioned growth relative to the values in

the previous period.

And so in some sense, if you kind of underestimated

something in the previous period, it's much harder to get,

you know, high growth in the next period.

Right.

And so, uh, yeah, so that's, I, I think that's

exactly the reason, right?

So if you see that, you know, proficient maybe was

less right now, so even stays the same just because

the normalisation of the base is different, you can get

this reversal.

OK, and then finally, yes, they also have good labour

share, but of course, given that, you know, you shift

profits between countries that affects the labour share, but as

you can see the numbers don't change very much so.

And also, you know, for all it's, it's, it's kind

of irrelevant.

OK, any questions about this paper?

This is a very nice paper.

I think it is, you know, no inspiration like instrumental

variables, no, uh, no sophisticated model, just, just raw data

and simple account.

Here's another paper in the same spirit, and this is

a more recent one and quite influential, so this is

by and and they have kind of big agenda of

of changing how we estimate capital flows.

I think I might have, yeah, I think this is,

by the way, I think we can and you can

go to the website where they have, uh, a lot

of data.

OK, so, uh, so what are they doing?

So the speed of the exercise is very similar, right?

So if they want to adjust capital flows for, for

this, um, shifting for settlements, but instead of, you know,

in contrast to the previous people, which doesn't just for

the US versus the rest of the world, they want

to look at all bilateral trade flows in the world,

OK.

And so the way they do it, it, it, it's

kind of uh.

It is difficult, OK, so let me also try to

remind myself, um, so the way they do it is

the.

They have data for mutual funds.

OK, these mutual funds, they invest in some companies, but

these companies, they often are not there, you know, the

parent company, but some subsidiaries, and, and the subsidiaries, they

are registered in some other countries.

Do you have a picture uh for that?

No, OK, let me just show it here.

Here how it looks.

So I think their favourite example in this paper is

about Brazil.

Brazil is somewhere here, right?

It's one, so you have, I think called Petrobras, right,

the largest oil company in Brazil.

So suppose it wants to borrow money in the international

financial markets, right?

And then there is, there are US investors.

I OK, I'm sorry, I'm not sure how it is

it in Brazil, right?

I guess Brazil.

OK, so the money, right, so the money will ultimately

go from the US to Brazil, but the way this

is done often in practise that this Petrobras company, it

will open a subsidiary, let's say again in in Luxembourg.

OK, so they have the open company there.

And this company will issue, you know, either equity or

debt, and so will invest in Luxembourg in this company

and this company will then invest in Brazil.

Right, so in principle, if you're only interested in aggregate

borrowing or saving by Brazil or the US, it doesn't

really matter whether money comes directly to Brazil from the

US or through Luxembourg, if you just measure at the

border here and here it doesn't really matter, right?

The net positions will be the same.

So that, I mean, that's the difference from the previous

paper.

At the same time, if you're interested in bilateral flows,

they might change quite a lot, right?

I mean, you look at the data, you see that

Brazil is very much exposed to shocks in Luxembourg, and

that's not really true because in the end, you know,

this capital goes from the US.

Instead, Brazil is much more exposed to shocks in the

US.

Right.

And for example, one way to kind of sell the

whole is that you might be very much interested in

terms of exposure to China or Russia to these countries

because of a lot of geopolitical uncertainty, imagine there are

some of these countries, uh, you know, which, which prevents

borrowing and capital flows.

How much let's say investors in the US will be

affected.

Right, and if you just look at these pictures, you

might think, oh, actually doesn't invest in China very much.

Right, so there's very few capital flows here, but it

turns out that a lot of capital flows go from

the US to China through Luxembourg, and then you still

get a lot of exposure.

Right, OK, so then how do they make progress?

It's not real.

It's you, you really need to, to, to read the

paper if you want to understand the details, but the

idea is the following.

So first of all, they look at these companies and

they link them to their subsidiaries.

So for each company, uh, surprisingly, there are some databases

where you can establish all these linkings.

Then they, they have data coming from Morningstar and this

is, you know, this is the whole agenda is based

on this data.

So for all mutual funds and ETFs in the world,

they have positions of investors that put money into, into

this, um, mutual funds.

So in other words, right, if there is a mutual

fund, um, In the US, which invests through Luxembourg to

Brazil, right, so from the first data set they already

know that Petrobras has this company in Luxembourg, but now

from mutual funds they know investment of US investors into

this company.

Right.

And so that's how they will establish how much, you

know, this, so they can establish directly in the data

how much US investors through these mutual funds are investing

in Brazil.

And then the last piece is because they only have

positions of investors in mutual funds.

They don't really know, I don't know about.

Pension funds, right, or other ways how household invest they

will, they will extrapolate.

They will assume that, you know, uh, the portfolio that

these mutual funds hold is the same as other agents

hold, and then, then, yes, and then they, uh, can

you get closes.

So let me just show you some evidence.

Um, So, OK, let me skip this.

So let me, I mean, they can have a lot

of things, like one third of the whole paper is

theses which show us.

I will show you just a few examples.

So this is a portfolio of US investors in, uh,

equity in foreign equity.

And so this is just the list of countries, non-tax

havens, which is important, right?

And so this is, um, this is how much they

reallocate.

OK, so how much, so this is, this is the

original numbers that you see in the raw data, and

these are the, the, the numbers that they compute and

so this is how much things change, right?

So for example, the, the most striking number is probably

this one.

So this is again how much US investors, uh, invest

in Chinese companies.

And again, if you look in the raw data, it's

something like 150, I imagine billions, right, dollars, uh, it

doesn't say, but I think it's billions of dollars.

But what, but what we find once you take into

account all this capital going through Luxembourg and other tax

havens that number is actually much higher, right?

It's, it's almost 4 times larger than you might think.

Uh, the United Kingdom is another country, uh, but I

mean they have separate papers saying that there's also something

very special about the UK.

Now, so, OK, so what do you expect to see

for cameras?

It must be opposite, right?

It must be the actions are much lower.

That's exactly what they find, right?

These are tax scams.

It looks like, you know, US has some crazy exposure,

you know, investment in Cayman Islands.

Of course not, this is not where this money ultimately

goes, right?

In fact, the the right number is close to 0,

right?

And so once you relocate, yeah, you, you get much

lower numbers.

Um, and this is unsurprisingly true for all these, uh,

tax havens.

Um, There is one interesting thing here, by the way.

So I said at the very beginning that in principle,

if you're just interested in this net position of the

country as a whole, nothing should really change.

It turns out that's not exactly right in the data.

Only, you know, they do all this.

It turns out that, um, that all changes as well.

So why is that?

How do you think?

It's a little bit, but it's not like, you know,

US firms have that, you know.

And, and borrow, yeah, they borrow from an entity abroad,

but that money has itself been borrowed from another US

entity.

Exactly, exactly right.

So even US companies, when they borrow from US investors,

they sometimes do it through the maxim of Cayman Islands,

right?

And again, you want to exclude these things, and that

will change even this kind of net position at the

border.

So you can see that there is also quite, quite

harsh.

Um, so, OK, so this was, this is just, um,

now that, and this is for.

I think this must be euro Eurozone euro, uh, so

what is the start with no tax havens, right?

So one interesting thing is that, for example, exposure to

Russia is larger than you might think if you just

look in the raw data, right?

Again, uh, some Russian firms, they go through this, uh,

tax havens when they go wrong again, it is special

and, uh, US is special as well.

So there are more exposure here and again if you

look at the numbers are lower.

I mean Cayman Islands still play important role but not

as for Europe, you know, when, when, um, if you

want to raise capital from Europe and you want to

do it through tax government, you'd probably do it through,

right, which makes sense, probably in terms of just, uh,

legal, uh, much easier and and environment.

And again, you can see that even that position changes

union.

OK.

Any questions about this?

Does this make sense?

OK, so one last thing, um, one last thing here,

this is, this is really this.

Let me not spend time on this, but 11 thing

that they emphasise, and they also have some interesting results

is about China.

OK, the word is special about China is that, uh,

I mean, maybe some of you didn't know this, but

most people in the profession didn't know about this before

they wrote the paper.

So it turns out that when you buy stocks, stocks

like Alibaba, right, or some other companies, you don't really

buy stocks of those companies.

The way this works for foreign investors is that there

are some company in Hong Kong.

Which gives a huge loan to this Chinese firm so

that effectively it kind of owns that a Chinese company.

In other words, I mean, it's so big that effectively,

you know, if, if, um, if this company takes this

money back, the company will have to give off.

So it's kind of indirect, uh, control of that company,

and then this company in Hong Kong will issue equity

which is purchased by investors in other countries, right?

So most of this investment is done indirectly through Hong

Kong.

And, um, again there are a big adjustments once, once

you take that into account.

So I'm surprised you don't have a picture here, sorry

about that.

But 11 surprising thing that comes out of this, uh,

uh, these calculations is that, um, it turns out that

borrowing by China is much higher than you might think.

So when we, when, when we think about.

Chinese NFA, right, for a position.

So usually people think that it's something like, you know,

1.5 $2 trillion.

Right, so it is in that range.

And so it turns out that once you make these

adjustments, once you take into account that China actually borrows

a lot through Hong Kong, this number goes down to

something like, you know, 0.75, 1.23, so it's almost 50%

lower, right, precisely because otherwise you, you kind of underestimate

how much um.

Uh, Chinese borrowing internationally, right?

So government reserves, you know, on the asset side, nothing

really changes, but ligilities, Chinese libilities are much higher than

you might think from official statistics.

OK, good.

Um, yeah, I don't think I will have time for

this, so let me not even start talking about this.

Yeah, uh, we will probably skip this.

So any questions?

Mhm, so for, uh, we know that the, the, the

government basically engineers, uh, a surplus sort of like how

large.

So it's actually it went down a lot.

It's about $700 billion right now, right.

I mean, OK, so I don't think they have this

correction there because it's much harder to do.

It was the Financial Times article, very nice, very interesting.

So, uh, China had about $1.5 billion in US treasuries,

like official, you know, government, uh, assets, but they, they

were selling them and it went down to something like

$700 billion so you know, down by 50%.

But the problem is that we see that at the

same time the holdings of Luxembourg and other countries of

this measures went up a lot, and there is, you

know, there's a suspicion that maybe Chinese is now also

holding these ass through some other countries.

So we don't know that for sure and you know,

it's it's not mutual funds, it's government, so it's not

in this direction, but probably there are also some some

things going on there.

I wonder why are they holding this.

Oh, OK, so, OK, I mean, right, the one that

we discussed before, there was no government there.

I mean, of course you can think about, you know,

government just doing something on behalf of households, right?

Maybe, you know, households want to save in China and

the government just done it for them.

A more realistic story is of course that, that, uh,

probably you know Chinese government that there is, uh, export-led

growth that export is good for growth and it's, I

mean it's not gonna be because ours, but you know

there are models with endogenous growth.

Uh, the more you produce manufacturing goods, the more you

export, the higher growth, right?

And so how you achieve this, uh, current service is

by depreciating your by, uh, buying foreign assets.

You don't allow your to appreciate enough, in other words.

Do you have robust evidence on?

No, no, no, I mean, I mean he he actually

know a lot about this because he also doesn't work

on, on, uh, in growth, but I think this is

exactly, you know, even in growth, I mean, can't be

just exogenous, right, but, uh, how sensitive it is to,

to this policies is very hard to say.

But I think it's actually a super interesting topic, right,

because it seems like it's true that even Britain in

the 19th century, all these Asian tigers in the 20th

century, Japan, China, all these countries, when they were growing

fast, they were also saving a lot.

It seems like they were stimulating excellence.

That's true.

On the other hand, we also know that it seems

like that.

You know, the later stage these policies don't work very

much and now there's a lot of discussion whether China

should switch to consumption growth, right?

So they need to stimulate their domestic demand rather than

foreign demand for.

Lecture 17:

All right You Thank you Oh Oh, where's OK.

So shall we start?

Um, any questions from the previous week?

OK, so I mean we are getting to the last

third, right, of course.

So just to give you the big picture where we

are right now, I almost feel like I'm, I'm almost

lost, right?

But that was a that's kind of the core part

of the course.

Remember there were 3 equations there when we when we

solved the system, right, for the machine.

So there was what there was trade balance is a

function of the exchange rate.

There was not this budget constraint and then there was

the UAP, the equilibrium in the financial markets, right?

And then we said that the first of the approximation,

it's kind of a good model, but each of these

ingredients has some problems, right?

And so then we started with revising, improving which element

which was which one was the first one.

Who remembers?

So 2nd 2nd week.

Maybe maybe.

We started with financial markets, right?

We try to improve the UAP.

We discussed all these models with financials, there might be

different, uh, reasons why there's an additional risk premium from

in the US.

It was we spend like maybe 12 weeks on that.

So then you can think of the last two weeks

when we talk about global imbalances and that was about

why it's kind of even even so it seems like

uncontroversial.

There is still something interesting about it, right?

There be additional radiation effects coming from different returns on

assets like, and you know we discuss even in the

small s where, um, where country can constantly borrow and

that still doesn't.

And so the remaining part is about the the last

equation which was about if you remember that export as

a function of exchange rate, right?

So the way we kind of Motivated this relationship was

the expenditure switching right again, if you remember, we said

that, OK, that is the price of UK goods, which

is 1 pound.

We export the good to the US that the price

of that steel is 1 pound, but when the dollar

depreciates, it means that that good becomes more expensive in

dollars, right?

And so that will make US consumers switch away from

that good.

That was the logic.

OK, so I mean, we, I mean, we, we'll, we'll

get revise this, uh, this assumption as well.

OK, so we will, in particular what we're going to

talk about today is exchange rate pass through.

So what is that?

Well, I mean, I will show you the form of

the decision in a couple of slides, but that's how

much price is it is in most exchange rate, right?

So, in, in a sense the exchange rate moves up

by 1%.

But how many percent does a particular price import price,

export price, price a particular good, how much does it

change in response to that exchange rate?

So that's what we need.

Just before we go into all these.

Why is that important?

I mean, one thing I already said, right, the measure

that the pass is just 0, exchange rate moves, but

import and export prices won't change, then consumers will not

switch to.

The way or, you know, do this good so there

will be no change in experts or imports both, right?

And so that will, you know, that that's important.

So, uh, in the end, of course, we want to

think about optimal policy, right?

So if you think about, we say that one motivation.

To have stimulated depreciate that uh that stimulates experts and

decreases the locals, 0, then in some sense this policy

will not work, right?

And then the, you know, it, it's very different policy

prescription, uh, than in the model that we described so

far.

I mean, there is a kind of uh, you know,

very closely related thing which you might have seen in

uh trade part of the course.

Did you talk about parts through the air at all?

No.

That's what I mentioned at the very beginning.

For some reason, surprising reason when we talk about international

prices, it's all, it's usually studied by people internationally, while

international trade is more about some aggregate areas.

But of course these two things are closely related, right?

And so, OK, there's a change with Paro which is

the main focus of the international macro, but in trade,

what would be kind of the, you know, the closely

related concept, the past of what?

Of course, exactly, right.

So there you can tell exactly the same stories, right?

The effects of stats depend very much on the bustle

of the status into prices, right?

And there was, I mean, there's this recent literature which

started kind of the previous wave of stats imposed in

the US in 200, after 2016.

Um, and so one finding is that the pass through

of these import tariffs was pretty high, right, which means

that the goods imported to the US from China, their

prices, they increased for consumers quite a lot in response

to these tariffs.

Well, for example, the path through into export prices, was

low, which means that, uh, you know, the, um, US

exporters had to absorb this.

So it turns out that in the data the past

change it can be quite different from Ps and you

know, people still study why is that the case maybe

exchange rate has different persistance from Paris, right?

Maybe, you know, people think that there are more permanent

than the rate, although that's surprising because we know that

the change is closer around the world.

But, uh, in the end these are very closely related,

uh, issues.

OK, good.

So with this motivation in mind, right, let's get details,

right?

And so, uh, this is just, you know, one simple

thing, uh, which shows the price of the same good.

They can be quite different, right?

So that it's not exactly passed through, but it's, it's

a closely related, uh, concept, namely low one price, OK,

whether the low one price holds.

Now a motivating example in the very first lecture was

that there's good, the price of that good is 1

pound everywhere, and we just need to use exchange to

convert it into other currencies in other markets, right?

So that the low one price be?

Well, not, not exactly, right?

So one of the most famous examples is this big

market index.

The nice thing is that McDonald's is everywhere, almost in

all countries in the world, uh, and it's a very

standardised product.

It doesn't change very much across countries and so you

can measure the price of that, uh, product, Big Mac,

um, across different markets, right?

I mean, you know, you, you take the price of

big market, let's say, let's say in Brazil, in reals,

of course, then you multiply it by the exchange rate,

right, and you convert that into dollars and you compare

that price to the price of, uh, Big Mac in

the US.

OK, and so it turns out that there is huge

variation across countries, right?

So, uh, this is the index this is from 2016

and the picture, of course, changes from year to year,

but you know, some patterns are quite persistent.

So and the US is normalised to zero, right?

This is, let's say that the price of big market

is equal 1 in the US.

Now by how many percent is the price higher or

lower in other countries?

Right, and what you can see that Switzerland, that's a

typical example, right, it's in, in, um, in Switzerland, the

price of IMA is 30% higher than in the US.

Right at the other end of the spectrum we see

Venezuela, Russia, Ukraine.

So those are the countries which had already depreciated the

exchange rate in 2016 and they're actually, you know, the

price can be 70% or even 90% lower than in

the US.

that already suggests that there are large deviations from the

low one price and so, um, maybe our initial assumption

is not really very good.

I mean, for the market, you can also see that,

you know, this crisis, they're highly correlated with GDP per

capita, right it's not a coincidence that, uh, we have

witzerland, one of the richest countries with high price and,

uh, Venezuela, uh, with a lower price.

This is something we're gonna discuss later um but non-tradable

good like you can't carry it across right generally traded

goods that turns out that even for tradeable goods for

most of them are pretty large, but you are right.

It will be one of the.

OK, I mean, this is just very quickly, right?

So, OK, you can see that is there really something

special about countries versus just different regions, right?

I mean, after all, you know, even here in London,

if we go to different stores, the price of the

same goods can be quite different.

And you know, if you look within the whole country,

a large country like the US, of course there will

be a significant dispersion of prices, but it turns out

there is still something special about borders, right?

So this is just, I mean this is a large

data set for many, many goods.

And so people looked at the price of dispersion, distribution

of prices of the same goods within the US, right,

so this is the good light.

And then distribution histogram, um, within Canada, right?

So this is red line and then across this country

and you can see that, you know, this, uh, the

dispersion is larger if you look across countries, right?

Yes, it's not like the low one price holes within

the countries where you will, but across the city holds

even worse.

The, the differences are even larger and again this is

kind of which we think, uh, you know, countries will

quite close in terms of, uh, GDP per capita, right,

uh, very close to each other once we start looking

at more more heterogeneous countries, the dispersion would be even

larger and distribution.

What like what might be an example like having Big

Mac in Canada and the US is like what is

the plotting, so you can take, let's say, right?

You take the McDonald's there, right?

And then you, you, you hold this distribution.

I mean probably it's normalised so it's combined for US

and Canada.

Right.

I'm like in different countries in one plant and then

you ship it everywhere.

We have different plants in different countries.

I mean big markets closer to non-tradable, so it is

produced mostly locally, right?

But tradable goods where usually just one place and then

you ship it to different destinations.

Yeah, I think it's both, it suggest that um like

different countries and non-treatable good, even if they had different

production costs, that would still be the same price with

the counting for exchange rates.

Right, so, OK, that's a very good question.

So, so it's true that There are kind of transportation

costs, right?

There is the question is should we include that or

not when we define the low one price, right?

You can say that what should be true is that

the price is the same, including kind of tradable trade

costs, right?

And then, you know, even if the normal price of

the same good is different across countries, maybe it's just

accounted by the trade costs.

So in the end this discourse we will look at

dynamics, right?

So we will look at how the price changes across

these nations and usually we don't think the transportation costs

are very volatile.

We think they are stable in that this is a

percentage of the price, right?

So we will look at, you know, log.

Price one place low price in the other place, so

that kind of to exclude this tradable.

And so what we will still see that these things

are not very much correlated.

And so I think then it becomes much easier to

interpret, uh, the deviation of the local price.

But those are those are very good questions and.

Um, OK, before we go, let me make a small

digression.

Before we talk about all these different reasons why prices

might be different across, let me show you one interesting

reception.

OK?

It's, it's, it's, you know, it's even, you know, I

don't want to spend too much time on this, but

it's such an interesting paper that I think it's, it's

worth, uh, going through.

So there is this paper by Cavalloyan and Gabon.

So what they didn't, they did it quite a long

time ago, right?

So it's from 2014, but the paper was the year

of publication.

They wrote it even earlier.

Uh, so they started what they call the P and

Pr project.

So the idea was that you know in relatively early

days of um online source and so they kind of

uh scrapped the data from websites right and so in

that case it was Apple, IKEA, H&M and Zara, right?

They just wrote the code which will download the price

every day for different goods, uh, across different online stores

in different countries and they did it for several years.

I think it was actually a.

So he started working on this one.

He was still a graduate student and then accumulated uh

the state and so then they, they all speak.

I mean now it has expanded.

They have a lot of papers.

I mean, not they, I guess Kaval was different authors.

He's at the heart of this project and so I

mean they looked at how different, um, inflation was across

different woods across different countries during the pandemic, so many

peoples came.

But the original paper was about the lower prices, how

well it goes across different types of countries with different

or the same kinds.

And so they found something quite surprising.

OK, so let's look at this picture, right?

So what did, what, what, what they did, they, they

took different products sold by these 4 stores.

OK.

Take one product, take the price of the products in

in one country, OK.

Take the price of the same product in the United

States, press them in the same currency, and the low

price.

And so if you take, you know, each of these

countries against the US, you can see pretty large dispersion,

pretty significant deviations from the low price, right?

So in other words, if there were no low on

price deviations, then we should have, you know, all mass

at zero.

The price in the UK is exactly the same as

in the US.

Instead what we see that there are actually quite a

few products which have the same price.

There are some products which are more expensive, some products

which are less expensive, right?

Not legal distribution we see for all these countries that

they have in their sample.

No.

Uh, so I mean nothing surprisingly so far.

So here's the surprising, uh, OK.

Now suppose you replace the US with Spain.

I mean that's the limit.

You it's just one country in the Eurozone, OK.

And so what you can see immediately is that for

most other countries, which are also members of the eurozone,

the lower price divisions kind of disappear.

Right, so almost all products, I mean, Portugal is extreme,

maybe you can say Portugal is kind, neighbouring country of

Spain, but you can take, let's say Italy, right?

And you can see that even in Italy, the prices

of the same products are the same as in, in,

in Spain, mostly, right?

So there's very few exceptions.

Uh, Right, so you can see that, you know, again,

if you compare Sweden it back to the, going back

to the US, right, or you compare it to Sweden,

which has its own currency on Norway, you can see

it on al price distortion.

And uh so the most remarkable thing here is Denmark,

of course.

So what is special about Denmark currency is exactly right.

So it's a country which has a fixed exchange rate

against the euro.

It never changes.

It hasn't, you know, for a long period of time

it's quite a credible pact.

It's not know, Argentina, which has backed for 3 years

and a huge jump.

So it's a quite credible pact, but at the same

time you see that there is, I mean, it's probably,

you know, somewhere in between.

Uh, the case of countries with in exchange rates and

the eurozone, but there is quite substantial dispersion price.

It's kind of not enough to have be against the

euro.

You really need to have the same currency.

So I mean what, what do I mean they, they

don't really offer any explanation, right?

They, they just in the day, but what can you

one story?

What can how can we explain this?

How can we understand this?

Perhaps it's more um visible if it's the same currency

and different prices on the same currency, you know, like

normally you just like you see a price tag like

35 but if it said 35 France, 33 Spain, maybe

that would be more visible than if you put like

Danish crowns, and even though technically there is a technic

change rate the only issue that you as a customer,

you don't usually see this.

It's not like you go to the website and they

tell you different.

Different price to different countries they will just use your

IP address and give you one price, right?

It's true that you actually find that you can sometimes

use different, you know, uh, you, you can look in

as if you're from other countries, right, and then you

will see that the price is quite different, but yeah,

uh, maybe transaction costs between currencies, especially on a cheaper

product like, um.

Yeah, well, um, but I mean, so you, you think

like they sell the good and then they will have

to exchange their revenues in Denmark in the euro or

something like that, yeah, for example, I could order products

from Germany in the same currency, but then maybe I

wouldn't from Denmark is a firm.

Right, so you're saying that ideally they would like to

do some price discrimination, but I think you you you're

thinking as if the customer can choose, right, and then

discards to exploit to deploy trash, but I'm just not

sure that customers can exploit this because I mean it's

online store they will have to put the address right

where to deliver the good I guess.

I'm not sure that they can choose.

Uh, you know, otherwise, of course, they would like to

choose the lowest price, um.

So I think it must come somehow from the supply

side, right, from these companies, and so one potential explanation

is that they just have one marketing department for all

Eurozone countries.

I mean, the question was, why is that?

I have no, no idea why is that, but somehow

they just have these marketing departments based on the currency,

and they, you know, there are some scores that they

need to pay to decide what prices.

And somehow you have to set the price in In,

uh, Daros you still need to recomute this thing.

So then you will need to hire some people to

do that and you, you have to pay this, right?

But as long as you are setting, you know, the

price in euros, you can economise on this.

It's not, yeah, I was gonna go back to my

idea, which is the the the kind of counterargument that

you gave was that, OK, but you can, you just

change the IP address on the website, you know, because

they can see where you're from one price is visible

to you.

But maybe if also the price has to be the

same on the website as in person, which may not

be the case, but if you think that, you know,

Zara wants to charge this for the same sweater at

the same price in the physical store, when you go

to the physical store and you look at the shirt,

there is one price tag and it says price in

euros, price in Danish pounds, price in Swedish pounds, usually

quite often that would be the case.

If that is the case, then you have to, if

you wanted to ship the same shirt, if you produce

it in one location, you want to sell it in

different countries, you'd have to print a different price tag

for each location, if you wanted a different euro price

in different countries, you would say France 35 Spain 32

and, and that might have a cost like a social

cost.

Yeah, that's interesting.

So don't exist in Danish crowds because people can't, they

don't know what the peg, so they don't convert it.

So how does it work?

I know that when you go to the local stores,

you see this in, but then you really just the

price, but then in the end you can only use

the one which is you can only pay that one.

But the idea is that if they have to show

the euro price in every country.

Either you have different price tags for different countries.

So in Spain, the Euro tag would say 32 in

France with say 35, or you print the one tag,

but then it has to say 35 in France, right?

Uh, OK, like, OK, very good, very good.

I mean, it's the same kind of story that I

was trying to tell, but I was thinking from a

marketing perspective, but I, I guess, yeah, I mean sometimes

it's more precise story of this fixed cost, right?

Why, why you, it's hard to have different prices in

euros and Mhm, right, mhm, I mean, I don't know

about Apple though, right, about Apple products, uh.

Whether they, whether it's easier for them to set different

prices, but Yeah, I mean, I must say that it's

kind of one of very early papers, right?

People didn't really use this online data.

Now it has become much more sense.

It would be really interesting to see how much things

have changed, whether these patterns are still in the data,

right, whether they apply to a larger set of programmes

or not.

I mean they have all this data, so I'm sure

they could lose the fact that they haven't written any

new papers maybe that's just that the spiders are no

longer there.

I don't know something like Amazon, if you if your

IP address is here versus even within UK right, the

right, I mean the key of course there is just

one right?

uh, but yeah, I mean you can look at different

countries in Europe.

Yeah, OK, so I mean the money is some people,

even, even maybe also when you go to just for

a small subset maybe just too hard to download all

the data from Amazon, but it will be interesting to,

to, to kind of study this in greater detail and

maybe, yeah, again those, those of you who write papers,

you, you, you can maybe, uh, do some, uh, literature

review on the top.

OK, good.

So then I mean Eurozone is kind of an extreme

example, right?

All these countries then next to each other, so maybe

it's the common market.

Now what about other countries which have exchanges, right?

Or maybe used the same currency as let's say the

US.

And so it turns out that the patterns are very,

very similar, right?

So, OK, in other countries that they have.

Um, the sample.

So there are several countries which have pegged to the

dollar, right, like Saudi Arabia.

Again, it's, it's pretty credible back, right?

It's, it's not like it changes every other year.

The change has been stable for a very long period

of time, but still we see pretty substantial deviations from

the low price.

On the other hand, if you look at countries which

are dolarized, right, Ecuador, Salvador, you can see that at

least, you know, there's some mass at 0, right?

Maybe it's more stark, and it seems like indeed there

is something special about, but maybe it's again the story,

although it's interesting, right?

I mean, it's not obvious that I mean, yeah, I'm

not sure.

I'm not sure whether, you know, they use the same

uh price tags in these countries as in the US.

It's, it's hard to measure.

Well, it's it's definitely not the case that in the

US they have several prices, right?

I think they have one price tag, but you can

easily imagine that even though these are fairly small markets

that they just ship goods with the same price tags

for the years that I that I can imagine.

Um, Yeah.

Yeah, I mean, it's interesting that, well, yeah, now it's

weak, um.

I'm looking for other maybe Central American countries but which

have a bag rather than dollarized, but I guess there

are no such countries in their samples, so.

I was thinking with the eurozone, it might be a

special case because it's a common market.

So when you when you if you import from Salvador,

El Salvador, it passes through El Salvador borders.

If you import to France, it passes through the eurozone's

borders and so it might be difficult to.

Differentiate, you know, high tax across Spain and France if

it's one import versus, yeah, but I mean they can,

right?

I think I think why not, right?

I mean, even products produced within the eurozone, I guess

they have different prices and they can have different prices.

There's nothing illegal about that.

Uh, but yeah, but that's exactly why it's interesting to

look at this.

I mean, here's another follow up this IMF, uh, which

in some sense is even more stark, OK, so because

I was in the cross section.

I just wonder what does it mean that they have

like weaker.

I mean, I mean, usually some kind of currency board,

right, some kind of so I don't remember about Panama.

I don't know, maybe some, uh, I think a lot

of countries use their own currency and the dollar, right.

I can, I, I can't think like Argentina or people,

but the question is whether the changes stable, right?

I mean you're gonna use, yeah, I'm, I'm not sure,

OK, uh, we should double check, I guess.

Uh, OK, so here's the second paper that they wrote.

The that's coming from Latvia and what is really interesting

here is that they can look before Latvia, uh, join

the Eurozone and after, right?

So it's not just cross section, but there's also, you

know, this difference in difference dimension.

And OK, and the evidence is pretty stark.

OK, so this is the period before Latvia joined the

Eurozone, OK, but it already had a pact, right?

Usually the way countries joined the Eurozone, it was like

for several years, even before they joined, they already have

to stabilise the exchange rate.

Again, so this is Latvia against France.

I mean, you can look against Italy, Germany patterns, and

so you can see that there's pretty large, uh, the

issue of the low one price again.

There is no substantial method zero, but once Latvia joins

the eurozone, all these deviations collapse, right?

Um, and at the same time again, if you look

at as a placebo experiment, you can look.

At global price deviations against the US and, I mean,

here there's nothing particularly interesting, right?

I mean there was some dispersion and stayed there, so

nothing really changed.

Uh, so let me see if I have more pictures

here.

Yeah, I mean this is just the same thing.

It's just so, right, this is the share of products

which have, uh, for which the lower price falls.

You can see that this share is close to 0

before it joins the eurozone and then once it joins

it becomes like 85% or even higher.

Um, OK, so this is just the thing.

So what I think this hasn't emphasise enough what would

be very interesting, they're just talking about this, which is

interesting.

I mean, but what would you from the welfare perspective,

what would be more interesting, how do you think?

Hm.

Exactly right.

Exactly.

So Latvia, when he joined the eurozone, uh, given that

now it has the same price as Germany and France,

did did it benefit from that or did it lose?

Did the price on average go up because of that

go down?

I mean, I guess in principle you look at this

because it seems like before I joined the Eurozone, right,

these deviations, they were kind of, I mean, not symmetric,

right.

Uh, but they'll hear much less here, but it's hard

to see from this picture what happened on average, right?

Um.

But that would be interesting.

I mean, there is all this about, uh, optimal currency

area whether it's optimal for countries to have the same

currency or not, and that leadership, I think this thing

is not really emphasised very much, but it would be

very interesting to learn whether not uh faced a higher

average import prices, uh, since it joined the eurozone.

OK, good.

Perfect.

OK, so we've had a very interesting discussion.

OK, so, but this was all, you know, motivation and

one exception.

Now let's talk about, you know, more, more about, uh,

more TV where countries have, um, uh, lower price just

in terms of definitions again, right, we, we, we already

talked about this.

So as I said before, change the pass by, by

definition this% change in the price in response to let's

say 1% change in the change, right.

Uh, what will be very confusing, that's why, you know,

I like this topic very much, but in some sense

I don't like TV very much.

You will see later we will talk about the papers,

and unfortunately they sometimes they use different kinds of prices

so you can imagine that you have a price.

The key export the product to the US.

Right, so you have kind of price here and then

you have price at the border here, right, so here

it was, let's say in pounds.

Here you already have price in dollars and so it's

always confusing is it the pastor into this price or

into this price.

And of course they're closely related in some sense, you

know, uh, you know, if, if, if the pastor into

this price, let's say, is 50%.

Then it must be, you know, -50% in this price,

but unfortunately different, different people use different, uh, definitions, right,

looking at different prices, and so it becomes confusing, but.

So usually, I mean, to me at least it's much

more intuitive to talk about consumer price, right, or you

know, the destination prices, how much that price changed in

response to exchange moments, but there will be some exceptions,

right?

So we'll have to talk about.

OK, so how is this passpirically in the data?

Well, people just run regressions like this one.

OK, so on the left hand side, if you put

the price of the product, I mean, it can be

also some price index, sometimes import price index, export price

index, sometimes even CPI.

I can see what price it is.

OK, and this is already in locks, small, small letters

pay for logs.

This is percent change, OK, and you regrets that on

the percent change in the exchange rate and quite often

people would not just contemporaneous exchange rate, but also lags.

Right.

And so then, then you can, I mean, you estimate

this regression, and then you can plot an increased response

function.

Alright, so, um.

How much price responses, right, so you can have a

picture like this.

So you know, after the first period you get short

run.

You get the exchange rate pass through in the short

run and then if this thing just rate you get,

you get exchange rate pass through in long run.

Right, you accumulate all these cos that's that's how you

can see the kind of like baseline inflation rate.

Yeah, I mean I mean this is right so people

often include CPI this year right some controls on production.

I mean, in the end that doesn't change results very

much because we know that exchange rates are disconnected from

mic fundamentals.

So I mean, you know, one naive, but not naive,

but one standard critique of these regressions that you know

people in the like to do, they would say that

all exchange rate isn't.

prices are so what what about needed variable bias, right?

And, and theoretically it's a valid argument, it's a valid

concern, but in practise we know that the exchanges are

not very much correlated with other micro variables.

They're largely disconnected and so in some sense you can

think of exchange rate as a fairly extortion as variable,

um, in this, uh, in this.

OK, good.

So what are the empirical estimates?

Well, OK, you can think of this beta coefficient, right,

this this exchange rate.

You can think usually or less regression, right?

This is correlation and then the deviations.

OK, I mean, this is very basic stuff, but just

to remind you, right, where less regression gives you slope

coefficient.

Which looks like this.

Right.

And so, you know, covariance is just correlation multiplied by

standard deviation, one variable by standard deviation of other variable,

right?

This is, I mean, this is the definition of correlation.

Uh, which means that, well, and this variance is just

standard deviation of exchange rate squared.

So one standard deviation goes away and we get correlation.

And the division of price.

The standard deviation of exchange rate here, right, so that

that that's how we get.

And so in the data it turns out that these

things vary a lot across countries, right?

They vary a lot, um, depending on the exchange rate

that we look at, but kind of the for developed

countries at least the standard numbers look like this.

The relations is pretty low, so it's about 11.

And both of these ratios, I mean, I, I think

I showed you the pictures, well, probably not, but the

terms, I mean, the, the, this as right, this kind

of import export price, these terms of trade, it's usually,

uh, much more stable than the exchange.

It's also reachable.

Um, OK, so this S, right?

In, in this particular example, S, this is terms of

trade, so this is import price.

Minus export price and both need to be defined in

the same variable in in the same currencies.

Now I remember I showed you, I think when we

talked about the invitations of of our baseline model, right?

So going back to our baseline model, so if, if

the lower one price falls, exchange rate pass through is

one, then what would be true about terms of trade

response to exchange rates.

Remembers.

OK, so let's go through an example.

Let's think about the price.

Let's let's express both prices in pounds again, as I

said, it doesn't matter in which currency, it just has,

has to be the same currency.

So in poundss price is the same, right?

That was our assumption.

Now what happens to the prices and depreciates.

Because foreign goods become more expensive, so.

Exactly, and it moves 1 to 1 with the exchange

rate, right?

So in our model actually in terms of trade was

just equal to the exchange rate, which means that the

relation has to be equal to one and the standard

has to be equal one that's exactly why this pass

through regression for terms of trade is informative.

So the model, baseline model assumes that.

In terms of trade coincide with the exchange rate.

Now in the data we see that pretty pretty large

so.

So the question is what explains this.

OK, so here is the list, right?

And I mean you were kind of ahead of me,

so you already mentioned some of some of potential explanations,

right?

So the first one, the most one is a personal

one.

So I will show you some, but let me just

quickly go through the intuition here so obviously you have

a good which is not, right?

You know, you produce this good in some sense there

is no reason why the price of that goods needs

to be the same.

The production might be different and also there is no,

no way to, uh, exploit this, right.

So one example would be a haircut, right?

So haircuts, the, the, the prices are completely different across

countries.

I mean those of you who come from, I guess

emerging to developing countries, you know very well that the

prices are there much, much lower than, but it's hard

to, right?

I mean if you are lucky if you go there

on vacations you can get a haircut very cheaply, but

you will probably not buy there just to get even

though the price is.

Um, so, so that's, that's an extreme example, right?

So then another thing, it's kind of related, but it's,

it's a bit different, right?

Distribution costs.

So even if you take a very standardised product, let's

say Coca-Cola, right, I suppose that even that you produce

Coca-Cola at the same factory, which is of course not

true because You know, different countries, and most countries have

their own, uh, factories, but even if you think of

one factory producing Coca-Cola and then you, you ship that

Coca-Cola to multiple destinations, even in that case, part of

the final price, right, will be kind of, you know,

you will be, will account for the local costs.

Right, it takes, you need to, to pay for transportation

costs.

You need to hire people who will sell this Coca-Cola

locally, right?

There will be a local store, retail store, so this

will be local distribution costs.

And again, it turns out that they can be quite

substantial.

So for some products, we will see that they offer

for a large fraction of total costs.

And again, right, so even though the costs were the

same at the factory.

The final cost of of alcohol, uh, sold in London,

let's say, and they can be very different.

Right.

So then another thing is that there are also retail

markups, so in principle again, different retailers in different countries

can set different prices.

We will see that immediately this channel is not very

strong.

And then this is, you know, what we will talk

spend most time on, I guess, will be about complementarities

and.

Um, So want to accept that consumers cannot exclude this

arbitration.

Across markets, right, you can even if you see that

the price of Coca-Cola is much lower in another country,

you will probably not go to that country just to

buy Coca-Cola.

So then it means that firms might have different prices,

right?

So what should kind of our, you know, uh, new

hypothesis?

Should we expect firms to, to, to set different prices

or not if they can do that, right, if, if

consumers cannot do charge then isn't it optimal in general

for firms to set different prices?

Why, uh, you just maximise the profit, right, right, there's

no reason why the same price will maximise the profit

and in general we know what firms like discrimination, right?

So ideally if they discriminate consumers.

Wouldn't even try to do that in some cases they

just don't have enough information much about right so there

is a big, big about that.

But in general firms like, uh, doing price discrimination, right,

uh, so if I, uh, I'm ready to pay more

for the same good as you, then I should pay

more.

Uh, and so, you know.

Uh, these geographical barriers, transportation barriers they provide opportunities for

discrimination.

So we will talk about that.

So then there is, I, I also put intermediate goods

because there will be an interesting interaction between these two

channels, but let me ask you first.

So in principle, if firms use foreign intermediate goods, right,

so going back to our example.

So we have UK here, we have US here, right?

You, you can exports some product to the US, but

imagine that to produce that product, it also needs some

intermediate goods coming from the US, right?

So some, so this is final good.

And this is intermediate.

So then does that, does, you know, without any other

things, would that create divisions from the low one price

or not?

So once again, will that, will that create divisions from

the low one price?

Right.

So in other words, so you have a factory here,

right?

So that factory uses this intermediate good, for intermediate good,

and then it's exported but also sells it locally.

So will the price be different?

I don't see why they, right, exactly, yeah, yeah, exactly.

I mean, let's costs in the sense that they are

kind of constant environment.

So once we take changes, that should not affect it

exactly.

So there's no reason why intermediate costs, sorry for intermediate

goods should create deviations from the lower price.

So lower price might hold, but what the public should

pass through.

Why did that affect the exchange rate, right?

So once I look at the price, so again, the

exercise is the following.

Let's say that the dollar depreciates by 1%.

Will it change the price of this imported goods from

you keep by 1% or less?

The US currency depreciated you so then, yeah, so yeah,

then the other country, uh, can more cheaply buy the

intermediate good.

So that they can Reduce it more cheaply than you

could before.

And so there might be less.

1%.

OK, very good, yes, yes, no, this was kind of

very detailed, very good.

I mean, well, you know, extreme cases, which helps me

always that imagine that you just ship these goods from

the US, which has stable price in dollars, then in

the UK you just repackage it.

You don't actually put any labour costs.

Local, you just say package it and then sell it

back to the US, right then obviously whatever happens to

the exchange rate, the price in dollars, we use, you

know, your marginal costs stay the same and so then

you can set the price also the same in dollars,

right?

So it means that the import price will not respond

to who's exchange rate at all.

Right, so there, there will be no deviation from the

low price, but at the same time, the exchange rate

pass through measured here will be 0 rather than 1.

Is this from the US perspective of importing the good,

right, right, so we just, we just see we have

customs data.

We measure how much the price in dollars changes in

response to depreciation and that is that in this limiting

case it will not at all, but we just discussed,

right?

I mean, you don't really need to go to that

extreme.

More generally, the pass through will be just lower than

one.

So now baseline model that we discussed in the first

weeks, we assume that you know all inputs, they are

UK inputs and they are relatively stable in pounds.

And so that's why this price stays constantly in pounds

and when exchange rate depreciates in dollars, the price increases

by 1% by the same.

Uh, proportionately to the exchange rate.

And here we will not have this 1 to 1

movement.

OK, and then finally, right, so this will be, you

know, this is.

So then there is additional friction, very popular in macro

in general, but also in international macro, namely sticky prices,

right?

So even in the limiting case where you know you

want to set the same price across all markets, there

are no distribution costs, no non-tradable component, but, but it

might still be the case that in the short run,

the price has deviated because you said this price is.

Uh, in different currencies, right?

So if you just set the price in the same

currency across all markets, then you know, cash rates don't

matter, right?

The price will stay the same across different markets.

But imagine that when you sell the goods in the

UK, you, you set the price in bonds.

When you set the price in the US, you set

the price in dollars, and then, you know, you don't

adjust the price very frequently, right?

Imagine that you adjust it only once a year, then.

You know, what the price, so the price, let's say

that here you set the price in 1 pound, right?

Here you set the price in dollars, which means that

as long as the normal exchange rate is moving, there

will be deviations from the price, right?

Clearly this is not the same price, so it will

fluctuate during the whole year.

Then maybe at the end of the year you update

the price, you ensure that at that moment the low

one price falls, but then again you keep prices constant,

you change moves, and you get, uh, or low one

price in the short term.

Right, so going back to our motivation we think about

the effects of monetary policy.

It's exactly what matters, right?

The currency of invoicing will play a very important role

because monetary policy only works while prices.

And we'll, we'll come back to that.

OK, and 11 final thing that we will not discuss,

this thing is actually much more popular in literature, but

in the international market, people don't really decide this.

So on top of sticky prices, you can have stick

quantities, and I, I, I personally think that this thing

is very much understated.

We have, you know, a huge literature about prices.

We have much less empirical evidence of sticky ages.

But if you think about this, you know, without prejudice,

imagine that you, you, you know, you think about this.

National trade, right?

You think about US firm shipping goes to the US,

they probably signed some contract with some wholesale seller in

the US, right?

And in some sense there is no reason to believe

that they specify the price, but they don't specify the

quantity.

But this is the assumption in all the industries that

the firms set the price and then then they say

we will, you know, we will produce, we will sell

you as many goods as you want at that price.

It can be very large.

It can be very low.

We just fix the price, but the quantity you can

if you choose the quantities, right?

But in practise, of course, these contracts, they usually specify

both price and quantity.

If you wanna, you know, sell something, you want to

sell these on like a futures contract, you've already paid

for it, um, and if this, and in the future

some unexpected shock to the currency exchange rate in principle,

you should, you should be, you should ignore it that

way.

So, OK, that's important.

That is very important.

So we will talk about this, right?

So quantity.

There are two different things, there are, I guess more

than two things.

One thing is that we price and quantity.

There's nothing about that, but because you will pay me,

you know, in another currency 3 months from now, I

don't know the exchange rate.

I might still have some kind of real losses.

I imagine that you promise to pay me in pesos,

but peso depreciates hugely.

So in dollars or in pounds, I will get much

less money.

So this is kind of pure hedging thing, financial thing,

and that can be undone potentially using some futures and

options, right?

So that's, that's.

I mean there is some sides which side of these

things, and I mean it doesn't seem to be super

important, especially for large exporters.

We know that most of international trade is done by

large firms, and these large firms, they usually have access

to one, and they can edge things.

That's distribution.

What we care much more about is the realistic prices

affecting the distribution, right?

So if I specify the price, but you choose the

quantity exposed, and then the exchange rate moves, and so

suddenly for you the price in your currency is much

lower, you will buy much more.

And that might change the allocation strategy.

That's what we mostly care about.

On the other hand, if our specified both the price

and the quantities, then no matter what happens to the

exchanges, that will not change the allegations.

You will only have this transfer, right, this distribution effect

which seems to be second order.

Um, so that's, yeah.

Uh, so I don't know, you know, I, I have

some evidence.

I talk to people, so it's true that sometimes firms

just set a price, and then even, you know, customers

from other countries, they just, you know, email them, contact

them, and then they tell them how many products they

want to buy, and then it's, it's kind of sticky

price quantity.

But if it's large forms, you know, it's up, then

this usually specify also quantities and it's not clear which

one is more sticky, right?

So.

It's surprising how little evidence we have on this, uh.

Yeah, I mean, yeah, I guess it's also true that

nowadays shipments happen quite quickly, right?

It doesn't take, you know, several years.

It's just a couple of months usually, even if you

think about goods shipped from China to the US, it

doesn't take that long time.

And also, in reality, of course.

There is, there are also uh inventors, right?

So in the sense that even if you wait for

goods to be shipped, you can already start selling the

goods and you can kind of accommodate to some extent

demand shocks by the by, you know, those are durable

goods like cars, right?

And so you can, you have some stock of them.

So I think in reality it's, it's reality is much

more complicated than our stylized.

Uh, it's not clear which of these ingredients, which of

thesescriptions dominates in practise, and I, I, I, I just

feel like we don't have enough empirical evidence.

I will show you some results, some estimates, but there's

clearly much more to be done.

OK, so any questions about this kind of big picture

is, is this clear?

OK, the rest would be much easier.

Now let's look at, you know, separate studies, uh, which

looked different channels in details.

So start with non-tradable and I will just show you

one picture.

I mean it's not very surprising, but you know, good

to know.

So this is the paper by.

They look at large devaluations, right, large depreciations, so it's

mostly about emerging economies.

It's an old papers, so its evidence comes mostly from

the 1990s and early 2000s.

So let's see.

So this is trade weighted exchange rate, right?

So this kind of this exogenous shock.

Uh let's start maybe it was Argentina.

Here's this, you know, this is exactly this famous episode

when Argentina abandoned a currency board, right, and the back,

so it has a huge depreciation, like 100%.

So what happened to to different price indices, right?

Import prices, you can see moved almost 1 to 1.

So this is very much in line with our baseline

model, right?

The path through into import prices is kind of 100%.

Again, we will see that in most cases that's not

the case, but this is an extreme event, right?

It's, it's a relatively small emerging market which has crazy

depreciation and so it's not so surprising that import prices

increase almost proportionately, OK.

Um, then if you, I mean, OK, there is an

export prices, I guess fortunate we don't even have them,

but let's focus on retail prices of tradable goods, OK,

so you can see that here rate in the past

is much lower, right, so it's, it's 50%.

It's still the same imported goods, right, traded goods, but

measured this price measured not at the border, at the

customs level, but instead they are measured at the retail

level.

OK, so we can see that prices respond much less.

So what, what can this?

What can explain the difference.

Why is it that the customers For the prices increased

less.

I mean, first of all, they don't specify that it's

exactly the same trades.

Maybe some of these tradeables are produced locally, but even

more importantly, as we said, right, even for tradable goods,

you know, you need to ship them, you need to

sell them, so there is still this domestic component in

the final price, right?

There's the distribution margin, so that will partly absorb the

shock.

OK, and then finally you can compare the response of

this price of tradable goods with the price of non-tradable

goods.

You can see that despite this huge depreciation, there is

only a moderate increase in the price of non-tradables, right?

And so once you combine the price of tradables at

the retail level with the price of non-tradables, you get

the CPI index, right?

And so you can imagine that CPI is somewhere here

to CPI and the final price, consumer price is even

lower.

OK, and you know this is kind of typical pattern,

right?

So for example, if you look at Brazil, the import

prices increased 1 to 1 with the exchange rate shock,

but again at the retail level, you see that the

prices increased less and, and the increase is much more

kind of crazy, right?

in sticky prices will help as well, right, uh, when

you go to supermarket price they adjusted, uh, sluggishly and

so it takes some time for this huge shock to

us through into prices.

OK.

OK, good.

So yeah, I, I, I, I hope this is very

good, right?

It's non-tradable is quite obvious.

Yeah, um, I was just thinking, are the non-tradable goods

are also very different types of goods like different elasticities.

Sure, sure, sure, but again that would look well elastic,

yeah.

I guess, right, um.

I mean, in some sense, right, if you have an

increase in price in in in cost, it doesn't really

matter.

I mean, if you mentioned that you have a shop

which increases the production of all goods by 11%.

In the end it doesn't matter what the the end

should increase by 1%, right?

So here kind of the same show for all imported

goods.

It's true that the matter in the short run, right

you have prices, but in the long run.

Usually doesn't matter very much.

To the first one usually these things drop out, but

yeah, um.

What, what will be true, right?

So what we will see is that, so if you

think about trade very standardised goods like commodities, right, like

oil and gas, so for them we expect to be

much closer to one than for manufactured goods because manufactured

goods, they can, you know, there is imperfect substitution.

There will be, and this is exactly where firms do

price in the market, right?

Well, for commodities there is almost no price in the

market.

So there.

OK, OK, let's make a 5 minute break and then

we will resume and continue.

It's a bit cold here you know for some reason

I there's no way to regulate this thing.

I wonder why.

the windows, I guess it's.

I'm fine.

I'm moving, but you are sitting.

Mhm OK.

Mhm.

the the.

Oh, to the US Mhm I So Yeah It's.

I.

That's not a time.

I I Do you.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So I was like.

Mhm She can.

I want to do time to.

Mhm.

Oh.

Mhm Did you OK we can.

OK, so here is the second mechanism, right, that we

already mentioned, uh, motivating, right, we'll look at systematics later

on, but it's, it's kind of impressive, no, this is

easy to find the line.

So if you look at the.

Right, uh, the composition of course of, uh, not even

reducing, right, but kind of delivering, uh, a bottle of

beer to final consumers, you can see that what we

usually mean by kind of production was in the narrow

sense, it's actually very small, right?

That's kind of small of yeast packaging labour.

Right.

And so that's, that's kind of that part.

That's production costs.

So then there are margins, we will call this markups,

right?

So there is brewer's margin, there is a distributor's margin

and retailer's margin, and you can see that together the

kind of 60%.

And then there are also taxes.

I mean they're actually pretty small here and then there's

shipping, right?

And so, right, it's only how much, well, yes.

something like 20%, right?

It would be 25% that that uh production was in

the narrow sense.

I mean, of course in an image that if we

talk about less durable goods, more betterable goods, if we

talk about, um, food there, it will be more difficult,

right?

If we think about, let's say cars, uh, or more

sophisticated products, durable goods, they're usually, uh, production account for

a larger fraction of final price.

OK, here, here's another paper by the person, so they

looked at, they have some data.

For a few countries.

And they look separate.

I mean those are investment goods.

Let's ignore them for now.

Those are personal consumption expenditures and they look only at

tradable goods.

OK, so we already excluded haircuts and restaurants, things like

that.

So what is the distribution margin here and it turns

out that it's actually quite substantial, right?

So for all these countries it's something about 40%.

If you take the average across tradable goods, uh, in

personal consumption, if you look at investment goods expectedly here,

uh, distribution margin is, is lower, right?

And the investment goods, uh.

Uh, then you can break this into even, you know,

5 components and as I said before, if you move

it perishable goods, mostly daily products, uh, meat, etc.

you can see that here it can be really high.

Right, um.

The distribution margins, so production is also costly, but delivering

these goods, selling them, and I presume also probably a

lot of these goods they legally perish right before being

sold, and I guess this is kind of also like,

uh, account with like a distribution margin.

Um, OK, so here, again, this is just all goods,

durable goods, non-durable goods.

Again, if you look at the wholesale margin and the

sale margin separately, right, so for all goods, some kind

of it's close to 50%, and then if you look

at, um, Yeah, OK, so durable goods, it's a kind

of 25, 25, right?

And for non-durable goods, it's really mostly retail margin which

which matters more.

But in the end, right, so those are the things

that are usually local.

So even if we export goods from the yes, it

will be local wholesalers and retailers that will transport and

sell the goods you can see their margins are really

high.

So in that sense it's not surprising even you know

for Coca-Cola or the standardised products, even if they are

produced at one location, the price might be very different

for.

OK, good.

So zooming in on the retail market, right, not just

margin, but more narrowly, so it's very nice and very

relatively early people like coconuts and others, right?

So they, they had one particular grocery chain.

I'm pretty sure it's, it must be easy to figure

out which one is that they never say it, say

it in the paper and they study the prices.

Those retail retail stores, uh, was in the US, right,

and in Canada.

Um, So you know this is one of those papers

where they don't have, you know, universal data for all

products.

This the all data comes from just one company, but

you know this is a case study which is still

quite informative.

OK, so how to read this picture?

So this is the this is the exchange rate, and

this is the difference in prices across two, OK, in

the US and in Canada.

So think of this as, I mean it's all price

deviation.

You can see that it's almost perfectly coordinated with the.

So in other words, it looks like privacy is almost

constant in dollars, right?

So it's constant in, um, in, in, uh, Canadian currency

and then so.

The price deviation together with the exchange rate.

So what is interesting here is that The markup, that

the retailers charge this retailers charges doesn't change very much.

So it stays constant in time.

It's true that if you have really large movements and

they change it, eventually markup will change across the countries,

but that's really, you know, it's relatively stable.

That OK, and then there's this this this interesting um.

Table, how to read this is I have to remind

myself, um.

OK, so what they do, they look at the, they

take the price, the final price of a particular product,

they look at the price of, you know, marginal cost

of that product, and they look also at the marginal

cost of that good, the same good, but in other

stores.

OK, and so what they can do, they can do

it within the country and across the country.

So let me see, um.

Right.

OK, so let's, let's focus on first call it's with

the horizon.

So if you look, you, you, you take the prize,

you regress it on the um.

On the marginal costs, OK, so you get this number,

but then suppose you look at the costs of the

same good, but in so it's in the US, right?

So this is.

Uh, so you take the price of the goods over

here, right?

You can regress on the marginal cost of producing the

goods on the cost of the goods and clothes in

Canada, or you can look at the price, the cost

of that good on the other side of the border,

right, in the US.

Yeah, I hope I'm sure the border is here, right?

So all you and you can regress this, uh, price

on, on this Martian cost.

And so what is interesting is if you regress this

on the cost of that good on the other side

of the border, even though this story is very close

to the border, you get zero coefficient.

Right, so in other words, the, you know, you, you

see that the prices, price of the good fluctuates on

the other side of the border, but you don't change

your price at all in Canada.

Well, for example, if you look, if you look at

the price in the US, if you look at the

price of this of the same good in the stores

close by, there is some effects on your price.

Interestingly, and that's kind of more extreme version, so even

if you are, if you're in Canada.

You should just use this picture so it will be

easy so you look at the price, let's say let

me choose some other store.

Let me see, here's the store in in Canada, right?

We look at the price of that hood in Canada.

We, we look at how much price changes in the

store across the border.

And so it turns out that even though price might

might locate a lot here, I will not change my

prices in Canada.

So the border kind of fully, you know, uh, segments

these two markets.

Not surprisingly, if some other stores in Canada change their

price, I will change my price as well.

But it is perhaps more surprising that even if I'm

very far away, you know, supermarket in Canada changes its

press, you will still see some effects of the press.

So this is the last part of the table, right.

You do respond to these shows.

Well, you don't respond to this.

So this is really kind of the border effect, right?

This shows that price, price, you know, the the there

is strong simulation, uh, of markets, uh, in the US

and in Canada.

Does it make sense?

OK, can you maybe explain the last this last, uh,

so what I'm saying is that you have a price

here and you look at the price of that good

somewhere in Canada, but far away, far away.

It turns out that you, you will still respond somewhat

to to change in prices that far away, even though

you don't respond to a very close by super price

in the supermarket very close by on the other side

of the border.

That's.

And I think it's just in fact.

Right.

OK, good.

So, so I think so far it was just, you

know, uh, interesting facts, but I, uh, pretty into it.

Now comes the most interesting thing, and this should be,

you know, the progress that has been done, uh, in

the last less than 10 years.

Um, OK, so we will need some definitions, right?

What is the price?

think of flexible price keys.

So this is the price of good I.

This is the marginal cost, and this is the markup,

right?

So effectively this is just the mark.

So what can the laws.

Can take walks and then we can write this as

a sound because we are interested in bathroom and we

said that the bathroom is percentage change in the price,

right, so it's more convenient to to work with both.

Low price is equal to log markup plus uh.

Now it turns out it doesn't.

The question that we are interested in is how much

the price of the good changes when we change the

exchange rate.

And just in the accounting sense.

Right, so, so it should look like this.

So the exchange rate increases, that changes marginal costs of

the good, and by the way, it may be local,

locally produced goods.

It can be imported goods.

So again is very general, right?

So this thing.

This term is relatively easy to pin down, right?

So what would be the factors which determine how much

marginal cost it is found in, uh, in this possible,

uh, exchange rate movements.

Exactly right, so if it's, you know, how much of

foreign inputs you use will determine the effect of a

change on the margin.

So that, that's just the production side, uh, of the

economy.

So that's easy to pin down now.

The, the more interesting part is this one, right?

How much do firms change their markups in response to

the exchange rate movements.

And so it turns out that even though of course

you know you can write completely different models, it turns

out that it's relatively standard prediction of the model.

So there is very special cases, you know, CES demand

constant lais of substitution demand.

This is the most standard assumption that people use in

macro literature.

Then markup is just constant, which means that it doesn't

respond to.

But this is really.

So once you deviate from serious demand, once you write

slightly more general models, it turns out that you have

prediction that this markup.

It is a function of your relative price, so of

your price relative to prices of competitors, price index in

this economy.

In the graph with the markup and fluctuations in the

exchange rate, uh, didn't that show that markup remained constant

and was more like CES retailers, for retailers, you can

approximate, right?

But once we look at um at prices right so

that that turns out to be quite approximation.

Yeah, well, that's, that's a good point.

OK, so how does it work, right?

So why is it that the markup depends on this

thing?

retailers, right?

That's just what we need.

Why is that?

Yeah, I'm not sure, to be honest, this is a

good question, um.

Yeah, sure.

Uh, Yeah, so yeah, you will, I mean, I, let,

let's discuss the story behind this and why that works

for manufacturers.

The manufacturing sector, maybe you will tell me, maybe we

can think why it doesn't, the story doesn't work for,

but I'm not sure really.

Um, OK, so why is it that the markup depends

on, you know, the minus?

So, so in the large class of models, what really

happens is that markup depends on firm's market share.

Right, and so firms which have larger market share, they

usually charge a higher markup.

Right, they're kind of, you know, I mean, it's not

really mon monopolies, but it's something like that, right?

So the larger market share you have, the more, uh,

the higher mark you will set, but the market share

itself depends on the, on your price relative to price

of competitors.

Right?

And so, you know, if you have relatively high price,

then your mark your market share will be lower and

the markup that you will set will be smaller.

OK, so actually if you're right, you know, if, I

mean, I will not try to do that because usually

I get into troubles.

it's just very hard to, to, to show, but actually

even with linear demand you can usually see these effects,

right?

I mean, OK, so in levels I, I, I guess

I can do this.

I mean with with exchange rate pass through, I, I

usually get in trouble, but in terms of just level

of market, which would be easier, right?

So this is demand curve.

You have your own price.

This is, um, quantities.

Right, and so If you have low marginal costs, imagine

that you have zero marginal costs, right, then this is

marginal revenue in the future that you know very well,

right?

So intersection of marginal revenue with marginal costs determines the

optimal quantity, right, and this will be your optimal price.

So you can see this whole thing is kind of

your, uh, your marker right in levels in logs everything

in levels here, right?

But this is, yeah, so maybe it's, it's kind of,

it's not a small letter, it's big letter P I.

But you can see a huge markup, right?

So once you, you know, imagine that your marginal cost

shift up for some reason, right, so imagine that they

look like this now.

So again, intersection of marginal costs with marginal revenues will

give you the optimal quantity.

Now your optimal price will be here and you can

see that your markup became smaller.

And also your quantities become smaller, right?

You move from here to here.

So you can see that, you know, as firms which

are less, less productive, so marginal costs are higher, means

that they will charge higher price.

Which means that their market share will decrease.

Which means in equilibrium, you can see that also their

markups will decrease.

Right, I mean, here in logs, but with linear demand,

it's easy to see that in levels.

And so, right, I mean, linear demand is not serious

demand, so that's why we have this effect.

It turns out that it's kind of a property of

much more general class of demand functions.

In some sense, it turns out that even with CES

demand you can get this result.

You just need to.

from the case of monopol competition.

So if you have something like more competition or competition,

then you can even with CSD you will also get

the same result.

So so that's why I'm saying it's kind of fairly

general result while this one is really nini.

OK, good.

So let me erase this if you don't mind because

I need space.

So even this structure.

Even this structure right now, we can go back to

our equation.

Right, so then, you know, if you take kind of

full differential, right, so what is, how much does the

markup change in response to change in prices, right, what,

you know, uh, we just need to take derivative, right?

We need to take derivative Y and then we get

change in PI minus minus.

OK, and this derivative, because this is decreasing function, this

will be, you know, this will be some negative number

that gamma I minus gammai.

OK, so that that's a crucial step.

Does it make sense?

This is just, you know, in other words, again, we,

we will use datas, right, but for small changes, change

in markup is proportionate to the change in the relative

price multiplied by this elasticity of markup.

Right, so even that you know this is in locks,

these prices are in locks as well, so he is

really mark with respect to the price.

I mean sometimes people call this super elasticity of demand,

but I mean we don't really need this terminology.

OK, so let me now plug it back here, right,

so let's see what we get.

Let's forget about the exchange rate for a second, just,

you know, to, to simplify.

So we have change in prices equal to change in

markups, plus change in marginal costs.

But this change markup.

The proportion of the change in the relative price.

So let's let's put, you know, this term on the

left hand side, right, because it's the same one, it's

delta PI.

So we put on the left hand side, we get

1 plus gammai.

Here we have gamma I.

Well that's really the.

And then finally Expressing change in price.

Let me start with modular costs.

And so we get expression.

Ah, so the gold here, it's not go there it's

better I hope.

OK, good.

So, so you can see that the change in price

is a weighted average of price competitors and prices, uh,

and marginal cost, right?

So in some sense, if I know this as I

I, you can notice that this is just 1 minus

1, right?

The sum of these two things give you exactly one.

So that's that's a very beautiful expression, right, and so.

You know this elasticity, how much your markup responds to

prices just determines what weight you put on the prices

of competitors versus the price versus your own marginal cost.

So kind of going back to CESKs, right, the markup

is constant, it means that is 0, it means that

alpha is zero.

It means that this coefficient becomes 1, so your price

only depends on your marginal cost, your price moves 1

to 1 with the marginal cost.

Uh, So what I mean, what does this has, has

to do with um low one price deviations with exchange

rate?

Well, you can immediately see that imagine you have one

product which has exactly the same marginal cost, but it

is sold in different markets.

Right, and firms that different potentially at different prices across

these markets.

You can see that there might be low in price

deviations depending on the competitive prices, right?

So if I sell, sell the same good, but let's

say I, I exported to Venezuela, which is a relatively

poor country, right, and there I face competition with local

firms which have very low prices, then I will have

to decrease my price as well.

On the other hand, if I ship my good to

Switzerland, which has very high prices, the local firms that

have very high prices, then I will set higher prices

as well, right?

So in other words, kind of going back here, even

though my marginal quota are the same when I sell

in all these markets, I will set very different.

OK, so that's right, but then of course I can

now divide all these terms by exchange rate.

And so now we can think about go back to

our exchange rate pass through, right?

Uh, so this is the exchange rate pass through how

much might want to change the movements.

This is the effectively, right, the exchange pass through into

competitor prices.

How, how they, how much they want to change the

movements, right?

And so, OK, so what will determine this thing in

equilibrium will be the main factors.

Uh reading I mean, we already said, right, so here

what matters is how, how many, how much foreign intermediate

goods I use right so sometimes we will know this

was TI, so this is the share of 4 intermediates

used in production, right?

But what about this?

The response of competitors' prices to change rate will be

the first order that said.

Exactly right, whether those are local firms which are likely

to have, you know, to be less responsible to change

when those are also foreign firms, they also export to

the market, then they will be much more sensitive to

exactly, very good.

OK, so any questions about this expression?

OK, so this is, you know, we kind of started

with the accounting framework, but I think it's, it's quite

illuminating.

Um, OK, so.

There are, there are now already 3 papers written by

the same team by Mary Amitty, Ole Shoki, and Joseph

Koening, so they wrote, uh, several papers where they use

the same data set, right?

They have, they had some good connections at the Central

Bank of Belgium, uh, and that, you know, and in

that data set they can see all, all shipments between

all firms within Belgium, and they can also see.

You know, all imports and all experts and everything at

the firm level.

So my understanding, the only reason this exists is because,

uh, it is used to collect uh value added tax.

you really need to know how much intermediates were used

in production so that you can subtract that from revenues

and calculate value added.

And so then you know they have kind of uh

universal coverage for orders.

So it's interesting for the US and I think that

there is no such data because in the US you

don't really use VAT, right?

It's mostly sales tax which is computed in a different

way.

OK, so first of all, just in terms of style

aspects, it turns out I mean Belgium is a small

country, right, a small open economy, so it's maybe not

so surprising that they have a lot of exporters in

general and a lot of exporting firms.

Well it's interesting that also these exporters, they are also,

uh, importers.

Right, so in other words, for if we think about

exporting firms, for them, a large fraction of their, you

know, inputs, they come from abroad, and so there will

be, you know, substantial.

So how can we see this here?

OK, so you will look at all exporters, right?

So you know, 23%, 24% of all firms are exporters,

and out of this 24%, 78% are also importers, the

vast majority.

Right, that's, that's already suggests that, you know, just because

of that.

So even if I equals 0, right, and firms just

said price is equal to their marginal cost, the marginal

cost will be sensitive to exchange rate movements.

So the path through will not be equal to 1

and our standard model.

OK, so here's the regression which effectively, you know, kind

of tests this equation.

This is.

I always get confused.

I really, I almost hate.

I mean, Oleg is my co-author, but I really hate

this.

I mean, it's a very nice paper, very interesting, but

I mean they wrote these two papers and the exchange

rate pass through is exactly the opposite things in these

two papers.

So how am I supposed to teach this?

OK, let's see.

So this is, this here they look at export prices,

producer prices.

OK, so just to help myself.

Uh, this is Belgium.

Right.

And so this is export prices and we measure this

in euros, OK.

I think this is how So then effectively what they

do, right, they take this equation that we just started

here and they kind of multiply all terms by the

exchange rate, right, so you have change in price per

I mean by 1 minus 5.

PI right, this is kind of sensitivity of your margins,

of course.

And And then you have I I multiplied by, you

know, OK, we can do some additional letter here uh

let me call this not.

So yeah, we will not use this, but let me

go with data, for example.

And there's here.

And this is all multiplied by data change.

There's a change in the exchange rate as the exchange

rate moves, it has some effects on your marginal cost.

It has some effect on price of Americas, and this

firm has kind of puts different weight on these things,

right, and it determines how much it changes its price.

OK, and so, but in the end, I mean they

show many tables, regression tables, but what we will mostly

look at just two different types of firms.

So VI is relatively easy to measure in the data,

right?

Even the data set, they can see for each individual

firm how much of their inputs comes from abroad.

That will be a kind of proxy for GI, right?

And so there will be low import intensity firms and

high import intensity firms.

That's easy.

And, and, and right, kind of keeping out the parameters

also we say that as CI goes up, that will

change the past.

We will open in a second, you know, in which

direction.

Now, what about I for I?

How can we measure I for I.

That's much more problematic, right?

So what was alpha I again it's some function, you

know, of these gammas.

So it turns out again in this large class of

models that larger firms will have larger I5.

Larger firms put more weight on the price of.

So that's much, much harder to explain.

I mean, I showed you the picture for markup, but

why is it the case when you change, let's say

your marginal costs increase?

Why is it the case that large firms will not

respond very much, right?

So for them this this thing will below while small

firms get higher, even in the senior case it's hard

to see.

OK, but that's, you know, small firms, they behave as

if they, they face constant, constant demand.

While larger firms, they, you know, their price affects kind

of this aggregate, um, price index in a sense, and

so they, they, they, they take into account how much

their market share changes in response to price movements and

so they put higher weight on the price of companies.

OK so unfortunately, you know.

I know how to derive it, uh, but it's just,

you know, it's complicated man.

It's not, uh, unequal intuition, I'm afraid, but it turns

out to be true in a large class of models.

OK, and so what they're going to do in all

the studies, they take, they say that this alpha I

is a function of firm's market share.

Right, and then they kind of replaces I thought I

was.

Market shares and again the prediction is that larger firms

will be more deeper right than small firms.

OK, OK, so, so any questions about this?

Does this make sense?

So you can try, OK, so I try, I tried

to do it before, didn't work very well, but you

can try to make these features.

You increase costs by the same amount, but for large

firms, right, starting with low marginal costs and then starting

from high marginal cost, and you might try to see

how much prices they.

For now, given that this is a price in euros,

right, this is a surprise, how should we respond to

the change this and peace.

So let's start with low importing and high import, right?

So, so firms which have higher share of imports.

So the price in euro should respond more.

Right.

In other words, if you imagine the case where you

don't use any foreign intermediates, only local intermediates, and the

price of these local intermediates, you know, their, their price

equals relatively stable in euros, then there should be kind

of zero pass through, right in the euro price.

So that's exactly what they find, right?

They find that this pass through is higher for firms

which use more for intermediates.

Now the second thing is, as we said, this kind

of market share, right?

And so let's start with low that this EI is

just 0, then we can forget about this term.

So as long as there is non-zero, right, then it

will be firms which have higher market share.

They will This want more right with the exchange rate

movements.

So again, the way to understand this, think of start

from this corner, think of a firm which is small,

doesn't use any volume in the, but it's also small.

It puts zero weight on prices, then it will not

respond to change of movements at all.

And then there's a large firm which looks at the

competitors, and some of these competitors, they are foreign firms,

right, which respond to exchange rate movements.

So then this firm will have a higher pass rate.

It will respond to exchange rate movements.

So that's exactly, you know, what explains the difference.

And then, of course, once you combine intermediate and you

also combine large market share, you will get even higher.

OK, so that's, I think.

Yeah I mean uh.

It's, it's a very highly cited paper, but actually I

personally like their second paper much more.

I mean, it's published in the, you know, it's, it's,

I mean both journals are top 5 journals, but ER

kind of the top one, that is number 5 maybe,

but it's still very good, but I actually I think

it's much, much more interesting and much meaner exercise.

So what they do in the second paper?

It's slightly different.

So their goal here is effectively to estimate this parameter,

uh, alphai.

So they want to show to estimate it for for

small firms versus large firms.

And so the way they do they do it, they

um.

Um, yeah, OK, so let me focus on this table,

right?

So effectively what they want to do, they want to

run regression based on this, uh, this equation.

Right, so as we said before.

OK, so you have a question which looks like this.

Let me just add error term here.

This usually comes from some demand shocks which also drive

the prices.

Now, suppose you want to estimate this coefficient I for

I.

It's an interesting parameter, right?

It, it, it determines how much, you know, complement that

it is in price stating how much you put weight

on the price of competitors.

It turns out that, you know, uh, it's one of

these cases where people start working on this in, in

open economy first and now it goes in, in, um,

in those.

turns out that if you estimate this parameter, then you

can kind of back out also under some forms you

can back out markups, and that's an interesting question just

because you know markups they create some mislocation in the

closed economy.

So it's a big, big topic even for a closed

economy.

So it's kind of good to know the value of

this.

So, but then how can we estimate this just looking

at this regression?

What is the problem?

I mean, suppose, I mean, there are two problems here.

Why, why is it hard to just, you know?

A run oil less regression.

It was the time.

There are two points.

1 may be less important, more important, but.

Both are.

So that time was less important.

The less important is that you will be marginal cost,

right?

So what you can compute in the data is average

costs, right?

You just combine all spendings on labour, all spendings on

intermediate inputs, and then you can divide it by the

output and you get an average cost.

So in other words, what you see, you see some

noisy proxy for margins, but there's a lot of noise.

And as we know that if you regress, you know,

prices on some disor that noisy measure, then you will

have aeration right this will be attenuated towards zero.

That's kind of classical, uh, result about measurement error in

the metrics.

And like if we run the regression.

Like indulgence because the shots.

Uh, that's right, but tell me what will be will

be.

Um, right.

So, so in this demand from, right, or which one?

Right, so this is also what is called, I think,

reflection problem, right, they have this much or.

Yeah, pretty much, that will, that will force me to

change my price.

But you know, there are a lot of other firms.

They have similar equation, but they are increasing my price

will be increasing competitive price, and so they will start

increasing their prices and once they increase their price for

me as well, the, you know, the, the price caps

will increase, right?

That's why they will force me to increase prices, oh,

which means that quite much of will be eventually correlates

with this one here.

Right, that's, that's the problem, and of course I mean

you, there's lots of correlation between these two things, right?

I mean.

If I also use intermediate goods from other firms, can

affect my margin it will be all these correlations which

will bias the estimates.

This is a special case equation.

Yes, yes, yes, right, the kind of reflection problem, yeah,

you have kind of a system of equations and all

these things are correlate exactly.

Then how can you kind of, you know, fill the

burst with one stone?

How can we solve both the, uh, measurement error problem

and also endogeneity problem?

Well, we need an instrument, IV.

Uh, so we need a good insight.

We, we need these variation, the margin of costs of

competitors, right, which is uncorrelated with these demands, and what,

what is kind of I think is the beautiful idea

of this paper is that we can use exchange rates

because exchange rates we believe in this exchange rate disconnect,

right?

They are mostly to the synthetic.

OK, now, how can we can I mean the only

issue is that we can't just take one exchange rate,

right, because one exchange rate for all firms, then you

know, you, you can't use one instrument for prices and

margin loss of individual firms.

So we need some uh firm level variation in the

instrument.

So how can we construct, um, more specific instrumental variable.

So let's start with this thing.

That's kind of goes, you know, it's closely relates to

what we discussed before, right?

So the nice thing is that firms, different firms do

use different number of, uh, imported inputs, and also they

usually source these inputs from different parts.

It's not just on exchange rate.

There are a lot of bilateral exchange rates if you

bet yours, but they import inputs from different countries.

And so what you can do, you can take, you

know, I guess confirm I will be inputs from shape.

Right, you can take the share of inputs, uh, coming

from multiplied by the exchange rate between euro and J

right and then you kind of aggregate this across all,

uh, foreign inputs and you get kind of weighted average

exchange rate specific to I and that will be an

instrument, right.

Um, OK, so if this is clear, then tell me

what about this term here.

I mean, we still need another instrument, right?

I mean, this thing is still ering us and, and

we can't use the same instrument, we need another instrument

for this one.

What can we do?

share of.

Basically the same, right, so even this movement for each

individual firm, let me call it some other variable, I

don't know, X, right, let me call this XI.

What I can do, I can now.

Take this instant for each individual from J.

Right, now look at the share of firm G in

the same market.

It's not gamma gamma G, and then I aggregate across

all these competing firms.

Right?

So this will be, you know, this will be instrument

to the margin was a firms G and given that

different firms have different market shares right here, I can

contact this instrument.

And again, it will be different.

I will be I because again as I take the

whole market.

I exclude her I and then I look at the

remaining part of the market and and look at the

market shares of of this individual person.

Oh OK, so that will give me an instrument and

I have ID now for both parts and competitors.

OK, so I think that's actually it's really beautiful thing

and macro is usually very hard to come up with

some instruments.

I think the exchange.

It's really beautiful.

And what is even more surprising, I mean, I never

understood how why it always works, but somehow this team

of all, you know, it's.

main things will go wrong, but you know, they could

just get very noisy estimates, but somehow they still get

significant estimates.

I mean they're not the standard that the errors are

still quite large, but I think, you know, we're still

we learn something.

So they estimate this regression separately for small firms and

for large firms, and you can see what I told

you before, right?

So it turns out that that for for small firms.

They put almost, you know, 1 weight of 1 on

the marginal costs and zero weight on the price of

competitors.

Right, so that's exactly, you know.

As if they have if they have CSR for small

firms that provides a good approximation.

But once you look at large firms, right, and most

of international trade is done by large firms, you can

see it's kind of fifty-fifty, right?

Even standard errors, I think we can call it fifty-fifty,

right?

They put half weight on them all marginal cost, but

also very large weight on the price of competitors.

OK, good.

Any questions about this?

Does it make sense?

OK, so then 11 last thing that I want to

do today.

Um, let's now, we, we kind of looked at individual

firms, right?

And that was what was relevant when we wanted to,

um, Estimate, we estimate individual pass through and individual, you

know, this alpha, etc but now in the end, right,

we want to compute aggregate effects, we want to aggregate

the pass through of across different firms.

So what we're going to do, again, we're going to

use the same equation, right?

So for individual firm, we still have this expression.

And then, OK, so we call this delta, right?

We said this is, let's call it delta.

Um, And again going back to stylized, moreover, there's only

one exchange rate for all firms.

Now, what about this data?

Well, by definition, right, this is how much aggregate price

changes in response to movements and exchange rate.

But this is just right.

We take individual changes in prices.

And then we're multiply it by market shares of these

firms, so we just need to take average we average

across all firms, right?

So this gamma I again this is market share.

Of I And so effectively we just have a system

of equations.

For each individual firm, how much it changes price depends

on aggregate pass through, but the aggregate pass through, of

course, depends on individual pathro.

We just need to solve the system of equations.

Well, OK, let's do this, right?

So, let me, so just using this definition, they'll take

in.

Delta Yeah I divided by the exchange rate.

Multiplied by gamma.

Yeah, so I will now plug in this expression that

we have here.

And so I use this definition then I, I, I

replaced this with the expression there.

So we have right we have data on the left

hand side, we have data on the right hand side.

We just need to solve the situation.

OK, so let's see, let me just maybe write one

more time this thing, so.

I I.

1 minus 1 and then we have this terms of

data doesn't depend on I, right, because it's aggregate, so

I can take it out of the summation.

And then we have gamma I eye for eye here.

And time some across all right.

OK, just a couple of manipulations.

So let me start with this.

So what is this?

So right, this is those are market shares multiplied by

individual alpha Is so this is what.

Do you, yeah.

Some kind of average, right, trade weighted or market, market

weighted, uh, average alpha in this market.

So let me just know this this average alpha.

So then I can put it on the left-hand side.

Divide by this, right, and we get 1 minus alpha

R, and then we still have this expression here.

OK, so we're running out of time.

Uh, OK, so let, OK, so this is the expression.

One more manipulation.

I will subtract average the What is average view?

Well, let's defined in the same way, right?

The bar is just.

Gamma II and then I will also add GR like

this.

OK, so this is, you know, let me, so what

you can show then that this will be equal to

phi up a bar.

I think minus.

Sure.

Um, OK, so now right what I effectively did here.

Here I also subtracted and added alpha Apple bar, and

then I mean I skipped a couple of steps because

we're running out of time, but please check that at

home and also in the programme that you will have

to do it manually again.

So what we get eventually that this kind of data.

It depends on the fee up a bar.

The average, um, pass through of exchange rate into marginal

firms.

But it also depends on this extra term.

And if you look at this term kind of closely,

right, I mean, look at these two brackets, does that

remind you something?

And you subtract covariance exactly right so it's kind of

mark share weighted covariance of alpha I and PI right

OK so.

Right, we get weighted covariance between alpha I and CI.

Divided by this term here, so this is.

Weighted by by gammas.

OK, so I mean this part should be very intuitive,

right?

It it just reflects again different firms in the market

and they have a different, uh, share of foreign inputs.

The interesting additional effect comes from here.

It turns out that what matters is, you know, whether

it's whether the firms who use a lot of intermediate

foreign intermediate goods, whether they also have high high weight

on price or low weight, OK.

And OK, so since we're running out, let's discuss that

on the intuition because the problem will be also about

that.

But meanwhile you can also think about this and try

to understand what is going on.

One interesting case, right, that I mean if cover is

0, then we just get this one, but if is

not 0, then we can have high.

OK, good.

I mean, in general we are almost done with this,

so we'll finish a couple of slides next time I'm

done.

Your office hours are an hour.

Yes, yes, yeah.

Lecture 18:

OK.

And Yeah, Yeah.

OK.

So let's see where we stopped last time.

OK, somewhere here, right.

Mhm.

OK, good.

Um.

So you know we talked about this, uh, on Monday,

uh, but that was just an example right that in

the problem set.

So those are the actual numbers for Belgian economy.

So it's still the same paper that we discussed, you

know, there are two papers, right, but the, by, by

the same quarters.

I mean it's and Koenigs and so their second paper

review of economic studies, um, so right, this is the

numbers that we get the.

For the teaching old firms into foreign firms, small firms,

local small firms, large firms, right?

They estimate the pass.

They estimate how sensitive the marginal costs uh to, uh,

exchange rate movements, and this is what they get, right,

um, so when exchange rate.

Depreciates.

Let's say, right, we see that local small firms, they're

not very sensitive their, their courses are not very sensitive

because they don't use much foreign intermedis.

You can see that their markers almost don't change, right?

And this is because there are no strategicarities and prices

for these forms, right?

So effectively the markup is just constant.

So when the marginal cost increase, they just move their

price proportionally.

And then at a foreign first we supposed to use

a lot of foreign inputs, right, but we also have

stronger humanarities and Brexit.

And you can see that the exchange rate depreciates, the

marks actually decrease.

So why is that?

What is the intuition just to make sure that we're

all on the same page, right?

So exchange rate depreciates your depreciates.

So why do these firms decrease their markup?

So if they didn't keep their markups, right?

I suppose then the prices would move proportionately with their

margin of course.

So what would happen then?

Their prices would be higher than other firms, so they

would lose business and they don't like the price.

They want their prices not be too much from price

of competitors.

So what they do, right, they deprease the price by

GPs in markets exactly.

And then finally there are large firms which have relatively,

you know, somewhere between small firms and foreign firms in

terms of using foreign imports.

They are also sensitive to um uh price of competitors

and we see that they decrease their markers, right?

Uh, I mean, is it obvious by the way, is

it obvious that they should, they should decrease their markups,

KP that they might actually increase their markers.

What are the forces.

So on the one hand, right?

Their marginal costs increase, so they want to increase their

price, and they do increase their price, right?

But then they look at the price of campaign first,

right?

They, they see on the one hand there are some

local firms which don't change their prices.

And that pushes them to them to decrease the markups.

In principle, there are also these importers, right, foreign firms

which increase their prices here and so they could principle

these markets because of that, but we see that, you

know, kind of these, these guys dominate and so eventually

they decrease their markets, right?

And then you can kind of aggregate all these numbers,

right, combine large, small, and foreign firms, and eventually this

is what you get, right, so that.

There is direct effect this up of bar, right?

But then the, the aggregate effect on prices is slightly

smaller, right?

Well, I mean slightly low sizes how much is that

like 30% smaller, right, uh, because firms adjust their markets.

Right, in other words, again, if I, uh, were the

same for all firms, then we know that the aggregate

actually be the same as, uh, average, uh, marginal cost,

right, and this discrepancy, it derives from the fact that,

um, firms have different, uh, sensitivity to price of competitors.

In other words, right, these guys don't change their markups.

Well these ones adjust their markups, and so it's the

result we see that markups decrease.

Again, this is all in response to exchange rate depreciation,

right?

If the euro appreciated, you will get the same effects

but with the opposite sides.

Right.

OK, good.

Any questions about this about?

Complementarities and price I think, OK, good.

So then the very last piece, right, the, the last

explanation to incomplete um exchange rate pass through.

Um, sticky prices.

OK, so if you think about this, OK, let me

show you the whole slide and we can discuss, right?

There's a lot of information here.

So if you think about this, right, when we talk

about closed economy, we of course worry about the price

of flexible stick because that.

Determines whether monetary policy, monetary shocks have an effect on

real allocation, but this is, you know, in some sense

this is one dimensional object, right sticky flexible, and then

there's continuum, uh, contipossibilities in between, but it's one dimension

in open economy.

There is the second dimension in which currency prices are

stickier, right?

So if they're stickier, then in which currency, and it

turns out that there are many possibilities here, right, um,

so.

We talked briefly about this, right?

So the benchmark that kind of the standard assumption with

which the whole started is PCP producer currency pricing.

OK, this is when prices are sticky in the currency

of the producer in the currency of the exporter, think

about, let's say UK exporting to euro area.

Right, so under PCP.

This price should be sticky in parts.

And this was an complete assumption that we used in

our baseline model, right, when we said that there's expenditure

switching, we assumed that prices stay constant in the in

the currency of a producer and as a result, when

the changer depreciates, consumers in the destination country, they see

that prices, uh, well, if depreciates for their prices, uh,

in euros go down, right.

So You know, vice versa.

He will have PC if you have PCP, then this

prices will be see in yours.

OK, so, but this is just one possibility.

The is what is called.

Yeah let me maybe use just the same.

So.

So if, so what is the LCP?

Well, LCP means that prices are sticking in the currency

of buyers, right, local currency pricing.

So then, OK, again we will look at this trade

and under LCP the price is stick which currency.

In Europe exactly.

And symmetrically errors.

So, um, symmetrically if we talk about imports in the

key from Euro zone, then this price sticky inbounds.

Right?

OK, so we will talk about this later on about

policy implications, but I mean, even partial equilibrium, you can

see already that things will be very different, right?

So if you think about the UK exporting goods to

the euro area and price that stick in euros, OK,

suppose we depreciate pound, right, suppose somehow Bank of England

depreciates pound.

What will be an effect on UK exports.

In terms of quantities, right, because usually in in the

end, we care about quantities mostly.

So pound depreciates against the euro, but consumers, when they

decide whether to buy UK goods or to buy local

goods, Eurozone goods, they look at prices in euros, right,

and nothing really changes for them.

Pound depreciated, but they see the same price, uh, in

euros under LCP, right, because they sticky in euros, and

so there will be no expenditure switching in this case.

Right, and symmetrically here.

So again, prices in the currency of the consumer, they

don't change.

So households don't change the decision between buying local goods

and foreign goods.

Right, so it's an extreme opposite of PCP where you

completely kill uh expenditure switching.

Right.

And then finally, so there is kind of what is

called vehicle currency pricing, and there's a special case, dollar

or dominant currency pricing.

OK, so GCP.

So this is the case when both you know exports

from the UK to Euro euro area, but also in

the opposite direction, the prices is the key in third

currency, currency, and under TCP this is dollar, right?

Prices stay constant in dollars.

I mean, it might, it might sound counterintuitive.

Why would, you know, uh, firms and households where they

trade, uh, and they are from the from the euro

area, why would they use dollars?

But it turns out that that's quite common.

I mean, maybe in the it's not that common, but

again, I would say it's something like 20-30%, uh, of

trade is invested in dollars.

But if you look at trade between, let's say Brazil

and Argentina, it, it is, it is dominated by the

dollar.

And even if you think about developed countries like Japan,

uh, and South Korea when they trade with the other,

they use a non-trivial, um, service indoors, OK?

I will show you some more numbers later on, OK,

uh.

I mean, also you can already guess that under TCP,

the dollar exchange rate will matter quite a lot, right?

So even though, you know, you know, we talk about

depreciation of the pound of the euro, but in the

end it will be the US market policy and fluctuations

in US dollars which affect trade flows between these countries.

OK, but we will talk about that later on and

I will switch slides to, uh, international prices, and it

will be all about the CPA.

For now, You know, before we talk about these things,

so what is the right model, right?

What, what if we look at the data, what is

true?

And it turns out that the evidence is kind of

mixed.

OK, so there is this old style aspect that if

you look at the correlation of change in the terms

of trade, it is positive.

It is mildly but positive, which uh which is in

favour of PCB, OK, so.

Uh, OK, OK, we'll talk about that later on, but

remember with the terms of trade.

In logs Right, this is kind of import price.

Minus export price and we expressed both of them in

the same currency.

OK, so this is, you know, this is import price.

In home currency, this is our export price in foreign

currency and then we use normal exchange to convert them

in the same currency and this is all in locks,

so that's why it's it's some and different.

OK, so then.

What, what is, what happens under this 3?

Assumptions, let's, let's kind of check, right?

So under PCP.

The this is the, you know, this is the this

is the ex that was was from here.

So this is export price.

Expressing foreign currency, right?

We convert it into domestic currency.

So we kind of get, you know, our domestic price

and it is constant, right?

So this thing is not changing.

On the other hand, what about import price?

Well, this is just falling price.

Um, Plus the exchange shirt, right?

OK, so please stop me and ask if, if maybe

I'm going too fast here, right?

So we take the import price, the import price in

our currency.

Right, this is just foreign price plus the exchange rate

under PCP.

So under PCP this thing is not moving, right?

The prices are constant in the currency of producer.

This price is not moving.

OK, and so the only thing that most is the

exchange rate.

As a result, under the PCP terms of trade is

close to the normal exchange rate, so they should move

together.

OK, so then what is true under LCD?

So what about PF?

Let's start from here, import price.

In domestic in, in, sorry, in, in the, in, in

home currency, right?

It will stay constant, right?

It, it will stay constant, uh, because prices are sticky

in the car association.

This thing is not moving at all, OK.

What about this one?

So in which currency this price stays constant in local

currency, right?

So again, each star, which is the price in the

of, you know, our exported goods, but already in the

currency of the buyer in foreign currency, so this thing

stays constant.

So the only thing that is moving is changing, but

here this was minus sign.

OK, so you can see that the, you know, the

effects, the correlation between the machine trade and terms of

trade will be exactly the opposite.

And then finally, so what happens if we have dollar

currency pricing?

Well, OK, then, you know, uh, you have import price

divided by the export price in the same currency, but

both the sticky in dollars.

So the terms of trade are just not moving.

It's, it's kind of orthogonal to movements in the exchange.

Again, this is an extreme case, right, when the prices

are fully see here and all prices are in producer

currency, local currency or do.

But that's why, you know, this correlation and relative volatility,

they are kind of suggestive.

And so if you look again going back here, right,

so if you just look at this correlation, it turns

out it turns out that it is mildly positive, uh,

again it depends a little bit of the country.

Some countries it's almost zero, which suggests that we are

somewhere between here between PCP and DCPO.

Is that was kind of the old style.

On the other hand, and this is, you know, what

it's, I think the first thing is best than, but

then also then you didn't need to do about that.

So they think about this more, uh, that we should

look not at the prices but retail prices.

After all, you know, when you go to a local

store, Tesco, let's say, right, or Sainsbury's, uh, you go

there, you, you buy some foreign goods, and the good

is usually priced in pounds.

Right, and the price is relatively stable in pounds.

So even though you change it moves on a daily

basis, it's not like prices of imported, uh, goods change

that much at the local store, right?

And that's what matters for you when you make your

shopping decisions.

Right, I mean, of course there's an issue here that,

OK, maybe for goods that's true, but then there are

also business to business trade, right, for to trade, and

so there maybe contracts behave very differently.

It turns out that we know very little about it.

We have, you know, there's very good data at the

border.

There's pretty good data about retail prices, but what happens

about this prices this quander between firms, we know much

about.

So that is blind spot.

But if you, if you take, you know, just retail

prices, then seems like LCP is much better to the

real world.

And then finally going back to, you know, to, to,

to border prices.

So again, what, why don't we instead of looking in

this correlation, why don't we just look at the currency

in which the prices are set, because right, usually, you

know, when firms exporters and importers when, when they, uh,

fill in customs they, they have to, uh, fill in

the price and also the.

Cars in which uh the the book is invoiced and

so it turns out the most prices are set in

dollars and kind of more recent literature, you know, in

particular papers by either they push the idea that this

price not only they do but they also seeking votes

which is which is important again I will show you,

uh, much more evidence about that.

OK, so.

I guess in the end, you know, this is still

an open debate.

Probably the world is just very complicated, right?

It seems like, you know, you have some goods which

are sticky in producer currencies, some goods which are seeking

in dollars, and then you have these two layers, border

prices and then also consumer prices.

Consumer prices are much more sticky in, uh, local currency.

OK, so here's, here's kind of the, I think the,

the front here people that we have about this, uh,

by, uh.

Um, Rafael Auer, uh, Ari Bernstein, and Sara Lang, and

so they, they have very nice, um, evidence coming from

Switzerland.

So what is great about Switzerland is that you have

this almost 20% appreciation of the Swiss franc in January

2015, right?

So you do you remember the institution details?

Probably not.

OK, so what happened is, is the following, right?

In 2011, so, OK, Swiss franc, it was appreciating for

many years during 2000s.

And then policymakers, they start, uh, worrying that that might

hurt, uh, Swiss exporters that, you know, Swiss exporters might

become uncompetitive because the Swiss franc is so strong and

so starting from 2011, the Central Bank of Switzerland, it

imposed kind of a ceiling or a floor, right?

So they said that, uh, the euro to Swiss, uh,

exchange rate cannot cross some boundary.

Otherwise they would just intervene.

They would buy a lot of euros, uh, sell uh

Swiss franc, and so depreciate Swiss franc.

OK.

And so from 2011 to January 2015, they had this

kind of quasi pack.

It was kind of one-sided, uh, bet.

And then it's completely unexpectedly in January 2015 they gave

up.

They just announced that they will no longer support the

system and they would allow the Swiss franc to appreciate

it.

So why did they do that?

I mean, it's an open question.

I think there are kind of two considerations here.

One is that it turns out that Switzerland is so

good in terms of producing some goods that even very

strong, uh, exchange rate doesn't really hurt exporters, right?

So if you produce some, you know, unique medical equipment

that no one else produces in the world, then you

can actually set the price pretty high and people will

still buy your equipment, right?

I mean.

There are some goods which probably most of you, you

know, maybe chocolates, so it's chocolates, they are nice, but

in the end, you can substitute to, let's say Belgium

or even uh British chocolate, but there are some goods

which are just not very substitutable.

Yes, so, so the, so that was, I think the

reason why they thought it may be a further appreciation

of the Swiss franc is not so bad.

But then there's another consideration, right?

So as I said, how did they support this pack,

quasi pack?

Well, they had to buy a lot of euros and

sell Swiss francs, right?

So what is the problem with that?

How do you think so many euros that exactly right?

So they accumulated this huge gross positions, right?

So if you look at the central bank balance sheet,

just gross positions, right?

I mean net positions close to zero, but what about

gross positions?

How much liabilities they have and how much assets they

have, right?

We looked at these pictures for US as, as a

country, but if you look at just Switzerland and just

central bank, they, they kind of exploded.

Right, and then even small movements in exchange rates could

already harm, uh, and result in big losses, right, for

example, that's exactly what we see, uh, what we saw

in the last couple of years we saw that, uh,

Swiss franc was, uh, uh, uh, depreciating, right?

Or yeah.

Sorry, no, they, it was appreciating and so they, they

were losing money because of that.

Furthermore, right, I mean, OK, so on the liability side,

the Swiss Central Bank, it holds a lot of euros,

right?

Now what do they hold?

Sorry, on the side they had, they hold a lot

of Swiss franc, right?

They purchased a lot of euros which they hold on

the asset side, but then they also invested some of

these euros, so they were holding some stocks, some equity,

foreign equity, which again means that right, if this equity

prices go down, they have huge losses.

So it was a, it was a kind of an

uncomfortable position.

And again, if you know something about Switzerland, it's actually

things are even more complicated, right?

So where do these profits go?

I mean, usually Swiss central bank, it makes some profits.

I mean there's some se euros, right?

They just, you know, print Swiss francs and especially if

there's high global demand for Swiss francs, then usually they

make a lot of money.

So where does this money go?

Who, who, who knows Suic economy about economy.

So it goes to the government, but what is peculiar

about Switzerland, it doesn't go, you know, to the federal

government, but like many other things in Switzerland it is

very decentralised.

So it goes to.

Uh, cantons, right, kind of parts of the country, and

these cantons, they of course they kind of rely a

lot on this money.

So they already, you know, I mean for many, many

years they got this money, so they expect that they

will continue getting this money, you know, they have, uh,

expenditures on health, on education, and they rely really on

this money.

And so, uh, in some sense the Swiss National Bank

had got worried that at some point they will have

these huge losses.

They will not be able to make money to transfer

it to these condoms which.

Means that there can be some political backlash, right, that

at some point that people will just say that there

is something wrong about our central bank.

Why does it have so much independence?

Why does it make so right?

I mean, it's not like we, we central banks are

usually independent.

Uh, no one really elects the governor of the central

bank, right?

It's, there is no, there's some deviation from democracy, right?

I mean they usually is, uh, appointed by parliaments, uh,

Senate, but not directly by population.

And so, uh, this independence, it's a bit fragile, right?

It all goes well as long as the central bank

makes money, but what if, what if it starts losing

public money.

OK, so, this was a long story, but it has,

you know, it's, it's, uh, it's important here.

So, so the central bank give up and the Swiss

franc immediately appreciated by 20%.

OK, so the question what, what happened to prices and

what is nice is that, you know, these authors, they

have both customs data, but they also collected retail data,

right?

So there is this.

Uh, need data, so people who go to, to, uh,

stores, they just, uh, you know, they, uh, make records

what they purchase and, uh, at what prices.

OK, so let's look at this picture now.

OK, so here's the exchange rate.

OK, Euro, uh, exchange rate red line.

OK, it's kind of normalised to 0 to 0 a

month before the show, OK, and so you can see

that there's this dramatic, uh, appreciation.

OK.

So then we can look at what's happened at the,

um, at different prices, right?

And we have.

Uh, industrial, uh, this is industrial, I think so, right,

um, sorry, import import prices, right, this is exactly the

price of imported goods, and this is measured at the

border.

OK, so you can see this price and this was

pretty sale before the appreciation and then it goes down

a lot.

OK, it goes down but not as much as the

exchanger.

So it's like 50% pass through or change into import

prices at the border.

OK, so we will talk in a second why it's

only 50%, but this is a big thing, and then

we can compare that to retail price, right, and see

more price index, and we can look at the component

of the price index and also, uh, foreign goods, and

you can see that again there's, there's a big difference,

right?

So the domestic price then they didn't even change almost

at all, right, which is surprising because you might think

that, you know, some of these local goods are produced

using imported intermediates.

And still we don't see, you know, the horizon of

I guess 2 years.

There are always no movements in prices.

Uh, maybe they were decreasing because of this show, but

then, you know, there was at least some monetary inflation,

some increase in wages, and so these two facts exactly

against each other, right?

So in some sense you can see that there is

some slow growth probably would continue and maybe this will

just, uh, eliminated this, right.

But what is more interesting is that at the level

we see that foreign goods become cheap, right?

The prices go down, but again we see that there's

very much in a complete pass or even relative to

the prices of the yols at the border.

I it looks like CPI name for it.

It was pretty heavy deflation just coming afterwards.

So is it, is that how to interpreted or is

it?

Well, yes, you mean this one, this deflation or, or

you mean combination of the two combination right.

I'm not sure what is the weight how large is

this component, but yeah, I would not be surprised.

I would not be surprised.

I mean, exactly one of these countries which occasionally has

deflation.

And to know that, you know, so that's one of

the reasons why when they said interest rates, nominal interest

rates, they sometimes set them at negative value, right, because

inflation is not high enough to generate negative real interest

rate.

Yeah.

No, that's, that's, yeah, I mean, it's interesting that so

in the last couple of years when many countries had

pretty high, uh, inflation rates, so one of the things

that they did, they allowed exchange rate to appreciate more,

right?

So they were actually selling their reserves finally, right, not

buying but kind of selling, um, selling, you know, euros,

uh, in this case, and so they were uh, appreciating,

uh, the exchange rate to offset, uh, high price of

imported goods, in particular, high energy prices.

Um, OK, good.

So then what we can do, you know, kind of

going further, right, we can look separately at prices of

goods in both in different currencies, OK?

And in case of Switzerland and the Eurozone, I mean,

the vast majority is either in euro or in Swiss

franc.

There's also some fraction which is in dollars.

OK, um, and you can see that the pass through,

right, the response of this price is very different.

So while, you know, there are kind of no pre-trends,

right, like people call now quite a micro, these prices

were moving.

Almost, uh, identically before the development after the show we

see this, uh, the right, the prices of goods which

were invoice in foreign currency, this is, you know, because

we're talking about Swiss imports, this is PCP, right, and

this is LCP and so we see that for PCP

prices move almost identically with the exchange.

Right, again, if prices are fully stick, this is exactly

what you would expect, of course, in reality they adjust

for some frequency, but you can see that so they,

they kind of mimic moves and the changes surprisingly well,

right, even, you know, let's say, uh, 1.5 years after

the show, this prices moved together with the exchange rate.

As if they, they were fully stable in euros and

then we can also look at the prices of goods

which are invoices with strength right if these prices were

fully, then what we would expect, how would the invoice

response look like.

It will be just a flat line, right?

It will just be if they offer.

So we see that there's still some adjustment which suggests

that some of these prices are updated, right, and they

also incorporate this shock, but the password is much slower

and much less than for these goods.

And even like in the medium run, 15 years after

the show, we don't see that they're fully under.

Right, so that's exactly why, why these things matter, right?

Uh we see that in the open economy if you

want to analyse how exchange that movements affect expenditure switching,

how much they will affect inflation, right?

You really need to know in which currency the prices

are.

OK, and yeah, OK, um, they have this nice table.

Uh, where, where they can kind of fully decompose the

pass through, right?

So we talked about this, you know, different mechanism, uh,

which we use the pass through exchange rate shocks, and

they have full decompositions.

So you know, if you start, so this is a

different horizon, 1 quarter, 2/4, 3/4, 4 quarters, right?

So you look at 1 quarter, for example, you start

with a 100%.

This is the total exchange rate shock, then you can

look how, how this pass through, you know, changes.

Uh, at each step, right, we look at, um.

Yes, you can look at all, so these are boiler

prices, uh, in euros, right, PC, so they move a

lot, right?

Then, then you can condition on non-ze prices so which

means that these are relatively flexible prices, right?

The first which adjust the prices or large number.

Then you can look at all woods which are invoices

with strength numbers much smaller.

Right, and then you can you can look at what

is the component of this of of uh press which

did adjust, right?

So they adjust more.

So in other words, you know, if you, if you

adjust this number by this number, you will get number

much closer to 0, right?

So conditional on press not moving, of course, then, uh,

there should be no moves in this.

Then retail prices, right, my small number, so this is

this domestic adjustment and then finally domestic prices, retail prices

which don't move almost at all.

I guess this is in in percentage term the position.

Um, OK, so let me skip this.

I want to show you.

OK, so ultimately, right, in the end, I mean this

is all fascinating, as, as I think I mentioned before,

international micro people care about this exchange it passed through

a lot.

But in the end, of course, we're interested in effects

on commodities, right?

This is really the most important thing.

And so one way to, to look at this, uh,

is to look at import share, uh, how much it

changed, right?

And so this is just, you know, for different years,

you know, starting from January.

Um, Right, and I guess here it must be the

end of the year, right?

And so you can look how much, um, what, what

was the share and what is interesting here is that

the import share in 2015, right, is much higher than

in previous years.

So it increased, right, then the jump so, um.

Mm.

So what are these numbers?

Uh, I don't remember the ones.

So I, I, I forgot why they have more than

12 months, uh, and why does this right, we would

say that this thing coincide with this one.

So maybe they just look at some inquisite responses, but

I don't think so.

I thought this was just some kind of moments.

But sorry about that.

But anyway, right, the main point of the paper is

that once you have this appreciation, we see that the

share of imported goods.

It's not like it's not dramatic, but so before the

shock, on average there was like 25, maybe 25.5% of

all consumed goods were imported goods, and then it kind

of goes up by 1%.

So it's not huge, but it is.

The problem for this whole unfortunately is, you know, that

it's relatively easy to estimate the change pass into prices

and you get pretty, uh, precise estimates, but once you

start looking at quantities, usually the errors are much larger.

And you know this is uh usually you get the

sign of the coefficients correct right so that you know

prices decrease, quantities increase, but, uh, there is so much

noise that it's, it's still, you know, if you are

really sceptical, it's really hard to convince you that, uh,

these effects are, are large quantitatively and this goes back,

you know, to our previous discussion that if you have

international shipments, international, uh, contracts, it's not obvious what is

most sticky prices or quantities.

And in principle you can imagine, especially if it's trade,

you know, business to business trade firm to firm trade,

you can easily imagine that they just sign a contract

which specifies both the price and uh the quantity.

And then, I mean, of course we will still find

effects on prices, you know, depending on the currents of

invoicing, but maybe quantities are predetermined anyway.

And then it doesn't say, right?

They will, I mean, it, it determines how seller and

buyer split the surplus, right?

If exchange it moves against me, I will have to

pay more in real terms.

But in terms of allocations, which are more important for

from macro point of view, that, that might not be

so, so big.

OK, so, OK, so this paper provides some evidence, but

yeah, I I it's not the fact is not super

large.

OK, good.

Any questions?

Does it make sense?

OK, good.

So then let me switch this was that it was

the prices you know in invoice in euros that reacted

most closely to the evaluation and less so in in

that is the one.

And I would need right?

that's, that's what this is.

Well, I don't know.

I mean, so you, there are some goods in, you

know, currency pricing, others are seeking exactly the data shows

exactly that you have, you know, uh, the world is

complicated.

It's not just PCP or LCP it's both, but both

respond accordingly kind of to C price model.

Yeah, but it, it looks like like you were saying

but it looks like the euros, those ones in the

euro move more similar to the devaluation that I see

it, uh, so the time one is much, this is

a much smaller change and it's much, you know, yeah,

yeah, so if we have perfectly see prices, I mean

the blue bars would be almost the same, the green

would be just the, right.

So, but, but again, it's not hard to measure what

in which currency goods are priced in the day.

The question is, are they really sticking this currency?

So maybe yeah, right?

Maybe it doesn't really matter.

You, I mean, think of commodities, think of oil prices,

right?

It is, it changes every minute.

So even though it is invoiced in dollars, we don't

really care much about that because, uh, you know, whatever

happens to the dollar changes will be upset by the

price.

So what this shows is that the balance of invoicing

matters.

Right, so if, if you tell me that your price

is invoiced in local currency, I can predict that in

the immediate run it will respond less to exchange of

movement than if, if the price is set in producer

currency.

OK, so since you asked and you know, 11 kind

of a step ahead, so that's what we will talk

about I guess next week or the week after, um,

so.

See, we will see also evidence from the US and

we will see based apart we see that, you know,

in the short run there is a big difference then

there is some conversions, but this price is never converge.

So what do you think about this, about the fact

that even in the long run, these prices don't converge.

What can be they can be potentially be two interpretations

of this, of this fact.

I mean, the first one is kind of simple interpretation

that the prices are just so sticky.

There are some goods which never change their prices, right?

And so that's why even in the long run you

get this different pass through.

It can be one interpretation very favourable to, you know,

these models, but there's another interpretation, more realistic, I think.

So we will talk about this paper by um Gina

Fitz Hawki, OK, and Triabon, uh, so Oleksho is the

same as Hokki, you know, who is also my uh

co-author, and so he told me once that when they

saw the speeches for the first time when they estimated

this in the data originally but for the US, they

thought there was a mistake in the court.

They just didn't believe this.

They thought that, you know, after 2 years prices cannot

be that sticky and then they, they realised that there

is another much more reasonable explanation.

They wrote the whole paper about that.

Which we'll we'll talk about next time.

But what is the alternative explanation?

I mean, could it be that there's more or less

competition after that if some if some firms are hit

by this evaluation so much that you go out of

business and you have more or less competitive in those.

Uh hm.

So they, OK, so they just, well, so you, you're

saying there is some selection in a sense.

Um, but this price computer conditions staying right on the,

in the business.

Um, Yeah, I have to uh think about the exact

implications, but, but I mean if, if you have some

sector that is hit by, uh, they're hit by higher

input costs, some domestic firms.

And some of the farms that may be invoiced they

have specific currency.

They shut down.

Now you have fewer, and if that's a specific set

of goods, if that's a specific part of the economy

that tends to invoice in certain currencies, that is now

a less competitive part.

because of exchanging or for some other reason would make

that less competitive prices equilibrium prices would be higher.

OK, I mean, so to me it sounds a little

bit like, you know, that force should actually push them

together because those firms which have maybe too low prices,

they just don't survive and they think they should push

them the same prices, no, if there is this kind

of attrition based on the, on the prices that they

have.

But you also said another thing which, which, yeah, maybe

some uh importers changed their currency so they.

Uh, I, they do actually find some effects because depreciation,

appreciation is so large that there are some effects usually

very few firms change, uh, the currency of invoicing.

But again, I mean, all these things they are kind

of going around there I think the main effects that

are imports that are domestically are different.

So, um, so which ones, which ones are different.

Groups are different.

Exactly, exactly right, exactly.

So all the stories that we told before, it sounds

like, you know, there's some exogenous shock which gives sams

and the invoice in Euros in in uh and this

is completely random and then you have a change in

the change and then why.

You have a different responses, but of course, you know,

first when they choose the currency invoicing, they probably do

some optimisation, right?

They don't choose it randomly and it can be that

those just do two different types of firms which have,

you know, different, um, they actually want to have different

response or exchange, right, when they choose the curs of

invoicing and so they, you know, the models that we'll

talk about the models for in currency.

You know, first, you understand that if there is a

change in negotiation, in one case they will have such

forms in practise, this person said that they will want

to have, they will have such responsive prices.

And so if in the long run they actually want

to have different responses, why don't they already mean that

in the short run by choosing the right currency.

Right, it's really a little bit weird in my English.

You want to have, you know, very high response, very

high passro in the long run, but you choose this

currency knowing that in the short run you will have

small, uh, passro because of sticky prices, you know, if

you want high pass through, you would better to choose

PCP.

If you want low pass, eventually, why don't you choose

the LCD.

OK, so the, the model will exactly be based on

that idea, OK, but.

So it's not random currency choice and firms choose uh

currency to get particular.

Ah, so that will depend on, that's exactly, I mean,

this is, you know, you're going one layer deeper, right?

So, so, well, I mean, in some sense we already

know the answer, no, that's exactly what we discussed last

time when we talked about flexible prices, right?

So we have this formula.

And so there will be first which have, OK, you

can put I everywhere.

And as we discussed last time, some firms have low

alpha, other firms have higher alpha.

Some firms have higher sensitivity of their marginal cost to

exchange rates, others have low, right?

And so in principle, some firms might have high desired

pass through and the other firms will have low desired

pass like again the small and large firms, for example,

right?

And that's exactly what they do on their choice of

currency.

OK, good.

Sorry, but I, I, I, I, I guess we we

will talk about this in more details later on.

OK, so let's go back to sticky prices.

And kind of one step back, OK, so we're talking

about TCP LCP DCP, but now we will really kind

of zoom in and talk about more about TCP.

So the kind of, so sometimes people call this dominant

currency paradigm.

Sometimes people call this international price system, and both terms

they were introduced by, uh, so who is now manage,

uh, how, how you call it managing director, right of

IMF, so she's kind of the second.

Number 2 at International Monetary Fund.

Before that she was chief economist there and before that

she was professor at Harvard.

There are some rumours that maybe she's coming back to

Harvard now after working at the IMF, so that would

be of course great for the profession.

OK, but in 2015, so she, she gave this famous

Jackson Hole speech, right?

This is, you know, give these meetings, uh, of central

bankers with people from Macaitia.

Uh, and, uh, she pushed the idea that we should

take seriously the use of the dollar in international trade,

right?

There were already some papers which talked about that, but

she kind of nicely, very nicely combined, uh, several evidence

that already existed by then.

And she largely outlined the research agenda for the next

few years for, for, for, uh, what, what people should

work on, and she wrote several papers since then, you

know, and other people, including myself, I was a great

student back then, but you know my job market paper

was kind of also largely inspired, uh, by, by this

agenda.

So what are the key aspects here?

So first of all, we see that the dollar governments,

and this is the main currency of.

We see that firms set prices in dollars and prices

remain $6 and to some extent we see that there's

all that I said more needs there, but there's some,

some support.

So it's also interesting that these partners, they don't change

much over time, right?

So in some and, and that's a little bit of

a problem, right?

I again, if we want to understand how firms choose

the currency for invoicing, ideally we would like to see,

you know, firms switching currency all the time that will

give us more variation.

It turns out that these things are super persistent, right?

In some sense, looking back at the last, you know,

one century or so, we see that there was only

one major.

Uh, switch in terms of currency of invoicing, right?

There was the pound dominated at the beginning of the

20th century and then.

You know, gradually firms, uh, switched to using the dollar

and then since then there were almost no big changes

in how firms choose the currency.

There are some, some, um, dynamics for separate countries, right?

Again, we will talk about that.

So if you look at Eastern European countries again like

Latvia or Poland, you see that they used much more

dollars in 1990s and then they switched largely to euros

as the eurozone was expanding, OK.

But this is more like an exception.

Yeah, you know, these things are super persistent.

I don't think, you know, if you look at the

horizon of one year, they don't really change even in

response to relatively big shocks.

I mean, OK, so the only thing, the only country

which really changed a lot, the main currency of invoicing

is Russia, but that's for obvious reasons, right?

And I mean, it's not just the currency of invoicing,

it's completely complete change in the composition of trade partners

right before it was like 60% uh trade with Europe.

Now it's, uh, less than 20%.

So of course you would expect a country to, to

change the currency of invoicing, but otherwise almost no other

country changed.

Uh, I mean, they're losing a lot, um, an Indian,

right, because they trade also much more, uh, with China.

They also trade a lot with Turkey, right?

And even though there are still a lot of goods

coming from Europe, they usually come through some other, um,

you know, uh, southern neighbours of Russia, and so then

they, they, they would use, uh, either rubles or they

would use the currencies of these countries.

Right, but that's a big issue actually.

I mean, this is one of these, OK, so I,

I'm deviating again, but right, but so we will talk

about the role of the currency in terms of currency

of invoicing and thinking mostly, you know, in terms of

sticky prices, right?

We will talk later on very briefly about.

Different perspective, right?

We can abstract from kind of sticky prices and think

about the choice of currency for some other reasons, right?

And the case of Russia, what matters much more than

price stickiness is, um, kind of which currency you can

use uh in financial system, right?

So the problem for Russia is that.

It exports a lot of oil to India, let's say

it gets a lot of rupees for that, but then

it doesn't really need to to buy that many goods

from India.

It wants to buy goods from China, let's say, right,

or indirectly from Europe, but for, I mean, but, but

China doesn't really need these rupees, right?

China would like to get either dollars or renminbi, but

to do that, then you need to change one currency

for the other.

But then there are all these financial sanctions, right?

You can't really, so you know, if you want to

use dollars, you really need to go through the US

at some point.

Right, I mean, not you, but your banks, right, which

act on your behalf, they will need to go through

the US financial markets and this is completely shut down

for Russia.

And so I, I mean this is where exactly interesting

things are happening because usually we take it for granted,

right?

We think that this is almost frictional thing.

It's, it's so easy for banks to do these transactions

that, you know, that doesn't really even affect, uh, firms

when they choose the currency of invoicing because it's so

easy to do, uh, but once you have sanctions, you

actually start, you know, appreciating that it's, it, it's actually

not that trivial and that can be important incentives for

some countries to change, um, the currency of invoicing.

But again, you know, it's, it's an interesting conversation, but

also it's very undersideed question because until recently people just

thought it's, it's not very important.

OK, but let's, let's go back to, uh, international price

system.

OK, so here's kind of a few pictures to illustrate

the dominance of the dollar, uh, the share of PCP

in countries' exports, right?

So you take, let's say Brazil, you take all the

experts of Brazil and you compute what fraction of these

experts isn't voiced in, uh, Brazil Brazilian real.

OK, and, OK, you can see that for many we

just don't have good data, by the way, comes from

IMF, so actually when she became the chief owners of

the IMF, she, you know, she put a lot of

effort to make, uh, I am a collect this data.

And so you can see for most countries for which

we do have data, this share of PC is quite

low.

OK.

There are exceptions here, so I don't pay too much

attention to Saudi Arabia.

Saudi Arabia has just fix exchange against the dollar, so.

The way PC here is, is kind of including dollars,

OK, and for, for Saudi Arabia it's not very interesting

because it's mostly oil, right, and exports, and oil isn'tvo

in dollars, but I mean this price is not really

so it's, uh, it's more like an exception, right?

So for almost all emerging countries and even some developed

countries, right, I mentioned before, uh, South Korea, Japan, we

see that the share of ECB is quite low.

Uh, it's very high for the US, more than 95%

of US exports is in dollars, and then the really

high for Europe, but Europe is a special because, you

know, for, for European countries, most, most of their trade

is with some other European countries.

So it's in some sense it's even hard to distinguish

PCP and LCP, right?

If France trades with Germany, then PCP and LCP is

the same thing.

DCP will be different though.

OK, so then we can look at LCP and let's

look at share of LCP in imports and the picture

is very similar, right?

Again, uh, most countries, and by the way, this is

before, you know, any sanctions, this is from 2015, so

Russia, you know, uh, share of LCP for Russia is,

is still quite, uh, low.

Otherwise, the picture is very similar, right?

Again, for most countries in the world, the share of

LCP is very low.

Europe is a little bit of an exception for, for

more than 90% of US imports is invoiced in dollars

again.

Uh, and then once we look at the share of

dollar in exports, we could look at GCP and imports.

You, you can see that again for, for most countries

in the world, this share is very high.

Right, it, it completely dominates trade of emerging economies, but

again, even looking at developed countries, we see that the

share is not real.

And again, if you look at the eurozone, within the

Eurozone, the share is low, but once you start looking

at the Eurozone as a whole and against the rest

of the world, about 50% of world trade is in

those, right?

So even for such large and, you know, developed financially

developed country as, as the eurozone.

OK, uh, I was a blog, uh, we see that

DCP plays important role.

No, by the way, for Russia, GCP doesn't fully dominate,

right?

It's not as high as for let's say India or

uh South American countries, but that's exactly because back then

in 2015 Russia had a lot of trade with Europe

and half of trade with Europe with other countries isn't

euros and half is in dollars.

Uh, right, so what about the role of the euro?

Well, euro completely dominates, right, regionally, uh, within the Eurozone.

Again, if you look at the main trade partners of

the eurozone as a whole like the UK, Turkey, Russia,

uh, Northern European, Northern European countries, there the share of,

uh, euro is not real, right?

It, it's, it, it varies, but it can be 20-40%.

But once you go away from this region, once you

start looking at, you know, Western American countries or East

Asian countries, their Euro zones never used, right, so.

In other words, the world looks like this, right?

There's a little bit of PCP, a little bit of

LCP.

There is clear, clearly one dominant currency, the dollar.

And then there's a kind of regional currency, uh, the

euro.

So that, that's, that's kind of the first order approximation.

Another way to see this, you can, we can aggregate,

right?

This is just aggregate numbers across those countries for which

we do have data, and you can see the share

of these countries in global trade, global means only kind

of data.

And by the way, I should have said this before,

right?

Of course, I mean, on the one hand, this data

covers like 70% of global trade, but there is one

very big, uh, you know, problem.

There is no data, not a single year for which

data is available and China is kind of the largest

trading partner for most largest exporter in the world, and

unfortunately there is no data and of course it's also

the most interesting country in a sense, right?

Do we see a switch from the dollar to renminbi,

at least for China?

And, and data is missing.

So what people sometimes do, they would take customs data

for the UK, look at the bilateral trade laws against

China and see if there's any dynamics there.

But uh yeah, but again, right, I mean, the patterns

for trade between the UK and China can be different

than for trade between China and let's say um Thailand,

right?

So it's not obvious.

Uh-huh.

All of this will be good.

This is, this is good straight because this is customs

data.

I mean, OK, so what IMF did, they, they tried

to get customs data when it was available for some

countries which don't have customs data.

Then they asked central banks and central banks would give

them all international transactions, which includes also services.

But this is, I, I don't remember exactly.

I think this is mostly like for, for maybe 3

or 4 countries in the world for all other countries

it's, it's really good straight.

It doesn't include services, yeah.

That's a good point.

So PCP or PCP, no, no, no, this is just

again, this is customs data which of course doesn't have

any information about stickiness, right?

OK, I hope I have some, uh, no, I don't

have this data here.

I will, I will show you some evidence about pass

through, um, of course, ideally you want to exclude all

this commodity, commodity trading, that's true because commodity are flexible

prices.

But that's why, that's why we were kind of break

it into two parts in which currency firms set prices

and what is the pass through as a suggestive evidence

in terms of prices.

OK, let me just finish with these two pictures, and

then we will make a break.

OK, so aggregate in this country we should look at

data.

This is the share of US and Eurozone in terms

of trade flows.

I mean, you don't get too surprised that the share

of Eurozone is much higher because this includes trading between

France and Germany, you know, and then we should also

include trade between.

Content and uh Minnesota for the US right between country

between states we don't do that because right this is

where the border is uh but ok, the eurozone is

larger because of that the rest of the world.

Uh, now, once we look at the values of invoicing,

we see very different products, right?

The share of the euro is proportionate to the share

of the eurozone in terms of trade, but the share

of the, the dollar is disproportionately large shares to the

contribution of the US to global trade.

And as I already mentioned before, right, these partners, they're

surprisingly stable in time.

There is maybe so for Japan we have longer for

other countries and you know there is at least some

40 years, you see that the share of the.

decreased somewhat, but again, many things have changed.

I'm sure that you know the main trade partners for

Japan have changed quite a lot, right?

I mean, probably China was atrial fraction of of trade,

uh, uh, for Japan in 1970s.

Now probably the, the largest must be the largest trade

partner, no, uh, so but for all other countries, if

you look at the rise of 20 years, right, there

are almost no changes.

OK, OK, good.

So I think this is a good moment to make

a 5 minute break, OK, mhm.

Trade invoice in renminbi versus US dollars or other currencies

for China, um, would you be able to, to a

large extent infer that if you have the other wall,

yes, yes, yes, yes, but again, right, I mean, first

of all, so it's a way to get this deal,

uh, the data that IMF collected this was aggregated I

don't know.

Uh, you know, this is, of course it is very

microably right for you in the wood and of course

they work for the wood is coming but it just

you need to then combine all this.

So there are a lot of papers, you know, which

is migrate they migrate from Switzerland, Belgium to the UK

for Aladia.

Uh, I think what she, those are the, the, the

very inconvenient because you, you would have maybe all of

those transactions crossing into France, but you wouldn't have data

from let's say in Nigeria, so you don't really get

a share of Nigerian trade that is documented in.

Right, right, even though it seems like from the web

that we don't have data for most countries in the

world, but the countries don't have the same contribution to

global trade.

70% of global trade is already here.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, right.

I mean, if, if I think, yeah, I mean if,

if, if they had data for China, then they probably

be like almost 90%, you know.

Yeah So, so that's true.

I mean, he, he works with Thomas, right?

They have some joint papers, but I don't think he

came just because of the, I don't know.

I mean people at this stage of their career, they

just travel around the world and their lives.

I mean, I think he also spends more than half

a year, uh, in Israel, so I think he has

some affiliation with the university there, I would guess, uh.

Yeah, yeah, I know his co-author Gene Grossman.

He, he taught me international trade at Princeton.

So he, for example, spends one month every year in

Barcelona just, you know, in May.

Gene Grossman.

I mean, they're, they're the main coauthors, right, with Hellman.

So if you look at the main papers, which one,

the, uh.

Is it, is it the textbook or yeah all of

them are like but uh look forward to.

I see, I see, yeah, yeah, no, I'm also very

curious.

Um, Yeah, if, if they were a little bit more

like, I guess they could get the Nobel Prize with

Krugman, uh, because in international trade, kind of his major

papers, I mean, not, not all of them, but some

of them at least are written together with Halman, but

I guess the difference is that Krugman also has this

huge agenda in, um, in closed macro or in international

macro and so, uh, probably to separate this.

So I guess if Helman and Grossman get Nobel Prize

now, most likely they would get it for protection for

sale.

Do you know this paper?

Did you talk about?

No, OK, so this is one of the most famous

papers.

It's kind of a combination of international trade with political

economy, right?

So why do countries impose tariffs?

One reason is that they want to exploit in terms

of trade externality.

But another one is that they are just groups of

interest, right?

And like, we know that on average country wins from

free trade, but we understand there's a huge redistributional effects,

right?

And there are always somebody who loses and imagine, you

know, the classical example is something about shoe.

In the US, I forgot the numbers, but there are

kind of ridiculous tariffs on sugar, or at least they

were ridiculous tariffs on sugar.

And why is that?

Well, because I mean, each of us, right, I mean

US citizen wins very little from slightly lower prices on

sugars, right?

But what producer of sugar lose a lot of money

if there is free trade.

They make a lot of money being protected from foreign

competition.

It's much easier for them to organise together and then

to lobby in parliament the policies that they like.

And, and kind of grossman, they, they wrote, uh, classical,

uh, model of protection for sale but also how the

EU are like yeah, but not, yeah, but they would,

yeah, I, I, I actually don't know, uh, so right

there can be two different considerations.

One is to help their producers, but another one can

be they just want to hurt you as as much

as possible, right?

I think this last thing.

I mean, it's probably was always there because of trade

wars, but somehow now when people talk about sanctions, right,

about how to punish the trade partner, it has become

much more central than it was, I think, before, um.

Yeah, but he would probably tell you that it kind

of comes in waves, right?

So if you look back what happened in 1970s, it

was actually much closer to what we have now.

But if you, I think if, if you think about

how tariffs were imposed in 1990s, for example, I don't

think it was about hurting other countries.

It was really, you know, if you have one producer

and that producer has a lot of, uh, weight, uh,

a lot of flopping, then you would probably help that

producer.

Mhm OK, good.

Let's, let's get back, uh, I hope we can finish

this today because we still have much to discuss next

time.

OK, so dollar dominates as the currency.

Now does it mean that all and there there were

a few papers and so I remember I made these

mistakes a few times in the previous years.

I kind of tried to, to teach all these papers,

but I mean people get bored because in the end

all these papers are are similar and also in the

sense now there's a dear, uh, leader in the.

There's this paper by and authors, I think they wrote

two separate papers, give them 2 quarters and another people

give it another 3 quarters and then editor asked them

to combine this paper into these papers into one.

So now I think they have 6 or 7 quarters

in that paper, um, so they have, yeah, so they

have.

And why, why you still see it in the paper

because they use two completely different data sets.

So one is Columbia data.

This is microdata for each individual product, OK, imports and

exports, 40 rand annual, um.

And for, for pretty long period of time.

And then they have another data source where they have

all global trade flows.

The data is a little bit less, you know, less

detailed, and in the end, they also aggregate all these

prices into price indices, OK, bilateral price indices between different

countries.

OK, so I will show you kind of both pieces

of evidence.

I mean, I, I try to be fair because, you

know, this paper is probably so the paper by it

is probably the, the cleanest one, the best done paper,

but the idea was actually there long before them.

So Javier, his job market paper in 2014 was already

using similar data for Chile, OK, and, uh, I guess

he was a little bit unlucky and he didn't really,

so it's, it's, it's an interesting example because his paper

had like.

Three great ideas.

One of the ideas became eventually, you know, this paper

by Gita.

I would say another paper was, uh, you know, much

more developed, uh, form was my job market paper.

And then there are also some other ideas in that

paper.

But, you know, sometimes it's bad when you do research,

academic research, it's a bad idea of having a lot

of ideas but not developing them very much and just

combining them into one paper.

It's better to have three separate papers but then develop

each paper, um, as much as possible.

So that's why I think this paper is still not

published.

Which is a shame, of course.

OK, so here is the idea.

Here is the main idea.

Uh, so how can we test whether the world is

closer to PCB LCE, and TCA?

OK, we said that, but maybe price flexible, so this

is all.

So instead, a more sophisticated way of testing this is

to look at exchange rate pastor.

OK, so think of price of wood exported from G

to I.

OK, so now for example here, this is country J,

country of origin, and this is country of destination country

I.

OK, and we, we, we kind of focus on on

this street for now.

Let's get all this.

So then, depending on.

Whether this price is we will get very different exchange

with, OK, and I think I mentioned this last time,

so we will by default, we think that this is,

this is price expressed in the destination, expressed can we

see in any currency, but we just measure this in

of destinations.

So our example this will be in in euros.

OK, so then How does this work?

Yes, we have this.

Usually we take logs, right?

So this is in price and logs and then they

take the difference so this is change in price and

you compare that to changes in exchange rate.

So if, if we have LCP, let's start with something

simple.

So when the exchange rates move, what will happen to

this price?

So this price measured in euros.

And supposedly stick in euros.

Then it doesn't move, right?

It will stay constant no matter what happens to the

exchange.

OK.

70s, what about PCP?

OK, so in this case, this price is still in

pounds in currency.

Which means that You know, once we have movements in.

Bilateral exchange between these two countries, there will be 1

to 1 pass through of this exchange rate into this

press, right?

And this is, you know, OK, this is euro, you

know, this is as usual, our euro exchange rate, uh,

against the UK, right?

So the number of euros per 1 union of pound,

right, so given that the price is still in pounds.

You know, when we give more euros for 1 pound,

it means that this price increases.

And then finally the most kind of interesting and also

30 cases disappear.

OK, so if the price is sticky in dollars, right,

there's somewhere here also in the US.

We're not talking about good from the US, but because

shocks happening in the US, let's say the door, uh,

depreciates or appreciates against the euro.

So then what happens to this prize?

So in dollars, it doesn't change.

But it will change in euros, so what is the

exchange rate which matters here?

Between, yeah, but between which countries?

Sorry, exactly right, they will be between these two countries.

OK, so this will be between country I, des destination

country, and all right the US.

I mean, know that this matters and on this.

This exchange between the pound and the dollar doesn't matter,

right, so.

It's always 3 children, but only 2 of them, um.

So in other words, right, we can run this version

where we include both bilateral change rate but also the

news.

We can estimate the two coefficients and then we can

see, right, we can test this free, free hypothesis, right,

where uh you put all the weight, you know, we

have for change and no pass for rate no fast

through at all or only pass through and that that's

kind of it was I think the key key idea

of uh.

This paper because people have run this password regression for

ages but they almost never included this exchange right so

they were always looking for the and and kind of

the idea of, of, of this paper is to use

both.

OK, so just, you know, very briefly, I must say

that there are some problems with these regressions, so we

actually now have even better evidence, um.

I mean, one problem is of course that you can

make that, you know, dollar is even though there is

a change in disconnect, right, but US is such a

big country and dollar is such an important, uh, currency

that it still correlates a little bit with some business

global business cycle variables, right?

And if this business cycles affect prices then that you

can get curious correlation.

So that's, that's, that's one worry.

Another worry is that, I mean, if you, if your

only hypotheses are PCP LCP and DCP then it's fine.

But there is one more alternative hypothesis, which is not

explicitly here.

Namely Flexible prices, right?

And so in principle, as was already alluded, right, we

said that firms choose currency for investing based on their

desired to pass through, the one that they would like

to have even under flexible prices.

But in principle, it can be the case that imagine

you find, I don't know that, you know, you find,

you find coefficients looking like this, but maybe this is

not because price is sticky.

Maybe it's just because even in the flexible price a

lot of firms want to have complete pass through of

bilateral and zero pass through these things.

So in that sense it's a little bit, you know,

it's a little bit more complicated again, there's a very

nice paper which I will not teach.

It's, it's, it's, I, I.

I, I, yeah, hopefully it's not here because I really

hate teaching.

It's a great paper, but it's just very hard to

teach.

So the same quarters that we talked about last time,

I mean here it's hot.

And tunings So they have a recent paper published in

QJE I think it's 22 if I'm not mistaken, uh,

where they use, they use data for Belgium as always,

and there they can really see.

Firms that change their prices, firms that don't change their

prices, and they can separate the two and control kind

of for everything, and they still find similar effects as,

as here, OK?

But here, it's kind of more aggregate level.

OK, so here's the main result of the paper.

So again, this is Colombian data import prices, they look

only at trade partners which are notized.

OK, so just to distinguish PCP LCP from sorry not

LC to distinguish PCP from DCP they don't include countries

which have a back against the dollar, OK.

And here is the past coefficient for bilateral.

OK, so you can see that if you're only you

get 35, right, so this estimate in some sense would

suggest that we're living into the world with a species.

Right So what they show next, they include also the

exchange rate, and he is the uh passer, and you

can see dramatic change.

You see that the bile the pass of the bichange

rate goes down a lot and it's actually the dollar

exchange rate which shares the highest pass.

OK, and so, uh, looking at these numbers, we can

do that they can do that the world is much

closer to DCP rather than to PCP.

And then I mean you can also you know set

up controls with euro you can include aggregate pricing this

is is control over but you can see results don't

really change much.

Uh-huh.

Colombia, for it is specific for sure, right, but again,

it doesn't include any domestic prices or financial variables.

It's just customs data.

You just look at the what's imported, and Colombia has

a floating exchange rate, so it's not like it's, it's

speaks against the dollar, right?

Uh, no, but, but you're, of course, you're right.

It's, it's just for Colombia.

So I will, that's why I will show you also

the estimates for using global trade flows.

OK, just before we can, you know, finish with uh

Columbia, just, um, uh, effects for quantities, right?

As I mentioned before, ultimately we're interested whether this currency

choice has effects on allocations, uh.

And, and you know there is some evidence, right, exactly

the same regression, but you, you, you put quantities on

the left hand side.

I mean quantities you, you might ask how to measure

quantities, right?

It's not the real thing, but again, when you export

or import goods, you have to report to customers, uh,

service, you know, the weight, sometimes the size of objects,

and so people use this as a proxy for, uh,

quantities.

And here you see high pass through or bilateral exchange

rate if you only include this exchange but most include

both bilateral and dollar exchanges you can see that you

know only this one is significant and you know it

to the right side.

So when the exchange rate depreciates, local exchange rate depreciates

against the dollar, the quantities imported decrease that becomes more

expensive to buy foreign goods.

So again this is, uh, in favour of DCP model.

OK, so here is the evidence which comes from the

from the global trade flows, and this is annual data.

This is not quarterly data.

OK, so this is the functions and you will see

that there will be much more noise.

OK, so how do we read this?

Let's see, um, OK, so we, so they look at

trade weighted and unweighted, um.

Regressions and the first problem is when you only include

bilateral rate.

OK, so again, OK, let me focus on the upper

right now.

OK, so you see that if you get high gas

surprisingly maybe close to the one that I just showed

you for Colombia, right, something like 0.7, but then you

do also dollar exchange and you see that bilateral change

goes down a lot while the dollar changes, it's the

same pattern and you can see that it is through,

you know.

And instantaneous after the moves, it is still true 1

year after and even 2 years after.

I mean, again, as, as we already discussed, I would

be much heavier if I saw that these two lines

kind of, you know, uh, somehow, uh, converge or change

a little bit at least after 2 years because it's

hard to imagine that, you know, in the short run,

the price is the same as 2 years after the

shock, but you know, they get all the, it's hard

to say.

Again this is a lot of noise but again they

exclude, I think they exclude because this is not.

No, no, this is, I mean this is very important

and, and they report, you know, both, but I included

in my slides only this one because this is much

cleaner.

Uh, right.

Mhm.

OK, good.

So then, um, OK, so this was remember, right, this

is not using any information about invoicing, about the currency

of invoicing.

So what you might want to do ideally, right, you

want to estimate again this pass through separately based on

at least official uh currency that they use.

The problem is that um.

So these price indices, right, in this regression, they're bilateral

price indices.

They don't have currency of invoicing at the bilateral level.

Instead, they only have for some countries in their sample

what is the aggregate share of let's say DCP in

total imports or in total exports.

So they, they kind of use this as proxies, but

obviously this will be very, very, you know, uh, noisy

measures.

So this is, you know, kind of looking at the

uh For countries which have low share of dollar, let's

say, right, they estimate and then they estimated for countries

which 5 share of dollars, and you can see that

indeed the pass through of the dollar increases, right, is

higher for this country.

So that's kind of the the one theory, but again,

uh, unfortunately they don't have micro level or at least

bilateral, uh, level, uh, information about currency of invoicing.

Um, yeah, and if you look at the trade elasticity,

right, this is again for quantities you can see that

here things are even kind of worse and I mean

they, they're just very noisy after 1 year.

For 1 year at 1 year horizon kind of instantaneously,

you get some estimates significantly different from zero, but then

it's just noise.

So this, OK, so this is kind of a placebo

experiment which I really like because again, what if it's

not about the dollar per se, maybe it's just that

you know you have exchange rate I, you have exchange

rate G.

They both affect prices, but they don't affect it differently.

And so maybe you just, you know, here you kind

of impose that this to exchange rates, they have the

same effect, right?

It's only.

Exchange rate of I minus exchange rate of g which

matters.

And so then if if that's true, then it might

be the case that whatever other exchange rate that you

do, you will always get statistically significant effects, right?

So again, if you mention that, you know, UK uses

goods from the Eurozone, it combined with goods coming from

the US from other countries is the inputs, right, their

production, then the, the, even under the flexible prices, the

opt price will depend on all these bilateral exchange rates.

Right?

And so then this is not sufficient statistic.

And so it's an interesting exercise to do.

What do we do some other changes.

And so why did they do this right include the

euro exchange rate and you can see that there is,

you know, on the one hand in my pos is

correct if you only include bilateral change and the euro

exchange rate, both will be, right?

So euro will be.

But what is interesting is that once include the euro

period, right then.

Practically becomes insignificant through the dollar and which play the

most important role.

Um, OK.

OK, let me skip this.

So this is just looking at the same inputs response

functions, but conditional monetary shocks.

That's very interesting, but eventually they had to take it

even away from, from the published version of the paper.

So I, I, I guess there are some problems there,

uh, we better not talk about this.

OK, so any questions about this empirical evidence?

Is this all clear?

To make sure that I, I followed in the last,

yeah, on that one, are we saying that if we

believe that it's DCD then that the left hand side

is more or less a spurious correlation it's correlated because

it's correlated with.

Change and that's where we see that the urine is

also cor because once again it's, it's very gregation.

So it's not about Europe.

It's not about Europe.

The thing is the following.

So if you So even if dollar and euro are

uncorrelated, there is always this high component.

And that's that's why you get this thing.

So again it's, it's a little bit hard to to

show the result of the model but intuitively again if

you have sticking prices and they are seeking PCP you

this is the sufficiency, but imagine that prices are actually

flexible.

Then should we expect that this bilateral exchange is efficient?

No, right, because again, you can't use those inputs coming

from everywhere to produce goods that support the eurozone.

It will compete in the eurozone with firms coming from

all over the world.

And actually, even in simple model, what you will have

is that, you know, the price, the price from G

to I, it will be a function of many, many

exchange rates, right?

Exchange rate I exchange rate G.

Think of this as trade weight exchange rates, but also,

you know, many other.

You know, many other exchanges.

And so if you regress it on bilateral exchange rate,

but also you either this or this exchange rate, both

will be significant, right?

Because this 11 will reflect the exchange rate of G

and this one will kind of uh reflect exchange rate

I.

And then you can include even more exchanges and they

will be all, they will all play some role, right?

Maybe not very large quantitatively, but they will be all

significant.

And so that's why it's an interesting exercise.

What happens if you include euro exchange against I rather

than $1.

Uh, but, but kinemetrically, you are right that there is

curious, uh, correlation.

Why is that?

Because these two are always correlated due to this I

component.

Yeah, yeah, so if you look on the right hand

side euro was the one that that is an ECP

would be but that's not what we're seeing right.

OK, very good.

If there are no other questions, then let's talk about

policy implications, we, we kind of already.

the switching, but there are a few general, general.

Discus.

OK, so the first one is about, um, just bilateral,

you know, just unilateral even trade balance.

So imagine Unfortunately we will have to talk about two

separate cases, we'll talk about non-US economies and because they're

different.

So that We have an exchange rate depreciation, right?

Maybe US just has, so local central bank has, uh,

loose monetary policy.

It depreciates the exchange rate.

So what, what happens to imports and exports in each

of these countries?

And this will be local she should just get over

my face.

So what happens to, let's start with non US economy.

And we're talking about, OK, so this was, this is

our main focus now.

What happens to countries exports and what happens to countries

ports.

So let's start with exports.

That's that's more interesting.

Right, so, OK, you can't export goods to the Eurozone,

but these goods price is $5.

So what do you have some bound depreciate.

OK, maybe let me keep this, this regressions, right this.

So where?

We're now talking about TCP.

So what happens when currency trade producer currency.

Depreciates So the prices at the US, which means that

the dollar price doesn't change it, but then also the

exchange rate between the euro because it was the British

pound that that different.

So therefore the eurozone pays the same price as before,

right.

So there is no, no change in euro prices which

means no switching.

Which means that it won't change, OK, so you can

see that for all US economist.

Exchange deprecision completely loses its kind of stimulative effect right

that we kind of start, uh, it was one of

the main motivation why are interested in exchanges because they

can help them to stimulate experts and so this is

no longer true under this, OK, that's one of the

biggest differences from PCPKs.

OK, good.

What about imports now?

Again, I think of the UK buying goods from Eurozone,

but these goods have prices sticking in dollars.

And again, pound depreciates.

It also depreciates with longer because it's so therefore it's

gonna be more expensive to buy these goods than before,

so you in terms of quantity you want exactly.

So we still have, in other words, we still have

that will increase.

So that's exactly like we had in our baseline model.

So there's still a positive relation between exchanger and experts,

but it will be first of all, it will be

muted, and second, it will all work for imports rather

than for experts.

And, OK, I don't want to, you know, welfare implications

are complicated.

It's actually surprisingly hard to say whether it is good

or bad if you take the model seriously, but at

some intuitive level it's not great because.

You depreciate your interest.

You want to stimulate your output usually, right, to simulate

production.

That doesn't happen.

Instead, you now have, you now face high import prices.

You, you can't afford that, right?

You cut your consumption of foreign goods, so households probably

will not be very happy about this.

So you still have an increase in net exports, but

it comes through, you know, from.

Uh, not the most.

Welfare improvement channel.

OK, now what about the US?

Again, let's start with uh US exports.

So now US also has DCP.

I mean this is very true in the data.

Almost all US imports and exports, uh, are in, uh,

dollars.

You have, OK, seeking dollars and now US depreciates dollar.

It's already in the door, so we wouldn't experience.

OK, extra prices, right?

But for consumers in other countries.

Who decide whether to buy US goods or not.

For then the price will decrease, right?

So think of US exporting to Eurozone as well.

Dollar depreciated price in dollars don't change, but in euros

they now go, uh, down, right, which means that we'll

still up exactly, exactly, mhm.

That's right.

Now, what about here imports?

Stays constant or decreases stays constant, yes, right, so yes,

import prices, they are sticking dollars.

Dollar depreciates, but for US consumers, nothing really changes, right?

They still see the same import prices.

They don't buy more goods, don't buy less, and so

import stays the same.

So in other words, again, we, we still get this

positive effect on net exports, right?

net exports will still increase.

But it's completely different channel than the one that we

have for non US economies, and in some sense it's

kind of more pleasant, right?

You don't get any import import price inflation.

You can still buy the same amount of imported goods,

but you stimulate your exports.

OK, so that's, that's kind of the main.

The main difference Uh, OCP from PCP, right, and the

PCP who will simulate experts who have lower imports, and

this would be the case for any country to the

US.

With DCP we have this as symmetry.

OK, maybe I shouldn't use the table here, um.

OK, so this was kind of the first, this is

the first policy prediction, right, the first important uh implication

of the model.

Um, Now, what about global trade?

So even now think about, you know, OK, we have

export imports, but right, what is export for one country

will be import for another country.

So you will have.

Dollar depreciation against other countries.

What, what would be the effect on global trade?

Most routes are paid in dollars, so it will be

cheaper.

Mhm.

So you would expect the banks go uh for use

or you think about the, no, wait a second.

No, I want about just volume of global trade, global

trade, not US trade, just, but all, you know, I,

right, all goods which cross borders, which happens to these

flows.

I mean, you, right, exactly, so.

Exactly right.

So in all countries, households still go to stores except

the US, uh, and they see that imported goods became

cheaper in the US.

There is just no effect, right?

But for all other countries we see that, uh, imports

should increase, which means that the global trade increase exactly.

So in other words, even if the US is an

infinitely small country, which is of course not true in,

but you can imagine, right, we can probably find some

parts of the world where there's almost no trade with

the US.

And even for these countries, which seems to seem to

be isolated from the US, they will still experience the

effects of fluctuations in the US dollar, right?

And in particular the trade for them will increase, which

of course means that right, if, if the dollar appreciates,

then the global trade will go down.

I mean there are some empirical evidence.

I don't like it very much, but sometimes people mention

this, right?

So in 20082009 when, you know, at the peak of

financial crisis, the dollar appreciated because uh.

US, uh, currencies of safe haven, right, investors put their

money in the US, so the dollar appreciate and we

see that at the same time there was this huge

decrease in global trade.

I mean, the policy is not the only reason, obviously

the fact that there was a recession that already decreasesrate

quite a lot, especially trade in, uh, euros, but it's

still interesting that there is some, you know, it looks

like there's significant, uh, positive relation between the two variables.

OK, so, so that's kind of the second implication right

of this that no matter how large the US is

as, as a trade partner, it's exchange has effects on

global trading.

So the third part is my favourite.

It's again about US exchange rate.

Depreciation But what are the effects on global GDP?

OK, and this is a good, you know, place to

discuss spillovers.

I don't think we talked much about this, but.

Um, So one of the biggest questions, you know, in

policy world when people talk about international national of money

is what is the thing about the wars, right, uh,

so especially when you know we got a global crisis,

global recession, there are always these debates.

Isn't the good news for other countries if US, let's

say decreases interest rate, right, stimulates the economy.

And in principle, even before we talk about GCP, there

are two standard channels, how, how decrease in US monetary

in US interest rates affects other countries.

So do I have it?

Yes, OK, so here, here it is.

So the, the first one is, OK, US decreases interest

rates that stimulates local aggregate demand.

But some of this demand is, you know, spent on

is demand for foreign goods, right?

And so you increase the negative demand in the US

will also, uh, increase demand for foreign goods and that

will have stimulative effects.

So that's the kind of positive spillovers.

But then there's also expensive switching effect, right?

In the world with PCP, we know that.

Decreasing in US interest rate is the depreciation of the

world which makes foreign goods relatively more expensive, right, and

consumers both in the US and in our country they

will switch to US goods and that can, uh, can

decrease the amount for there for, for foreign goods.

Right, there is all this debated, you know, a lot

of empirical literature which tries to estimate which, which force

dominates in practise.

Again, there is this I say we before we just

write the the the second paper which looks at the

limiting kids with zero lower bound.

But monetary policy can still choose the exchange rate, and

we discussed this, then you may end up with currency

wars, right?

Then you completely lose expenditure, but you still have expenditure

switching effect, and then it becomes, you know, uh, how

you, you just want to export your recession to some

other country by depreciating the exchange rate.

And that's exactly what some policymakers were very much uh

worried about after well during uh global financial crisis, right?

I think it was Brazil Brazil which complained most and

in some sense of currency wars.

To be honest, I, I'm personally quite sceptical.

You really need very very exotic assumptions to get this,

uh, force dominate.

In most standard models actually, you know, if other countries

stimulate the economy, it's actually good news for my economy

as well.

So usually explain of major effect dominates even under PCP.

Uh, but what, what I think was a little bit

overlooked, and I still feel like people don't fully realise

this, is that there is, if you, if you believe

in DCP, there is kind of additional force which stimulates

global out.

And so one way to see this, and it's, it's

of course very, you know, uh, heuristic, it's not really

proof, but you can show it formally in the model,

right?

So if you take the global economy as a whole.

Their GDP is kind of and there is also an

investment in our place, but let's forget about that.

The important thing is that once you take the sum

of GDP across countries, the tax rates will drop off.

Right, because an expert, you know, if you have an

expert in one country in other countries will be negative.

So at the global level, the effort is zero because

we don't trade with other planets.

And so, right, but what is kind of, what is

GDP and well, this is determined by aggregate real demand

and again reallyly speaking, right, there's nominal demand determined by

monetary policy and there is price, uh, price in the

global economy, right?

So even if you have zero over power, even if

for some reason my policy cannot stimulate global outputs or

endless constant.

A depreciation of the dollar will decrease prices across countries,

right, because some of these prices, they speak in dollars

and when depreciate it decreases CPI in this for other

countries.

OK, so real demand increases and that stimulate global output,

OK, and again that was again part, uh, of the

mechanism in, in my model, in my job market paper,

so you can take even the limit where US becomes

again infinitely small.

So whatever it does in terms of expenditure switching or

or expansion of it doesn't matter, right?

It's if it's a tiny economy it will have zero

spillover from the rest of the world, but as long

as its currency is used in most of the global

trade.

Depreciation of the rule and this, this is again even

the kind of a simple calibrated model this effect dominates

the the other two for the US.

OK, so we have stimulating effects on GDP.

Again, notice that those are two different things, right?

So for example, global trade effect effect on global trade

defence depends a lot on expenditure switching, how much you

switch between home goods and foreign goods.

If this elasticity is small, then you know, expense switching

will not change global trade.

Well this effect, it, it doesn't depend on elasticity, right?

There are no elasticities here.

It's just, you know, increasingly.

That's it.

Uh, so yeah, you can have, you can have one

without the, those are two really, really different effects.

OK, makes sense.

Uh-huh, please.

Uh, we have like uh.

will help like facilitate uh global trade which is going

to be like on top of this government policy effects

we may also have more gains from trade.

Yeah, but this effect again, right, net experts cannot change.

Net experts cannot change, so you will not see at

the global level change in net exports, right?

So all effects, if you see in global trade effects,

it will be part of this thing.

Again, right, I mean, I'm saying that you, OK, you

can say that, OK, it's obvious that depreciates, increasing global

trade.

Some produces these goods, so it should increase GDP, but

that's not obvious because you can have increased in exports

in all countries, but at the same time decrease in

domestic consumption because you now consume less of local goods

which, which are more expensive relative to foreign goods.

So in that sense, again, I, I don't think this

result is sufficient to get this result.

It's, it's different.

OK, just, I mean, just since we, we probably will

not have much time to, to talk about that later

on in this course.

I mean, there is also big leader which thinks about

financial spillovers of, of my policy, right?

There is a whole literature about global financial cycle.

So Helen Ray from LBS, she's, she's the one who

coined this term and, uh, one of the main, uh,

people contributed who contributed to that literature.

So the idea there is that OK, you change interest

rates in the US, obviously that has a lot of

implications for financial markets in the US, right?

All assets will be repriced, uh, you know, it can

increase profits of some banks, right, decrease, uh, results in

loans for, for other banks, but because the US financial

market is again disproportionately large, it affects all financial markets

in other countries and.

The rate at which firms and households can borrow in

other countries will also change, right?

And so there, there, there is potentially this fourth channel

which is also very important, but again people kind of

disagree with the empirically how much empirically this channel is.

OK, good.

Uh, so just, OK, this is again from Gitter's paper.

This is pass-through of US exchange rate into CPI in

other countries.

Uh, so there is short-run pass-through, there is long-run pass-through,

and There is a direct effect just using share of

import imported goods and indirect total which takes into account

that uh foreign goods are used in production in production

of local goods and I mean again this is not,

you know, uh, it's, it's a very rough estimate because

it only uses.

Voicing uh data, it will use some trade laws.

It doesn't take into account all these micro level input

outages, but I just want to say that right, the

numbers are quite significant.

So, uh, you know, like 10%, let's say depreciation of

the dollar can decrease prices by 2.7%, which is low,

I think this is in the upper bound it's probably

a little bit.

Ah, too high, but uh.

Again, you need kind of better data to, to, to

make more precise estimates.

OK, good.

And then finally, right, so, so everything that I said

so far was about positive implications, right?

But what is the optimal policy?

Uh, so that's, you know, not my, my job market

people, but that's another follow-up paper that we had with

my quote, Konstantin Igorov.

It, it's actually turns out to be very interesting.

It's much more, you know, when we started the project,

we didn't expect to find this, but let me, we

don't have too much time, but let me still talk.

What do you feel about this?

OK, so who knows what is divine coincidence in the

context of my policy.

Have you heard of this term?

No.

OK, so in the closed economy macro, there's this famous

result that if my report is stabilises prices under certain

conditions, it will also achieve efficient output level of output.

So you kind of kill two stones, two birds with

one stone, you achieve price stability and optimal output, you

know, full employment by just using one monetary tool, uh,

interest rates.

So it turns out that in the open economy, there

is also divine coincidence under the PCP.

OK, so if you have producer currency pricing.

Then monetary policy.

Should stabilise prices, domestic prices, OK?

So you stabilise PPI producer price index, domestic prices, and

once you do that, you achieve the first best allocation.

OK, so what is kind of very high level intuition

for this result?

In a sense, I mean it's not legal, right, but

in a sense.

You have only one price which is sticky in the

economy.

It's your domestic price.

And if you, if monetary policy ensures that firms don't

need to change these prices by targeting right by doing

inflation targeting, all other prices will adjust so that the

relative prices are efficient and it is the relative prices

which determine the allocation, right?

So once you have the efficient relative prices, you will

also get the efficient allocation.

Right?

So that's, that's a very, very general kind of insight

in this literature, right?

So if you have both sticky wages and sticky prices,

you cannot achieve first best allocation because you can only

stabilise one price, you can't stabilise both, right?

But as long as you have only one price which

is sticky, then you are, you're fine.

And, and in the open economy, right?

OK, you have domestic goods which are seeking in your

currency, you have foreign goods which are seeking foreign currency,

but because you have a floating exchange rate, effectively you

can achieve efficient relative price.

OK, that's exactly the main argument in favour of free

floating exchange.

It allows you to achieve efficient relative price across domestic

goods and foreign goods.

Now the problem is that once you have DCP, this

is no longer the case, right?

You have, OK, you still have your domestic prices which

I see here in, uh, domestic currency, but now you

have exported goods which you also produce, right?

It's the same goods kind of, but they're stick in

dollars, OK.

The problem is that.

Uh, domestic prices.

Domestic prices, they are sticky in local currency or producer

currency and export goods.

They are sticky in dollars.

Right, and so when you exchange it moves, these two

prices, they divert even though again producing this, these two

goods, you know, cost you the same way, so they

should be priced at the same price.

So what, OK, so what, what is the implication?

It turns out that even though you can no longer

achieve the efficient allocation under DCP, it's still optimal to

target PPI inflation.

OK, so the optimal policy.

Is that you still want to stabilise PPI inflation.

Even though it will no longer be, you know, fully

efficient, right?

But you monetary policy cannot, cannot do better than that.

I mean, OK, so this is an interesting result.

On the one hand, it's still very stark result, right?

You still have very clear target and it's still very,

you know, still close to what you know, most economists

advocate inflation targeting, but at the same time, it, it,

it will, it doesn't mean that exchange will be freely,

free fully freely floated.

Why is that?

Because as long as you use some imported goods in

production.

To stabilise DPI, you will need to stabilise kind of

marginal costs or every source of local producers, and this

will include foreign intermediates, foreign inputs.

And so for example, if you have dollar depreciation, it

means that foreign imports become more expensive for you.

It means that now local firms will have this pressure

of increasing their prices and monetary policy will need to

intervene and tighten, right, monetary policy, which effectively means that

the exchange will move slightly better, right?

Not fully back, but it will, the, your currency will,

uh, will move against the dollar and so the resulting,

you know, net movement will be smaller than the original

one.

So you always want to partially stabilise your exchange against

the dollar because of this.

Right?

So once again, right, let's say those are appreciates.

Your input prices, foreign input prices.

Go up, so my policy will local mine to policy

will titan, and so your exchange rate.

Will kind of appreciate, right again, the net effect will

be still the case that your exchange rate depreciates against

the door but not as much as uh if monetary

policy did not intervene at all.

OK, so that's, that's the interesting implication of DCP.

Again, if, if there is no DCP, there is no

reason for you to respond to lower movements.

You should respond to exchange of movements uh coming from

your trade partners, right?

But if you don't trade much with the, you will

not respond to US exchange.

Uh, so what is interesting, OK, I'm really running out

of time, but let me show you two pictures.

So it turns out empirically that there are very few

countries in the world which have a true free floating

exchange rate.

OK, US, UK, Eurozone as a whole, Japan to some

extent, a few other countries, but most countries in the

world that we know, they have, they're somewhere in between.

It's not the 3 exchange rate.

It's not a fixed exchange rate.

I mean some of the fixed exchange rate, but most

countries are somewhere in between.

We have a growing, joint flow, manage people use different

terms.

And what is most interesting is that for the vast

majority of these countries, uh, the dollar is the anchor

currency.

So this is 19,150, OK, this is kind of the

high point of Bretton Woods when all the countries head

back to the dollar, right, some American countries, but then

there was still a large number of.

we had the bond.

Some of them had against the Swiss, uh, the French

franc, right?

And then it was ruble so on.

Now we live in a much more globalised world where

even though most countries don't have, you know, fully fixed

exchange rate, they still anchor their exchange rate against the

dollar, right?

OK, so there's Eurozone.

There are some countries which have, which you know enter

their exchanges to the.

Lecture 19:

I Uh Yeah And OK, good.

I guess we should start, um, right, so we have

2 lectures and then we need to move to another

room for the seminar.

Uh, so we need to make a 10 minute break

because it's somewhere else.

Um, OK, good.

So let's just quickly finish where we stopped last time,

right?

Just a few slides about international price system and then

we can talk about the last kind of main topic

of the currency shares.

OK, so, so if you remember, right, we talked about

the implications of dollar currency pricing in international trade for

policy, right, we talked about, uh, adjustment of the trade

balance whether it works for the imports or exports, right,

that depends whether it is we're talking about the US

or the rest of the world.

We talked about effects of US monetary policy on the

global economy, right?

And if you remember there were kind of two effects.

So one was about global trade, right, and another one

was about global GDP.

And they are in principle different and then the very

last piece I we kind of talked about this but

too quickly I think uh is about optimal policy, right?

And so the argument here is the follows.

So if you take the simplest possible open economy model

you can show that.

The optimal stabilise PPI inflation.

So the price of domestic products should be constant.

It's actually quite involved.

It's, it's not easy to show, you know, it's, uh,

even in my PhD class I show some results, but

you know, to get to, to really drive this formula

it takes much time.

OK, but you can see analogy with a closed coin,

right?

We usually think that monetary policy should stabilise prices, right?

I mean, sometimes there is, um, you know.

Uh, there is a big recession than market policy deviates

from, uh, just arising prices.

It also thinks about output and, uh, unemployment, but kind

of the main goal of the policy is stabilise prices,

right?

And in the open economy, it becomes less trigger because.

Right, I mean, in the closed economy just CPI is

the same as PPI, right?

That's kind of one price index, but what about open

economy?

The PPI doesn't coincide with CPI, right?

So let me just remind you, right?

What, what is kind of the gap?

What is the question between CPI and PPI in an

open economy where, where it comes from.

National accounts 101.

Why, why are they not?

OK, maybe, maybe I should say what PPI is.

OK, so this is gonna see more price index and

this is producer price index, right.

So what is the difference between the two?

In an open economy, often consumption is greater or like

not equal.

That's right.

Uh, but in terms of composition of this price indices,

right?

So even if you have a balanced trade, even if

you, it's not like you're borrowing or saving internationally, why

even in that case there might be a gap between

the two.

So which goods will be part of CPI but not

part of PPI?

and some, OK, so there is kind of CPI core

CPI, right?

That's true that sometimes people exclude that.

That's true, but that will be true in a closed

economy, right?

But there is additional thing in the open economy.

Uh-huh.

OK.

Exports imports, right?

Exactly.

So imports will be part of of CPI, right, because

we consume foreign goods, but they will be not part

of PPI.

Well, exports, I mean, it depends a little bit on,

you know, country, but usually at least some export prices

are included in PPI.

Right, and so that's exactly the gap between these, uh,

two price indices.

And so in the open economy that is a kind

of a question, right?

So which prices is, uh, the planner should use, and

the answer is that in standard models, including, including models

with DCP it's PPI.

the pricing kind of intuitive, right?

I imagine that you have a shock to import prices,

right?

Maybe you know other countries become less productive, maybe more

productive, right?

Maybe there is a deficit of oil in the global

market.

So something changes.

So if it's a small open economy, it should not

respond to this price shock, right?

It should take it as given.

It's almost like a technological shock.

So you should not, you know, adjust prices because of

that.

It's, it's a little bit counterintuitive, right?

I mean, there are all these debates and discussions whether

multi policies should respond to oil price shocks which are

kind of global shocks, right?

But if it's just, you know, if it's just import

prices and then, uh, they're part of CPAC, then the

market should not respond.

OK.

Now there is one important detail here, caveat here, right?

So if you have import prices.

And then you use these, these goods to produce local

goods.

OK, so if, if this is kind of inputs in

production, right, and we spend time discussing that very often,

right, large, uh, firms they are also importers of foreign

imports.

And so if this prices I used them to produce

local goods and then eventually, right, it affects local prices,

local PPI.

So then these prices matter, right?

So in particular oil price goes up, it becomes more

expensive to produce local goods.

Then monetary policy should kind of respond and stabilise PPI.

OK, so the interesting implication of this result is that

the currency of invoicing actually might be quite a lot,

right?

So again, you can think of the case when we

have LCP, local currency pricing, imagine that all import prices

seeking local currency.

Then mightport doesn't need to work very hard to offset

shocks in the global markets, right, because it is in

the short run, import prices will not change in local

currency, so there will be no response on PPI of

PPI to this global shocks.

On the other hand, if you have DCP, it is

quite different, right, because then what happens to the dollar

exchange rate will, will pass through completely into import prices.

And in particular, as that's what we discussed last time,

right?

So US managing US, you know, TV shows to the

US dollar will affect all countries in the world, right,

will affect import prices in all countries and will, uh,

will, will, um, make it awkward for other countries to

respond.

So in particular, just as is one most important example,

imagine that the US decides to raise interest rates, right?

Maybe there is just, you know, local economies over here,

maybe there's a large fiscal shock which stimulates the US

economy, and so the Fed responds by increasing the interest

rate.

OK, maybe just more precisely yes, super.

OK, so US interest rate goes up.

So what happens to exchange rates in other countries?

It is.

According to all those kind of stuff.

Depreciates exactly right, so other changes depreciate.

Right, so which means that import prices in local currency.

They go up, right?

Because they're sticking in dollars, they don't change in dollars,

which means that in local currency they will become more

expensive.

And if these goods are used as inputs in local

production, that will also increase PPI.

Which means that what should local monetary policy do?

If, if, if, you know, they follow optimal rule and

want to stabilise CPI, should they increase interest rate or

decrease interest rate?

To fight local inflation.

Uh-huh, exactly.

They need to increase interest rate, right?

I mean, it will kind of cool down the economy.

I mean, notice that in particular we know that that

will also partly offset movements of the exchange rate, right?

I mean, it will still depreciate but not as much

as, uh, if one policy did not respond, right?

So that kind of, you know, heals partially in the

effect.

But partial, right?

And so what you can see.

That's kind of interesting.

There are kind of two interesting implications here, right?

So the first one is that all countries import US

monetary policy to some extent.

When the US titans maybe, but maybe exclusively for local

reasons, right?

Maybe there were no global shocks, but US monetary policy

titan.

All other countries will kind of move in the same

direction.

This is what what is sometimes called global monetary cycle.

Right, and, and, and not right, it's not like, you

know, I give you one example.

It's not like, uh, it works for any other country,

right?

It works only for US monetary policy because if they,

let's say, uh, the, the, the ECB European Central Bank

t is monetary policy, that will not change import prices

in other countries if border prices are sticky in dollars,

right?

It's really very much a symmetric.

It's only the US monetary policy which has such, uh,

disproportionate effects on other countries.

Um, right, and so you, you know, all other kind

of kind of import monetary stance of the US.

So that's what that's the first implication.

And the second implications that I already mentioned, right, is

that.

It looks a little bit as if other countries want

to stabilise the exchange rate against the dollar, right, it

will, it will not be a fixed exchange rate.

It's not like they don't move it a lot at

all, right, because after all, there are some local shocks,

local productivity shocks.

My policy needs to respond to them as well, so

the exchange rate will move sometimes, but it, it, it

will be partially stabilised.

Right?

And that's, that's, you know, exactly what we see in

the data.

That is what, uh, people call, uh, crawling packs or

dirty floors, uh, and we see that many countries in

the world anchor the exchange rate to the dollar.

OK, so I'll show you there in a second.

OK, so any, any questions about this?

Does this make sense?

OK, good.

So then let me just again, I mentioned this.

I showed you some pictures, but I think it's too

important paper to, to, to go so quickly over it,

right?

So it's just androgov, one of the most cited papers

of the last 10 years in international macro.

So what they did, they classified all exchange rate regimes

into different categories, right?

They have free floating, narrow and managed.

Right, so how do they classify that as well, they

look at the this the volatility of the bilateral exchange

rate, OK, so it's, I mean.

If you want really, you know, to criticise the paper,

you can always say that maybe it just happens so

that two countries have very correlated fundamental shocks, and that's

why the exchange rates are not moving very much, right?

So in principle that can be true.

Uh, I mean they do some robustness checks.

It seems like productivity shocks at least are not very

much correlated across countries.

And so then their preferred interpretation is that some have

with the mighty police, right?

Central banks intervene in countries and they manage, uh, exchange

rates, um.

Uh, against other currencies.

OK, so then how can, how can you identify the

currency?

Well, you just look, uh, at different bilateral exchange rate,

right?

Let's say I'm, uh, Argentina.

You can look at the exchange rate of Argentina against

the US, against the UK, against Japan, and you look

at which one is more stable, right?

And so if, if, if, uh, peso moves less against

the dollar against other free flow curs, then it means

that the US dollar is the end currency for.

OK, and so here are kind of the stark pictures,

right?

So, um, OK, so this is the change rate regimes.

Right, so you know, the dark colours show more piece

exchange rates and uh white colour shows uh free low,

you know, 34 or free free flow folding, those are

usually the kind of with very high inflation, right, like

Venezuela.

So if you have, you know, hundreds of, uh, per%

inflation every month, and the change rate also moves like

crazy, right, you can see it here, but these are

just a few exceptions for most countries it doesn't apply

and so then.

You know that is like the UK, Japan would be

classified as uh free voting.

I mean, the interesting thing is how they classify the

eurozone.

There's a big debate in the literature between these guys

and the IMF.

IMF says that the eurozone is a free floating country,

uh, while they classify it as a fix exchange rate,

and I mean it's, it's interesting, right, because of course

Eurozone as a whole, it has a free floating exchange

rate.

But each country individually in the eurozone, it almost like

has a fixed exchange rate, right, because its main trade

partners are usually also members of the eurozone and against

these countries it has a new exchange rate.

So it's, you know, it's there's a little little you

use here, right, um, but yeah, I mean you can

see right that so for if, if, if we talk

about African countries, many of them actually have attack against

the euro.

Voting against the gold but against the, the euro you

said in the second, so countries in the Middle East,

all the sporting countries, they have this exchange rate against

the dollar.

And OK, so this is China.

I mean in the case of China it's a little

bit more complicated.

China had a tax exchange rate from 1995 to 2005

because and then some adjustments, but the vol is still

very low, so it seems like they're still kind of

intervening in the currency markets and so on.

Based on this, this paper classifies China as a fixed

exchange rate regime.

OK, so, OK, so then the next question is, right,

uh, what is the anger currency for a given country,

and again, I showed this briefly last time.

The amazing fact here is that we, we would have

thought that 1950 is kind of the, you know, the

peak of the bread and board system, right?

The peak of the system of fixed exchange rates.

And now you could think that much more candidates have

uh free flows in exchange rates, and they say that

that's not the case.

So if anything in 1950, the system was, you know,

less centralised, right?

There was, there was, uh, regions there were countries which

use the do as a.

And the currency, uh, there were countries which use the,

uh, French, um, friend, I guess, right, uh, as a,

as, um, anger currency, of course there were several currencies

which still use, uh, the British pound, um, as, um,

anger currency, right, and, uh, uh, countries, um, uh, using

the ruble as um a currency.

OK, and so now in 2015 we see that things

have changed quite a lot, right?

So there are effectively only two, anchor currencies left, right?

So, uh, the eurozone and some African countries, they use

the euro and almost everyone else, if they do pay

some form of pay, they pay to the.

Right, and I mean it's, it's, it's, it's, I mean

there are two things I think which are non-trivial here,

right?

So somehow, even though there are no official agreements between

countries to, to have, you know, but was was, you

know, an agreement, right, explicit agreement.

Now there are no such agreements across countries, but still

many choose to back to the dollar even though they

don't have to do that.

Uh, and, and it must be somehow related to globalisation,

right?

It seems like nowadays when countries are much more exposed

to both international capital flows and also trade flows, they

find it optimal to stabilise the exchange rates, right?

So in some sense in the 1950s, most countries were

relatively close, so after all for them it didn't really

matter that much, how much volatility there was in the

market, but nowadays it's just very painful for many countries.

So that's one interesting observation.

Um, Another one is um.

Another one is why so few countries have a free

floating, right?

I mean, what is so special about you know these

few countries that uh have a free floating and that's

not so obvious, right?

It seems like partly it's just historical reasons because, and

again, Eurozone, it makes a lot of sense, but what

about the UK, right?

The UK is a small and fairly open economy and

it's not clear why, why, you know, it has, uh.

It's own, uh, independent, uh, exchange rate, right?

So and Switzerland, by the way, so Switzerland, as we

discussed at some point, right, for many years it actually

had a growing back against, uh, this, uh, the euro.

So even for Switzerland, uh, you know, they, they, they,

they worry about exchange rates.

Oh, and one more thing, let me say here, right?

So I mean, an interesting thing about this picture again

1950 Bretton Woods, right?

So as I said, in some sense you, you see

a lot of different colours here, right?

This is kind of French look, this is the key

look, right, and so on, but.

France and the UK themselves they change against the world,

right?

So in the end, most exchange rates were, and this

raises a very interesting question about today's world, right, because

In some sense, you know, the countries entered the bread

and Woods system when the UK was still importing of

and France was still, you know, they were still important

countries, they had, uh, colonies.

They had large fires, but then when countries exited the

red and woods in 1973.

When the pound started moving against the dollar, most countries

decided to stay with the dollar rather than with the

pound, right?

So when the pound is not moving against the dollar,

you can't really say, right?

It's not obvious whether other countries are pegging to the

pound or to the dollar.

This is kind of observational equivalent, right?

Uh, but once they decided, it turns out that countries

already switched to the US.

And so there's an interesting question, what happens, you know,

when China allows its exchange rate to be more volatile,

right?

So right now, again, it's true that Renminbi is moving

against the doll, but it's not moving much.

And so if you, you know, for most countries in

the world, China is a much more important trade partner

than the US, but they don't really have to choose

between the two, right?

If they want to have a pack, OK, they're back

to the dollar, but implicitly it's also packed to the.

So the interesting question is that if we kind of

for some reason exit this regime, right, and China starts

moving its exchange rate much more, will this country switch

to the back to the renminbi or not?

I didn't, I think that's exactly what we kind of

don't know.

Uh, I, OK, we know the Chinese is very important

trade partner, right?

If we think about most Asian countries, for example, for

them, China dominates the US, uh, in terms of, uh,

trade.

Right, on the other hand, there's this bigger symmetry, right?

So China is the most important trade partner, but if

you think about financial markets, of course they are much

more developed in the US, right?

And so maybe there is just again when we think

about this counterfactual world where China has a floating exchange

rate, we also need to specify, uh, whether it needs

capital controls, right, whether it will become easier for other

countries also to have capital flows against China.

Because otherwise, you know, like even Russia, which is under

heavy sanctions and would really love to switch from dollars

and euros to renminbi, they struggles with that, right, because

of all these capital controls.

Actually, China is not surprisingly not very open to the

idea that Russia will hold a lot of reserves in

the Renminbi, so.

So there are some issues there and yeah.

That's an open question.

OK.

Um, OK, so there is a nice paper, I think

it was eventually published published in the Journal of Finance,

uh, by Tony Zhang who shows, you know, maybe the

most direct evidence in favour of this mechanism.

So let me see how it works.

OK, so he looks at at exogenous US monetary shocks,

right?

I mean, there's a large literature in monetary economics how

to identify exogenous shocks to monetary policy, right?

Usually people look at, as we discussed at this FOMC

meetings, right, 30 minute windows.

Um, and so he looks at how exchange rates in

other countries respond and how interest rates in other countries

respond, and he looks at the countries, you know, based

on their share the share of dollar invoicing, uh, in

imports divided by total consumption, right?

So for example, if you don't have any imports or

you don't have any DCP imports, then the share is

zero and then we expect that.

You will have smaller spillovers from US markets, right?

And it's interesting that he finds indeed that countries which

have, you know, which don't use dollars very much in

trade, their interest rates don't change much when the US

increases interest rates, while countries which have high share of

discipline their neighbours, right, they increase interest rates in response

to high hikes in, in, in the US.

Similarly, if you look at the exchange, I mean here

it's maybe a little bit more noisier about the point,

but here again, the, the, the slope is in line

with the theory.

So if you have um a high share of uh

of your um Consumption in dollars, you will and if

not allow your exchange rate to depreciate as much, right,

uh, while these countries they allow for movements in the

exchange rates.

OK, and this is just yeah, the same results but

using regressions.

OK, very good.

So any questions about this topic?

OK.

2015 so this must be free floating.

I mean these are the kinds which have free floating

exchange, so they don't have anchor currencies at all.

Yeah, it's not, I mean, yeah.

Mhm.

Well, OK, at least, at least for Australia and Japan.

Um, OK, here it might be that, uh, South African

currency is used as currency that I mean, I, I,

to be honest, I don't remember exactly, but I think

that might be the case.

Uh, yeah.

OK, any other questions?

OK good so then.

OK, so this is kind of a natural continuation of

the same topic.

So so far, right, all these things that we discussed.

We took currency choices given, right?

We said, OK, there's PCP, LCP, GCP, maybe even ECP

euro currency pricing.

We talked about evidence in the data, right?

We see that prices are set in dollars.

We see that prices stick in dollars and we kind

of discussed different policy implications of of this thing.

Now another interesting question is how do firms choose this

currency and so I.

My, my favourite way of thinking about this, the whole

literature is like this, right?

You have empirical facts.

About Right, without them you, you got to start thinking

about these issues.

So then once you establish this about policy implications.

And that's what we did last time and what we

discussed just now, right, but that's kind of, I mean

that's, that's maybe the most important for, for central bankers,

but kind of.

From the low frequency, right, kind of long term perspective,

another fundamental question is that why do we see?

And if we think about uh my policy today maybe

it's not such an important question, but on the other

hand, as we just discussed, right, it's not like the

dollar was always the dominant currency.

It's not like, you know, it's baked in and it

will never change.

We understand that under certain circumstances this might change, right?

Like just 100 years ago, the pound was the dominant

currency and then, uh, countries is switched to, to, to

the dollar.

And so ideally, right, we also want a model which

explains.

Uh, this outcome, this equilibrium is an endogenous, uh, outcome,

right?

And so that's, that's exactly what we're going to talk

about today.

OK, so in some sense, again, it's, you know, it's

always, I think helpful to build analogy, make analogy.

So in some sense it will begin very close to

the question why we use money, right, kind of the

standard macroeconomic question about the use of money, right?

And if you remember this is almost like, you know,

undergraduate macro.

There are 3 functions of money.

Right, unit of account, medium of exchange, and store of

value.

And if you think about this a little bit more

deeply, I mean, we just learned this at school or

you know, first year, uh, undergraduate macro but then if

you start thinking about this, so these three rules of

mind, they try to capture some frictions.

In other words, if you have completely friction.

then you don't need money, right?

Or I mean your portfolio is not really determined, right?

There are many assets, there are many goods, and you

don't really need money, right?

You can exchange goods for goods.

You can, you can hold different assets in temporary.

You don't really need money.

So you need to introduce uh some kind of friction

and so you know, each of these functions of money,

they kind of emphasise different frictions.

So if you think about you going.

It it is, it's about sticky prices, right, because again

that was the whole lecture last time, right?

So depending whether you set price in dollars or in

produce the currency, if the price is sticking that currency,

that will generate very different exchange rate pass through and

that will result in different allocations, right?

And so clearly both consumers and firms, they, they care

about this again that is.

A large and well established about this I will show

you I spent much time, maybe too much time showing

you some results from from my paper.

OK, so this will be kind of the main focus

of today and the reason is not just because I

kind of know this literature better and like this maybe

literature more, but it's just that it's much more, much

more developed.

I, I would say, you know, it's really kind of

maybe even more or less fingers.

OK, so these two stories, they are different and they

are, I, I would say actually somewhat understated.

OK.

So if you think about the medium of exchange, this

is, this is the, those models, they usually emphasise transaction

costs, right?

And you know, like we could exchange one good for

another good, but usually there is no coincidence of needs,

right?

I mean, you want, you want coffee.

Uh, I don't have coffee.

I can only teach and so, right, you will pay

me maybe for teaching.

I will pay for, uh, some food, right, but eventually

we kind of clear all the markets, uh, using mine,

right?

So in that sense it's kind of, uh, works well.

And so if there are some transaction costs, right, if

butter is not really an option, then you can generate

demand for money.

And then again, right, the interesting thing here is something

like you have many countries within each country people and

firms, they use local currencies, but then they meet right

in international goods markets.

They need to to export goods and import goods.

And so then how do they clear these markets, right?

Which currencies should they use because in principle they, you

know, they kind of have different currencies in their pockets.

Uh, and so there's an old leadership about this, but

this is kind of went for I don't know why,

but somehow it went out of fashion, and there is,

there are very few recent papers on this topic, and

the main problem I would say that there is just

not no good empirical evidence, right?

So I will show you a very stylized model which

kind of captures this idea, but I don't think we

have any good empirical estimates how important, uh, these these

frictions are in the end.

And then finally this is I think the most intriguing

one and this is where you know you can see

the recent papers uh are exactly on this topic is

that there are some financial res, right?

So this is when we say that we use money

as a store of value, but then of course the

question is why do we use money rather than some

kind of bonds or stocks, right?

And so there must be something special about this.

And again, in the international context, it seems like there's

something special about dollar denominated, uh, bonds, right?

Maybe it's actually maybe the currency of invoicing is not

so important.

Maybe it's more about just US issuing very particular assets

which is very hard to substitute, right?

And so if you want, you know, many central banks,

uh, and financial institutions all over the world, they want

US treasuries, but if you want to use US treasuries,

you need dollar to buy them, right?

And that will, uh, result in the special role of

the dollar in global markets.

OK, and, and again, I will show you one of

the lips, uh, very stylight version, but again, the problem

is that it's, it's very hard to, uh, provide, you

know, there are some stylized facts that you can explain

using these monos, but estimating kind of structure parameters is

really hard.

OK, any questions so far?

OK, good.

OK, so then let's talk about sticky price model.

Um, let me, before we go into general equilibrium, let

me actually start with partial equilibrium, OK, so this is

kind of the most, uh, important idea, um.

And actually let me, you know, maybe.

Uh, do some math here.

So we, we didn't really use, uh, derivatives that much

in this course, but let me do it once, OK,

and I will use actually payer expansion.

Is it OK?

OK, good.

OK, so here's actually a beautiful thing.

I think people use it when they start thinking about

sticky prices in the closet one, but it turns out

the same, um, approach also works, uh, if you want

to think about cars.

OK, so imagine you have a firm.

And the firm has some price, right, so profit of

the firm depends on the price.

The idea is that this price, it will kind of

determine the point or the demand curve, right?

So it will determine the quantities and eventually it will

determine profits.

And by the way, I mean, usually it's more convenient

to think about this fee as log price, OK, so

this is already in logs.

OK, so then what you can do, you can take

approximation, OK.

Uh, of this function before we even talk about this

is that we will use, and the point of approximation

that people usually use is the ideal price.

OK, so this is the price at which the profit

is maximised.

None of the word.

This is right of this function.

You just take the condition you find the pro the

price which uh is the highest value.

OK, so let's take uh an approximation on this point.

So this is just 1st, 1st term in the Taylor

expansion, right, and then.

Let me write one more.

Again, there are of course higher audios, but we will,

we will ignore that.

OK, so why is it, I mean this is, this

is just, this is just some, I mean depends on,

but it doesn't depend on you.

Now, why is it that the first order approximation is

usually not enough in this setting?

So what do we know about this term?

Right, so again, just remind you we evaluate this derivatives

like the profit function derivative at this 0, right?

This is the first order condition.

Given that PT, the maximise profit, it must be the

case the derivative of profit is equal to 0 at

this point.

Right, so this whole term is is 0, and that's

why we can focus on the second audit term.

And again, so how do people use this in cost

economy?

Well, they would say that imagine that you have a

menu cost more, right?

You can either keep your price at some predetermined level.

Right, let's say P or you can pay fixed cost

kappa and then you can set the optimal price either,

right?

Then how do you choose whether to pay this fixed

cost or not, this menu costs?

Well, you use this approximation, right, and then you compare.

Right, so So this is in a sense how much

you lose if you don't adjust your price, right?

So if your price is already predetermined, it's different from

the option one, right?

And so this will be losses how much you lose

if you don't adjust your price.

Right?

And so you compare these costs versus menu posts, right,

couple.

And so in particular, if let's say, OK, let me

see um.

So we must, I mean this is, by the way,

what is the sign of this thing.

It's negative, right, because this is kind of second order

condition.

The functions is, uh, guaranteed, so it has to be

negative when we put minus here.

And so if to make this thing, so if the

cost of noting price is higher than menu costs.

Then you adjust price, right?

Then you pay when you call and you just adjust

to be.

Right, on the other hand, you know, if you have

a situation like this, then many costs are too high,

you just keep the price at the pretty level.

OK, so this is kind of.

Any questions?

OK, so now let's go back to our problem in

current issues problem.

So let's think about exporter from Gandhi G to Gandhi.

OK.

So for this order again there exists some optimal price.

So which currency is this prize, by the way?

What is our convention?

We express all prizes in currency.

Of the buyer, right?

That's, that's uh, so this is in currency, this is

measured in currency I.

Don't get confused, it's important, OK?

So this is this is the one which maximises profits.

OK, of course, right, if firm can adjust prices in

every kind of state of the world in every period,

it will just set this price.

But imagine that price is sticky.

OK, and let's assume that let's just simplify and there's

only one period.

OK.

Before shocks are realised, you choose the currency, you set

the price in that currency, and then shocks realise, including

exchange rates, and you get some, you know, consumers will

face some price that will determine the firm's profits.

Right, and you can't adjust price at all aftershocks are

realised.

OK, this is kind of the fully sticky priced version

of the model.

OK, so suppose that you set price in currency.

OK, so this is a firm from.

It says price in currency key.

So that price will be fully sticky.

It doesn't move.

What will be the price that consumers face?

I mean, we, we work with laws, so we will,

we need to add some change, but what the change

is.

We need to convert this price from currency key to

currency.

exactly right and so again, uh.

I mean if if we had price in in in

levels, we will just multiply by the bilateral exchange rate,

but here it is in locks, everything is in locks,

so we just add the exchange rate, right?

But we can work from currency key to currency, right.

So this will be the price that consumers face eventually.

OK.

So that means right.

What is the expected when firms decide, right, uh, firms

decides.

Suppose it chooses.

Um, they don't confuse right so.

Right, so this will be the price that consumers face.

Right, it will determine the quantities that they buy.

This will determine profits and we take the expectation of

these profits.

OK, so that's what firms want to maximise, and they,

they choose this price, the upper bar.

But most importantly, right, most importantly for us, they choose

currency key in which they pre this price.

So in general yeah it would be a very complicated

problem to solve, right?

I mean this profit function, it's very nonlinear, so it's,

it's hard to, to work with this.

What is nice is that we can use this inside,

right?

We can take the second order expansion of the profit

function and then I mean we will have some term

which doesn't depend on anything, right?

It will not depend on currency choice.

It will be just optimal price.

We will have this term which is 0, and then

we are left with this uh object, right.

So we have, uh, I mean, again, this thing is

just negative, right?

So maximising profit means kind of minimising uh this object

and eventually what you can show that this problem.

It's just equivalent.

To Mhm To minimising this.

So let's, let's let me know if there are any

questions about just formula and then we will discuss.

Sorry, could you move from the right, right, OK, so

you, you, we have a profit here.

We substitute in this expression.

This is just exertions.

It goes away.

This is 0.

So we want to maximise this object.

But this second derivative is negative, right, because of second

order, which means that.

I mean it's it's a constant number but it is,

it is negative, so we take it away and we

get minimization of of the of the last break it.

OK, any other questions about derivations here?

Uh sorry, what was it K is the currency in

which they preset their price, right?

The currency in which price will not change after the

shocks are realised.

OK, good.

So now let's kind of stare at this expression, right,

and try to understand it.

I mean, first thing, first thing to, I mean, observe,

it's kind of almost trivial, right?

So this is the ideal price.

If firms could implement this price, they would be super

happy, right?

That's the best thing to do.

Unfortunately, usually it's not possible, so this will be the

price that consumers actually face, right?

And what firms try to do when choosing cars, they

want to minimise the distance between the two on average,

right?

That, that's kind of the interpretation.

So, so that's kind of, you know, observation number 1.

The second observation is that it's almost as though without

loss of generality, we can normalise this to zero.

OK, this is thing.

I mean, actually you can solve this problem, right?

Imagine that for given key, what is the optimal value

of the preset price?

You can take the first order condition with respect to

this object, and what you will show, what you will

get is that this thing should be equal to the

expectation of this object.

OK, OK, maybe I see confused faces, or maybe I

should just try this, so.

You can show by just taking the first other condition.

OK, so this is to be more precise.

When you present the price, you look at your ideal

price.

Uh, corrected by the exchange rate.

So what is this?

I mean, it will be important for us later on

as well.

So what is this?

How to interpret the the sum.

So this was Desired, right, ideal price in currency.

I Now we add exchanges between K and I.

So we convert this price into currency key.

Right, it's kind of as if you, you, you, uh,

subtract I component and then expressing some global numerator and

then you go from that global numerator to currency key,

right?

So this is ideal price expressed in currency key.

Right, and so, OK, I mean, then I think it

makes a lot of sense, right?

For every state of the world or for every, you

know, period, you have ideal price and special currency key

when you choose your at what level to present the

price, you just take the average, right?

That's the best you can do.

And as I said, in some sense, you can, you

can, we can normalise shocks and, you know, these things

in such way that this is just, you know, this

is, that is the first moment.

So let me ignore this term for this reason.

Um, so then what remains.

OK, so let me multiply it by -1 PGI, and

then minus this object.

And so OK, so what is the interpretation of this

thing?

And, and, and now, right, we already, we don't have

this thing, so the only optimisation left is with respect

to currency key.

So this is exactly the currency insurance programme.

So we choose colour as the key in which this

object.

He's the smallest.

So what is the interpretation here?

Right, it's kind of the same object.

With this kind of this moment.

The dispersion, right?

It's a dispersion and so what is the intuition?

Who, who can see it?

You want to go and see where the fluctuation will

be as fluctuation.

The exchange.

Almost, almost, yeah.

So it's so it's the price in the currency.

So I want the variation in that price to be

as low as possible.

So I want something that's stable.

Exactly, exactly, right?

So, OK, imagine as a limiting case, suppose that my

optimum price is $100 in all periods in all states

of the world.

So in which currency should I set my price?

If I set it in dollars, I will have it

optimal in every state.

If I choose any other currency which is not fully

fixed against the dollar, it will move away from the

optimum price all the time.

So I will have some losses, right?

So if you are lucky to find a currency in

which your optimum price is fully stable, you should choose

that currency.

It of course in reality, right, it's usually the case

that there's no such currency exists, so, uh, so that

you, you know, you ate the optimum price in every

single dollar.

Instead, you know.

Imagine that this is where we're going, right?

Imagine for a second that I'm a large firm which

use inputs, you know, from the AP inputs from Switzerland,

from maybe from Poland.

I can buy them into a new product, then I

canete with firms coming from China.

And so my optimal price actually it responds to all

this.

Exchange rate movements, right?

Ideally I would like to set my price in terms

of some basket of currencies, right?

I would say, OK, here's my car that I sell

in the US and you should pay me $5000 2000

euros, I know 3000 pounds, 1000 Swiss francs, right?

In practise we see that firms are not doing that

probably for a good reason, right.

Uh, and so they have to pick just one.

It's, it's a discrete choice problem, right?

It's not like they choose weights in this basket of

cars.

They just have to pick one currency.

And well, they, they, they look at the ideal price

of, of this car.

The express its fully in dollars, fully in Swiss franc,

fully in pounds, and then they decide which, which one

is kind of the most stable.

OK, so I, I find it, I, I find it

quite amazing, you know, in a sense you do the

second order approximation and you get such an intuitive result,

right?

Who would have thought and just looking at if, if

we wrote the nonlinear expression, you know, was marginal cost

with demand function, it would be very hard to see.

But once you take the same approximation, you get amazingly

intuitive results.

But any questions here because this is important, this is

really kind of the core.

Uh, so the K in black above that sorry, sorry,

sorry, yeah, yeah, it was Kapa, yeah, yeah, no, it's

OK, yeah, I don't know something like this, yeah, it's

completely different, yeah.

OK, any other questions?

OK, good.

So it turns out that we have a surprisingly strong

empirical evidence in favour of this, uh, mechanism.

OK, so again, so this is, this is the core,

this is, by the way, Charles in 2006 paper, one

of, you know, the founding blocks in the whole, but

then she went in two directions.

So on the one hand, it turns out that that's

almost all you need to do empirical test.

And then you can use this as a building block

to, to, to create a general equilibrium model where you

can think about, you know, when do countries and firms

switch from one currency to another.

So let's start with empirical evidence.

OK, so let's apply this.

You know, this, this formula.

To a particular choice, OK, in principle, again, as I

said, right, it's, it's a multi-dimensional problem.

You choose between, you know, and currencies, right, euros, pounds,

dollars, uh, Swiss, etc.

So, and you need kind of to compare bilaterally all

currencies, right?

It's, it's not a simple problem to, to, to solve.

It's not like you, you can't takes, right, because it's

a discrete choice.

You, you just pick one particular currency out of currencies,

but let's focus for simplicity as the starting point on

a special case of PCB versus LCP.

Hi Uh, kind of since we're going to talk about

paper, particular paper which does this analysis for the guest,

so think of, so G is kind of, so I

will be US.

And she will be the rest of the world.

You, uh, have an exporter from, you know, let's say

the UK to the US and it chooses between its

own currency and global currency which is just, uh, USD.

OK, so then let's say, let's say.

Let's, let's find conditions under which, you know, the sperm

prefers PCP rather than LCP.

So we, we want to kind of, you know, sufficient

condition for this to be true.

OK, so let's do this.

Let's apply this formula.

So under PCP, what do we get?

OK, so this object is always the same.

But then if it's PCP, then K is equal to

what?

Exactly, exactly, so they choose of the producer and on

the LCD.

Yeah, or I know there's not exactly.

OK, so then let's see we have.

EJI here, right?

And so for first to prefer PCP this needs to

be less than the same thing but under LCP.

Right, OK, so.

If I use K equal I, this becomes exchange rate

between currency I and currency I, which is always 1

and then logs is just 0, right?

So this, this term goess away so where all the

left, which makes sense because as we said PJI is

already in currency I.

OK, so let's just simplify this expression, right.

Yeah Uh, there's surprise you just like, you know, here

very simple math delivers a very powerful turns out that

here you can also do quite a lot.

So how can we simplify this well.

One thing that we know is that it looks very

much like a 2 minus B2 right and this is

just equal a minus B multiplied by a plus B.

So let's just apply this for me, right?

Put this term on the left hand side.

So let's see what we get.

Um, OK, so a PGI and then it's only that

is left.

And then we add.

this needs to be less than 0.

OK, very good.

So let me put something on the right hand side

and something on the left hand side.

Uh, it's the patient.

Um Hm OK, so OK, I, sorry, so what I

did, I took, I took this thing and I put

it on the right hand side and the change is

left on the left hand side.

OK.

So that's why I have minus here.

this fine.

OK, so then I mean one last very last thing

that I, I need to know to do, right?

So this, I think of this as something like a

sheet of sheet of I, right?

So then if I put minus inside this break it,

it will become the opposite, right?

The exchange between I and she.

And so what we get, OK, this is, this is

just expectation.

Of IJ here.

I mean this thing is because the square doesn't matter,

right, whether it's exchange of I against J or J

against I, it's the same object.

So, so I can divide.

By this exaltation.

And make it I and then I and then OK,

I have one left here and then divide it by

2.

And this is the expression that I get.

the right hand side the GI square into square square,

right.

Right, and this is just equal to EI minusheia.

OK, any other questions again I'm.

Made a few steps here, but.

OK, this was actually the main result from Charles and

his original paper.

So he actually, I mean, I don't know who, who,

who deserves the credit.

I mean, I would argue that, you know, this, this

formulation is closer to what I had in my, but

doesn't really matter.

I mean, he wanted to think in terms of these

moments, but why is it such an, such an important

moment?

I mean, it looks like we just manipulated formulas.

I mean, why should we like this expression?

What is the economic interpretation of this?

Of this moment on the left hand side.

And by the way, I think of this, you know,

you can keep, you can, you can interpret that all

random variables here, they are normalised on average to 0.

So then what, what, what is this thing and what

is this one?

Perfect.

Exactly, it's covariance over variance.

And from here it's easy to see that it's also

can be interpreted as.

Yes, where, where do we see such?

In the Mathematics This is slow coefficient in the regression,

right?

So what is the regression?

What what what kind of regress on what?

So it's a regression of prices, ideal prices, right on.

Uh, exchange rate.

Right, so if I estimate this regression, I will get

this ratio, this is beta, this is equal beta.

Right, and, I mean, I'm, as I said, I oversimplify

it obviously it's like this.

First of all, you and then you have.

Second, you never do the levels you always put the

changes and then that may have complications, but this inside

it still survives more generally, OK?

So it turns out that if you run regression of,

you know, this desired prices on the exchange rate, you

will get the pass through.

Right, and this is how we do this this change.

And this exchange depending whether it's greater than 1.5 or

less than 15 should determine whether the firms want to

have PCP or LCP.

OK, so what is the economic situation again we, we,

I think we talked about this very briefly last time

when we, when I showed you some pastor estimates in

the data.

So why is that if If this If the pass

through into the desired price, ideal price is high, then

you should be.

Let me ask you a different question under the PCP,

what, what parcel do you get in the short run

while prices are seeking?

So if you producer currency in consumer currency.

If we move 1 to 1 with the exchange, you

will get complete pass through, right?

With LCP, what is the pass through?

0, exactly right.

So it's actually super intuitive, no.

You have under LCP you have 0 pass through.

Under PCP you have.

Pass through equal 1, right?

I mean, uh, OK, you have some ideal pass through,

but you can't replicate it because of city prices.

And then what can, how do you choose these things?

Well, there's a threshold and given the second order approximation

is exactly 15, right?

And so if you desire pass through is above that,

you'd better choose PCP.

If it's below that level, you'd better choose the LCP,

right?

So it's, it's an extremely intuitive result in in again,

I will show you the picture in the second, but.

As we said, if you decide to pass through 0,

it would be crazy to choose PCP and have pass

of equal 1, right?

It's exactly the opposite.

Why would you ever do that if you could just

start with LCP and uh have low pass from the

beginning, even in the short term when the prices are

for.

OK, so let me, let, let, let's quickly finish this

and then we can, we can have a break.

So this is a, you know, brilliant paper by Gitta

Gorn, um, Ole Hoki and Roberto Rabon so which implements

this idea.

There's only one kind of missing piece, uh, for implementation.

So how do you measure this thing, right?

This ideal price desired price by firms.

So in principle you don't observe that, right?

And we, I mean, of course one way to go

is to make structural assumptions how what factors determine this

thing.

We will talk about the model, uh, in the second

half of, of, of, of the lecture, but can you

somehow do this agnostically without imposing additional assumptions and the

kind of brilliant inside of this paper is that there

is a particular moment when firms kind of reveal their

desired price.

And this happens when firms adjust their prices, right?

So they have very high frequency data.

It's actually very unusual for most companies don't have this

data, OK, so when you have customers' data, you usually

just ask firms to report these prices, and you only

absorb them when they.

You know, when they bring some goods or sell some

goods, so but in the US you have, um, custom,

uh, sorry, not customs, but, um, survey data, OK, so

BLS actually in the old days they called, no I

guess they just send emails, they send emails to firms

which import goods and ask them, have you changed your

price this week, right?

And You know, in most ways, the store will say

no, we just have the same price and some occasionally

they would report that they have updated their price.

So what you see in the data, this is, this

is a, I, I this is kind of weekly data,

right then you see that the price stays constant and

then occasionally the for good, you absorb these prices.

Again, for uh customs data it's usually much low frequency.

It's aggregated.

It's not even prices, it's usually values, and then you

need to switch to units.

So it's, it's, it's, it's very complicated, very noisy data.

This is pretty amazing.

I, I actually think it also, if I remember correctly,

it also exists for Australia and a couple more countries,

but uh very, uh.

Feel, OK.

And so then you have to change it, right?

This is just, you know, observe the change it or

the US against the, the party, uh, from which the

producer comes.

And so what you can do, right, when firms adjust

their price, they adjust them to desired level, right, the

PT and so what you can do, you can compare

this change in price which exactly corresponds to this change

in PTM.

And you can compare how much exchange rate changed between

these two reports, and this will tell you right then

you run the regression changes and changes and that will

reveal the desire to change the positive right as beeffi.

That's, that's quite impressive.

No, that's a beautiful idea.

Um, now what is most amazing is that it also

works.

Uh, OK, so here's just the graph and then I

will show you the table, right?

So this is, so what they do, right?

They have US data.

They classify goods into the ones who share PCP and

the ones who share LCP.

Again, given that this is the US, most goods will

be LCP.

There will be a little bit of PCP and almost

no goods in any other currency, right?

So you, I mean the dollar coincides with the LCP,

so there is no, uh, vehicle currency, and then they

estimate this exchange rate pass through regression separately for these

two boots, right?

And so, OK, this aggregate when you just, you know,

pull all the data.

This is the goods we have dollar currency pricing which

is LCP.

And these are the most, right?

It's, it's as I said, it's quite remarkable.

I remember Oli told me that when they first ran

this regression, they just couldn't believe their rights.

They thought that there must be some mistake in the

code or in the data because they expected these two

lines to converge, right, because they think about us they

just thought about sticky prices affecting exchange rate pass at

all, but these things never converge, right, not even close,

and that's clearly shows that there is kind of endogenous

selection.

Right, firms which want even in the long run after

2 years to have low pass through, they can choose

LCP, which makes pass through even lower in the short

run, but you know it's much closer than going from

that point, right, and firms which have which want to

have high pass through, and it turns out that they

want to have pass through both in the short run

and in the long run, and PCP allows them to

perfectly replicate, uh, this high pass even in the short

run, right?

So here is the table right again.

You run.

It's a complicated regression if you look at it, but

the idea is very simple, effectively in the end you

just run this regression again separately for two types of

uh um goods with with PCP and LCP.

So for LCP, right, and you can, I mean you

can do it by sector, you can do it by

different kind of origin, but you can see that all

these estimates are below 15.

Right, I mean sometimes they take a little bit crazy

values, but that's probably because they have very few observations,

right?

You see, much less observations than for some other countries.

But it is also remarkable that when you run the

same regression for, for good to show PCP, you get

coefficients above any occasionally completely crazy numbers, some suspicious numbers,

but there are standard letters, uh.

But the fact that it works in every single case

that it's always, you know, above and below 1 half

and again I just show you, you know, one table

they have much more they split the data much more

also, as I said, based on sectors they, they even

have a few firms which switched from one currency to

another and you can see that even for these goods,

right, when they switch the pass through regression also changes,

you know, the coefficient this be so, so it's, it's,

it's pretty convincing evidence.

I mean, to be fair, right, there is one important

limitation of this paper and, and this data more broadly,

right?

I said it's amazing data.

The problem is that there are no quantities, so you

only see prices and you're actually not allowed to merge

this data set with with customs data.

And as a result, you know, if you, if you,

if you think that all this passed through, it doesn't

matter for quantities, they, they can't prove you wrong, right?

They can't show you that this matters for quantity.

That's, that's a bit unfortunate, but what can you do?

Uh, again, because this is data is collected by BLS

and BLS collects this data just to compute import price

index to compute kind of inflation and stuff.

They, they don't care about quantities.

OK, very good.

Any questions about this?

OK, then let's make a 5 minute break and then

we will continue.

Uh OK, exciting times to study international economics, no.

OK.

Can you open these?

It Uh Yeah, it is.

Yeah.

OK.

Um, OK, so.

Any questions, by the way, no, about something, OK.

OK, so I showed you a very simple, uh, theory

of currency choice, right?

Based on the ticket prices, no other frictions.

Not that.

I mean you would have said, you, I mean, again,

especially given how it evolved, I think like 20 years

ago you could easily say, oh this is all second

order relative to some transaction cost, right?

It's just costly for firms to, uh, to get access

to foreign currency, right, something like that, and that's why

they choose uh one currency rather than the other.

I mean, if that were true, there's absolutely no reason

why this currency issue should be related to pass through.

Right, the fact that we see very clear pattern in

the data is, I think it's a very, very strong

evidence in favour of this particular theory of current situation,

which is not to say that other theories are not

important, right, or other mechanisms are not important, but it

might be very well be the case that all of

them are kind of work together.

I would just argue that we don't have unfortunately such,

such a clear evidence in favour of other mechanisms.

So, so it's kind of makes sense to start with

that mechanism, right?

And let's now kind of put it into general equilibrium.

That was exactly my, my job market paper, OK?

You, you take that, you take that mechanism, you put

it into general equilibrium.

What does it mean general equilibrium?

We need the theory of how Pil is determined, right?

to do empirical tests.

Don't need that, but if you want to think about

how will the use of the dollar change, let's say

10 years from now when China becomes even larger, you

maybe it becomes less stable economy, etc.

for that you really need to have a full, full

structure, right?

You can't do that with just partial equilibrium first programme.

In particular, because what one firm does, right, what one

firm chooses will actually affect the currency choice of other

firms.

You really need fully specified model.

OK, so here's the, here's the analytical version.

So eventually, you know, in my paper I had kind

of two versions.

One is more quantitative.

I will show you some results, estimates from that model

later on.

But just to understand how things work, it makes sense

to start with a simple analytical model, right?

The idea is that you have.

It's a little bit like, right you have.

The US economy, which is large, it has a mass

in the global economy, and then you know the rest

of the world is kind of one minus and it

is, you know, every point on that line is a

separate economy, so it's a small open economy, OK, and

this just, it's nice because it makes all these countries

symmetric.

That's exactly what, what you know.

Once you take the model to the data, you need

to kind of deviate from this assumption of course countries

are very asymmetric in terms of size and trade laws,

but for now we will treat this, this is symmetric

smalls and one large US economy.

Um, that would be one sort of asymmetry between the

US and the rest of the world, and now the

asymmetry, given, you know, the, the pictures that I showed

you at the very end, I'm going to assume that

other countries use US dollar as an anchor currency.

And so in equilibrium, the exchange rate between these countries,

you know, and the US will be smaller than the

volatility of other bilateral exchange rates, right?

There is some anchoring.

So the US kind of has two advantages relative to

other countries.

It is larger and it, it has, uh, and other,

and a lot of currencies, uh, have backed to the

dollar.

OK, again, this is a stylized model.

It's, it's, it captures well I think how the world

looked looked like, uh, after the Second World War.

Now we have also large EU.

We have large, uh, China, uh, and that's, you know,

that's exactly what, what, uh, is interesting to interesting dynamics

to think about.

OK, so households very standard, you know, like we discussed

before, they consume, they say there's acquired labour.

The interesting part is, uh, the firm block.

So 11 thing I will show you I will again

use.

Uh, this expression.

Uh, sorry, um, first want to minimise if you can

to minimise.

deviations of the from the from the ultimate so they

use the currency in which the desired price is more

stable.

There's one piece, the second main piece is how this

object is determined, right?

How what what determines the optimal price of firms and

kind of the easiest way to understand.

And this is to use the picture oh just one

last thing, right?

Just, I mean this will be my stabilises nominal wages.

I mean it's not exactly CPI targeting or PPI targeting,

but it's going to the first order it's the same.

This is just an assumption which simplifies a lot, um,

algebra.

OK, so let me show you how it works in

the picture.

Uh, OK, I mean, forget about proposition for a second.

Just let's, let's look at this picture.

OK, so think of again this is from country G

to country I.

How is the, how is the desired price of the

term determinant?

OK, so it has some marginal cost and there are

prices, right?

So this is the complementarities and price setting that we

discussed before, right?

Firms put weight 1 minus alpha on their own costs

and weight alpha on price of competitors.

And notice right the marginal course they determined in County

G from which the firm comes, the exporter comes.

Price of competitors, they will be determined in a given

market I, right, to which country exports and so in

principle again, I mean if countries were aymantic each time

a firm exports goods to different country, you can choose

a separate currency and it's, it's optional price will be

different because, because it depends on global.

OK, yeah, just to finish, right, some of these competitors

are local firms, and some of these competitors come from

other countries.

They are also exporters from other countries.

What about marginal costs, so this is kind of round

about production.

So what is used in production is labour, and so

wages will affect marginal costs.

And then firms also use intermediate inputs, right?

We discussed this empirical evidence that not only large exporters

use intermediate goods, but they also use a lot of

foreign, uh, intermediate goods, right?

Some, some, some, uh, intermedi goods are produced locally and

some supplied by foreign firms.

Again, and so in the end there are 3 parameters

here, right?

So one is complementarities in price setting.

The second one is the share of intermediate goods in

production, and the third one is kind of the openness

of the economy.

Right, so 1 minus W is the share of local

competitors and local suppliers.

And In that sense, like the speech is it already

shows, shows you how will choose, uh, the currency of

the voice.

So if you go to the simplest possible model without

any price complementarities I is equals 0, is equals 0,

then the optimum price of exporter is just determined by

wages, and wages they're sticky, right?

They're stable, they're stabilised in the currency of the producer.

Which means this is exactly this, you know, corner solution,

the limiting cases where, you know, if you have a

firm coming from the UK, your optimum price is always

100 pounds.

And then of course it's optimal for you to choose

PCP right?

you just set your price in pounds.

I mean, you can also offer for domestic suppliers, right,

but their price again, if they are stable and low

in producer currency, they will also push you to just

PCP.

On the other hand, you can, you can look at

the other extreme cases, right?

You mentioned that I only care about the price of

competitors and all these competitors they are local firs, right?

So they have prices stable in local currency.

Then I'd better set my price in local currency as

well, right?

I alpha and low gamma you will choose and first

we'll choose LCD.

Right, so this, you know, this, this 23 versions.

And then finally, so when, when, when do firms have

incentives to choose dollar currency prices?

Well, this is when they use a lot of foreign

intermedias and they compete with foreign firms.

And in a sense, right, OK, let me see, I

don't think I have all the pictures here.

OK, I have only this picture.

So in a sense there is kind of coordination, right?

Imagine that.

This is an example I gave you before, right?

I use.

I'm part of some machines.

I'm using the middle coming from Vietnam, from maybe Indonesia,

from China, from, um, Germany.

I assemble, right?

I combine all these inputs into my final product, then

I ship it to the US, and there in that

market I compete with the US firms, but I also

compete firms coming from all over the world, right?

And I want to synchronise my price with prices of

all the supplies and.

I don't want my price to move, you know, too

far away from, from, from, from their prices, and that

means that it's kind of optimal for me to use

the same currency as they use, right?

And in equilibrium, there's kind of coordination.

It's not like it's not explicit, right?

It's not like firms talk to each other, but there's

a powerful force that pushes them to choose the same

currency.

Right, if all my suppliers, foreign suppliers, and foreign opators

set their price in dollars, then I know that in

the short run at least their price will remain stable

in dollars and myau price is also more stable in

dollars.

So I also want to set my price in dollars,

right?

Question?

OK, OK, so that means that uh.

I mean, it's, it's optimal to to choose the same

currency, right?

It also tells you that in a sense you can

have situations where there are multiple equilibria, right?

If all firms choose dollar, I also want to choose

dollar.

If all firms choose, let's say euros, I also want

to choose euros, right?

So it's only the first step which explains the dominant

currency doesn't explain which currency will be.

But this is exactly where this asymmetry between countries become,

becomes important.

So it turns out that you know both the size

of the US and the fact that the dollar is

used as a currency by other countries, it also pushes,

you know, firms to coordinate on the dollar rather than

any other currency.

So how does it work in the model?

Well, OK, size of the economy, it works through two

channels, right?

So first of all, when, when all other firms export

to the US, they will, they will compete disproportionately more

with US firms, right?

But even when they export to other countries, there will

be kind of a positive mass of firms coming from

the US.

And right, so it's not like you know you have

a lot of the foreign companies, but out of this

foreign companies it's a production comes from the US and

US firms almost by definition, right, they are more inclined

to use dollar currency prices, but if they start using

dollar, you also want to use dollar and the same

on the supplier side, right?

If you use a lot of intermediate input from the

US, then you also want to use, uh, the dollar.

The second mechanism maybe is a little bit more subtle,

uh, but again, right, remember that you want, you want

your price to be kind of OK, so let me

give you the following example.

Imagine that I use 100 inputs all in the same

proportion and all of the, all of them are coming

from different countries, OK, and all these countries have, you

know, their own exchange rates.

So again, ideally what I want to do, I would

like to do.

I would like to set my price in terms of

the basket of these 100 currencies, right?

So I'm not allowed to do it.

I have to pick one currency and I choose the

currency which best approximates these currencies.

And if, I mean, of course, each currency will have

its own idiosyncratic shocks, right?

But if all of all these countries use the dollar

as an anchor currency, if they partially smooth the exchange

rate against the dollar, the dollar will become the best

proxy for this basket of currencies, right?

So it will be still the case that bilaterally, each

of these currencies, they move against each other quite a

lot, but they move less against the dollar.

And so dollar is the best proxy for this basket

of currencies, right?

So in other words, I, I'm trying to say that

even if n is equals 0, right, if I use

inputs from all matters proportionately, there is this additional motive,

I still want to, to, to use the, uh, the

dollar.

I, I had actually some beautiful pictures with it, but

I guess at some point I decided that it's just

too hard to explain.

But you can see that in the model, right?

And by the way, I mean, these are all propositions

you can show this, you, you can prove this analytically

that, uh, there is this comparative statics.

OK, any questions about this?

OK, it makes sense, right?

So before I show you quantitative results, let me just

say one more thing here.

And by the way, so at the seminar we will

solve kind of a simple example with some numbers, and

I will show you how it works numerically.

But, um, before that, before that, let me just kind

of, so what is the story, right?

In a sense, I mean these things, they tell you

that there are good reasons for countries to choose to

coordinate, uh, to exporters to coordinate the single currency.

We see that in the last 2030, 40 years, global

economy became much more globalised, right?

There's this rise of global value chains, which means that

incentives to use one single currency are even higher than

they were in the past.

Then why is it the dollar now if you, if,

if you didn't know anything about previous history of the

world, right, you might be surprised why firms coordinate on

the dollar rather than let's say renminbi, given that, as

we said already, China is a bigger trade partner for

most countries, but After the Second World War, there were

no alternatives to the dollar effectively, right?

There are all other currencies, all other economies, they were

kind of ruined, really.

And so the dollar was kind of unambiguously the leading

currency.

So it makes sense that back then countries firs coordinated

on dollar currency pricing.

And then it kind of becomes a history dependent thing,

right, as we said before, OK, now China becomes larger

and larger, but China has an exchange rate which is

very stable against the dollar, so there are really no

not much incentives to switch to the re, right?

You can kind of stay in the same equilibrium.

And then of course the question is that we at

the forward under which conditions this might change, OK.

And so to answer that question, you really need already,

you know, a quantitative model.

OK, so quantitative version, it's the same model but without

imposing this uh symmetry across countries.

So you have, you have 63 countries.

This is just, you know, the one for which I

have data.

There are 32 sectors in each country, OK?

You have, uh, fortunately, you know, in, in international trade,

people, uh, uh, assemble this, uh, input output tables, right,

as the one provided by the.

OECD, so this, this, this data set, it, it effectively

gives you the, uh, trade metrics, right, the openness and

the input shares for each sector in each country, and

it's all bilateral, right?

It's kind of a big metrics, uh, it must be

63 by 32, and then it's all squared equals, uh,

it's bilateral flows.

So that's one main input in this model.

The second main input that you need also covariance metrics

of exchange, right?

I mean going back here, OK, this is, as we

said, we need to compare this variance for each key,

right, and then we choose the one which has the

lowest volatility.

And to estimate that you need to know the properties

of of all bilateral exchange rates, right?

You need covariance semantics and so that's, but that's, I

mean, again, it's what is nice that you can easily

in the in the data, right?

It's not so hard.

I mean, also in principle some exchange rates we, we

know that most exchange rates they follow random law, but

there are a few exceptions where there's kind of trends,

uh, especially in countries with high inflation and so, uh,

that's also allowed.

OK, and, and, and then the way the model is

solved, OK, so this data, it goes from 1995 to

2015, and this data, so, uh, and I mean you

can re estimate it for every single year, but we

know that even in the data currency situation is very

persistent, so there is no really point to estimate it

for every single year.

So what I did is estimated for different dates, right?

estimated from 1995 and 2005 and then 2015.

Um, and You know, and, OK, I think that's, that

should be OK, OK, so let me show you quantitative

results.

So this is just kind of the zero order thing,

OK?

This is just aggregate values, uh, for the countries for

which the data is available.

So one key thing I should emphasise going back to

coliberation is that notice that.

No data on currency of invoicing is used here, right?

So covariance of exchange trades, this has nothing to do

with the use of the dollar.

It's completely different information, right?

So you kind of feed into the model of this

data, and then the model tells you how much dollar

and other currencies are used in trade, and you can

compare that to the to the data.

OK, so, OK, so these two bars I already showed

you last time, right?

This is, uh, the share of different countries in in

global trade.

So this share of the US, and this is just

separately share of commodities.

This is share of the eurozone and this is the

share of other countries again among these 63 countries.

As I showed you last time, right, while the share

of the euro is in proportion to the share of

the eurozone in global trade, the share of the dollar

is proportionately large.

And the third part is new, the one that I

didn't show you before, right?

It is what the model is and it was kind

of targeting this moment explicitly.

It turns out that the model can reproduce the shares

very, very close, which is a good sign.

OK, so this is, you know, just the beginning.

Then you can push the model.

You can say, OK, this is just global values.

But what about kind of bilateral trade flows?

Can the model explain why some countries use more dollars

and other countries use less dollars?

We don't have data really at bilateral level, right?

We only have, uh, currency shares on for total imports

and total exports and not even for all countries, but

for the ones for which we have data, we can

can compare predictions of the model with the data.

Right, you, I mean, again, model tells you everything.

Model tells you currency of invoicing for every bilateral trade

flow, all sectors, all countries, but you can aggregate and

compare to the numbers in the data.

OK, and so here I don't know, I guess this

must be Switzerland, right?

So this is how much dollars is used in imports,

Swiss imports in the day and this is what in

the world it is, and you do it with different

answers this will be the best example here the model

is far from perfect, but you said, you know, the

model captures this va quite well, right?

So ideally you want all these points to be on

the 45 gig.

Uh, larger deviations, but in the end, you know, the

R square is, is, is, is surprisingly high, right?

So the model can explain why US, more interestingly maybe

Japan or South Korea, why they use a lot of

dollars and these, those are mostly European values which use

much, much less, uh, dollars.

Um, this, yeah, I mean this is just to be

to, to, to benchmark the numbers, right?

Naive DCP instead of having a full structure model, you

could just assume that all trade flows, they're kind of

split between the countries.

You just say that if the UK trades with the

US, half of this trade is in pounds and half

is in dollars, kind of mechanical rule without any optimisation,

without any, you know, sophisticated model.

So it turns out that fails completely, right?

So if you have.

Rule of thumb, it doesn't work at all, so you

really need structural model.

So this is naive and you can see first of

all, every share of the dollar is much lower in

the model and also there's almost no systematic variation comparable

to the data, right?

So you really need optimal currency choice to explain the

data.

This is just uh the same but for, for, for

euros, right?

And if anything, the, the fit of the model is

even better, uh, local currency pricing in imports, again, you

can see that numbers look good.

And then, OK, so another thing, right, so this was

a cross section of countries.

Another interesting thing to look at is the cross section

of sectors, right?

After all, in the data we have 32 sectors.

Uh, unfortunately, for there is no, you know, global data

set for currency for invoicing at the sectoral level.

So what I did, I kind of contacted some people

who work with Swiss data.

I mean they have data, you know, at the product

level.

I don't need that, uh, but they, they were kind

to share with me.

Aggregate numbers across different Swiss sectors.

OK, so.

You know, each appears here twice, by the way, this

is Swedish experts, right, and I don't know what it

would be a good example.

OK, I see computer here and computer here.

So one number is for DCP.

The blue one is the share of DCP, and the

red red number is euros.

OK.

And so then if you subtract both numbers from one,

you get the share of uh.

OK, uh, but, OK, anyway, the point is even across

sectors, the model works pretty well, right?

It's not just but also across sectors that the model

captures the right variation.

And again, what is different across sectors?

Why does the model produce different numbers?

Well, because, uh, you know, you trade with different trade

partners, right?

You have different, um, uh, composition of competitors of inputs,

and so, uh, firms will choose different currency of invoicing

in different sectors.

OK, and then finally, you can push model even further

and you can ask whether it can explain time variation

in currency shares.

Right, and in some sense, again, I show you just

for 6 countries here because for most countries the pictures

are very important like for Japan, right?

You just see this, you know, for all 20 years

in the data, the, the view points uh from the

data, there's just nos at all, right?

OK, it's good to know that the also the producers

there for most countries just, you know, that there should

be no changes in current of invoicing.

So that's good news.

Now, can we identify any countries where there were some

interesting transitions and perhaps unsurprisingly, the all the countries which

have a transition are the ones in kind of East

Europe, right?

So they, in, in the game, they kind of start

with high share of dollar DCP, and then you can

see that it goes down because.

2000, year 2000, the eurozone emerges, right, this kind of

today mostly it was the eurozone, uh, economies, and so,

you know, they kind of, uh, subject to this strong

variety forces and so they also start switching to, to,

to, to the euro.

Right, again, uh, model doesn't predict this programme right you

can see, for example, gets here, but it's interesting that

the model also reproduces this downward sorbing, uh, trend, right,

and precisely for these countries where we absorb it, not

for other countries.

Um, Right.

OK, so that's, I mean, so that's just to convince

you, right, that the model can quantitatively match the data.

It's not in that respect it is completely crazy.

Then ultimately, uh, so what is, what was the kind

of the goal, right?

What, why, why do we need this model?

Well, because it allows us to think about some, uh,

counteractuals, right?

So you know, people in the streets, they usually think

of economies that they need to make some forecasts like,

uh, what will happen to the dollar.

So that's, you know, I don't think we have very

good answers to those questions but I think we are

a little bit.

Better we can uh see the scenarios, right?

You, you tell me some some inputs, right?

Suppose that China grows at that rate, and I will

tell you through the lens of the model what will

happen to the share of the renminbi in the global

economy, something like that, right?

So, so that's what, what you can do with this

model.

It's very hard, you know, just to do it unconditionally.

OK, so let me show you a few, uh, possible

scenarios.

So this is just the benchmark, right?

This is the year 2015.

This is the share of the dollar again.

This is the share of the euro, and practically nothing,

uh, in terms of ren.

I mean, the numbers are slightly different here from the

ones that I showed you before because this is not

just for the countries for which we have invoicing data.

This is for all countries in in this calibration, right,

because I'm not going to compare it to the data

anymore.

OK, so here's the first scenario.

So imagine that all countries grow for at the same

rate as they did in the last let's say 10

years, but they grow for the next 20 years, right?

So we're now 2030, I mean 10 years they already

passed, so, uh, but how, how were there, right?

Uh, OK, so 2035, right, and countries grow, which means,

of course, that, you know, China and especially India, they

become even larger and the share of the US and

especially share of Europe, it kind of goes down in

the global economy.

So what is interesting is that if you look at

the prediction of the model, there, there is not much,

there are not much changes in terms of, right?

OK, the euro becomes less important but kind of marginal,

right?

And the, the share of the dollar actually, if anything,

it increases.

And why is that that's exactly the logic I told

you before, right?

So even though China becomes larger and larger, and you

know other emerging economies become more and more important, they

all have, uh, uh, exchanges which are fairly fixed against

the dollar.

There is still no incentives for firms to switch for

any other currencies, right?

And if in some sense they can actually even help

the dollar to sustain its dominant role.

Right?

So then you can say suppose that China adopts a

losing exchange rate, right?

They, they no longer have a pay.

So what happens then?

And then you can see immediately that you know emerges

as one of the main, one of the, the third

main, uh, trade, uh, currency in global trade.

So mostly it will be, you know, imports and exports

of China itself.

So China Renminbi doesn't become a legal currency.

Right, when third countries trade with China, they still use

mostly dollar, but at least the trade flows which go

to from China, they start being in the, right?

That's exactly because you know this first they face this,

uh, uh, strong, um, trade-off between.

The USD between the dollar and renmin.

And even, you know, more kind of ambitious, uh, scenario,

imagine that, OK, that's what we talked about at the

beginning of the class, right?

OK, now we have this kind of Breon Woods 2

system in a sense where everyone is paying against the

dollar, but we don't really know where the emerging economies

back to Renminbi or the dollar.

Now suppose China has a floating exchange rate and other

emerging economies faced with this trade-off, right?

They switch to begging the exchange rate to Mia.

Rather than to the dollar, and then you can see

again that this this that the share of will be

larger.

Interesting and again, the dollar still has the largest share,

but you can see that, you know, that, you know,

given the standard terms, I would say that there are

like 3 regional currencies in the world right now.

Renminbi dominates in Asian region.

Uh, the euro dominates in, in Europe and, uh, neighbouring

countries, and then US dominates in, in Latin America and

Northern America.

So then that kind of ras also the question.

So if, if kind of the dollar is so robust,

is there anything that can really undermine its status in

the global economy, you know, the question which is especially

interesting these days, and so, you know, it's, it's, it's,

it's exactly what you would expect, I think, uh, so

the main problem is not China becoming larger or changing

its policy.

The main problems are internal.

Right, so if something goes wrong with the US economy,

that will create the most, the strongest incentives for firms

to abandon the dollar, right?

And I mean, OK, so what is, what can the

people measure you have 10% inflation, yes, right?

And it, it's not like 10% of inflation that we

had, you know, a couple of years ago.

No, it's, it's a, it's a permanent change in the

mind policy, right?

From now on, all Asians expect that there will be

high inflation, yes, all the time.

Right, not like 11 time event.

I don't know, or something like that, and you can

see that then, of course, right, then it becomes very,

um, suboptimal for firms to choose the dollar as a,

as a, as a currency because the price in, in

dollars, but if the dollar very quickly loses its real

value and so we the prices, real prices, of course

they go down very quickly.

Right, instead they then they refer to set prices in

some more stable currencies, so the euro, and we see

that some firms switch to euros, but actually the euro

share doesn't change that much.

What is more interesting than actually with this shock.

You, you see, really, uh, the, the renminbi becomes the

largest, uh, cars, and why is that in some sense,

right, we said that right now firms don't have enough

incentive to social media because it's a very substitute to

the door, but when something goes wrong with the door

and rein is still kind of a, a, a substitute

but a very substitute first are switching tombi, and it's

only a coincidence that firms wish not to the Euroba

to to learn in this scenario, right.

OK, so that's, I mean, this is just some examples,

right, some interesting scenarios, but of course in principle you,

you can look at many different things, right?

Like I mean one interesting exercise I'm not sure anybody

has done it, like you can look at the effects

of sanctions, right?

Imagine that some sanctions are imposed on Russia.

How much is currency of invoicing.

Will change or you have a trade war between the

US and some other countries, right then that changes completely

this trade metrics.

How will that affect the the use of currencies in

global trade, right?

So it's kind of a machinery, the model that you

can use to answer all these questions, uh, quantitatively.

OK, good.

Any questions?

No questions.

Is that like the last case of it is Yeah,

yeah, no, I, I think it must be symmetric, um,

yeah, it must be more or less symmetric, I would

imagine, but, uh.

Yeah.

I mean, again, right, it's, it sounds like it's not

that much given we just went through this episode of

high inflation, right?

But it's not the same as thinking that long run

inflation will be 10%, right?

If you look at all these futures, GDS markets, which,

which kind of predict what will be the long run

inflation, there was not a single point when they thought

that the US inflation in like, you know, 10 years

from now would go above 3%.

So people still think that, you know, the Fed will

eventually bring inflation back down, but if you have 10%

every single year, that's just completely different minor regime.

Mhm.

So before we were saying that there are kind of

two forces which makes the, the EU US all dominant

line one which was the fact that so everyone else,

one of the fact that it it's stable and so

you can use that as a peg and everyone else

uses it as that.

And then the second one is that the US is

also like a large trading country, which means that, you

know, for, for even if it wasn't for TCP, if

you use ACP in to the US, you'd still be

using US as well, right?

But the rest of the world you could still um

yeah you could see that the US dollar remains dominant

it's a stable currency.

That's true in principle, theoretically, right?

There is, I mean, that's very true, right, because when

countries trade with each other, they just need some stable

unit of account, right?

They, it's not about them trading with the US necessarily.

And again, the share of US and global rate has

declined already quite a lot, right?

And they didn't push other countries to switch to another

currency.

No, that's absolutely right, right?

As long as you have exchange rate determined and for

that you need to have at least epsilon of trade

because otherwise, you know, under financial of sorry, under the

full trade order you don't have exchange rate as long

as there's some epsilon and as long as the exchange

rate, uh, keeps its good properties, you still have this

right.

Right, right, right, exactly.

I mean, of course the question is, and that's exactly

what I think people now are discussing over the last

couple of days, is that how much properties of the

dollar exchange rate will change in response to trade tariffs

and trade wars, right?

That's kind of uncharted uncharted territory.

I mean, we know we talked about, remember about the

border adjustment tax.

We expect to change it to appreciate and they did

appreciate for several weeks and months, but now, for example,

it depreciates for some reason after the announcements and so.

Uh, so people try to figure this out, right?

And of course if you have a lot of extra

volatility in the exchange rate, that can also make a

firm switch.

Uh, to know the currency.

OK, good.

Any other questions?

OK, so then let's stop here because I don't want

to start, you know, the next topic.

It's, it's long and also we need to some time

to get to another building.

OK, so let's stop here, move there, and then continue.

And, and also the, the, the problem that that we're

going to discuss, I understand that you didn't have opportunity

to solve it, but it is all based on the

model that we just discussed.

So let's talk information session for a new job.

OK, now, uh, but it's online and I also like

watch recording there so but I was just on my

phone and like I don't do anything.

It's just uh it's for like, um, yeah, case studies.

I see.

So it's it's yeah, no, like assessment and it is

more like, uh, like tips and for the occasion.

I see so interesting, but I will attend that I

will be off of you will tell us later yeah

what what they ask you.

I'm curious.

Uh, yeah, oh yeah.

How many What Mhm Oh.

Um, yeah, yeah, you know.

Yeah.

Yeah, yeah, well, I.

Uh on Monday so I will.

You got a little bit more pressure because that before

that.

No, I haven't.

Um Like I have these I I so I just

have here then all of you I thought you two

clients and all that he doesn't talk that maybe my

05, no.

They do it all so uh that's just.

Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

1.

OK.

Oh Yeah, OK.

The biggest one Yeah, the attitudes that's good.

Uh Uh Well.

Lecture 20:

Yeah It Oh let me now just like.

Yeah.

Yeah I'm OK.

I know That's so long My Well sure.

Yeah And what was your?

We find you.

I thought so.

I Hi how you doing how are you?

Yeah good.

Do you think we should.

It's sounds quite dark in here.

But Slow motion.

So.

I OK.

this time you might capture it.

Oh.

the OK, I'll just say that.

What's not coming.

Oh.

I By the way, I just uploaded, uh, two exams

from the previous years, right?

So you can check.

we have the solutions uploaded as well we have the

solutions uploaded as well.

They are included and also has both trade and international.

OK, good.

So in some sense our last class, right in this

term.

So, uh, there is one more class seminar scheduled in

May.

I mean, I'm, I'm not really sure when it will

take place, but it will be more like a review

session probably mostly to answer your questions, maybe going through

some questions from previous exams, not really anything new.

OK, but today we still have, you know, uh, some

things to finish, right?

So, uh, yesterday we talked about CD price theories of

currency choice, and now we'll just very briefly go over

to remaining, right.

So the first one is about.

Uh, transactions.

So I will, I will show you a very stylized

model, and it's, it's kind of interesting, right?

So Krugman, he was one of the very first people

who thought about, uh, global use of currencies for money,

right?

This, this theory that was exactly his theory of common

currency.

He was thinking that there are, you know, some, so,

so, OK, very, you know, at the very high level,

right, imagine that Brazil is trading with Argentina.

Right, they need to pay to each other and we

said that in Argentina people use pesos, right?

In Brazil they use rials, but once they trade with

each other, they need some currency, right, to make transactions.

So in prisma they could to use either real or

or peso, right?

But suppose that these markets are shal in the sense

that there are high transaction costs.

Right, there are just very few people who are ready

to exchange one currency for the other directly.

So then what can be optimal to do is to

go through the one global common currency, right?

You first exchange pesos for dollars, then you use dollars

to buy reals, right?

And that's how you pay, uh, for, for imported goods,

right?

So that's kind of in two sentences, uh, the theory,

uh, transaction was the theory of government currency, and so

we'll talk about.

The conditions when that's optimal, right?

So who kind of started there back in 1970s, but

for and there were a few papers also in, uh,

1990s by Nobukitaki by Helere, but somehow, as I mentioned

yesterday, this, these models, they kind of went out of

fashion, right, and maybe one of the fundamental problems that

it's.

Pretty hard to discipline them immediately, right?

We kind of all believe that there are some transaction

costs, but are they really large, right, especially given that

usually it's large firms, large exporters, which should do most

of the international trade, and these transaction costs are really

substantial for them.

So that's an open question, and it's, it's, it's in

the end it's a question.

OK, so let's see how it works.

OK, so this is just an example, right, with 3

countries.

Let me try to put there.

So we have three countries A, B, and C.

OK, so there are some fundamental reasons why this country

is trade.

OK, this is kind of outside of the model, right?

You can pick your favourite trade model which, uh, explains

this.

And so there are in terms of volumes, in terms

of dollar values, right, there are these trade flows between

countries, between A and B.

A and C.

And then between B and C, which is normalised one.

And for each pair of countries, right, there is, there

are transaction costs.

So if you exchange, let's say X or Y, then

you have to pay.

Um, OK, X is let let me call this, let's

say, OK, there's an example from A to B.

OK, so what is what here, right?

Um, X is the amount of currency exchanged between countries

A and B, OK, or between currencies A and B,

I should say.

And this is per unit cost of transaction.

What is the idea here?

Why do we have this relationship?

The idea is that the more people exchange currency for

currency B.

Right, then we get kind of more liquid markets and

so it becomes much easier to find uh a counterparty

which is ready to exchange currency for you, right?

And so the cost of finding such, such counterparty uh

decreases in in the volume of this market.

OK.

Makes sense.

So the important thing, right, that this, this thing will

be indulgence.

It's not like it is, right?

B is just the, the flow of goods between these

two countries.

So this thing cannot change, but whether this trade is

done by exchanging currency directly between A and B or

maybe instead exchanging B4C and then C4E, that's, that's, that's

indulgence.

And so what you can already see, so what, what

will be, you know, what, what very important key property

of this model will be similar to the one that

we discussed yesterday, right?

So we will look for, for there can be multiple

equilibrium and they can be equilibrium which is the dominant

currency.

So that will be similar to to yesterday's model, but

What feature of the model allows you to get multiplicity

and lo, how do you think?

game the.

Language, what is, what is special about this model and

this is also similar to the model that we had

yesterday.

How do decisions of agents, you know, interact with each

other?

It becomes kind of like a coordination game, right?

If I want to trade in one currency, then the

transaction cost in that currency is lower, and then other

countries also want to trade in that currency.

So we all, you know, coordinate on one currency bank,

exactly right.

And again, you give theoretical language it is sometimes called

strategic strategic complementarities, right, that the more other people choose

to do something, the more likely that the more, you

know, beneficial it is for me to choose the same

action, right?

And here's exactly this feature.

OK, very good.

I guess that's all we need, right?

Those are kind of all people.

So let's now solve, solve this model, um, OK, so

first of all, right, kind of.

The way to solve this model is this the same

as we did yesterday.

So we kind of injection equilibrium, right?

We assume that all other agents play that game, that

equilibrium, and then we check whether for kind of one

representative agent.

It is also beneficial to join, uh, the same actions,

right.

So let's kind of start with the equilibrium that doesn't

have dominant currency.

In other words, you know, OK, countries trade with each

other and so they also have direct change of currencies

between themselves.

OK, so this is kind of the first type of

equilibrium.

So then we can compute the cost of trading, right?

So for each country pair, AB.

BC And this AC, we can compute this costs.

Right Right, and then for trade between B and C

we just get one or two.

Now the question is, right, the key question for us

will be we will think of Country A as the

dominant one.

And so the question is the following.

When is it optimal for agents from Country B to

trade directly, to exchange currencies directly with, uh, Country C

rather than going through A, right?

So that's kind of, you know, that would be one

alternative, right?

This is, this will, this corresponds to the dominant use

of currency.

The alternative is just to trade directly between B and

C.

Right, so here we can gesture that all other agents,

they trade directly, and they change currency, BNC directly.

But when is this an equilibrium?

What needs to be true?

When will you, you know, choose to exchange B and

C directly rather than going from A?

The cost BC must be less than the cost AB

and A.

Right, at least we that that crazy.

Uh But by the way, I'm saying A B rather

than B, but it doesn't matter, I think it's completely

symmetric, so, uh, you can change the order.

OK, very good.

So let's use the values that we just computed, try

to work hard for equal then.

21 And we can solve this in.

OK, so we get that he needs to be less

or equal than free.

OK, does this make sense?

I mean, uh, number maybe is, uh, hard to guess,

but in terms of the inequality that for small enough

value of V, such equilibrium exists and for high enough

V, such equilibrium does not exist.

So why is that?

What is the intuition here?

The intuition binds the.

The small country or equal, I guess that if the

trade volumes are very high, then it's easier to fight

another party.

So therefore costs are exactly right.

So if most countries trade with a right, A is

a really large country like the US or China, and

the trade and so this trade flows much larger than

the direct trade flows between B and C, right?

Then it makes sense to go through currency A, right?

And then such equilibrium, one is one will not exist.

Right, I mean, I don't know, it's a, it's a

little bit hard for me to come up with an

example, but imagine maybe some Central African country trading with,

let's say New Zealand, right?

And if you think about this, right, they're very far

away, that probably the trade flows are very, very small

and probably it's almost impossible to find anyone who wants

to exchange these two currencies, right?

And so instead of exchanging them directly, it probably makes

much more sense to go through dominant currency, right?

And then.

The dollar, let's say can emerge as the main uh

view that exactly.

OK, very good.

Um.

OK, I should, how do I raise, erase this, let

me see.

A lot of people have a little space here, but.

Then, OK, let's now consider the symmetric equilibrium, right?

Let, let's not talk about the opposite is when, so

I mean this condition tells us when this equilibrium exists,

right, but it doesn't tell us anything about them.

Is when the opposite equilibrium because it can be the

case that two equilibria coexisted for the same values of

parameters, right?

So we need to check that separately.

OK, so let's do it.

So suppose now that everyone else when they want to

exchange currency B and C, they go through A, right?

They don't exchange it directly.

So then what are the costs?

Right, so it means that we know that, you know,

this country wants to import one unit of goods and

so all these people will go like this.

So now the trade, the trade flows, the exchange flows,

sorry, not trade, but exchange flows here will be not

just the but 1 plus V.

Right, and the same here 1 plus because not only

we use this market to finance these imports but also

to finance this month.

So what do we get then?

Yes say for AC.

And then for BC.

Right in this format we get one because there are,

there's no direct exchange.

So could you repeat what's uh this new equilibrium.

So what changed?

Yeah, the new equilibrium is the one where everyone goes

through A and no one really changes Goddess B and

C directly.

So then what must be the case if this what

kind of inequality we need to support this equilibrium.

It must make it cheaper, right, to go through A

to exchange directly, which means that.

The sum of courses.

Going through it should be less or equal.

then that exchange.

Right?

And I mean, given that this is a positive number,

right, this will be always satisfied for any.

So how should we interpret this result?

It means that such equ always exists, right?

So in other words, OK, just to illustrate, right, so

we have different values of the starting from 0, right?

We have this threshold 3.

So what do we have?

So We always have equilibrium, right?

Always equal.

There's always an equilibrium where countries go through pain.

Right, for any value of here, but then on top

of that, if this is less than 3, right, this

region also have another equilibrium where there is direct trade

between B and C.

Right?

So the the region with multiple equilibrium, and this is

the region with uni equilibrium.

I mean, notice again you need and multiple in terms

of these two partic equilibria, right in principle we could

consider also other cases where for example A and B

don't trade directly, don't exchange currency directly, and they go

through C, right?

That would be another type of equilibria, but we, we

just don't, we're not interested in that.

And it's consult for it.

It makes sense.

So, could you explain why for AB um in part

B, um.

It's not directly just B while we add the extra

1 plus B.

which one this one yeah, the first one, this one,

no, yeah, OK, so here, I mean.

X what is X, right?

X is V because they still exchange, they still use

this market to finance imports, right?

But now also, right?

B wants to import goods from C which are worth

let's say $1.

They don't, they, they need currency C, but to get

this currency C they first exchange it for a and

then exchange A for C.

Right, and so that means that now kind of the

volume of trade in this market and in this market

will be 1 plus.

And that's exactly what makes this markets quick as people

say.

Any other questions?

So you can see that it's it seems it's a

very different model, very different prediction than the one that

we discussed yesterday, but it has exactly the same problems,

right?

First of all, and the, the, the fundamentals matter, right,

the large country which trades with many other countries is

more likely to become provider of the dominant currency, right?

You need this new the high value fee makes it

more likely, right, that this country will, uh, will emerge

as the um.

Blue milk currency provider.

I mean, more if you take, you know, the whole

matrix of bilateral flows, right, that will matter.

So, uh, I showed you numerical results for, for from

the model yesterday, but here something like that, right, in

a, in a quantitative version of the model, the same

trade metrics should also, uh, determine which currencies are used

in equilibrium.

And moreover, right, as we discussed, it has the same

flavour of strategic implementarities and as a result we can

have multiple equili.

Right, so in that sense it's, it's very similar.

I mean, maybe the kind of the big difference is

that volatility of the exchange rate doesn't matter here at

all.

Again, probably there are ways to to to make this

transaction costs depend on the volatility of the exchange rate,

right?

You can say that, uh, you know, if it take

some.

I mean there are some time lags between you get

money and you pay money, right, then exchange rates might

move meanwhile and then generate some currency risk and so

transaction costs are increasing in the volatility of exchange.

If that's the case, I guess that will make the

even more similar to the one that we discussed yesterday,

right?

So it's a little bit annoying, I must say because

in terms of normative implications, all these implications, the model

can be very different, right, because it relies on a

different friction.

So for example, you know, think of China.

Suppose China wants to promote the status of, of, of

the renminbi, right?

What should they do?

According to the model that we discussed yesterday, it should

be something about, you know, sticky prices, maybe, uh, a

missing its own firms, importers and exporters switching to that.

Well, in this world it's all about developing financial markets,

right?

If it can somehow it doesn't have to be necessarily

the trade, right, but maybe it needs to liberalise the

market for the Indian, make it, maybe allow more financial

agents to enter that market and to decrease the transaction

cost in that market, right?

So from the police perspective, we really want to know

which model is correct.

But in some sense I don't know, uh, in terms

of explaining the data in terms of explaining the empirical

effects, they are very similar.

Right.

Does, does this make sense?

OK, good.

So then, Here's the very last one.

I don't think I don't have any other kind of

all but not very likely this is.

OK, so then the very last, right, the third type

of models that people used to think about currency insurance

are the models that rely on financial relations.

Um, and so I will show you one simplified.

by um, so.

Um, OK, so here's how it works.

So think of some emerging economy, OK, and you can

think of this international trade, but actually this model is

also very convenient to think about, uh, currency choice, uh,

within the economy, right?

So we know that.

Even you know when, when you have two firms or

even firms and households in the emerging economies, sometimes they

use dollar contracts rather than local currency contracts uh when

they trade with each other, yeah, so this, this model

can speak to this.

OK, so the idea is the follow, right?

So there, OK, so there is a firm, OK.

It was signed the order with uh with um um.

It needs to sign a contract with another firm, OK.

So the contract specifies how much firm will pay in

the next period.

OK, so this BH and BF, this is how much.

And Trump promises to pay in the future in home

currency, and this is how much it promises to pay

in the foreign currency, OK.

So, OK, we sign this contract, you give me some

goods, some inputs, intermediate goods.

I use intermediate goods to produce, OK.

So I will produce some output Y.

And, and then I will sell this output at some

price speed, this price, we will think of that is

mostly determined by monetary policy, OK.

So then I produce, I sell, and then I feel,

and then I pay you back for the intermediate goods

that you give me, right?

So thisage and BF and W is kind of the

wealth, uh, that, that, uh, I get as a firm

after I, I paid for instance.

OK, so, so this is just an accounting thing nothing

really cheap.

Now the interesting part is that.

So where financial friction comes from, well, we're going to

assume that uh there is no default condition.

In other words, when I buy goods from other from

other firms and promise to repay them BH and BF.

They know, right, that I might default.

Right, so I, I, I, I will not be able

to borrow in the next period.

And so they only are willing to kind of lend

me, right, to give me, uh, to, uh, to sign

contracts with me that have such BH and DM that

I will never default in the next period.

No matter what is the realisation of my output, no

matter what is the realisation of price level and the

exchange rate, I should always be able to repay back

kind of my debt.

OK, so this is kind of the no default constraint.

Um, And then, OK, so this kind of outside of

the model, right, but the change rate depends also on

aggregate output and aggregate right, right, we spent much time

talking about this general equilibrium models for now we will

just take this as some, uh, exogenous function.

OK.

So as I said, why is think of this as

productivity shock and P is just monetary shock.

OK, does it make sense?

So let me maybe write it here right the key

we so we will.

So this is the first building block, the key one,

OK, and the second one is that.

As a firm, I should be able to pay back.

The supplier.

Of any realisation.

OK, so I told you, I mean this is, you

know, how they interpret this in the paper, right?

It's kind of two firms signing the corner, but of

course in principle you could also think of that as

some financial institution again, right, borrowing in home currency, foreign

currency, making some local investment, getting the returns on these

investments, and then they need to pay back the debt,

right?

So that's, that's kind of inaccurate interpretation.

OK, good.

So now the question is, right, so suppose we have

kind of two economies, maybe economy in two states.

So one, let's start with the one where we have

a lot of monetary shocks.

OK, so in other words, let's for now keep out

it constant.

So suppose that productivity doesn't change much in this economy,

so it is more or less constant, but there are

a lot of monetary shocks.

So the question is, should we sign a contract using

home currency or using foreign currency?

And of course, right, that will depend on the exchange

rate.

So, OK, we need to make assumptions.

How does the exchange rate depend on these two shows?

So when monetary policy, a lot, you know, is, is,

um, stimulated, let's say, right, when prices go up, what

do we expect to happen to the exchange rate?

And keep using our knowledge from previous classes.

So imagine that the central bank prints a lot of

money, prices go up in this economy.

So what happens to the normal exchange rate?

OK, maybe printing money was confusing, but suppose the sentiment

decreases interest rates, right?

stimulates the economy there's inflation.

So what happens to the exchange it when interest rates

go down.

So that also down.

Uh, depreciate or appreciate.

So if you, if you have stimulative minding bodies here.

Ginger becomes weaker or stronger.

It depreciate depreciates, right, goes up, right?

Oh yeah, right, so it depreciates exactly right, and it

kind of makes sense, right, because both the price level

and nominal changes, they are nominal variables, so they kind

of move together in this most monitation.

OK, so, and just so that we don't need to

come back to this later.

So what about output?

OK, so it's, I mean, we, you remember, right, we

said about country has positive productivity shock that affects its

uh exports.

So what happens to the exchange rate.

Appreciate exactly right.

So if that is very productive, its exports go down,

and as a result in equilibrium to ensure that the

trade balance holds its exchange rate needs to, uh, appreciate.

OK, good.

So this is again, this is just from our previous

models.

Now, let's go back to this model.

So imagine again, right, that output is constant, but there

are a lot of monetary shocks.

Again, why is it?

Well, because probably this country doesn't have a very credible

monetary policy, very solid central bank, and so, or maybe

they just need to finance government deficits, so they occasionally

print a lot of money.

So then which, which currency should we use to sign

this contract?

So I mean the what what the firm wants to

do, it wants to kind of borrow as much as

possible because it allows it to buy more intermediate goods.

It allows it, you know, to to kind of scale

up the production, right?

But it needs to satisfy this constraint.

So the question is if it wants to kind of

maximise its borrowing.

What currency should you use given these shocks?

Right, OK, so let me just rewrite this constraint again.

right hand side.

So, OK, let's consider the the state of the world

where prices go up, right?

If prices go up, as we just said, exchange rate

will depreciate, so it goes up as well, right?

And of course when prices go down, exchange rate goes

down.

So then the question is, in which currency it is

better to to issue debt.

So the exchange rate goes up in the home, the

home currency.

I mean, OK, sorry, maybe I should have said this

explicit, right?

This is all in home currency.

This is prices in home currency.

This is debt that I borrowed in home currency, and

this is, this is debt in foreign currency, so we

need to multiply by the normal exchange.

In in.

OK, so let, OK, if, if, if you can see

immediately less than break it into two steps, right, so.

Looking at this constraint, when will it be most binding?

Because it needs to be satisfied in every state of

the world, right?

So when is it more binding?

When this thing goes down, right?

So you would think that, you know, he is a

random variable, right?

It's some, some random variable, but it's somehow distributed between.

Minimal value and maximum value.

Right, we worry a lot about the minimum wage, OK?

So, I mean this condition needs to be satisfied in

particular.

Or be that that is low, right?

So then, you know, again, let's look at these 22

components.

I can borrow in this currency and home currency, in

which case, you know, my left hand side will be

always the same, right?

I owe the same amount of money.

OK, so when it goes up, it means that I

will sell my output at a higher price.

I will raise a lot of home currency, and so

this thing will likely be not binding.

But then if I'm kind of miscalculate and actually the

government doesn't print that much money, prices will be lower,

my revenues will be lower, and then this will be

more binding, right?

And so then it means that I'm at the risk

of default and knowing that in advance, you know, my

creditors, they will not issue me much debt, right?

They will issue.

So if I go for home currency.

What is the maximum debt that I can raise?

Well, it will be.

Minimal price multiplied by output of endless.

There's no interest rate.

I always like it.

Ah And so this will be the maximum amount that

I can raise uh from creditors in homes.

OK, what about foreign currency?

Suppose now I go and use for foreign currency.

Right, so it's OK, focusing again on this case when

prices are relatively low, what happens to the exchange rate?

It goes down, right?

It appreciates in those states of the world.

But that's a good thing, no, because it, it brings

down the left hand side for me automatically.

Right, so not the words.

You will again focus on.

realisation So then, um.

I need We use exchange rate for that realisation of

my policy, right, and it will be a kind of

flaw, right, so this thing down.

Which means that I can potentially raise more money by

borrowing in foreign currency.

Right, so in other words, I mean, maybe it's, you

know, uh, it should be more or less evident from,

I think this inequality.

So if you borrowing foreign currency, you get kind of

automatic stabilisation, no, if, if, if prices go up, exchange

rate depreciates.

And and and the real value of the sorry, the

nominal value of your debt, uh, goes up.

But when prices go down, your, your, uh, nominal debt

also goes down, and you care exactly about this kind

of worst case realisations, right, because again this concern needs,

needs to be satisfied for all realisations of shocks and

so you get kind of automatic stabilisation for the exchange

rate.

Right, and so if monetary shocks are the main source

of uncertainty in the economy, you can show that it

is optimal to choose foreign currency.

I don't see.

And that's exactly what we see in the data, right?

We see that countries, the classical example are Latin American

countries, usually the countries which at least in 1980s had

very high rates of inflation.

We see a lot of dollarization in these economies, right?

The contrast between firms, sometimes even between firms and households

and and workers, they were written in, uh, uh, in

dollars rather than in local currency.

OK, but this kind of, I mean, this is, this

is, I think, pretty obvious right now.

The question is then why don't all countries do that,

right?

Why do we see that in most countries in which

we have relatively stable inflation, agents don't switch to foreign

currency.

They for some reason use local currency, right?

So let's now try the second shock and see whether

it it helps to explain this part, right?

So let's now assume that my policy is credible.

It stabilises inflation prices.

But now we have output shocks.

Right, so we still We need to satisfy the same

constraint.

Let's now again kind of right, go through the same

logic.

So what is kind of the worst realisation for the

firm?

When this constraint is more likely to bind.

Well, it happens when output goes down, right?

Right, there's some Yeah, some, some crisis in the economy,

right, recession, unemployment and output decreases.

So then revenues of the firm will go down.

And then let's see, so which currency should it use?

So if it uses foreign currency.

What happens to the exchange rate?

Well, as I said before, right, low productivity means that

the exchange rate depreciates.

This thing will increase and then as you can see,

it's kind of the worst possible combination for the firm,

right?

It's revenues go down and the value of its debt

goes up.

So I mean it can in principle still borrow something

in foreign currency, but it will borrow very little right

for creditors to realise that there are these very, very

risky states of the world and so they will not

lend much money.

Instead, right, if, if firms use home currency, I mean,

it doesn't upset this shock, right, so there will be

still this issue, but at least.

It will not be amplified by the depreciation of the

exchange rate.

And so demanded firm in Puru.

It's just be multiplied by by me.

While in foreign currency, it should be.

Um, this thing, right?

OK.

And given that we know that uh.

Negative dependency here, right?

So this is kind of, this is less than.

Yeah Because in this case, It's better for firms to

say sign in Hong Kong.

Right, so that's exactly, so we think of, you know,

uh, most developed countries and countries with stable inflation and

output shock productivity shocks are perhaps more important for them.

And so that's the reason, right, if you want to

ensure is this shows you better use foreign currency.

OK, so I want to to to go two steps

further, but before we do that, let me ask you

if there are any questions about uh derivations.

Basic result.

OK, good.

So then, I mean, again, in some sense.

This is still just partial equilibrium, right?

This is just firms probably.

What is interesting about this model, something that we didn't

talk about in the previous models, is that you can

also add another layer, uh, of complementarities, not across firms,

but between firms, decisions and monetary policy.

And that's, that's really nice about this one.

So, OK, suppose, right, so, so here we said suppose

all other firms choose some patents here, right?

And then what is the optimal choice for me now,

let's think of slightly differently.

Suppose all firms choose, let's say, uh, foreign currency.

Well, let's say, sorry, let's start with home currency.

Suppose all firms decide to sign contracts in home currency,

then what is the optimal mindship policy in this case,

I mean.

It's not very formal.

I mean, we need to specify utility and other stuff,

but informally, how do you think what should my policy

do?

In this case, So if firms already chose to use

the home currency, right?

Then how can, I mean, think of the central bank

in this model, what, what, what can it do, right?

It, it, um.

And the most welfare relevant thing, it, it probably wants

firms to avoid defaults.

So how can it help firms to avoid defaults?

And my three instruments here is just the price level,

right?

Centralban just I don't know, uses prints money or uses

interest rates to implement some path of uh price levels.

Would the goal be to stabilise outputs because that's what

would affect.

Ideally, yes, but even if we take Y as an

exogenous, I suppose for a second, you're absolutely right.

The first best thing is of course to stabilise output,

right?

But even if there's some volatility in output that the

central bank cannot fully upset, right, then it probably wants

to use to choose to change prices to kind of

upset these movements, right?

So when output goes down, it wants to increase prices.

Right, but that's, I mean, in the end it's all

very consistent, right?

If you have a recession, you want to have a

little bit of stimulative mindset policy either to increase prices

or if you can maybe even do better by um

by increasing output right it kind of goes in the

same direction.

Exactly, so you, you kind of get this very conventional,

very standard policy prescriptions, right?

So that's, and once central bank does that, that increases

further the incentives of private firms to choose home currency,

right?

So again, in the limit, if somehow central bank fully

achieves its goal of.

this thing, right, then unambiguously it becomes optimal for firms

to choose home cards, right?

I mean, exchanges will might still move.

I mean, it depends, you know, it depends on the

elasticities of these two things, right?

Our exchange will probably still move, so it's kind of

risky to borrow in foreign currency, but in the home

currency there's really no uncertainty.

You know exactly your revenues in home currency.

You know exactly how much you own in in home

currency, and so you kind of you can perfectly uh

avoid any defaults and borrow as as much as possible.

So that you, you right there this complementarities now I

suppose that for some reason, right, maybe there was past

history of very high inflation in the country, and suppose

that all firms switch to foreign currency, uh, and signed

contracts, right, set prices in dollars.

So then what is the kind of optimal response of

my policy?

I mean, Yeah, I guess we need to abandon this

assumption, right, because much which is now in dos, suppose

we kind of have both shocks.

Uh, I guess, OK, so let's stay here, right?

So we have now, so firms choose foreign currency, the

important foreign currency, but my policy can still control.

So what should my policy do in that case?

It's not obvious, right?

And in some sense imagine that if you, you know,

if you bring, if you increase money supply by 10%,

that increases prices and exchange rates proportionately by 10%, right,

that's, that's true in some models.

So then I mean it will increase by 10%, changes

will depreciate by 10%, and this will exactly upset each

other, right?

So there will be no effects of monetary policy.

So in some sense, monetary policy becomes much less powerful

once firms choose to set prices in foreign currency, right?

and again we can discuss.

You know, maybe there are some issues.

Maybe changer will move by 9% while price move 10

by 10%.

So maybe there's still something for mighty policy to do,

but in general it will have very small effects, right?

And again, going back to our complementarities, once firms know

that M policy will not help them, right, once they

know that there is no, uh, no stabilisation effect of

mindetary policy.

Firms might, right, and maybe again maybe maybe if for

some other reasons as we said, there is also a

lot of volatility in my voice, then they will switch

to foreign currents.

Right, so imagine for a second, I think this is

exactly how they, they actually did it in the model.

I mentioned that the central bank, it cares about two

objectives in general, it wants to help firms, but there

are some political constraints, and sometimes they really need to

print a lot of money to help the government to

finance fiscal deficits, right?

Usually they try to balance these two things and under

home currency, uh, choice of terms, right, they actually will

put a lot of weight on domestic stabilisation.

There will be this fiscal shocks, but they will try

to help domestic economy by stabilising this thing, right?

But imagine again first switch to foreign currency, right?

Now central bank knows that it will not be able

to help these firms in any case, right, by stabilising

nominal, uh, increment economy.

Now it puts more weight on fiscal objectives and fiscal

objectives means that they will occasionally bring a lot of

money and so actually now firms also don't want to

use currency.

Right, so for me Full circle, um.

Right, so something like this, uh, terms.

Choose Home currency, the central bank.

It's more weight Constabilizing the economy, right?

And that in turn incentivizes domestic firms to choose home

patency.

And, and symmetrically right so if firms choose supporting car

in.

That means that central bank will put more weight.

On some something else, right, and in particular on this

fiscal.

Deficits So it will print money, trying to be volatility

variance of P increases, and as a result, firms have

more incentives to choose foreign currency.

Right.

And so you can again, you, you, you kind of

get this motivity of equilibria, but, but this multiplicity, it

comes not, you know, from slightly different my means, right,

but not like other firms choose dollars and I want

to choose dollars.

It's more like other firms choose dollars that changes monetary

policy and that makes it optimal for me to choose

dollars.

To, right, and so it also means that there can

be a lot of histos, right?

You can have some economies that 1980s had very high

inflation, all firms switched to to dollars, and then, OK,

maybe there is, you know, a better central banker.

As bank arrives, uh, so they want to change my

voice to make it more credible, stabilise, uh, inflation, etc.

but in some sense, at least in the first periods,

it has very little incentives to do that.

And if, if again ifs don't think that this, this

is a credible.

change, they will continue using foreign currency.

The monetary policy will actually not be able to affect,

you know, output in the economy very much, right, because

if it's, if oil prices are sticking in dollars rather

than in foreign currency, it's mostly the US policies that

will affect the equalities as we discussed before, right?

OK, OK, so this is just a few, a few

pictures which illustrate this point, right.

First of all, we see that countries with higher, uh,

inflationable as.

They have higher share of dollar, uh, depositization, right?

They also have higher share of dollars in as a

kind of invoicing.

This this is USD, uh, in imports, right?

There's also positive correlation.

And as I said before, there are these periods of

very strong histories, right?

You, you have, OK, I said that before, like Latin

American countries, if you look at them in 1980s, they

had extremely high inflation.

This is OK.

You, you, you, you see this is just truncated, right?

And obviously inflation was even higher, but the numbers are

so high that they decided to truncate it at 100%

and you can see that, so there's um.

Let's, let's look at Argentina, right?

We see that there was theization of deposits.

I mean, the reason that it probably started late was

mostly because of some government regulation, right?

Probably the government just didn't allow banks to issue dollar

deposits, but then there was probably some liberalisation, so the

share increases and even after inflation goes down, right, in

late 1990s, we see that this, this share remains very

high.

And then I mean it drops here but I'm pretty

sure it's get some some government intervention here right, some

regulation and then sometimes again if you believe this model,

indeed it seems like monetary policy alone is not not

enough, right?

So if you really want to switch from kind of

one equilibrium to another one, you really want to simultaneously

change monetary policy and also maybe, you know, uh, ask

your firms and banks to switch to home currency from

foreign currency.

Unfortunately, right.

Many countries with poor political institutions, what happens is only

the second one, right?

They don't really change monetary policy, but they just force

local agents to switch to, uh, local currency, which is

not great because then it means that if you still

have a lot of inflation, you just expropriate right effective

the, uh, wealth of, of private agents and so that,

yeah, I mean you need to do kind of change

more.

Um, OK, any questions, comments.

So that's interesting.

No, I mean, this is about politicisation of the large

economies.

I must say that it was a very popular look

at something like 20 years ago.

Now you see very few papers about this.

This is really an exception, and this is precisely because

even for Latin American countries nowadays, they have much more,

uh, credible, uh, mindbo, right?

There are actually not that many countries left which have,

uh, crazy high, uh, inflation.

in some years, and Zimbabwe is a classical example, but

uh those are really a few exceptions.

Um, OK, very good.

So I mean, let's conclude this topic, right, and, uh,

I just want to emphasise again, right, that in some

sense all these models are, are, are very similar.

They always have some sort of complementarity in currency shows

across agents, whether it's directly across firms or through the

central banks.

The policy prescriptions are very different.

But, and, and that's exactly why it is important to

kind of know which story is more important.

It's probably true that in reality all these stories matter

to some extent, but which one is the main one,

that's, that's the question.

That's, uh, that's no still not good question.

OK, very good.

Let it be seen, I mean, I think.

OK, let's make a 5 minute break, right, and then

we will continue to talk about.

Be waiting I can do it next year.

Yeah.

Oh really, that's for PG or.

Um, not that sure actually I will today we still.

She was uh from the profess something like that.

Uh, I'm not, it's actually really connected to both.

And so it's in the eastern parts and um those

are some of the companies uh mainstream finance.

So, we'll see.

Yeah, I think so, yeah, at least like also the

conversation with the marketing.

You were like my old professors, so I'm also teacher

just want maybe their advice on, yeah, like what are

the odd one and this one just, you know, for

academia.

Uh, or maybe first go and then, but so many

options are there for, yeah, it would be nice to

that sounds good, yeah, yeah, yeah, I don't know.

It would also be it'd be nice to have some

more certainty, but at least I think that's also the

reason why I want to go and just made it

clear and.

Set it up.

The Bull is nice if you ever been there.

Yeah, I went they invited me so it's.

I'm not, yeah.

It's OK, like this goal.

Um, I mean, I talked to and like the university

sounds like they're not going to, like, I don't know,

exploit you like I don't like, yeah, so.

Yeah, no, it's also like close to the Netherlands and

Belgium, yeah, yeah, fair enough.

German, Germany can be a bit boring, I would agree,

but at the other side actually, uh.

I spoke with a few students who we did our

exchange.

And they really, really enjoy it.

So apparently it's nice, yeah, it's a beautiful city and

it's pretty calm, but it's maybe too calm because you're

from Bogota, yeah, that's.

Yeah Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, no, that's kind of,

yeah, fair enough.

Uh, it's very nice it's already got a PG for

doing so and yeah yeah mhm yeah.

Go to like something that I don't.

I didn't have the option.

I didn't have to go home and I super hard

to get out of there.

Yeah, yeah, I can imagine now you're in Europe and

Germany and it would be I guess we should just.

Yeah, yeah.

That's actually I change my mind.

So the very last topic.

Uh, this course, uh, and I mean, in, uh, I

was, I, I mean, I often think it's a little

bit boring.

I think, I mean, people are very interested in it,

so am I, but usually, you know, it's a little

bit like also GCP, but on the more financial side

about global safe it's, it's a fascinating moment, but even

that things don't change very often, right, like you know

do was the dominant currency.

And US Treasury were the global safe assets 30 years

ago they're still now and well, we usually think that

they will stay like that forever, not forever, but for

20 more years.

So it seems like why should we even here try

to understand these things, right?

But I mean you can see that even during.

Uh, this course, right, this last couple of months, you

can see quite a lot, and again, and you can

just see it like corners are again inside and people

from other fields who usually are not interested in international

economies at all.

They start asking all these basic questions of what everybody's

kind of, uh, what theories do you have, uh, of,

uh, global set is under which conditions can will, uh,

lose its, uh, dominant sets, etc.

and so.

Uh, in that sense I think it's, it's, it's, it's

now again a very topical question.

OK, so I will show you two models, and again,

I, I think, uh, in the end, probably we're not

super heavy, but this is the here, right?

This is not, this is not ideal.

I mean I wish we had more empirically disciplined models,

but this is really the, the kind of the, the

most advanced models that we have so far.

OK, and so in some sense, right, what are the

main questions here, so what makes the US more special,

right?

And many people will say that kind of this dollar

thing it's kind of second order, right?

The the reason why we have the dollar playing such

an important role in the global economy is because.

US bonds, US treasuries are the same assets, right?

So what we really need to focus not so much

on the currency but rather just the special status of

uh US assets and so I mean sometimes people just

use this interchangeably, but I guess maybe this is a

more fundamental, uh, question.

And then there's a question, right, so what is, um,

what are the implications for the policing and for, uh,

for GCS.

OK, so two models here just to give you some

intuition, something you know that is a starting point, uh,

to think about this issues.

So there's this recent paper by Hirishnamo and Milbra which

kind of focuses more on demand side.

And you know it's a very simple model, but I

think it makes an important point, right?

In some sense, you might think that safe asset it

is the property of the supplier, right?

But they want to say that this is more a

property of the demand, OK, so maybe that's a good

way to, to put this in right, so we have

to say yes.

And the question what makes particular assets safe, right?

And in some sense this first paper it emphasises more

on the demand side.

So you will see that there is nothing interesting going

on on the supply side.

There are some criterities of the country, of course, but

in the end it will be mostly about coordination of,

uh, buyers of these assets.

And then there's the second theory.

Which is much more about supply.

I mean, again, there will be some parameters, you know,

the size of the global demand for assets, but in

the end it will be kind of US choosing, right,

uh, whether it's assets are safe or not.

the rest of the world or private investors.

Yes, that's, that's, that's kind of.

The way to think, uh, why we need at least

more is to think about these issues.

OK, so how does it work?

So think of two countries, OK.

One is large and one small.

So the first country is large.

It has large debt and it will also be able

to raise more taxes, OK, and think of this country

as the US country number one.

And then there's another country which is relatively small, and

this can be, you know, Germany or Switzerland.

I mean you keep somewhere in between, you get small

but it issues a lot of debt.

OK, so the, so I think Germany is a better

example here, right, until at least until recently, Germany had

a relatively low, uh, ratio of debt, government debt to

GDP, right?

It seems like now things will change, but so far

it was pretty low.

or they was loosen as in case of, you know,

very small government debt.

OK so.

Right, it's a static model, so the government starts with

this amount of debt, and it wants to roll over

the debt, right?

So it needs to repay back the previous investors and

it can raise additional money, issue new debt, uh, to

pay it.

OK.

And so what we get is that right, there will

be endogenous depending on whether, you know, investors believe that

this is a safe asset or not, they will charge

different interest rates and this kind of translates into different

prices.

So in other words, as is how much uh debt

I need to repay today, right, the number of dollars

that I need to give back to creditors.

But then I issue you the debt, promising that I

will again pay investors as unions as dollars in the

next period, and they just determine how much they are

willing to pay for this amount of debt today, right,

the union of debt.

And then, so, so, so, so how do I finance

my debt?

Well, OK, first of all, I borrow new, I issue

new debt and also I have some, uh, taxes, right,

as the government, uh.

I, I raised some taxes and so the the I

is the amount of taxes that the government can raise,

and this is normalised.

So this, so this is per unit of debt, OK,

let me just try this question somewhere here.

Right, so, OK, I need to grab this amount of

debt.

This is what I pay today.

So what is my income?

Well, I have taxes.

This is total taxes.

He, as I said, the I is just not, it's

normalised per unit of the.

And then finally, I can raise.

New that, right?

I can issue you a new debt.

And sell it at price behind this unit.

Makes sense?

Right, and so the government, right, and decides, right, so

if, if it can, if it has enough resources, so

if in the policy looks like this, then it will

repay the debt, right?

We repay the debt.

The problem is, and so I mean everything is pretermined

here.

I mean SI is predeterminant.

Taxes are also social freedom, so the only kind of

source of uncertainty for the government is this, uh, price

of the FBI.

If for some reason, Investors are not willing to buy

my new debt.

Or in other words, they are only paying very, very

low price for my new debt, and I will not

be able to raise much money and if my taxes

are not enough, then I will need to default.

Right, so if, if when the police looks like this,

then it means that the government.

OK, so in some sense, you know, I show you

this paper because this is right here in the literature,

but it, it's kind of an old idea of, uh,

calibre, right, that if er you will see that they

will begin strategic agreementalities, right, if everyone thinks that I'm

issuing safe assets, right, save debt, they're probably willing to

pay a lot for that, for these bonds.

I will be high.

As a result, the government will have no problem of

raising money and roll over the debt, right, to remain

the all debt and indeed it looks like it's a

safe asset.

Right, is it the same problem as like a bankrupt.

Like if I think that you're not gonna have any

deposit to pay back, then I'm gonna withdraw it, which

is a set of prophecy.

I mean, yes, exactly.

I mean, it's, it's almost like a diamond you want.

The only I guess.

Yeah, I mean that I think people they like to

emphasise that there is some, some maturities in this information.

I will eventually have a lot of money usually as

the project is finished, but I can't really repay today

because I invested all this money in capital, right?

So then you can have a bank run while you're

still waiting to get profits from your investment.

Here there's no this kind of maturity information just like

either everyone runs, then maybe I'm in trouble, right, or

no one runs and then I'm not in trouble.

That, uh, right, so, and I mean it's, it's, I

mean you, I mean, we, we already went through one

sovereign debt, big, big sovereign debt crisis, right, in Europe,

in Eurozone, uh, in 2010, and it was very, very

clear that that was, you know, exactly that, uh.

The scenario like Italy, right?

Suddenly investors get spooked, right?

They are very, very afraid that Italy will default.

The all this stress, they go up like crazy.

It was extremely expensive for Italy to borrow, right?

It's almost impossible, and you know, they, they either need

to raise taxes like crazy or they need to default.

The country pay the debt that they already owed under

such high interest rates, right?

But then, you know, once you know, central bank.

European sentiment intervenes, you know, and some people would argue

that it's not just the central bank, but Germany and

France saying, you know, that whatever it takes us to

know this phrase, right, so that implicitly they will guarantee

I alien debt, the, the spreads go down.

Italy has no problems repaying this debt and eventually, you

know, France and Germany and European settlement, it didn't even

need to help me that much, right?

So, so there's clearly there's the room for multiple equilibrium,

exactly.

OK, so this is just one model in this big

family of, uh, multiple equilibrium, uh, background models.

OK, so that's, that's kind of the, the thing that,

you know, holds for everyone.

So this is, this is, uh, I know this is

government side.

Now investors sizes, it's very simple.

So investors have 1 + F.

I, I'm not sure.

I don't know why 1 plus F rather than F,

1 + F unit of currency, that's the dollars that

they need to invest.

Right, so they will spend this money either on, on,

um, country 1 once or country two ones, and so

they will spend it in one, I should wait for

these books and as well as just one.

Is this marketing.

And, and the demand of investors in aggregate is totally

in the past.

OK, so now let's, let's, let's so agree, right again,

what is indulgence here?

Well, there is effectively only two indulgence variables, P1 and

P2, right, but also whether the government defaults, the government

defaults or not.

And the way it works, it looks good, you know,

the most the easiest way to characterise equilibriums to make

this background, you might have seen it also in microeconomics

one on one.

So it looks like this, right, so this is kind

of the total funding that these investors have.

So it's one plus have.

Right, and, and each point on this line, you know,

it shows how much is allocated to home country versus

foreign country.

At least how much how many dollars they spend to

buy uh funds or issues.

OK, so we will need to, first of all, we

need to, to, to, to determine where the government defaults,

right?

So this is the point what is nice is that

we can cancel out as I as the end.

So, so eventually what we get is that um.

Sorry, uh, a second.

Well actually without cancelling, please let me write the first

thing so we need SIPI to be greater and.

Yes, I want my.

So we will need this version for this background.

OK, so again, remember each point on this line.

And at this point, it shows it will be S1

E1.

This will be S22, right?

This is how they split this money between 224.

And so this tells us the minimum amount that investors

need to spend on foreign foreign debt for the, for,

for these countries not to default.

It's sort of for for whole country for country number

one, there's a threshold.

As one multiplied by one.

Minus 3 to 1 and this one is equal to

11.

So as you can see, right, so this is the

threshold and then for what and there is also some

threshold here.

So let's say there's 21.

Right?

So, and what, what are we going to put on

the vertical lines well we will put returns.

So what are the returns on this, on these bonds?

Well, each of these bonds, right, it promises to pay

1 unit of $1 next unit.

For B1 units of dollars today, I spent today so

this will be 1 over B1 and 1 over P2.

Any questions so far?

OK then let me ask you, so suppose So we

want to, to show these returns, right?

Let's start with the home in the US.

Suppose invest investors put very little money into USSports, right,

somewhere here, and what are the returns?

What will happen?

So if this inequality is not satisfied, then what happens?

The home economy the government defaults exactly, which means that

they're just gonna be, right?

The government is not able to roll over the debt,

so it will default and by definition.

Right Yeah, he want most.

So the returns are equal 0 in this case.

Now what happens once you cross this point, right?

So suppose we are exactly at this point, so this

really is satisfied.

The government replaces back its debt.

Right.

Then again, looking at this condition, you can see that

you know as I rules away.

So we can cancel this I and then PI is

just equal 1 minus 1.

So 1 over P1 is equal 1/1 minus.

The returns go up.

And then again, right, so, OK, so the government, the,

the amount of money that the government can raise kind

of state, but if investors put more and more money

with this response you can show that charges will decrease.

Right, because again, taxes are fixed and this is the

major this is the only source of revenues of the

government, right?

And so the, the more money investors put into US

bonds, the higher will be the price of these bonds,

right?

S S stays constant, S stays constant, so the price

will increase.

And as a result, the resources will decrease.

Right, for, for foreign country, the picture is symmetric.

So if investors don't put enough money into foreign debt,

foreign government debt, the foreign country will devolve, so the

returns will be zero, but then at some point.

There's not on you This is 1 minus.

And then, yes, so the returns become very high and

then as we go further again, the returns decrease.

OK, so we're going to talk about equilibrium in a

second, but before we do that, there's one key property

of this model again going back to the strategic compliments,

I think, right?

So if you think from the perspective of, of investors.

Are there decisions, strategic compliments, or strategic subsidies?

In other words, if other investors put more money in

US bonds, does it make me also, uh, more willing

to put money into US bonds or less?

That is not trivial.

It, it depends, right?

Like you, it's very complementary to the extent that you

don't want them to default, but they're substitute to the

extent that as a condition of not defaulting is that

I want right in this region of economy where we're

kind of cos I actually.

I want you to put a lot of money in

if you guys wants for me to make it profitable

to invest in these bonds.

But once we, we, we, we go beyond this point,

right, it's clear that if other agents put more money

into US bonds, their jobs will be lower and so

I get less happy about putting my money there.

Exactly.

So that's quite interesting, right?

That's, that's what this model captures.

OK, so then now looking at these pictures what and

how can we find the, well, OK, we need to

determine, right, the point of this line which determines how

much money investors put in home and for it wants,

and the equilibriumization is something like the terriors needs to

be equalised, right, at least for internal solution.

Right, for example, why can't, you know, this point be

equilibrium?

Well, because clearly, you know, if, if we split money

in this way, then guys will put money into home

economy.

They get much lower returns, so they will clearly start

putting money into foreign ones, so that will shift the

point here and it will stop executives, right?

So this will be one of the equilibrium points in

this.

OK, so is this unique?

That is no.

There are several other qui here.

On the edges also the, uh, the, the border is

to the furthest left and this right off the equilibr.

So this point, for example, yes, and that and the

equivalent point on the other side.

So how, how do we know that this is equilibrium

because if we're there, there's no, there's no profitable deviation

that makes, you know, investing in like from the left

hand side there's no profitable deviation that makes investing in

what is it country one profitable, so I'll always invest

in country two.

Right, exactly, right.

So, and of course point A is better for everybody

in a sense, right, because all investors get higher returns

than the point B.

But we're not talking about, you know, jumping here, right?

You can't jump.

I'm just moves right here and each individual invested it's

whether to deviate from here, right?

And I mean, if, if you, even TVs knows that

the returns on foreign bonds are equal 0, right?

The so home home bonds is 0, home bonds is

full, right?

So it's, it's not profitable.

So it will stay there, right, and symmetric4.

C.

And in principle, in principle, there are also these points

here, right, this intersections here and here and in principle

you can consider that as an equilibrium as well, but

it's very unstable, right?

It's very unstable because you know, once you dig it

slightly to the left or to the right.

You, you, you needed to go away, right?

You either here or here, so we, we will you

know if this one is very interesting.

I was gonna say what like what does it mean

if we include that line because like I, I imagine

that as sort of it's not included it's included either

on the left hand side or on the right hand

side but not but it must be something probabilistic, right?

It must be that the different between defaulting and not

and so it defaults with some probability, and that's what

makes, you know, investing in these ones equivalent to investing

in these ones, otherwise, of course, right zeros at this

level it's, it's coming here.

So yeah that that's why I'm saying it's yeah it's

good.

OK, good.

So this is the model, right?

I mean, in some sense, point A, I mean.

All three equilibrium stable, but point A clearly are the

dominates, right?

It's the best allocation of resources between this, uh, I

mean, the fact that you can still jump from A

to B or to C, right, that's already shows that

in pri in these markets there can be inefficiency, right?

This game comes from the fact that it's a coordination

game.

There's no guarantee that we will coordinate with the best

possible to do.

Um, another thing to notice and that's kind of the

meaning is point of the paper is that, OK, so

this was, you know, the case where there is a

lot of fights in, in, I mean.

So this is maybe the most uh the intermittent case.

Let's start with the extreme version.

You mentioned that there, there is a lot of uh

funding in the world.

Yeah, OK, sorry, I'm just thinking how robust it is

this parameters, but so given the issue that we make,

so this is in the sense the case where there

is high demand for safe assets is 1 + F

is high.

Right, so if you have so faring of one of

the sky it means that you can kind of stretch

this picture even further, right, but you will always have

the same, the same agreement.

Right, so that's, so we start from the world where

there's a lot of demand for government bonds.

Sometimes people think of that, you know, as pre 2008,

right, go demand to state assets.

Maybe it comes from private investors.

Maybe it also comes from central banks, right, which look

for they, they need, they want to hold reserves, and

so they need to hold them in some assets and

they look for the safest assets because usually they need

these reserves in bad times, right?

There's a crisis in the.

OK.

But now suppose that demand shrinks for some reason, right?

Maybe, you know, maybe you know population in Japan becomes

already so old that they don't save, they start this

saving.

Right, and that's why, you know, the savings of the

of Japan has all decreases or maybe also China at

some point who about this demographic peak, right, and also

starts spending, uh, it's accumulated, uh, resources, right?

So something like that or maybe I don't know, maybe

there's some geopolitical reasons, right?

Imagine for example that, uh, so the US and Europe,

they freeze US assets now.

Yeah, now China gets cooked and it starts uh also

unwinding its positions and selling US treasury and European, uh,

bonds, right?

You can imagine that.

So then what will happen at this quarter?

Think of that, right?

We should think of that as kind of this, this

line become become short term.

So what will happen when, if you, if you, the,

the closer and closer that the two sort of default,

defaulting states get to each other, then eventually one of

the countries will have to default, right, right, assuming that

we start from point A where there was enough funding

for both countries, right?

So as these lines become closer and closer, the returns

go up, but at some point, I guess this line

will be below this.

He So As we have for home economy, US economy

let's say.

And then for foreign economy if this economy has made

it not very strong fundamentals, right?

I mean this thing is increasing in data so we

assume that this data tool is less than 81.

So then at some point we can have a picture

which looks like this.

Mm Yeah, so this is, OK, so this is the

2 less than 8 to 1 and F already went

down.

Right, so that's interesting.

Uh, so at some point, right, there is in some

sense not enough funding to, I mean, there is enough

funding to sustain both countries there, right?

It's not like there's not, I mean they, they have

to, but there is no equilibrium.

Goals on both boards.

Right, so, so what happens here?

So what would be with this picture?

I mean there are two stable equilibria, right, but I

guess.

Yeah, which one is more like this.

mentioned that we started with the left picture and then

we're going to start shrinking this F.

Right, so at some point this, this, uh, peak is

on this, uh, green line, but then it goes down

so what capital towards investors with that work.

Moving a little bit to the right and country they

will defaults, right, exactly, exactly right.

So these returns are lower than the returns here, so

they will keep investing in this and eventually they will

go to this point, right, to default and they want

the courts, exactly, exactly.

I mean, the principle, right, principle we could imagine them

going to the left, but here there's no reason to

do that.

Exactly.

And so if This is the case and we will

go, sorry, point C, we will go to point C.

On the other hand, if we think about Germany and

Switzerland, especially, this is not a realistic scenario, right, because

it's still that they're small, smaller, so you don't know,

S2 is less than one, but this condition doesn't seem

to be satisfied with that.

I mean, I mean it's, it's, it's not.

Maybe I shouldn't say that.

We know that, right?

I mean, the US economy, it is a very powerful

economy in terms of just innovation, productivity growth, we know

that it, it has been growing much faster than European

economies over the last decade, so maybe I, I shouldn't

say that, but in terms of, you know, uh, just.

Fiscal prudence.

Germany has some advantages too, right?

Uh, so it's, yeah, it's not obvious, I guess, how

to map, uh, data into, uh, page 1 and 82.

So maybe, maybe it's actually a good way to think

about Germany, right?

So Germany has an advantage of that it needs less

debt to sustain, not 24 or other and maybe indeed

data to, uh, is less than data.

OK, what happens next?

So it's suppose that demon shrinks even further.

What will happen then Well, OK, so the each of

4 right looks for the yes it looks the same.

Right, uh.

Yeah, I guess, yeah, I guess for the interesting case,

right, that for the US, it was at some point

there will be just not enough funding for the to

sustain US debt, I suppose that we should go we

we know this slide, but there's still enough grits of

funding to sustain um.

German debt, right?

And so in this case, nearly everyone will just invest

in German debt and so we will move to.

I think in this case, and of course the here

will be, I mean it depends on what is the

of I guess.

Yeah.

So in other words, if we think that the US

economy is, is kind of more powerful in terms of

tax revenues, economic growth, etc.

But Germany has the advantage of issuing less debt.

Then for intermediate values of global demand, actually US dominates,

right?

US has an advantage over Germany.

But if demand shrinks further down, eventually, right, the only

that get sustain his job once.

There's this, this kind of interesting normal thanicity, uh.

You OK, so that's said, right?

I mean, you can see that probably arguably we're still

in this world, right?

It's not like over the last decades we've had any

episodes and, uh, demand forest was really low.

If anything, it probably increased.

I will show you some numbers in a second.

And then in the end it's really about coordination, right?

And that's what exactly why you know interventions by the

central bank are are important.

So I guess the fact that US debt is so

safe it's partly also due to the fact that in

the worst case scenario, the Fed will would intervene and

at least purchase some part of it, right.

Uh, which it is not supposed to do, but again

if you think about an over equilibrium request, it's probably

in the environment as well.

And then unfortunately I mean the world doesn't really tell

that doesn't tell you explicitly how the best is coordinate

on points B, A and C, right?

That's, that's it, that's, that's.

I mean, there are actually in the people they use

global games as a selection device between multiple people.

Have you heard about global games?

No, it's kind of game theoretical approach.

You introduce some noise so that each investor doesn't know

exactly what the fundamentals are and, and almost magically actually

having this noise eliminates multiple equilibrium.

There will be some cutoffs or fundamentals, you know, that

will determine uniquely be.

But you know it's uh it's, it's actually not very

robust.

So people have shown that debating on uh how you

introduce this no you can actually rationalise any of this

agreement, so.

Uh, yeah, and I'm not sure if the new life.

If we have, for example, the 2 larger than the

right hand side, so then I mean if the 2

is greater than the one we kind of have symmetric

keys, right?

We'll go first.

I mean, we'll go to to to for for German

ones, we will stay there forever.

So it's like the right hand side of the original

graph.

That I know.

This is so we'll go here.

No, so if, if, if this one is higher, right,

so we're kind of shift, shift, shift, s, shift, and

then this part becomes below this level, and at that

point we will go.

Yeah, we'll stay there I guess in principle if you

have, you know, 1 plus F is like very, very

low, right, so that, um, you could only sustain, you

couldn't sustain both countries at the same time.

You might have, uh, maybe less interesting equilibrium you'd have

a set of equilibrium where no country where both countries

default, right?

Like because if, if the money sort of if, if,

if you're in between the two lines of, of default,

then any small deviation wouldn't turn any country liquid.

Do you see what I mean?

I mean this model that it's, it's not possible, right,

in this model, because there's no point where both countries

default.

I mean, if you we talk about this picture, because

here, well, here you looked up there or this one

like you have like a set of you have a

set of equilibrium wire.

Every country has.

That's right.

Although I guess it's very, I mean it's, it's possible,

but it will start again from point A and then

we kind of smoothly moved, right?

So again, suppose we are here.

Um, yeah, if you were on the right hand side

and then it shifted, you'd be stuck at the far

end of the room, right, so you need to jump,

right?

You need to jump.

It's not, it's not, it's not fair enough, fair enough.

No, exactly, yeah, and right, I guess another way to

say it is, I mean, if Germany has already defaulted,

it's too late to, to, uh, go back into German

words.

Yeah, no, that's a good point.

So, so it's, you know, so each model is a

nice model.

There are a few lessons again, I mean the reasons

between this model and reality is is is obviously very,

very large, and so it's not like we can easily

map that into reality, but at least it gives you

some intuition, right?

What is the role of micro fundamentals?

What is the role of the already accumulated that.

Um, I mean, in some sense also.

Um, So here's my question to you.

I never thought about this in the context of this

one, so let's see if we can figure this out.

So imagine that we are either this picture of this

picture right now Germany wants to substantially increase government, right,

like almost 2 times.

A lot, right, so they want to issue almost like

1 trillion debt.

In other words, it will pro it will shift this

curve a lot, a lot to the debt, right?

So does it help it in any way or not?

It might, right?

Um.

Yeah, I guess it well.

Yeah, I guess the, the thing is, right, that if

they want to issue more debt, if, if they just

issue more debt, that will help them.

But if they issue that and also proportionately increase taxes,

right, in other words, if this thing was that, but

even that it increases yes, it means that it will

have to increase total taxes that it affects the economy.

So if it does that, then I can see that,

you know, with so much debt and extra tax revenues,

the returns might be higher on, on, uh, German debt

than on the US debt.

In principle, you can imagine that you know that equilibrium

dominates this one, something like that.

Uh, you think in terms of this thing, so what

will happen here?

So that would be kind of Germany saying I can

borrow for longer than the US can stay liquid.

Uh, Yeah, I guess I mean if I still stay

in this region, I guess it will be right, it

will, well, investors will have to shift resources towards Germany.

Reserves will increase for both countries, but not the kind

of, uh, quali change, right?

It's just shift.

Uh, I mean, again, of course, if they, if they

increase taxes a lot and issue a lot of debt

that will undermine US, uh.

Position, right, and then you guys will have to pay

higher higher returns is one thing, but also at some

point they might be not able to sustain, uh, so

that I'm sure we're very far away from that right.

Um, That potentially could have a different world where you

know if you have lots of if you have lots

of small European countries and one big US government and

the US government is considered safe asset if, if, if

you know something happens in bond markets that people pull

out they all flood to the US which is safe

all the European countries go bankrupt, but then in the

end if the US goes bankrupt, you have no European

countries to flee to then because, because I mean if

the US is considered the safe one.

Yeah, so if if the US defaults, you're saying then

the European, if the European ones default first, Romania, but

then the problem is the US is so big that

if it goes just below what the US can borrow,

then you have no European assets to safe assets to

they become relatively more safe because they can actually take

it with the amount of it's in the market, have

some like Switzerland, right, like they have so little there

that they will probably stay.

Uh, so they will survive in any computer, right?

So for, for on picture looks like this thing is

almost absent if you have a figure like that, then

you will never exit, right, I guess, uh, but this

is not, this is very different from the Eurozone as

a whole, yeah.

Yeah, OK, so you can see it's kind of a

rich model.

It's sometimes it's too rich in the sense that, you

know, there are too many scenarios that you can model,

uh, that can come up, uh, you can come up

with using this model, but it's interesting.

I mean, I, I didn't show this table to you

before?

No, because I show it when I show global advices,

and this is fascinating me.

The table actually I, I really love it.

So it's, it's an old one.

It's, you know, it's not an academic one.

It's from, uh, some analytics, but it's, it's really amazing.

So they show the supply of safe assets before 2008

crisis and Eurozone prices and afterwards.

OK, so, OK, if you, if you look and focus,

I guess, on these numbers, this 2007, right, right the

last year before global financial crisis, you can see that

there's a lot of kind of safe assets coming from

the US.

Right, some of them are held by the Fed, so

we can kind of exclude them, but you know, most

of them is held by private investors.

Then there is kind of this, you know, quasi semi

government, um, uh, safe assets which were provided by, uh,

by mortgage backed securities, right, all these agencies, I was,

I always get confused how they called.

Freddie Mac, right, and Fannie Mae, right, or vice versa.

OK, so, but you know, right, that these government agencies

which were, uh, holding mortgage backed securities, right?

But I mean they, especially back then they were backed

by the government effectively and and even during the crisis

we saw the government put a lot of money to

save them, right?

So all, all assets issued by them were uh considered

safe and well.

Probably yeah, not, not rightly so, but still, right, so

this is another, you know, a lot of money, a

lot of safe ass come from there and then finally

German and French and even Southern European government debt were

also considered, um, safe, right?

So those are all safe, uh, safe assets and so

the total supply was like this, right, $20 trillion and

then after.

The crisis, or during the crisis you can see that

the number went down by by almost more than I

guess 40%, right?

And so why is that?

Well, because all these mortgage backed securities turned out to

be not AAA, not really AAA, uh, securities, and Southern

European debt turned out to be extremely risky, right?

And so it's, we see it's, it's less than 5

year horizon and almost half of global supply of safe

is disappeared.

Right, and I mean it would be really interesting to

have some numbers for later years.

I, I'm not sure where we're standing right now in

the, you know, that government that expanded a lot, but

I don't think there is.

You know, I don't think that we have almost any,

uh, privately issued safe, uh, that, right?

And that's, that's quite interesting.

I mean, what is missing from, I guess this model

there was one job market paper, uh, a few years

ago, but it hasn't become that popular and of course

the supply is kind of endogenous, right?

And so even, I mean, you know, when, when investors

are really hungry for safe assets, they will probably perceive

themselves at least themselves that this asset is safe, right?

And then something starts going wrong and then it's all

unfolding, right?

It's a little bit again like in this one.

So if we all coordinate on some asset, it will

become in some sense safe, right?

This government or this private company maybe you will not

have problems of raising money and paying back.

Uh, he said, right, but what, what he was kind

of, you know, the confidence is gone, then to become

easiest and then.

It's so it's kind of very much to this demand

and coordination.

OK, we don't have much time, but I want very

quickly to show you one last model.

OK.

So I always struggle to teach this paper, but it's

important.

OK, so there are, there are two old views about

government debt.

So there is a classical view of Kinderberger.

Uh, that, so, OK, so this is going back to

President was period again, even back then there was debate

whether US, uh, debt, US dollar debt, whether it's safe

or not, and Gerberg said that, OK, all countries, they

need to sustain their back against the government, so they,

they hold a lot of US reserves, but it, but

it's, you know, you, so US in some sense acts

as a global banker.

Right, but that's fine, right?

I mean, if, if other countries want to hold more

US assets, that will give us more money.

US will invest this money, get some returns.

So it's kind of internally consistent system.

It's true that maybe it's a bit asymmetric.

Other countries a little bit loose.

US maybe benefits a little bit from it, but in

the end it's all stable and there is no risk

of a crisis.

And then Trian said kind of the opposite thing.

He said that as demand for US dollars will increase,

and why should it increase?

Well, the global economy is growing, right?

So countries will need more and more US reserves to

sustain the brand.

Demand for US assets will increase, but, remember, at the

bread and goods, it had to peg the dollar to

gold, right?

But supply of gold is not changing.

And so you know, US liabilities will increase more and

more while its assets in terms of cost will not

change.

And as a result, at some point it will become

a very fragile equilibrium.

In other words, if other central banks and if other

countries decide to and win their positions in US dollars,

the, the Fed, that the US will not be able

to convert that into, into, uh, gold.

And that means that at some point there will be

a classical even run, right?

Uh, it will be a self-fulfilling thing that once everyone

realises that there are not enough assets equity, they will

kind of run on the yes.

OK, and so in some sense they even proved to

be right, right, so the bread and wood system collapsed

in in 1971, 1973 for a reason, right?

'71, Nixon, there was Nixon's job, but Nixon stopped converting

uh dollars into both precisely for this reason, right?

It was, you know, some countries preemptively already started uh

unwining their positions like France was doing that and, uh,

eventually.

They, you know, sorry, um, the guys had to, uh,

switch to free voting exchange, right, so that was the

end of the work.

Now, uh, OK, this is just shares of different currencies

in reserves.

Now the question is, is it just, you know, an

interesting effect from the past or it's still relevant today?

And on the surface it looks like this debate between

Kindenberger and it's all about this fixed exchange rate regimes

when other countries are kind of forced to hold US,

uh, US assets, right?

Uh, and, and, and the US has, has to hold

both.

The problem is that even though we now have lows.

In some sense, the system hasn't changed that much.

And this is exactly the paper by Gri and that

we discussed before and the paper by fight and majority

by going to in a second.

OK, so if you remember, right, when when we talked

about exorbitant priage we showed that the rest of the

world still holds a lot of US debt.

And even though again they don't have to do it,

it's not like they needed to sustain um re and

good system, but still many first of all, many countries

in the world have banks for the dollar, so they

need US reserves and also there is high demand for

global, global demand for safe assets, and US is kind

of the, the, the key provider of this safe assets.

So in the end it's still the case.

The US holds an extremely large uh uh liabilities on

its balance sheet, right, and it still has, you know,

it has some assets, but they are risky assets.

And so the question is, can you still sustain the

safe status of the US, um, dollar of US, um,

debt in this world, right?

Again, in some sense, will investors at some point just

realise that there is not enough.

Assess to sustain right, not enough resources to sustain this

high government debt and then the whole system will collapse

again, right?

So that that that's the question.

OK, and so far sure they have a pretty nice

model about that.

So that's exactly what the supply size.

So you will see that investors here will be much

more passive.

There will be, there will be still some coordination, but

in some sense much similar coordination than in the previous

model, but there, there's only one country here.

But the US can kind of choose, OK, so this

is the margin which was absent in the previous model.

So now the country in the US can choose how

much debts to issue, and it's not like this British

government as you can choose, and of course if it

issues very little amount of debt, it will be very

safe, right?

But if it issues a lot of debt, it, it

will be unsafe.

So the question is how the government, uh, chooses, uh,

facing this tra.

OK, so here's the model.

Um, in Asia there are 22 assets.

One the risky asset who expected returns are up a

bar, and then there is US bond.

OK, so this is just, you know, capital, capital in

the US capital outside of the US, so it's, it's

kind of one risky asset.

And then there are US bonds.

US bonds are special.

So if investors believe that US bonds are safe.

Then there is a downward sloping demand for US assets,

right?

So this is just, I mean, it's upward sloping in

R, but in terms of price, which is 1 over

R, it is downward sloping.

OK, so what is, what is, what here's W is

just a game.

It's kind of 1 plus F from the previous model.

This is the total resources, this is some parameter which

reflects wealth of investors, right?

The demand for safe assets, and then there is this

gap, right?

So if interest rate on US bonds is really high.

Uh, investors will put a lot of money in, in

US, uh, bonds, right?

And then if interest rate goes down, they will put

yet less money.

So, so what matters here is kind of the gap

between returns on US bonds and returns on risky gap.

I mean, micro 101, right, just linear demand function.

And then So this is, but this is all conditional

on US, uh, bonds being saved.

Now if US bonds become riskier, if Asians think that,

you know, the US might, uh, uh, default in that

case.

They require exactly the same returns on US bonds as

they require from risky assets, OK.

Yes, once they, they kind of lose their advantage relative

to risky assets and so the returns have to be

exactly the same.

Makes sense.

Uh, OK, so the question is.

Will the government choose, you know, have safe the or

not say B, and the key trade-off is the following,

right?

So the US can always default.

There is no commitment, OK?

And so there are some costs of default.

We, we think that in general, you know, it's, it's

kind of costly, right?

If, if, if it was not costly for governments or

private agents to default, then they would always default.

Right, but there are some costs.

There will be probably a big financial crisis.

The government, the government would not be able to borrow

for several years, probably, or not borrow as much.

And so all these costs they are summarised by this

parameter top.

On the other hand, right, so if the government borrows,

it means that interests are.

This is how much the government needs to repay back.

And so if it has a lot of debt at

some point, you know, repaying this debt is more costly

than just paying this exogenous cost uh cost of default,

and if that's the case, the government will default.

Right?

So, so it will not default as only if this

BR is less than 1.

OK, so here is kind of right, and so, so

what do we get here?

So it turns out that there are 3 regions.

The first one is the safe region.

What the safe region?

Well, imagine that investors think that US bonds are risky.

They charge high interest rate, but even, even, even given

this high interest rate, the costs of default are higher

than the outstanding debt of the US government.

And then the government will not default, right?

So in other words, again, remember what we talked about

before, right?

There can be multiple equilibrium.

So if, if investors think this debt is risky, they

charge high interest rate, which makes it very costly to

repay and so the government defaults, right?

But this is the condition which tells you that even

if investors are extremely dismissed, even if they charge a

high interest rate, the government will not default.

It issues so little debt that it will not default.

Right, then there's an opposite case.

So even if private agents think that this is a

safe asset so that they charge a low interest rate,

the government issues so much debt that it will default

anyway, OK, so in that case for values of be

high enough you will get this collapsed region.

The government always defaults.

And then finally, if you have B which is between

this lower bar and the upper bar.

There's ambiguity, right?

This is where you have multiple equilibria.

So if everyone thinks that this is safe asset, interest

rate is low, the government will repay the debt.

If everyone thinks this is a risky asset, they will

charge high interest rate.

The government, the government will default.

And so indeed it is a risky asset, right?

So you have multiplicity, and you know, the way this

paper solve this problem is a very, you know, hardwire

solution.

They just assume that there is exogenous probability of default

alpha in this region, completely exogenous, OK?

It's, it doesn't come out of the model.

OK, doesn't make sense that that is the set up

clear here?

OK.

And So let's now kind of make a picture uh

still have some space.

So what, how will the returns for the government look

like in this case?

OK, so the government chooses me.

And we want to And show the value function for

the government to this value function here.

Well, it issues here, right?

It has to pay.

It it it it borrows and interest rate are right

and invest kind of in this case.

So again, it's a little bit of this model of,

uh, venture, global venture capitalists, right?

The country borrows at low interest rate, invest in risky

assets and can make uh exorbitant ear exorbitant privilege because

of that.

OK, and this B here, if, if, you know, it

it's a function of R, right?

Or I guess I mean another way to put it

maybe more convenient here you can see that R is

a function.

OK, so suppose, right, so we have these three regions,

so that's, let's make a big.

So suppose we're in a safe region.

Suppose that he is very low.

Everyone knows that the government will definitely not support.

And what is that for for low and then it's,

it's very simple, right?

We have um our linear demand function.

we can invert that so we have.

And R you are upper Y plus one, E minus

W.

And so we have, we we we plug this in

here.

Right And we get Multiplied by rama Wm.

OK, so this is, this is just quadratic function, right?

This is quadratic function like this, in particular when this

equals 0 then here here you don't get any example

of privilege, but there you this like using function so

if if I just It only applies in this region,

but suppose it looks like this, right, and it goes.

OK, so now what about this um risky region?

Well, in the risky region, We still have the same

expression, it's probability 1 minus 5, but there's no default

then.

but the probity alpha.

There is default and default is associated with squat, right,

in this case you lose money and that's it.

So you can see right in the sense you take

this function that we already have in the first region,

you scale it down by 1 minus 15, and then

you also shoot it down by alpha power.

So it looks something like a.

It's an extreme version of.

This, this is how it looks here.

And then finally, when we enter the last region, collapsed

region, then VOP is just.

Mighty stuff, right?

I defaults and then he.

And the little benefits so it's supposed to something like

this, like this is hard stuff.

OK, so the government can choose any point on this

kind of envelope, right?

This is, this is the You see the kind of

uh jumps.

And the boundaries, but they can choose any point on

any of these pseudo lines.

Makes sense.

OK, good.

So then what happens?

How do you think?

Oh, by the way, I forgot to say, right, that

here in the same region, what is the value, what

is the ultimate value of E?

What is the maximise this function.

They derivative for people there, yeah.

That to, no.

Uh, this is, this is kind of good.

OK, so each picture looks like this, which means that

there is, there is demand for safer, but it's not

too high.

In other words, this happens in the first region, then

it's very unambiguous, right?

What the government will do.

We really choose this one.

And the asset stays safe, right, so everything is kind

of.

But not very.

OK, so the interesting stuff happens when you have a

different picture.

Imagine that now increases, there is more and more demand

for safe assets.

And it turns out that, you know, OK, I just

don't have space and time, so imagine the picture looks

something like um.

Like, yeah, something like this, yes.

Right, something like this, so, I mean, it only applies

in this region.

Here we need to scale it down, right, scale it

down, but Well, you can still, so this must be

better, right?

And then you go and this part is always the

same and it doesn't change, but you can imagine the

picture looks like this, right?

I mean this gap again it comes from the fact

that we have some, some provisions we have default and

those who can scale down a version of the of

the image, but you can see from this picture that,

OK, you can still choose any point, of course you

will never go to the collapsed region.

But here there's a trade-off, right?

You can stay here at the boundary of the same

region that that that is 100% safe and you get

some over the beach, but it can turn out that

that your peak is actually somewhere here.

Right.

And so W over 2 is actually here and you

get higher returns here.

So even though you know that you kind of need

to gamble, you know that with some probability that you

will have to default, right, and have default cost and

everything, uh, or other, uh, unpleasant things, but still the

expects are so high that you decide to move from,

from this boundary point.

So that so it must be here, right.

and this is the boundary.

So the expected returns are so high.