Lecture 1:

So.

That.

My industry, but that's what I want to do next.

I'm.

I think.

Sorry.

I open this window?

Just look this really warm in here.

No.

Problem with that.

As it may get too loud, I think you'll be

fine.

Got a trade off boiling, boiling up and hearing perfectly.

Or a little bit of air and cooler and nicer,

but harder to hear.

We'll figure it out.

We have enough to begin.

Needs to start and people come and hopefully not too

many will go.

As we get through this material and hopefully you are

here for it's formally called monetary economics and aggregate fluctuations.

This is really a course about monetary economics.

So.

My name is Michael McMahon.

Let me tell you a few things about the course,

how it works about me.

I'll find out a little bit about you and then

we'll get into the lecture.

One is usually quite nice and gentle.

I'll start off with an apology, which is that I

had uploaded a whole bunch of material like over the

last few days, and I had clicked a button in

Moodle that said Show and it wrote underneath it something

which I didn't fully understand.

My mistake.

I should have looked into it.

It said, This is now available, but not on the

course page.

And I didn't really know what not on the course

page meant.

It meant if any of you had guessed the URL,

you would have been able to see it.

But there was no human way you could get it

unless any of you are like sort of premium level

hackers of some kind, in which case, what are you

doing here?

You can make loads of money elsewhere.

And so.

So I figured it out this morning.

So I have been.

And hiding appropriate material.

I'm sorry.

I'm.

I can't even say I'm completely new to Moodle, but

I'm a little bit new to Moodle and therefore I'm

going to blame that.

But they're there now and if you can't see them,

do let me know.

Okay, so this is an option course.

You have other choices you could make.

Why should you take this one?

Well.

And ignore all the stuff I put on bullets.

This might have been a harder sell a few years

ago.

A few years ago, monetary policy had gotten a little

boring.

We hadn't really had to fight inflation for years.

Yeah, we had some things like the zero lower band

and that kind of kept us occupied and that will

be in here.

Should we do QE?

Should we not do QE?

All these sort of interesting questions that central banks have

to ask themselves.

But now we're back to like classic monetary Economics 101,

which is.

We have inflation.

We all want inflation.

Fighting inflation makes people seemingly unhappy.

Having inflation makes people unhappy.

How do we do it in a way that minimises?

The total unhappiness that we create.

And that's largely what this course is about.

You know, I know what's coming after Christmas.

I obviously know it's coming before Christmas.

It's really the fundamental questions that are in monetary economics.

So, you know.

Any of you who are here.

In London this year.

But ultimately we'll go back to a different country or

stay in London and work at a central bank.

This is probably a course you'll take.

Because a lot of the rest of your life, if

you stay in a central bank, we'll have these sort

of issues underlying them, at least in the monetary policy

part.

We will also talk a little bit at the end

about and in my part about.

Issues related to the sort of macro prudential financial stability

part, although that really is like the last set of

material.

The bulk of it is monetary.

And then after Christmas, you're going to learn a lot

about applied monetary, which is I'm going to talk about

a lot of things that.

Quite literally can happen in theory, because I will show

you in theory they can happen understanding whether or not

they do happen, how strong they are, how quickly they

happen, whether they happen differentially when we're at zero, lower

bound or not is a whole other Pandora's box of

challenges.

For empirical monetary economists.

And if you're a policy maker sitting down the road

in the Bank of England right now, understanding the size

of the effects that you're having, when they will kick

in, you know, whether there's a chance they won't kick

in.

These are first order important policy questions right now.

And so they're the kind of tools that you will.

Leave after this course with and.

Hopefully they are beneficial to you.

Okay.

So yeah, so, so as I said, the material before

Christmas that I'm going to teach, I should probably list

these in the wrong order.

It's mostly theoretical.

I'm going to let you in on a little bit

of my background.

I started.

I always had.

I started my life.

That would be I started my professional life exactly where

you are 23 years ago.

When I did the MSC in economics and I took

monetary economics, we didn't have economic fluctuations in the name

then.

It was just straight, hardcore monetary.

And and actually I then went and worked in a

central bank that I came back to this beautiful institution

and did a raise and did a PhD.

And that was all really theoretical work.

And I'm going to teach you a lot of theory.

Actually, if you look at my website, you'll see that

a lot of my work more recently has been very

empirical.

So I could have also taught you this at the

after Christmas part.

But you have somebody else, Ambrogio, teaching you that He's

excellent.

So I will teach you theory.

There will be.

I will happily talk about empirically if people want to.

In fact, it's going to be one bit, which I'll

talk about a little bit today, which is the area

that I mostly work on.

And I do it mostly empirically, and that is understanding

the effects of communication.

You will see in basically every model I write down

classical monetary type models.

The role of communication is either indirect or.

There's really no role for it because everything is perfect.

Information, rational agents.

ET cetera.

And so a lot of my empirical work and even

my thinking at the moment about the theory of communication

of central banks and that's also fun.

And I'll happily talk to any of you about it,

but here's what I'll actually cover.

So today I'm actually going to and this will happen.

A fair amount.

So don't panic when it does happen.

When I have lecture slides that have a number next

to them, they do not exactly equate to the number

of topics that I have chosen to teach.

So there will be moments when it will be week

three and will be on lecture two.

Or we could be as we will today, we will

be on week one, but touching on lecture two.

So there's.

Topics.

And then there's a bunch of lectures within them.

If I were to say what I think is.

The biggest single topic.

It's really three and four.

Three and four is the introduction.

So have any of you worked in a central bank

before?

I knew that there'd be a few turning up.

There always are.

Okay.

The the standard model workforce model now in monetary economics

is the new Keynesian model.

Okay.

And so if you if any of you come across

this in your undergrad or did a masters before in

to work or whatever, the new Keynesian model.

Is massive.

And in theory, I think we could do an entire

course just on the new Keynesian model.

So even three and four, there'll be a sort of

a bigger chunk of material there.

So we may look like we're getting ahead of ourselves,

but we'll be pulled back by that stuff.

But so we will talk about some.

I took away some general stuff just thinking the way

I think at least.

And then I'm going to think about getting money into

models because in a lot of models that we write

in economics.

We have no money.

We write what are called real models.

Now, real models are great because they keep things really

simple.

They also have ludicrous assumptions.

We'll keep a lot of those ludicrous assumptions.

But, you know, things like you get one unit of

output which you can either eat and call it consumption

or turn it into a machine.

And we don't have to worry about things like prices

or relative prices or money or anything like that.

We cut all that out.

We look at how the economy works.

So the classic one is the real business cycle model.

Getting money into those types of models was first done

in two what I would call shortcut trick ways.

And I'll I'll start on that today when I start

telling you a little bit about the money and utility

model.

It is exactly as the title describes.

You put money into the model by letting agents get

a utility value from it so they don't just get

utility from consumption or utility from leisure.

They forget about the leisure choice today to make it

easier.

You also get utility simply by holding money.

Right.

That's a way to get it in there.

The big, primitive basic role is even better as transactions

demand cash in advance models, which will come on to

next week.

They're much more, you know, trying to build in this

idea that in order to buy something, you need to

have the resources already.

For people like in your generation?

It was even true in my generation.

That idea is kind of becoming harder and harder to

swallow, even the cash in advance thing, right?

I mean.

How many of you carry sterling notes with you?

If I ask this question 20 years ago, 23 years

ago in my class, we will have all had cash

on us.

Because there really was a cash in advance because if

you wants to go buy a.

Tea or a coffee or whatever you needed to have

the cash.

I just don't even carry cash anymore.

Sometimes I don't even bring my cards.

That's how dating with the kids I am now.

I can pay with my phone or I can even

pay with my watch.

That's the world we're in.

So we're gonna have to think a little bit harder

about why these things matter.

But.

But ultimately, they're kind of setting us up when we

go on to the new Keynesian model, that's when we're

going to get into the really classic idea in monetary

economics, where money is going to have a role because

we're going to introduce some nominal rigidities.

And by that I mean prices that aren't going to

adjust immediately to imbalances in supply and demand.

So we'll get there, we talk about it, then we'll

talk about a lot of things in that, things like

optimal monetary policy and what happens when you have a

zero lower bound.

Then we'll think a little bit harder about those nominal

rigidities because we're going to put them in.

Well, I say we do.

Keynesian model puts them in and.

One of the most beautiful ways.

But also one of the most ridiculous ways.

That is, they introduce something called a Calvo fairy.

That is all the firms in in the economy who

are thinking about changing their prices.

They're only allowed to change their prices if they have

been granted that power by the Calvo Ferry, who is

assumed to flutter around independently, tapping you on the head

that you can change you on the head, that you

can change, but you cannot.

So now you're stuck with your price.

And you know, when you set your price that you

might not have a visit from the Carbon Fairy for

a while.

That rigidity.

Helps.

You can solve the model mathematically.

Nice, Fairly ridiculous.

So we think a little bit more about why firms

don't adjust prices all the time.

And we're going to think about time and state dependence

and time is a bit more like the colour of

a ferry.

Like we set up a meeting every six months with

management to review the prices.

And in between we just don't really think about it.

State dependence is a price that's within a certain range

we're going to be okay with.

But if the optimal price is sufficiently far away from

where we are, then we're going to act.

Both of us, what appeared like sticky prices, that's what

we call them.

But they have some different implications that we'll look at.

And then like I said at the end, I'm going

to touch on credit models.

This is the idea, not new since the financial crisis.

I'm going to emphasise this a lot.

Macroeconomists often get criticised that we didn't think about credit

in our models before the financial crisis.

Absolute nonsense.

Every model I present to you at the end of

the last topic is stuff that will have been known.

Back before the financial crisis.

We just didn't.

Build them into every model because we thought everything was

working nicely.

There's a ton of things that we know are real

in the world that we don't put in our models

because we don't think they affect monetary policy or we

don't think they affect affect the way the economy fluctuates.

Yeah, we got that wrong.

It turns out they weren't working perfectly.

And when you build in frictions into the financial models

in these world, you can get some interesting effects.

And so that's going to be the bit where you're

really going to get the.

I added this because I really wanted to make sure

I stayed true to the monetary economics and economic fluctuations.

That's going to be mostly the fluctuation.

There will be fluctuations throughout, but that's where you're going

to get mostly fluctuations.

Okay.

Like I say, there's one of the lovely things about

relatively small classes like this is.

We can talk.

So you should feel free to ask me things as

I'm talking.

And, you know, like I say, I have lots of

material.

I'll sometimes skip over them and leave them there for

you to, like, read yourself.

But equally, I'm kind of flexible.

If we if we get really deep into something, I

can adjust things and we can just cut back on

other stuff.

So full flexibility.

Okay.

I'm going to go very quickly around just so I

get some sense of each of your name that you

can just tell me what you don't have to tell

me.

All of these.

Bigger than I thought they might have been.

15 of you A bit more.

But you could tell me something like.

You don't have to tell me if you're going to

drop the course because I've already put you off.

That's fine.

You can.

You can even.

Maybe I'll turn around and close my eyes for like,

30s.

And anyone who wants to run out can run out.

And let's not send myself an email with that cursor

there.

And so just.

Yeah, you can just tell me like if you if

you're a monetary economist, you want to work in a

central bank, you want to do a PhD in monetary.

And I'll just give you some sense of who's in

the room.

Let's start with you.

Okay.

My name's Paige on Student.

Innovation.

Okay, cool.

My name is Marcus.

I'm from China.

I'm just a econ student, but I'm very interested.

So, like, in general, I don't really work in this.

I never really worked in the central bank, but, like,

I thought this might be a good idea to study.

Um, so, yeah, it's cool.

My name is Carl and I'm from Sweden.

I did my bachelor in Stockholm and interested in central

banking and.

You guys have the oldest central bank in the world.

There you go.

Just a little central banking fact for the day.

Riksbank Out dates the Bank of England, which is the

second oldest by about 20 years.

And I want to.

So I'm trying to see what I can.

HQ or any other one.

My name is Idiot.

Figuring out what I want to do.

So I want to try.

See.

Okay, cool.

I'm.

Yoshi.

And I'm from Japan and I've been working in.

Other.

Okay, Perfect.

And my interest is the relationship of my party and.

Okay.

Well, no, it's not there anymore.

Topic seven for the old to be awesome.

I just came back from Japan for the first time.

It's amazing.

I loved it.

Wanting it back.

I'm Mariana.

I'm from.

If I ask you, my animism or an A.

Okay.

My wife is a Marianna with a B, Very confused,

but it's much more straightforward.

She's.

She's Austrian.

So I did my undergrad here and.

Let's go.

Cool.

Tell you my my my monetary fiscal interaction story in

the minute.

My name is Chris Coleman.

Uh, I've been working for the Bank of Japan for

nearly five years, so I be.

I have some.

State of the dynamics of inflation.

So, I mean, there's a.

Cool.

I've already told my Bank of Japan story.

Okay.

My name is.

Pat, and I'm trying to.

I'm also trying to figure out this cause between me

and I'm also considering doing a PhD on monetary policy

in.

I'm.

I'm from Bosnia Herzegovina.

I did my undergrad in economics there.

I also did MSC at Oxford.

I work for a deposit insurance agency in Bosnia, and

I'm generally interested in macro finance, a pinch of political

economy and how does nature.

Which country?

That most.

People.

Well, I'm I'm from I'm actually from Ministry of Finance,

which is the institute in the corresponding.

His Majesty's Treasury.

So I'm interested in their interest rate policy or some

other policy which might have huge influence on our interest

payments or something like that.

I'm looking forward to this.

You paid my salary for a while.

I worked for the IMF in Singapore at the Singapore

Training Institute, and I found out, like while I was

there, that all of my salary was paid directly by

the Japanese government.

So thank you.

Thank you.

I'm Diego and I studied in Spain, and I'm interested

in the interaction between international finance and macroeconomics.

Cool.

Oh, hi.

I'm.

I'm from India.

I'm a program, so I've always been interested in volunteering.

But, like, specifically, last year, I had the opportunity to.

Study about gender in military policy.

Which.

Quite interesting.

Oh, I'm not going to do much heterogeneity this time,

but there's some fantastic people here.

Ben Excetera, the world leader in it.

I'm Panos.

I'm from Greece.

I like macro in general.

I'm actually.

I'm trying to find out.

It's kind of like more, I would say, um.

Yeah, I think.

What's what's the competing course?

I think there's not going to be the courses as

that.

Yes.

Monopoly power.

Yes.

Okay.

Yeah.

It's often the case you get a thousand micro theory

courses and just monetary.

Well, that makes it more fun for me.

I'm Christian and from Malaysia.

Studied at.

I'm generally passionate about.

Um, setting it in the context of developing countries.

I won't teach much of it, but I'm happy to

chat about it because like I said, when I was

in Singapore, my job was teaching.

Macro to government departments throughout Asia.

So.

That many of your colleagues from from Malaysia and it

was very good.

And back in the garage was really excellent stuff.

Microeconomics, and I want to be a.

Financial analyst to do a macro.

So you're bridging from the micro to the macro.

Okay.

I'm also from Greece.

My name is.

I did my undergrad.

Believe it.

So So you saw that and you thought, I don't

want to continue earning proper money.

I'm going to go back and study it.

And therefore, that's the spirit.

I made the same choice in.

My father always said I was an idiot.

Cool.

Hello, my name is Robert and I am from Japan

and I've been working for the central bank for five

years.

Interesting.

I'm really interested in.

And the impact of.

The population decline on the continent.

I mean, demographics.

Cool.

Yeah.

Yeah, I think so.

When I came here, I was paid for by the

Bank of England, so I sort of felt it was

obligatory to take monetary.

I think if I went back into development, it was

amazing.

Yeah.

Hi, I'm Josiah.

I'm from Singapore and I'm interested in macroeconomics and I'm

thinking of going back to work for the central bank

in Singapore.

So I'm taking this course in the hopes that it's

relevant skills and listening skills to do the job.

So I worked in the Mas Building, Although the IMF

is a separate, I couldn't go into the lifts that

go to the proper floors.

I have to go to different lifts.

But yeah, I love living in Singapore.

I'm adding I'm from London.

Um, taking this cool cause I'm potentially interested in working

at a central bank.

I obviously have many London stories because I've lived here

a long time, but I will tell you all of

them.

Yeah.

Okay.

Where do we start?

Let's start at the back there.

We'll work our way forward.

Hi, I'm Chris from Multiple.

So I want to work in the kitchen right after

graduation.

So as I can tell you that I'm genuinely interested

in macroeconomics, especially about this population.

Okay, cool.

In the.

It's okay.

Don't have to have it all worked out.

Yes.

Yeah.

And I'm interested.

Okay, we're not going to do a lot of that,

but I'm happy to chat about it.

My original research.

A lot of my early research was exactly about their

optimal central bank design and particularly committee design.

I think it's not a super interesting topic, but it

doesn't fit in in a relatively short course like this.

Area background.

And.

Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm the.

Because international it's not just international finance, it's also trade.

Quite different.

So, yeah.

It's fine.

Good.

I you are you.

Yeah.

I suppose to do this course because you basically telling

me to do.

Grabbing us.

The.

This.

So if you're wondering how I had the power to

tell them what to do.

This is my monetary fiscal interaction story.

So I started my career as a central banker.

But all of my research was on fiscal policy initially,

and then I became an academic and I started doing

all of my research on monetary stuff while after I

left the central bank, like this committee staff, communication stuff,

etcetera.

And in that time, I've then become a policymaker in

fiscal.

So I'm actually chair of Ireland's fiscal council at the

moment, which means I get to get shaped up by

politicians.

But he came in, he was an intern this summer,

so when he told me he was going to LSC,

I said, Ha, I'm going to be teaching a course

there.

You got to do it.

So I know how that is.

One person said, I.

My undergrad at UCLA and I'm interested in macroeconomic.

Telenet, Austria.

I live in Austria and I'm really interested in free

market research and also.

It happens.

By.

That's where you.

I was from Salzburg.

Yeah, it's not too far.

I did, like, when I was in, like, a secondary

school student.

I did the school exchange, the German exchange to Vienna.

And in all these, I got married in Austria and

all this.

But I'd never been to the Austrian National Bank until

a few months ago.

They finally invited me in that year.

Like the cordon.

You have links.

Just.

Just here for the python code.

Not that python.

Just keep keep it coming.

Yeah.

Thank you, Chris.

I am the.

Media and I have a Justin Hank on this, so

I probably probably need to endorse that.

You'll get the right card.

And then from there, once you understand that really well,

then you can move into into the court.

Yeah, we're not going to do much.

I can talk to you a little bit better.

Mother Andromeda.

Or I have a background in engineering.

To pursue research in macroeconomics and.

Days work best.

And this is the only proper macro option you have,

so.

Hi everyone.

I'm from India.

I did my undergrad in finance.

Do update.

Um, it was last year when, um, as a part

of Charles Goodhart lecture series and LSC sort of ground.

Man who gave electricity last year over central bank balance,

expansion of financial stability.

It was since then that I got interested into some

stuff and then started going on about it.

I'm not sure about like taking this subject for the.

How do I then?

This.

This September, I joined the monetary policy department.

So I'm just thinking of.

I shouldn't do this.

And if you're an essential like you have to do

this, it gives you the language anyway.

Good.

Well, you're all welcome, even if you leave.

And so a few things about me.

I've sort of told you most of my background in

that, like I said, I consider myself a semi reformed

central banker in that I spend a lot of my

life hanging around.

And I don't think I actually think the only country

that has a central bank that I haven't visited.

Is Portugal that you mentioned.

Oh, no, I'm sorry.

That's right.

No.

There was something in the story, a different one.

Sorry, but yeah, so I spent a lot of time

in central banks.

So there's an email address that's actually the same email

address I got when I joined as a master's student.

So they kept it warm for me because I'm not

actually based here.

I'm actually a professor at the University of Oxford.

That's actually what I was asking, which college you were

at.

And so I'm based there but on leave all year,

so I'm not in Oxford this year and then kick

me over.

Anything else, I'll get to you to just not be

there Nice.

And so while I'm there, I'm spending this summer, the

summer, the the academic year in London.

So I'm leaves here and so I don't.

This course.

Love you.

So as I said, I also have this policy role

which which has me going back and forth to Ireland,

including later tonight I have to go back to.

Endorsement meeting.

Get to tell the Department of Finance if they can

have a budget or not.

So it's fun time for me at the moment and

only things I would say, okay, look, there is a

lot of material.

The material that we will cover can seem pretty heavy.

I'm going to like I'm going to try and make

sure that all the material is there.

But in the lectures, I'm also going to try and

make sure we get the ideas across, right?

So because, you know, grinding through the maths, you can

kind of do and if you're struggling, just ask me.

I can write further details of.

But at least in the class, getting the ideas of

what these models are trying to do is I think

certainly the better place because if you take this course

formally, one thing you'll have to do is you're I

keep changing the name, I'm going to call it what

it used to always be called the extended essay, the

research assignment, whatever you want to call it.

You know, in doing that, you're going to have to

sort of come up with an idea of a question

you're going to ask and answer.

You're going to give and you're going to have to

use the right techniques to do it.

So.

What?

I introduced some of these things.

I will try and get those ideas across.

And then if there's like if there's a derivative that

you need help with, then we can sort of grind

through that separately.

And in terms of communication, I hope you will understand

me.

I used to have a much stronger Irish accent, but

it's got much more.

Think neutral since since I've lived here a long time.

I've been here since I came over to do the

MSC.

So I've been part sometimes I've lived in the US

and I've lived in Singapore.

But you know, this has been the base for the

goods of 23 years.

So and, and I will occasionally still confuse you with

language.

And I think there are three ways I'll do that.

One is I will occasionally use economic terms that you're

not clear of.

You should absolutely just stop me and ask me.

And the second is I could use English language phrases,

particularly for those of you who are not native speakers.

If I say a word that you just don't understand,

don't feel bad about asking me to explain it.

It's always doable.

And I even some native English speakers.

So there are a bunch of people from London here,

you know, I will use expressions that only he will

understand and I have done this before.

I will tell you my favourite example of this.

I was about six months into my job at the

Bank of England and I was sitting in a meeting.

It was a divisional meeting which the chief economist had

come to, actually person who's here now, Charlie been back

here and they asked me about a project and I

said, No, that project is on the long finger.

Everybody in the meeting looked at their hand, looked at

them all came and went as he just sworn during

a meeting with the chief economist.

And I have to go back to my desk and

this is revealing how long ago it was.

There was no Google back then.

I had to Yahoo!

On the long finger to discover what does it mean

in.

Deferred.

Yes.

Yes.

And the logic of it, just so you know, is

because when you push something away, if you put it

at the top of your longest finger, it's as far

away from you as you can possibly be.

Use all the time in Irish parliamentary debates like the

main newspapers, etcetera.

It just turns out that it's an Irish expression.

So if I do that, you can of course either

ask key and after the lecture to interpret for you,

or you can just ask me.

I'm happy to do that.

I can draw pictures that we need to communicate.

The other thing that I have a tendency to do

when I get very excited is talk quite quickly.

Not Spanish level quickly, but quick for English speakers.

And so if I do that, you know, do just

sort of wave and.

Slow me down.

So we you know, there's no I've studied enough communication

to realise that if I send signals.

But they're never received, that's not good communication.

So I'd rather send less signals, but have them received.

And like I say, I'm flexible and I can adjust.

Okay, so I have a bunch of slides here which

I'm hoping to get done in about 20 minutes.

My plan each week I see there's a few other

things I should tell you.

I plan each week when we have the two hour

lecture is to do.

About an hour, taking five minutes.

Stand up, get blood flowing, go to the bathroom, do

whatever break, and then come back and do another 50

minutes or so.

Okay.

So that's that's the normal plan.

One thing which you will have to keep your eyes

peeled for announcements on is next week's lecture.

So when they ask me to teach this course, I

said I could teach it, but I'm away in week

two on the Monday, not the Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or

Friday, but on the Monday.

And they said, Don't worry, that's fine, we'll adjust it.

They haven't yet.

I emailed him last week because it's getting kind of

close.

I wouldn't mind being able to tell them like we're

meeting on Tuesday next week or Thursday next week or

online, or we're deferring it to keep your keep your

eyes open.

I will tell you when we meet next week.

But in general, we will be here Monday.

Every other Monday is fine.

It will be 2 to 4.

I will have my office hours just because it's convenient

just before them.

So if you have if you want to speak to

me before, just.

I've got to have to figure out some way of

having it booked through something called Student Hub, which I

haven't figured out yet, or just email me.

And in fact, my general advice is if you have

a question and you want to ask it, there is

a discussion forum, if it's a technical question, but if

you want to just set up a meeting with me,

just send me an email.

I mean, even if it's an online meeting, we're all

I mean, you guys are.

Products of the generation.

You're used to online meetings, so I'm very happy to

just arrange meetings like that.

So don't, don't stress about, oh, well, I have to

be there between 1 and 2 or I'm never going

to see you.

Just send me an email we can arrange or I

can meet you afterwards at the break.

We'll deal with it.

We'll make it happen.

It's a small enough group.

We can make this work.

Question Because like you said, your office.

Yeah.

I don't think any of us can make it.

Excellent.

It's going to be quiet.

You to have an.

Econometrics lecture coming back.

Okay, Let me have a look at what my 12

to 1.

For.

That could be fine.

I could do 12 to 1.

We'll figure it out anyway.

It'll be sometime in the same block.

I did want to go after because you're going to

have classes afterwards, so half of you will do a

class right after and another half will do the class

after that.

What I could do is I could do them from

like half, four to half, five, and then you each

have a half hour window.

But like I say, let's not stress about the formality

of the time.

If you need to see me and you're in group

one for the class, I can meet you after your

class.

Or if you're in group two, I can meet you

after the lecture.

Let me give you another time.

It will be fine.

I am perfectly confident that this is a manageable enough

size group.

You can deal with it.

And good.

Any other questions?

Okay.

And so I'm going to set the scene.

At.

I think this is.

Monetary policy.

Even 30 years ago.

Now, some of you, 30 years ago is a lifetime

ago or more than a lifetime ago.

But it's my lifetime.

So I remember these years, and I find it amazing

that the world was so different then.

But.

You know, it's really during my lifetime that a lot

of the things we now take as given in the

design of central banks, in the setup of policy and

how we conduct policy, they all came about in that

time.

Okay.

So.

If I if I were to describe what I think

one of the main lessons of monetary theory is and

you will get this by the time we do the

new Keynesian model.

It would be that there is an absolutely key role

for inflation expectations pi e in monetary policy.

Okay.

Central bankers the world over.

Believe that.

And I can point to a number of different things

that have changed in the last 30 or 40 years

that reflect that key fact about how inflation dynamics work.

That is, if you can convince people inflation will be

low and stable, the chances of achieving low and stable

inflation go up.

And then you should do everything to just keep convincing

them of that.

Part of that is achieving it.

So if inflation is too high, like let's imagine a

world where inflation got to over 10% in the UK.

Hard to imagine anymore.

We were there.

Seven months ago.

We were above 10%.

What do you have to do in that world?

You have to take policy actions that bring inflation down.

The quicker you do it, the more you convince them

and they go, Oh, that's a really good ingredient.

And the longer it takes, the boring grain gets, the

more you'd anchor expected inflation, which makes getting inflation down

harder, more costly, more painful.

Okay.

So that's, I think, the key thing.

And I'm going to tell you this sort of what

I think is the sort of a very US centric

but very prime story of that.

But I want to be very clear.

A lot of the innovations in policy that we have

seen have not been fed driven, even though a lot

of the research is fed driven because they have more

data and they're sort of a lot of academics there,

they get published more easily if you do February.

But things like inflation targeting central banks.

Who knows who invented them?

Good.

Zealand.

Good.

Yeah.

New Zealand.

But then quickly adopted.

Then the UK was pretty early.

Chile.

Sweden.

Yeah, people were getting getting into it.

Someone was asking about developing economies.

Monetary policy was like you.

Yeah.

You know, now a lot of even emerging market economies,

maybe not the lowest income countries, but have started to

move towards inflation.

So Bank of Thailand, for instance, is a very clear,

explicit inflation target.

So then I got an eight line.

This is going to be.

This.

It's going to take me.

It's going to be the most.

I'm going to prepare you for this.

This is going to be the most disgustingly ugly, confusing

chart you'll ever see.

You know, the way somebody cleverly designed the tube map

to be schematic and look great.

Have you ever seen the real version of that?

Basically I've done that for the monetary transmission mechanism.

Like there's people who've done schematic versions with like one

big square and.

Now.

I did that.

I went deep.

Into that mess with all the arrows, but I'll build

it up gently, and by the end you'll be like,

Oh, I totally understand that.

It's going to be the most practical thing I tell

you.

You know, it's it's really basically for that, you have

to imagine I'm not trying to teach you any academic

material.

I'm trying to tell you literally how it is for

central banks in the real world and all the stuff

they're thinking about and all the links they're thinking about.

And then that's like the hook on which we're going

to hang a bunch of different models.

We're going to think about them and there'll be bits

we don't get to and there'll be bits, I tell

you, Oh, if you're interested in that, you should go

see this and you'll see it when it comes.

Okay.

Let me tell you, first of all, the story.

Most of you will have heard this story always important

when you're at the LSE to talk about Phillips.

This is the Phillips Curve.

It's not the original Phillips curve.

The original Phillips curve was mostly based on the UK

and basic representation, but same kind of era 1960s US

data.

Each of the years plots.

A combination of unemployment and inflation.

You can see this kind of downward sloping thing.

And again, trade off in inverted commas, because people.

As he discussed, as if this might be a trade

off.

In other words, you could come along and say, well,

I'd rather more people in work.

And so as a result, I'm happy to have 5%

inflation or someone else could come along with their preferences

and say, No, I would like 1% inflation and I'm

okay having 6% unemployment.

Okay, That was the idea.

Now, the problem was if you look at all the

data across lots of the years, that doesn't look like

a stable trade off relationship.

And of course, modern economics knows it's not.

We are going to get to a version of it.

It's going to be a beautiful expectations augmented type version

of this.

But you can.

You can resurrect a Phillips Curve, but it ain't the

sort of trade off that people may have thought about.

Well, okay.

Thinking about this.

Well, what what was going on in these in these

years?

Well.

If you thought it was a trade off.

Which was fine if you were just writing these relationships

down with no kind of expectation or component of rational

expectations, you think, okay, well, when when unemployment is a

bit high, I'll just I'll just create a little bit

more inflation, less unemployment by moving up the Phillips curve

or, you know, if I wanted before, before an election,

I could get even lower unemployment and take the hit

of inflation later.

The whole point of rational expectations was essentially to say,

well, you can't do that in a rational world.

If you try to exploit this before an election, you

might get a short term gain for a while, but

then people will start to expect that level of inflation.

So the whole thing back, this thing went on and

on.

And this was interestingly the idea that inflation expectations are

just you can kind of see this in the US

data.

Amazing.

I should show I have another slide which I haven't

stuck in here.

If you put, say, the behaviour of the UK next

to this in the same era, you get something very

similar.

And if you put Germany there, you get something very

different.

Why?

Because the UK, the US policy, interest rates, monetary policies

actually literally.

Then it was monetary policy deciding how much money to

have in the economy.

Monetary policy was designed to help try and fight the

unemployment.

But we had the big oil shocks, the big supply

shocks, so we had unemployment going up and prices going

up.

And the more you tried to get unemployment down by

throwing money at it, you just created more and more

inflation.

So we kind of first of all, but second one

could go again.

And then the interesting period is this.

This was, I think, just a hugely important period for

central banking.

Now, if you're if you want like a German centric

view, you would say, are they caught up?

Because Germany, the Bundesbank had had a very strict control

of money growth over this period.

And so inflation never got off to these levels of,

you know, ten, 15%.

It was high by German standards, but not at that

level.

What happened then?

Well, this period here.

In particular from here.

I like to think 1979 is important year for central

banks and monetary economics because I was born.

It's actually also when Paul Volcker was appointed as chair

of the Federal Reserve.

And again, if you're into economic history, you should definitely

read the story on this.

It's not as simple as the way I'm going to

tell it, which is, oh, you jacked up interest rates

because he wasn't actually even able to jack up interest

rates.

You had to do things with non borrowed reserves and

all sorts of things.

The effect was to drive up interest rates.

I drove them up high and he kept them high

and he kept them high even as inflation started to

come down.

What did he do was the first time for the

US that they have had to fight a big inflation

and generated this inflation and we did it by generating

these grey areas.

Here are official NBER recessions.

So we generated not one but two early 1980s recessions.

As you could imagine, he was not the most popular

person in Washington.

There were elections around that time.

He had both a metaphorical and probably a real.

Target on his back.

But he's good for.

He was like he was a giant of central banking

in the sense that he was six foot seven.

But he just said, no, this is.

This is what we're doing.

And his and his thing.

His thinking was entirely driven by a lot of the

research that had gone on that basically said you can't

keep stimulating the economy.

Have lower unemployment than some natural rate.

So if you plot out in a schematic way, the

what actually ended up happening.

You know, this was the early years of poker.

On the planet at natural rate and high inflation.

He jacks up effective rates through number reserves and other

measures.

It looks like he's just moving down a Phillips curve

and everybody wants it.

Like, they're like, What are you doing?

You're basically generating 10% unemployment just to get inflation low.

You've made a choice, and that's not the choice we

want, you know?

Get him out.

Get him out.

What then happens from around then?

Well, people went, gosh, that guy really does fight inflation.

And stopped expecting inflation.

Firms stopped expecting inflation.

So when they set prices, they set prices with their

mind on the fact that others would not increase prices

by 10%.

Once you start getting that happen, the economy starts to

keep inflation low, in fact, even drifted a bit lower.

And unemployment went back to the sort of natural rate

levels.

Now you don't get the big gains, but that's what

rational expectations tells us.

You don't get gains except short run potentially.

What you get is you can maintain with a strong

monetary policy, you can maintain unemployment at or around its

natural rate while also keeping inflation low.

We can all discuss what Loa means and it means

different things for different countries.

You can see that here these are different measures, some

from surveys, some from market data.

But you can see that inflation expectations long term.

What do you think inflation will be in ten years

or what do you think inflation will be from over

the period from five years to ten years?

People started to come to think of it as being

up around 8%, having at the start of the 70s

been down around four.

Volker wrote this down.

And then we went through this period where inflation expectations,

which is very low and very stable, there were some

shocks, but they still stayed low and stable.

This is a chart, Nick, from the New York Fed

paper.

But it's yeah, you see it, you see it even

further on.

This, I think, is my favourite representation of this effect.

Okay.

This is the Federal Reserve Bank.

Of.

Cleveland, I believe.

I apologise to the people if I get the wrong

bank.

What they basically very simple exercise.

They took the CPI consumer price Index is thousands of

goods and they just marked them with 0 or 1,

whether they were goods whose prices were flexible.

So think about fish at Billingsgate Fish Market.

If you go in, they will have just a whiteboard

and they'll write up the price.

And if you go in early, the price will be

something different to an hour later, to two hours later,

etcetera.

Or sticky, if you think about, well, an Apple iPhone,

right?

If you go to the Apple store in Covent Garden

and there's a big queue waiting to buy the iPhone

15, they don't jack up the price because of, you

know, local demand conditions.

It's sticky for a period now.

Apple may stick up the price.

In fact, next time they do a release, they might

change all the prices, but they do an incremental li.

You do that with all goods.

It's a little bit crude, sticky, flexible, flexible.

So you can deliver.

And then you look at what happened to the inflation

rate of the two baskets separately.

If you look before the sort of Volcker expectation anchoring.

Flexible prices go up and down, up and down, up

and down.

And the sticky ones largely follow them.

After the anchoring.

The sticky winds are much more stable in around this

level and you still get to flexible ones jumping up

and down.

That is the power of anchoring inflation expectations.

You can control the way prices are set.

Wages potentially are demanded, as much less evidence of that,

however.

But that's what you can do.

And then there's a bunch of quotes here which I

won't bore you with and.

But I will say one last thing, which is in

most of our models and in most of our practice,

when we think about modern monetary policy, we think about

the nominal interest rate as being one of the instruments.

But in our models, what matters.

The real interest rate.

So if you want the quickest fire way to understand

why central banks are so diehard dedicated to inflation expectations

anchoring.

It's to understand that from the Fisher equation.

If expectations are anchored and imagine they're hard anchored.

Everybody in England just believes it would be 2% no

matter what.

Then whatever happens to nominal rates happens to real rates.

Inflation expectations can move around independently.

The central bank has much less control over the real

rate, and the real rate is what matters, at least

in our models, and at least that's what we believe.

Okay.

There's a bunch of other stuff you can read there.

Yeah.

Real grief is the.

Price of what?

Is a is in like what market is.

Well.

You've already called me out on the first sleight of

hand.

There is no real rate.

There are many real rates.

The real rate is just expressing a nominal rate in

purchasing power terms.

So imagine the nominal interest rate is 10%.

You put £100 in the bank, you get 110 at

the end of the period.

Okay, that's a 10% nominal rate.

But how much does a £110 buy you in one

year from now versus today?

That's the real rate.

So in fact, what we think matters is equation one,

which I will be more specific on it now.

It is the ex ante real interest rate.

So when I'm making a choice of what to do,

this is what I what the interest rate I'm being

offered is they're offering me 10%.

But if I think that inflation over the next year

is going to be 20%, then putting my money in

the bank is going to lose me effectively 10%.

So that's what matters for my choice today.

What do I think will be the return in real

terms?

So every interest rate can be real or nominal?

In our models, we're going to have, particularly in the

first few models, we're going to have a world where

there's going to be perfect acid substitute ability.

So there's going to be none of the frictions, none

of the problems, none of the recyclability issues that you

might get with other assets.

And so having cash or having a bank account should

be or having government bonds or having capital or having

equity should be the same.

And so there will be one return equilibrium return.

In practice, there are many and they depend on how

creditworthy you are and all these other things.

But so you can think about anything, the interest rates

on the bank, the borrowings, the return you get on

capital, everything, if it's the real return that we're going

to.

Good question.

Okay.

This is my spaghetti chart.

Somebody mentioned that they're interested in the monetary transmission mechanism.

But I am going to satisfy you in the first

lecture.

And then to possibly disappoint you for nine more.

Okay.

What is the monetary transmission mechanism?

Well, when people talk about the monetary transmission mechanism, what

they mean is.

How do policy changes have effects?

How do they get transmitted?

Monetary policy get transmitted to the real economy and ultimately

to inflation.

As I said, given everything that's gone on, most central

banks have a focus on trying to control inflation because

that helps them control inflation expectations.

And that's a key part of what they're trying to

do.

So ultimately, I'm going to draw this as a mapping

from one end of policy to the other end of

inflation.

But you will see I will build it gradually and

by the end it will be a horrible mess.

Let's start with some key points about it.

Milton Friedman made, you know, not a fan, not a

huge fan of monetary policy as Big Milton Friedman.

But.

He probably has one of the most cited terms about

both inflation.

Inflation is always in everywhere monetary phenomenon and about the

transmission mechanism.

Monetary policy acts with long and variable lags.

This is actually what makes policy hard.

If you think about some models, and it'll be true

in some of the models we look at here.

You can have the effect of policy immediately.

In reality, when you change policy, it can take, we

think up to two and a half, three years to

have this effect on inflation.

So when inflation is 10% like it was six months

ago here and you're jacking up interest rates, you're only

going to see the effect of that 18 months, two

years, two and a half years.

Three years.

And sometimes it'll be faster and sometimes it'll be slower.

And ultimately, what central bankers.

This is why I say this is the most fundamental

question of policy makers.

Monetary policy makers ask themselves if they change rates, what's

going to happen?

The answer is we don't know perfectly well.

We can give you lots of stories.

You can give you lots of empirical ambrosia.

We'll take you through tons of ways of cutting this

up.

But there is a lot of uncertainty and there's a

lot of differences in the lives.

In fact, some of the likes are negative.

What does that mean?

Policy becomes anticipated.

And so asset prices are just think of the exchange

rate.

And the exchange rate is amazing because it automatically feeds

in and affects inflation.

Is anything you buy from France in euros.

If Sterling becomes stronger, if it appreciates, then you can

buy that same stuff for cheaper.

It's effectively like the price is dropped.

At least for the the buyer.

Okay.

But like I said, we think.

The channel onto inflation is typically through domestic inflationary conditions

and exchange rates.

Okay.

So that's the sort of picture we're going to build

up, but we're going to do it.

And I'm going to start with the Volcker story and

I'm going to start with my favourite areas.

Think of this as inflation targeting.

If we set a policy framework that's clearly focussed on

controlling inflation and that anchors inflation expectations, that affects the

way firms and set prices and people affect unions, ask

for wage increases, which affects inflation.

And as I said, this feeds back because if you're

controlling inflation, if I tell you all I'm controlling inflation

and inflation is controlled, you believe me.

And so then you expect me to control inflation, which

is why the last two years for central banks have

been tricky because for years they've been controlling inflation and

suddenly it looked like they're not.

So that's channel one.

So when the Bank of England became an inflation targeting

central bank, that framework.

The idea was it would convince me and very clearly

communicate we have an inflation target of.

At the time it was 2.5%.

Today, 2%, 2%.

And that's our target.

And therefore, you should expect us to get 2%.

And if we do that, then you'll set prices with

2% in mind and that will help get us 2%.

Uh oh.

Sometimes things don't just work out magically perfectly by convincing

people.

Sometimes you've got to use the policy rate.

What does that.

How do we think about this?

When you change the policy rate, you're going to affect

bank lending rates.

Okay.

So people want to borrow.

Or in fact, also the deposit rates.

So, you know, households are going to think, well, the

interest rate is now 5%.

I'm not going to borrow as much.

I'm not going to do that construction project.

Instead of going to take the money, I'm going to

put it in the bank and save it.

You adjust the balance of activity that affects household demand.

Think of corporates doing the same.

That affects the amount of demand in the economy.

And that means the firm coming along to set their

price goes.

But we don't exactly have people queuing out the door.

If we jacked up prices by 10%, you know, maybe,

you know, nobody comes and we go out of business.

Whereas when there's a big queue of people at the

door and loads of money being spent, 10% is fine.

You think people will pay it?

Okay.

That's the idea to domestically generated inflation again, 18 months

to two years for this effect.

I already mentioned this one, but it is an important

one.

The direct effect when you move policy rates.

So you said you liked international finance and might do

it instead of this case?

We do a little bit of it here, right?

Purchasing power parity, interest, equality, equations.

If you're offering a whole lot more money, suddenly money

will flow in that cause an appreciation, that appreciation lowers.

The import price.

Of these goods directly affecting things, but also affects net

demand.

Right.

So if you're, um, if you, if you're if Sterling

appreciates, then sterling goods look more expensive relative to Bosnian

goods.

So what do we do?

Buy more from less from the UK that affects conditions

here.

Labour market gets a bit weaker, jobs become a bit

harder, wage demands become a bit less aggressive.

Okay.

But again, you can already see even the way I'm

just talking about it.

If you think about it, there's a lot of I

can imagine this sometimes happens, sometimes doesn't, does it, really?

Well, that's the long and variable life.

There's effective policy decisions directly on market conditions.

So if you think about a market, there's a market,

a yield curve which plots out the interest rates that

you can get at each point in time.

If you want to borrow for ten years or five

year, five year forward rates, that means starting in five

year borrowing for five years, what are the rates markets

for?

They will adjust.

Based on their expectations for policy, including the decision today.

So actually, you can already see.

That the policy is not just communicating the decision today,

which is the policy of 30, 40 years ago.

We thought that's how it worked.

But you're also trying to tell them we're going to

go high and we're going to stay high, we're going

to go low, we're going to stay there, and that's

going to change the yield curve, which then affects the

bank lending rates, then directly affects corporate demand.

ET cetera.

Okay.

Just being able to borrow cheaply for one month isn't

going to change your mortgage decision.

But at the at the bank thinks the rates are

going to be low for five years and they offer

you then a fixed rate for five years.

That's pretty low.

That might entice you to borrow more.

I mentioned that.

Why?

Because we also have to think about credit conditions.

It's not just about setting a price and letting anyone

borrow banks oscillate and how willing they are to issue

loans.

Classic example of this, which many of you will have

heard of, is the idea that before the financial crisis,

US financial institutions were lending what were called ninja loans.

No income, no job or assets.

So in other words, people who probably wouldn't pay back

unless house prices went up and then they could, you

know, leverage that new house price increase into getting themselves

a better deal and then eventually they have enough asset

wealth to do it.

Yeah, credit conditions can matter a lot and they will

be affected by beliefs and perceptions about what's happening to

policy.

Oh, gosh.

Then we hit the zero lower bound.

Now we're at a point where the nominal rate on

the short term lending is at or around a lower

bound.

Now, we used to think it was zero.

Nobody said they were Swiss, did they?

The Swiss have led the way in showing us it's

not zero, but it's somewhere not far below zero to

nominal interest rate that we can we can get.

So, you know, -1%, -1.5%.

Those are at some point if you're trying to charge

people for putting money in the bank, they're just going

to put it under their bed.

Because the interest rate on cash is zero.

So if someone said you can either get zero by

putting money in your wallet and keeping it with you,

or you can pay 50% by putting it in the

bank, I know if you're going to do.

Right.

Is it something that kicks in?

So Kiwi purchases.

This is where the bank stopped selling the rate, but

actually started just buying assets.

And by buying them further out the yield curve, they

were affecting this sort of range of rates that are

available also had an effect through the exchange rate at

asset purchases.

Whew.

Nearly there.

Macroprudential.

Why?

Because all of this stuff matters in terms of what

credit is available if you change macroprudential conditions, for example,

if you change the loan to value ratios that are

allowed or if you change the amount of security that's

required for a collateralised loan by a corporate, that is

going to change this, which then feeds into corporate and

household demand, which affects inflation.

So those people who said they're interested in the interaction

of these policies, there's an interaction and it's massively not

well understood.

We don't have that good studies because we haven't had

macro proof for that long.

Actually, one place you may want to study if you

want to study macro is Singapore.

You guys have been macro brewing since.

Years ago.

Much more policy fund there.

And then my favourite slide of the entire course.

Central bank communication.

Okay.

So again, a lot of the old stuff is classic

central bank policy, like we've done in my life.

It's only since 1994.

For most of you were born still only since 1994

that the Fed.

The US Federal Reserve actually announced its decisions.

In 1993, they would make decisions and not tell anyone.

No.

Every central banker is watched for speeches, for announcements, press

conferences, the minutes, everything.

They they used to tell them what their decision was.

If they had the meeting today, then in 3 or

4 days time they would tell you what their decision

had been, not 3 or 4 days earlier, but eight

weeks earlier at the meeting preceding the one they just

had.

Because they didn't want his talk.

Now they talk all the time.

They talk because they're trying to control inflation expectations.

They're trying to convince you that they're confident.

They're trying to convince you they have the right policies.

They try to convince you they will achieve those targets.

And they're not just talking to you and businesses.

They're also particularly talking to markets.

And this is a big part of my research.

Words move markets.

Ever heard of the taper tantrum?

Ben Bernanke.

Was misinterpreted.

He said something about when the Fed would taper its

asset purchases.

Few billions and billions of dollars of assets, leaving emerging

market economies, causing crashes all over the place.

Flooding.

It's as people re-evaluated their portfolio.

Yet to come out a few weeks later and I

was I was in the room when you said a

few weeks later you had to basically explain themselves.

It's not what I meant.

For words.

I think it's beautiful.

Anyway, right?

Okay, let me say a few of these things.

Now I'll skip that.

Who you will.

Most of you have seen this.

If not, you can look it up.

Very simple.

This is that inflation is always and everywhere a monetary

phenomenon.

The quantity theory of money, the the price of goods

times the amount of them in real terms should equal

to the amount of money in the economy multiplied by

this lovely concept called velocity, which is, if you think

about it in traditional note terms, back in the day,

I used to hate to give this lecture and put

a note out and we could pass it around.

I don't even have a note anymore.

And but the amount of times that note gets used

and we have a measure of this, this is GDP,

nominal GDP, that's real GDP, that's the deflator or any

price index.

We can measure money.

We can count how much money there is.

It's not as trivial as you think.

It is trivial if you want to count the notes

and coins.

But then you have to choose what is money and

what is not money.

So what is money?

I mean, I just said I have no money.

In a traditional sense.

In my bag.

I have a.

Wedge of different bank cards.

Do they count as money?

Well, your debit card does, because that's what I use

to pay.

Does.

The government bond count as money.

Well, probably not if you want to buy a can

of coke, but in a sort of wider liquidity, send

some of these sort of assets.

Are they draw a line?

Government bonds are not typically money, but they draw a

line somewhere and there's different measures called like one and

two and three getting broader and broader in terms of

money.

But we can measure it.

And then if you take logs and differentiate this simple

quantity equation, you get this expression that it's the percentage

change in prices, which is inflation, the percentage change in

Y, which is real growth, percentage change in money, and

the percentage change of loss.

If you think that that's the bank stable, at least

over sort of medium run times, then you get this

relationship that if you increase the amount of money it

either has to cause inflation or it have to cause

real growth.

And we think that in the long run, certainly money

is neutral, The money is neutral in the long run,

you push this off.

You get no effect on that, you end up with

inflation.

You get two, almost one for one.

And I'm going to show you this now.

I'll show you it again in the next set of

slides slightly differently.

Oh, I didn't put the chart in because I have

it later.

You'll see a slight the correlation.

Between inflation and money growth over long periods like 30,

40, 50 years is hugely positive.

So again, you don't need to assume that these correlation

causes implies causation, but it's still interesting.

Okay.

I'm going to.

Okay.

I'll tell you this one thing.

Once you get on temperatures part.

The real question for the entire after Christmas part is

I want to know that transmission mechanism.

How do I figure it out empirically?

Well, I'll be really nice is if we just had

that.

No, I want to know inflation or output on one

side and regression on the on the interest rate.

Why can't you do that?

You can't do that because monetary policy is forward looking.

It's the classic endogeneity bias.

It would be like and this people have done this.

If you run a regression of people's health on whether

or not they go to the hospital.

You find exactly the opposite effect that you would hope

for.

Statistically going to a hospital is really bad for your

health.

People who go to hospital are more likely to die

than people who don't go to hospital.

Why?

Because when we're all feeling happy and well, we don't

just randomly go to the hospital, that would be good

experimental evidence, right?

You go to hospital, you do, you go to hospital.

You don't.

You don't you go.

You don't.

Right.

Random.

Great.

Not random.

You only go when you're sick and when you're sick,

you're not as well as people who are well.

Same is true here.

When interest rates go up, it's because either inflation is

predicted to go up or inflation is predicted to stay

high.

So the question is, what is the counterfactual?

How do we deal with the failure of blue?

Best linear, unbiased estimator that fails.

We have the largest variable lags.

So all of our brochures, part of most of this

part is going to be coming up with ways to

deal with that indulgent bias.

And he will give you all the tools to get

to cut my spaghetti chart.

Up into pieces.

Here is one particular very famous representation of that.

This is Si Cristiano Ichiban and F is 1995.

It is a monetary policy shock analysis in a vector

autoregression.

Again, you don't have to know what that is yet,

but it's a way of putting all the variables in

and letting them all be endogenous.

And they find that when you raise interest rates.

These are quarters.

Do you raise interest rates?

It tends to drive down the amount of money in

the economy.

After about a year to 18 months, you get a

big effect on output, which gradually goes back.

And then after about 2 or 3 years, you start

getting the price level.

Brochure will teach you how to do that.

I just want you to have that in the back

of the mind for everything we talk about.

Okay.

Any questions on that?

Just when you thought it's home time, it's not home

time.

I need to tell you something about money and utility

models.

Okay.

So.

Do we go without a break today just to get

through?

We survive.

The ego and the less ego ones are like, Hell

no!

Let's go.

Yeah, it'd be better if I just go.

Maybe I'll.

As I say, maybe I'll finish early.

I never finish early.

Just.

Just if I ever say, Oh, this is a short

lecture, don't worry, I'll probably finish early.

Like hell I will.

Almost certainly will not.

Probably because I'm Irish.

You need an accent to talk for.

I will fill that time.

Going to get used to it.

Okay.

So I already sort of told you the background of

this.

If you take a lot of our standard models, they

didn't have money in them.

So people came along and said, well, let's get money

in there.

This is a.

Trick a way of representing.

Money that gets it directly into our models, and that

allows us to sort of solve the models and think

about the effects of policy.

Now, I'm not going to finish all of this today,

I promise.

So I'm going to go I'm going to definitely cover

the assumptions and then I'm going to jump across slides,

which I will come back to next week.

But I want to give you the basic idea of

what we do without the detail.

Okay.

So here's what we do Think about the basic neoclassical

model.

Okay.

Neoclassical model.

I mean, we have a production function.

It's capital and labour and some productivity term.

Labour augmenting productivity.

Neoclassical.

We're going to impose perfect competition.

So firms aren't going to.

They're going to compete away profits in the economy.

So.

Are you going to have a rental price of capital?

There's a real wage and this is their input and

that's been all be totally eaten up to.

There's no extra profits left over.

And we know this.

You will have seen this.

In the pre-match course, I'm sure.

But many of you in courses before you end up

in a world where the the.

Profit maximisation conditions give us the normal marginal conditions whereby

the real wage is equal to the marginal product of

labour, and the rental price of capital is the marginal

product of capital.

Okay.

This model is beautiful.

There's no uncertainty.

Again, that just keeps things simple.

You can add uncertainty into these models and then you

have to work with.

Ever so slightly more complicated expressions because you'll have expectations

in there and then you have to worry about the

expectations.

Operator.

This is where all the action is.

You'll have seen the U of C before.

You get utility from consumption.

And these are infinitely lived ages.

So they live today, but they're also thinking all the

way out to infinite time, but they don't value time

equally.

They value today more than they value tomorrow, more than

they value the next day, etcetera.

And that's all captured by the beta, the discount factor.

Okay.

Okay.

Make it like this.

Point nine, 5 or 9, nine or something like that.

So they they do value these periods.

But you know, once you get far enough out in

the future, they're essentially discounting their infinite.

Future lives.

So you like utility from consumption?

Eating is good.

This is the new thing.

This v function depends on m t minus one divided

by t.

M t minus one is the money holdings that I

had at the end of the last period.

Divided by p t.

Is their value in transactions today.

So I bring money from the last period in and

that allows me to have to have a sort of

transaction value.

I can buy goods with it.

Now what's important is when I buy stuff with it,

that might also be consumption.

So I will get joy.

From the consumption separately.

The V function captures.

The transaction motive of money or the convenience of having

the cash in my pocket.

So I'm going to transpose myself back.

Even 23 years ago, when I first came across these

models, not in this room.

This room used to be the.

The Land registry office, something like that.

So it wasn't in use, but in a similar room

somewhere in LSC.

And the story was that, you know, if I didn't

have cash in my pocket and I suddenly wanted a

T.

I had to walk.

To the bank.

Now, I'm not that old that we're bank machines.

But if you go back to when they were first

developed these models, you have to walk to the bank,

get in the queue.

Like this.

Many dollars.

Take your dollars.

Go back, buy this coffee, and all that time is

wasted.

And that's this utility.

So having the money gave you joy.

Utility.

That's what we're trying to short circuit in here, Right?

We don't want we don't want to build a whole

motive.

And, you know, just we're not measuring time properly or

anything like that.

But, you know, if you think about it back in

the day.

If the bites were closed, you literally could not transact

if you did not have cash.

There were no ATMs, people didn't have credit cards, debit

cards, etcetera.

Apple watches Apple Pay.

People pay.

Okay.

But I said, So we impose some standard conditions on

this, so in particular.

This.

This does capture the idea that if you had no

real balances.

You would not get any enjoyment.

In fact, the marginal marginal gain from going from zero

to a little bit is infinite.

These are classic united conditions.

And ultimately at infinity of money, there's no marginal gain.

Okay.

So there's going to be some kind of internal optimal

that you want to have, but that's the model.

Other than that, we can write down and talk about

all the normal stuff that we do.

Okay.

So we do have to talk about constraints because these

are going to matter.

Let's think about what the households can do.

What do they have?

And.

Well, we know they're going to consume.

We're going to have a fiscal agent here, fiscal authority.

So we're going to have taxes that they could pay.

Of course taxes can.

Taxes could be positive.

T can be positive, which means you pay taxes or

T could be negative, which means you could get a

transfer from the government.

So that's in there.

They can buy capital so they can own machines.

And we know what you can do with machines like

in a standard model.

Households can own machines and lend them to firms.

Firms pay a rental price for them because there's no

uncertainty.

They know what they'll get for it.

The productivity of it.

They don't have bond holdings.

I don't have money holdings.

Okay.

So this is sort of what they can do.

This is the remember in period t they're going to

choose their money holdings.

And we're having to convert all the prices into the.

The same units.

So we're converting the money today in real terms.

But if you remember from the the.

Money and utility part.

What's actually going to matter is this nominal stock of

money at the end of period t that I bring

into the next period evaluated in real terms at the

future price level.

So there's a p t plus one that appears in

the utility.

And again, we're just doing we're we're now.

What do we have?

What are our resources available to us?

Well, we can work and we get a real wage

for that.

We're going to shut this channel down entirely.

Again, it's not that hard to add it, but it

gives you an extra Euler equation and extra markets to

think about.

So we're just going to say everybody's going to work

one period.

So there's one unit of this and they get a

wage for that, that wage determined by the marginal conditions

of the firm.

What other resources do they have?

Well, they have capital.

What capital do they have?

Well, they have one minus Delta Times Capital.

That's the capital they had before left the depreciation that

took place.

But they also have.

Extra return that they get for the from the capital.

Remember, they get paid for their capital that they have

last period.

They get paid for that this period next time.

So that's their this period resources they also have their

bonds and their stock of money that they have.

This equation is just a constraint that most hold.

And I managed to get something caught in my throat.

And.

Okay.

I'm going to leave these up there for you to

read.

There's a lot of, like just discussion points here.

I think I said most of them.

I've certainly said why we're using it as a sort

of reduced form representation.

Yeah.

Yeah, I think I said all of this.

I mean, maybe I didn't explicitly say the second last

bullet points.

I'll say that.

Now these models.

Give a special role to this thing called money.

They they they say that money has this liquidity or

transactional advantage that gives joy.

And otherwise, in a normal model, money would just be

an asset that paid zero return.

Again, the zero return was very standard when we were

thinking of this as cash.

But you can adapt these.

You can think about.

You know reserves held by banks at.

At the central bank.

You could you could imagine a world of central bank

digital currency if you're.

That moves at the frontier of financial innovation.

You know, this idea of a cbdc.

Have you heard this is the idea that we will

all have a digital currency but issued directly from the

central bank.

So.

Yeah, if I.

If I.

I once lived it because when I worked at the

Bank of England, I had an account at the Bank

of England and I had a bank card from the

Bank of England that only worked in three ATMs.

In the country, two inside the Bank of England and

one at the printing works in Devon in Essex.

So I actually live the life of the person who,

if you needed money, like at the weekend, you had

to take it out before the bank closed its doors

on a Friday.

Very dangerous thing for a young man in London.

Oh, I'll just take out £200 for the weekend and

go out on a Friday night.

Never had any accidents.

Never got mugged.

But, you know, there were risks taken, people.

Yeah.

Okay.

So this is just to say again, other discussion.

I will talk as if this is little money.

And again, I apologise for those of you so young

that you can't even remember the use of money.

I'm looking at the Swedes here because you guys gave

up on many years ago, didn't you?

Yeah, we did.

Yeah.

The Sweden.

Sweden, like.

Just like ten years ago, you couldn't use money there,

whereas 15 years ago you couldn't use a credit card

in Germany.

Go figure.

Okay, so now we need to solve this.

What do we have?

What we have.

Your pre-match course.

You guys are experts at this now, right?

We have a constraint.

We have a utility function.

So some of you can update me as to which

techniques they're teaching.

I assume they taught you Lagrangian.

Hamiltonians wouldn't use Hamiltonian days not to use time, but

that's okay.

The bellman equations do Bellman do that?

Or you can do, in this case even easier one.

Just plug it in.

And solve it.

Again, we can have an expression.

These these constraints, budget identities have to hold every period.

So we have a CT.

When the CT puts one of them in, take the

first order conditions.

Okay.

So now.

Remind me that I really got to slide nine.

Okay.

That's where we'll start whenever we meet next week.

What am I going to do now?

Now I'm going to blitz you through the logic of

each of the next steps without grinding through each of

the derivatives in that.

And then when we come back, if there are questions,

we'll spend a bit of time on it.

At the start of next week.

We can look at some of them in particular.

Right.

What do we do?

We're going to take first order conditions with respect to

k, b, m, c Et-cetera We're going to work out

optimality conditions.

I got Euler equations.

You're going to get a whole host of Euler equation

things that relate our choice today to a choice tomorrow

because these are most of these models are dynamic and

have a dynamic trade off there.

We're going to get very standard looking Euler equations.

Okay.

What's the what's the big Euler equation that we get?

Well, this is the classic one.

I'm asking myself the question.

If I give up one unit of consumption today, what

do I lose?

I lose utility.

What's the utility?

It's marginal utility evaluated at today's level of consumption.

You asked, what do I gain from giving up a

unit of consumption?

Well, if I do it through bonds.

I get one plus r back with certainty.

No expectations here because I ship that day, I get

one plus r back next period.

How much is one plus r worth to me?

Well, it depends on how much I like consumption.

How much do I like consumption?

Well, that's tomorrow's evaluated marginal utility of consumption plus one.

But I also have to take into account that I

don't like tomorrow as much as I like today.

That is my impatience parameter.

That's the beta.

Exact same logic for investment in capital, except the return

is arcade.

So now here's the answer to your question.

Although I was talking about the real interest rate.

So far, there are at least two real interest rates

here.

The real interest rate on bonds and a real interest

rate on capital are in equilibrium.

It's been adjusted.

But so I can still talk about the real interest

rate, but really a few of them.

Okay.

So that's what we have.

There's a bunch of things that just relate.

Nominal interest rates to real interest rates relate to.

And this the price of the bond and then inflation

it and the Fisher equation you bring in here but

you get Euler equations right?

Bunch of Euler equations going to get some Euler equations.

Now on money this one I'm going to spend a

little bit of time on because this is the novel

thing here, but it's not actually that novel.

What is the benefit of holding money?

Well, what money?

Special features in this model.

Doesn't pay interest.

But it gives joy.

So that's what the trade off is.

If you hold an extra unit of money today, you

get joy tomorrow because remember, that extra unit of money

in real terms is over.

P t plus one term gives you joy.

That's good.

What do you lose?

Well, you lose the interest rate that you would have

got if you put it into another asset.

And that interest rate.

How much is that interest valuable to you?

Well, again, we evaluate things at their consumption, utility value.

Marginal utility of consumption.

Okay.

So that's the trade off.

That's just an extra condition.

Not.

Beyond a little bit of extra maths.

This is just a sort of standard model of optimising

consumer behaviour.

The.

Okay.

So I will come back to this.

I'm going to so from that.

From that equation.

From this equation here, you can back out an implied

demand for money.

And if you plot it, you get this nice downward

sloping demand for money.

Demand for nominal money is proportional to the price level.

So real money balances are what matter, which is what

you would expect.

The higher your consumption, the more you want to hold

nominal money and the higher the interest rate, the less

you want to hold money.

So it has it has features that are very similar

to if we just went back to our first year

undergrad courses where someone came along and said, Here's a

money demand curve, it's downward sloping.

Now we've sort of jacked it into a model and

a bit of dynamic programming and gotten the same basic

thing.

So there's no there's no funniness going on there.

Skip that.

There is a transversal condition that we have to have

with these infinite horizon models, essentially that you can't roll

over debt forever.

But but let's leave that out.

So now what have we defined?

We'll define the firm sector.

That takes.

Real things, capital and labour and combines them to make

outputs.

We've got a household sector that will supply labour, will

buy and supply capital.

So it's doing a lot of the real stuff will

consume real units of consumption.

But also gets joy from money.

And so because of that, we actually now have to

augment the standard models with someone supplying money.

And that supplier of money is the central bank, typically.

Okay.

So.

Like I say, we're going to think about this as

the central bank setting monetary policy, the amount of money

we have to choose and.

And it's you know, this is sort of a repeat

of some of the discussion I already had.

But.

When I described.

Measuring money like M3, We don't actually just think about

the notes and coins.

Created in the Bank of England or the Royal Mint.

We also think about the fact that I have money

as deposits in NatWest, HSBC, Barclays, Lloyds.

I'm not trying to advertise anyone under the sponsorship deal

yet.

Other banking suppliers are available.

Yeah.

So, so, so the central bank is going to be

setting monetary policy.

So this is really where monetary policy, the idea of

it comes.

And in fact.

Such is the only one monopoly supplier of M.

And in fact, we're going to think about this in

terms of a growth rate for em.

Okay.

I'm gonna.

Okay.

We're getting very old style Bundesbank here controlling the growth

rate of EB.

We're going to see what happens in the economy.

So let's see what I'm going to do, the bank

balance sheet, and then I'll race you through the last

exercises.

And then then we'll finish up.

Okay, Here is the bank balance sheet.

The bank.

The central bank.

Issues Money.

I was an issue money the way actual central banks

issue money.

If you're the monopoly supplier of money, you are in

the best position possible.

What do you do?

Create money magically.

Buy stuff.

You know, in this world, we assume they buy bonds.

As a counterparty to their money or potentially capital capital

think of as equity.

And most central banks don't buy a lot of equity.

But we're going to allow them to.

Item theory.

They also the value of their assets can, of course,

fluctuate.

They can have a sort of like capital.

Central bank capital.

Interesting, really interesting discussion of whether we should think about

central banks as being able to go bankrupt.

Because it kind of seems mad if you have the

ability to just issue as much money as you want

to buy assets.

That we could think of you going bankrupt.

Because actually, what happens?

What happens to the profits from a central bank?

What someone said.

You get a treasury, you know, we hold them.

Senior age.

So there is a transfer.

But most central banks, the way their contracts are written,

if they were negative.

Flow has to go the other way.

They would have to be recapitalised by Treasury.

Now it turns out you can even recapitalise the central

bank by just not doing transfers and committing to not

doing transfers until you're back in the in the.

In the positive capital.

So this is their balance sheet.

This is their this is their flow equation.

So they can in any period they can buy more

bonds.

They can buy bonds.

They can be one period bonds and they buy bonds.

They buy capital and they make transfers to senior transfers

to the Treasury.

I hope they fund all of that.

They just print money.

For less money than they had before.

We can increase or decrease that.

They have their bonds that pay back from the last

period and then they have their capital just like the

household.

Their capital is what they had less of depreciation plus

the return.

Okay.

Bunch of other technical assumptions.

So now we have a central bank.

What about the government?

Well, we had that in there.

So now we we have the government.

What does the government do?

Well, the fiscal agent can also buy bonds or it

can do government spending now.

Currently the way we wrote the model down, they would

never want to do government spending.

Why?

Doesn't do anything.

You could put and people have done this.

You could put G in the utility function.

Whereby, you know, gee, when they spend on public goods

creates its own utility, we don't have that.

But, you know, you could have it.

We know that you transfers.

So they can they can they can take taxes or

give money to households that can be negative.

Give it like over here.

To get money from the central bank and then they

have their bonds from.

Issued today.

So they're the issuer of bonds.

Okay.

Let's skip that as well.

Now we work at equilibrium once equilibrium.

The markets have to clear.

Psychology.

Because why?

Standard?

The labour market.

Demand for labour from firms equals supply of labour, which

we have held fixed at one.

That's just a normalisation because I didn't want to think

of any labour market.

Rental market for capital.

Well, the total amount of capital used has to equal

the amount of capital that's held by households or the

central bank.

Bond market.

The issuance by the fiscal agent has to equal the

total holding of bonds.

And the money market is that the amount of money

held has to equal the amount of money supplied.

They are just market clearing conditions that we impose for

the equilibrium.

Once we have that, we can write things down.

Now.

You look at this.

You will notice one thing.

There is a these models admit a block.

That just contains real variables.

In other words.

If I had done and written a real business cycle

model down with no money in utility.

Forget about that.

I would get probably these exact equations, not probably I

would get these exact equations and you get what is

called the classical dichotomy.

That the real part of the model and the nominal

part of the model can basically be separated.

So if.

And I don't think anyone.

Express this interest.

But imagine you were thinking.

I'm trying to decide between whether I want to study

economic fluctuations like the business cycle stuff, or do I

want to study like long run growth?

Well if you're into long term growth.

This is the stuff you worry about.

So you don't have to think about money.

Because yeah, you know, interest rates, monetary policy, QE, they

can have little effects in the short run.

We're thinking about 30 years from now.

I'm not going to work over 30 years, but at

least that's what we think.

Any of you read The Economist recently?

Economists had a feature of a paper which I know

very well, and.

By Oscar, Georgia and Taylor and Singh, UC Davis, where

they estimate a long run effect of monetary policy now

that the evidence for that and the effects of it.

The big discussion big debate so you could think of

it because that you said you're interested in this was

it you innovation That's you?

Yeah.

There channel is that when you adjust interest rates, you

affect the levels of R&D and innovation and they then

have long run effects through Z and K again.

Not conventional stuff at all.

That's why I got in The Economist.

But interesting.

Our traditional models would have monetary policy doesn't affect any

of these long term because they're all real variables and

we can keep them separate.

The way we've written the model here is it's also

independent of tax policy.

That's a form of ricardian equivalence.

So we have this model and what the money and

utility model gives us is a real sector and we're

going to have a nominal sector which we can solve,

but we can still then look at the effects of

changing policies and what they do to things like inflation

and output.

Just to jump, you know, if you wanted to.

If you wanted to.

Um, break the classical.

I'm going to give you three ways you can break

the classical dichotomy.

One.

You can build in informational problems money, illusion, where people

didn't realise that prices are shifting and then they put

wrong values on the real value of money.

And then they do.

They probably consume more as a result.

Or you can bring in sticky prices and sticky wages,

which means that even though demand goes up, the price

doesn't go up with it.

And so the economy becomes demand determined.

That's going to be the new Keynesian model.

We're going to have our fairy.

Or I'm one that's not here.

Oh, it is here.

The last one.

The other way you can do it is.

And I didn't emphasise this and maybe I should have.

Let me jump back to it the way we wrote

this down.

We wrote utility of consumption and then the utility of

Money Holdings, and we had them as additively separable.

So they were separate terms.

They don't interact if you made them not additively separable.

So they interacted so that the amount of the amount

of joy you got from money depended on your consumption.

You get differently.

I don't know why I was thinking about it before

this lecture.

What story will I tell them about what that additive

separability is?

Is that like you get more joy having money?

Loads of money if your consumption is high or low.

What's the more natural?

Then I start to think, well, people go work for

like Goldman Sachs and they work 120 hours a week.

They have actually enjoy any of their money, but they

get rich.

Are they getting.

Is that a different interaction?

So I don't know which way it is, but if

you put that in, you start getting that the holdings

of money start affecting the choices of consumption, and then

you break the classical dichotomy.

How are we doing timewise?

Not good.

Okay, fine.

So what we do then is we go through it

all.

We look.

At the effects.

Of policy shocks, and then we think about optimal policy.

Let's come back to it next week.

We'll spend the first hour on next week.

I don't know when.

We'll see you next week.

It will be some time in some building, in some

place.

Yeah, I see.

So you said there is a rate of return on

capital and on bonds.

So the difference between the two is the rate of

profit.

No, there'll be no profit.

There'll be no profit.

So actually, once you adjust the rate of return on

capital for depreciation, which you can think of as the

kind of the user cost, the user cost of capital,

you can then return upon the income, but the assets

are perfectly substitutable because.

It's all the same.

Interest rate.

Yeah.

We're back in the old world.

It's fine.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Oh, sure.

Mean, I should feel like crash course.

First we.

Yeah.

So?

So I put it up there.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But I'm gonna.

Yeah.

What do they.

Do.

Running the classes?

And if we do that, he'll be able to go

through some of it.

Yeah.

To have a go at it.

Try it.

Because actually, I guess the problem set is mostly small

problem.

This is why I wanted to cover the basics.

Yeah.

How is this one?

Good to try it.

He said bad things about you.

How's it going?

I guess a lot of the.

No, no.

Can I ask you a question?

I mean, in in Russia, I have a flight in

two hours, so it's fine.

2.5 hours?

No, no.

I actually wanted to ask you.

The previous lecturer is God.

From the.

I asked him for the last time.

So the piece, The People, The Checker.

And Kevin.

O'Rourke.

I don't know about.

I love.

Yeah.

What can you like?

Oh, she's.

I just tell her.

And try those two.

And Iraq is in Abu Dhabi now.

But performances in.

Thanks a lot.

Try.

I don't have any deep thoughts.

Okay.

Okay.

Thank you.

Like the marquee player.

So hard.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Oh, so.

So if it's really the flow equation that you have

to restart the central.

Bank and issue money.

And print as much as you want.

It buys assets or it gives to the.

Also.

Well in Debian.

Yes it.

That's it.

Okay.

Okay.

No, no.

That's where.

That's where the printing works is.

It used to be.

Part of the bank.

It's now privately owned.

So it's owned by.

Oh, I can never remember the name.

There's a big international.

Uh.

The famous international printing company.

They now own.

Yeah, it's the.

Thank you very much.

I've got.

Yes.

It's a real budget.

Otherwise.

Okay.

You want to put it in?

So like it in terms of.

And then.

Not in the way.

The money.

That would be the.

On.

And then.

I.

Well.

Well, it's.

It's a simpler way.

As I said, if you put them as multiplicative.

You get.

You get it.

Oh.

Lecture 2:

Yes.

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

I'm.

They don't do cool rooms here.

You know.

How do we make trendy?

I'm talking temperature.

I think we won't be competing against the cold.

My experience is it's like the tube.

No matter what.

Even when you think, Oh, it's going to be nice

to get out of the cold, into the tube, you

go down there like it's very stuffy.

It's not so nice in here.

Yeah.

Yeah.

This was a one year.

How would you put.

We may get a premium, so we're going to need

that.

Seat there to let.

Your body.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I'm sorry.

Quarter sheet there.

You say.

Let's take this one here.

Yeah, it's very.

Beautiful.

Seeing.

Oh, my goodness.

It's tense positioning.

I think it's 1:00 there.

That's just about to be taken.

Okay.

Why don't you take this chair and maybe you guys

decide?

Yeah.

Hi.

Well, this is just.

You've just crashed the system.

Yes.

Nice.

Just tilted towards it to the point where, yeah.

Good luck and then try not to take it.

Just wanted to make.

Hey.

Thank you.

Yeah, that's right.

I guess they're.

As is so often the case, I think somebody has

walked off with the clicker.

There's a chipper receptacle.

Oops.

Okay.

Wait a minute.

Wage increases.

We've got a bigger room next week.

Okay.

So I want to sort of work through two things

today.

Finnish money and utility.

Again, we sort of stuck.

Why would people just keep coming?

The other options must have really sucked.

Class is growing.

Or last week it was such a dazzling lecture.

I got to put it down to this dazzling lecture

and.

So, you know, we start off with this sort of

idea of thinking about money's role.

In a place which is sort of weird, right?

We embed money in this model in a very short

cut way, and I probably didn't have enough time last

week to to really sort of talk about some of

the history of it.

And I'm happy to talk a bit more today.

But the sort of the way to recognise the challenge

and this is a challenge for macro, which probably surprises

people and certainly challenge from monetary economics and surprises people

outside of this field.

Because if you ask people, in fact, one of the

great things, if you choose to be a macro economist,

let me say that one of the great things about

it, you do the economics that everyone thinks economists do.

Like if you stop random people on the street and

say, what do economists do?

They'll say, oh, you know, inflation and interest rates and

taxes and all the cool stuff we do.

And the people are going, no, these models, no, we

do this stuff that people think of.

But within that.

It's actually quite hard to have models in which money

matters.

So the one thing that people associate with economics, which

is money actually is relatively hard to get into.

The types of models we look.

Okay, So why is that?

Well, just think about it.

If you have if you try to model reality and

again, giving this lecture just gets harder and harder because

the stuff I'm about to say is can at least

be increasingly less true.

It's not fully, but it can be.

But, you know, even 20 years ago, most people used

cash for transactions.

So people carried cash with them everywhere.

Now, certainly in places like London, you're more often than

not going to see signs in shops that say we

do not accept cash, even if you have it legal

tender issued by the government, you can't use it here.

Okay, so we moved.

But so the difficulty of getting money into our models

is that we have to explain why there is an

asset.

So let's think about money as an asset that has

zero interest attached to it.

And you would hold it rather than government bonds, which

traditionally positive interest rate associated with them.

So from just a sort of portfolio choice problem, the

normal interior solution to an optimisation would be to hold

none of the thing paying zero and then all the

other things that have positive interest rates.

As we spoke a bit about last week in equilibrium,

their interest rates will be equal.

Okay, So.

So it's starting to go.

Okay, fine.

So we have models without money?

Yeah, we have loads of them.

Real business cycle models and the foundation stone of business

cycle analysis and growth theory are models where money plays

no role.

Okay.

But if you're starting to think about monetary policy, that's

of course, problematic because those models also say the amount

of money in the system has no bearing on the

equilibrium outcomes.

So then you have to start thinking about reasons why

it turns up.

Now, the first version, which we started last week and

talked about you've done in the class, is probably you're

really bored of money and utility now, but still a

starting point.

We literally put a utility value of real money balances

in the model.

So you can already see how this is a trick

to get around that problem of people not holding money

in equilibrium because they will hold money up to the

point where the kind of utility value of the money

they hold compensates them for the lost interest that they

give up by not putting it in bonds.

Okay.

And again, what are we thinking about here?

You've got to project yourself back to like when your

parents were your age.

They lived in a world where you had to have

cash to be able to transact like the worst thing

in the world.

This is going to surprise you guys.

There was a thing that previously people worried more about

than leaving a phone at home because everybody left their

phone at home because their phone was at home.

So what was the worst thing you could do?

Forget your wallet.

You went out without cash.

You couldn't do anything.

Whereas, of course, now if you're like, I've got my

wallet, okay, I have my watch, I have my phone,

I have my whatever.

So this is changing a bit.

This is what we are capturing here, some transaction value,

happiness, joy that comes from being able to transact.

Okay.

In about 45 minutes.

You know, my timing is approximate, so it's some time

before the end of two hours.

I will start talking about another way of trying to

get around this challenge, which is going to be called

cash in advance.

So in that we're literally going to only allow you

to transact if you have chosen not to put your

wealth in bonds, but rather put it into this asset

that pays zero.

So rather than going through the objective function, we're going

to go through a constraint.

This is going through an objective function with normal budget

constraints, interior solutions.

Then we're going to think about a world where, okay,

you don't get any joy from it, but you get

joy from consuming and you can't consume unless you have

cash to do it.

Okay, So we'll see that.

So.

At some.

Deep.

Level.

Two of the things I'm going to do today.

But with money and utility, Mizzou or CIA cash in

advance.

What are these going to do with those models is

I'm going to say, well, what is the effect of

monetary policy?

What if you change how much money there is in

the system?

ET cetera.

You're going to see some weird results.

But but actually, these models were initially written down just

to get money into the model, to get around the

classical dichotomy where, you know, you could take an RBC

model and put money in it.

Then you had a block called the Real Block and

then you had the nominal block, and yet you could

shift things around the nominal block with money, but it

did nothing to the real allocations.

So the first step is going to be can we

get money affecting the real allocations?

The answer is going to be yes.

Is it going to work in the way we think

monetary policy work?

The answer's mostly going to be no, but we'll see

that.

But that is the sort of background I think, to

understand about why these cheats, these shortcuts actually make a

bit more sense.

So one topic which you might see on some past

exams or something, but I tell you explicitly, I think

I said it last week, I say it again, I

am choosing not to teach it, which is search theoretic

models, not because they're bad, they're not evil, that there's

just not enough time.

And I really wanted to talk to you about some

economic fluctuations because it was in the course title.

So I'm substituting some credit model stuff at the end.

But but just to say search theoretic models.

So famous example is here in Lagos.

These are search models in which money helps overcome the

double coincidence of ones that you get in barter.

So what's that?

Well, it's the idea you want economics, lectures, and I

want rounds of golf so we can only trade if

you happen to own a golf course.

Okay, That's very inefficient because I might spend my whole

life looking for that person who owns a golf course

but also wants economics lectures instead with money.

It doesn't matter.

I don't have to search as much.

So I could just give you this paper and then

you can give it to the person who has what

you actually want.

The economics lectures.

And then I take the money from you and I

give it to the person who has the golf courses

and maybe they like fast cars or something.

They go and that's women.

And what that model shows is that there are equilibria

in which this completely worthless asset, this money thing, is

held in positive values in equilibrium, because it reduces costs,

it costs over search.

Again, a fundamental model to try and get us to

like this, have money, have a meaningful role in the

economy.

Okay.

Anyway, so this is what we have is what we

were set up with.

I cannot remember exactly where we got to.

So let me jump in.

Yeah, we did.

We finished slide nine.

To finish first to continue from slide nine.

Oh, good.

That was good of me to acknowledge that.

I would not remember a week later.

Yeah.

And okay, so we have we have this consumer, this

household who has this budget constraint.

So somebody asked me last week why we divide everything

here by.

This is like a real budget constraint.

If you multiply across by P, you can get the

nominal version.

So whatever you prefer.

And but remember, it's M over P that matters, but

it's actually m t minus one over P, So it's

the money holdings that you end the last period with

is the real value of those that gives you joy

in period.

T Okay.

So that's the sort of timing convention.

Okay.

So you guys have seen some of this in the

classes as well because there's two problems that some money

in each other and so you get a lot of

exposure to them.

So we we write down, we do the optimisation that

you guys spend two weeks enjoying and we get very

standard first order conditions and we get remember, because we've

imposed sort of regularity conditions on the objective functions, we

get interior solutions.

So we know that if you held no money, the

marginal utility of a little bit of extra money is

infinite and we know it's some infinite amount.

The marginal utility is zero.

So you get to select some interior point in there.

And what do we get?

Well, we get very standard Euler equations.

Euler equation.

So I have a colleague in Oxford who's a mathematician

who gets, like tattoos of equations on his body like

that.

Yes, he has a phenomenal number of them anyway, but

he like one of the first ones he got was

a particular equation of fluid dynamics that was really central

to his PhD.

As a macro economist, if you're getting an equation tattooed

on your body, which I'm not suggesting you do, not

encouraging, you don't get extra credit for it.

Just be very clear on this.

The Euler equation is the one, right?

It's so central to the models.

We write down this.

It's the one where sometimes when I'm teaching, I teach

it to undergrads in Oxford and I'm like, I go

through it.

I just start with I can just recite it.

And then how do you remember it?

I'm like, I see it everywhere in everything.

Okay, Marginal utility of consumption.

You give up a unit of consumption today.

What do you get for that intertemporal tomorrow?

Well, I discount the future.

I get a real return.

And how much do I value that depends on marginal

utility.

Tomorrow we also have intertemporal ones.

We won't see them here because we shut down the

labour supply channel, but we will see them in the

cash advance model because again, it's just a decision of

if I work a little bit more, what do I

get in terms of extra consumption valued at utility curves?

Okay.

Second tattoo that I would get, I'm not getting any,

by the way.

Second would probably be the Fisher equation that I haven't

really rank them.

I'm thinking on the fly here, but definitely number one

is Euler.

Okay.

So that is we think about.

Adjusting the nominal money return for purchasing power.

In other words, we strip out the change in the

price increase.

Okay, So we get these very standard things.

And again, the sort of discussion that we had last

week was, well, if you have bonds in the world

and you have capital in the world, like, you know,

which what do we mean by interest rate?

Well, there are different return rates of return on those,

but in equilibrium they're going to be equalised.

So you're going to equalise the rate of return on

capital after adjusting for the depreciation, because obviously if you

buy a buy, if you take your units of output,

good, convert them into machines, rent them to the firm,

they will give you a return back, which is the

marginal product of capital.

But you will strip out that some of it will

be destroyed in production called depreciation.

And then that return on capital, adjusted for depreciation, will

equal the return on bonds.

So in equilibrium there is this real return.

But again, it differs from money which doesn't have that

real return.

It has zero in nominal terms.

Okay.

And then this is where I probably flew through this

last time, but this is what I was just saying,

because we're going through the objective functions, the the thing

that determines how much money we hold.

Here's a trade off between the marginal joy from extra

real money balances versus, you know what you gain by

not holding that well.

What do you.

What do you give up?

What do you forgo?

Well, this is what I said.

As soon as you choose not to hold the bonds

or the copper.

You give up a nominal return.

How much is that nominal return worth to you?

Well, that nominal return would come next period.

How much is it worth to you?

Depends on your margin, the utility of consumption tomorrow.

But this exactly pins down the optimal point.

So even though you're not getting interest on money, you're

getting joy.

You're going to equilibrate the sort of give up of

joy you get for the extra consumption joy you could

get by converting it into assets like bonds or capital

which have the same return.

That's it.

That's going to pin down optimal choice in this sort

of framework.

So if the point of this model was to have

a model in which there is an internal solution in

which money plays a role, we have, we're done.

Now, don't get too excited because all we did is

we said, let's make people like holding money.

And then optimise and find they hold money.

It's not totally okay, but it's still progress.

The place to start.

And.

That's just saying everything I just said.

Yeah.

You then combine it with the budget constraint and you

can map out a sort of an amount of demand

for money depending on the interest rate that, that, that,

that we have.

But even just think about the logic of it.

If the interest rate, the nominal interest rate is really

high, then you're not going to want to hold a

lot of money.

Why?

Because you need the marginal utility of your real balances

to be really high.

How do we have really high marginal utility of balances

by having really low holdings?

If we go to.

Because remember, the idea here is transactions.

If you have billions of pounds of money, then you

know, the transactions value of that extra pound is basically

zero.

If you have none, then the transaction value is very

high, right?

So, I mean, what am I.

Someone who works for me as a product is now

a PhD student here.

Forecast as you wait.

Probably because she could hear my voice echoing through the

corridors.

I probably need a small room and I'm not quiet

and.

Yeah.

Okay.

So you can plot out money demand.

So you can actually you can plot this now and

so you can already start to see how things that

shift the interest rate are going to shift the holdings

of money in this economy.

You're just going to change that trade off, that optimal

trade off that they're now making.

It actually has this money demand function has has features

that that we tend to like.

It's a real money demand function.

So we really think of it as M over P

and if you if you consume more, you can show

that actually you're going to increase the demand for money.

And if you increase the nominal rate, as I was

just talking about, you're going to show you decrease the

demand for money.

Question.

Okay.

So if you just call me Michael.

You make it a lot easier.

You're all adults now.

I know undergraduates are adults, too.

You're like, really?

Adults with the central bank sets.

The money supply is equivalent to them setting an interest

rate.

We're going to have to be a bit more careful

on that statement.

But for now, think.

Yes, but this is going to be a model in

which monetary policy is going to be about amounts of

money.

So we're going to think about it in a money

supply sense.

It's going to also be the case that money supply

has to equal money demand they're going to make.

And so, yes, they will have, in effect, create an

interest rate as a result of that.

I had a second question, so.

Can this graph be expanded to talk about a difference

between a risk heavy asset versus a risk based asset?

No.

In this model Y, there's no risk.

There's no uncertainty.

So I said we made our lives a lot easier.

We got rid of any uncertainty.

Okay.

If you want to add a world in which there

are risks, you are going to start getting risk adjusted

returns.

Now we start getting into a little bit of detail

to know about how you write these things in.

But the standard result we would get is that you

would you would work out the expected return on something

and it's usually expected that that payoff if you make

your agent's risk averse that you're also going to potentially

build in a risk premium.

These models don't typically give very large risk premium, but

you can get something.

But at the moment, no, the moment bonds are riskless,

capital is riskless.

The bond is riskless.

Why does the bond pay a return on the on

itself?

Is the time value of money.

You value money today more than money tomorrow.

If I want to take your money from you today

and make you wait till tomorrow, I'm going to have

to pay you a return.

So that just is a decreed return that I have

to do Now, if I want to issue a lot

of bonds that will determine exactly what return you're going

to need, because that's also going to affect how much

capital you have.

Why does capital pay a positive return?

In these models.

It could be consumption.

Right.

So this is the same Intertemporal But why intertemporal does

me get converting into capital to pay a return?

It's productive.

We have productivity in the model.

Okay, so you're right.

Like, could they just say, I'm not going to pay

a return on this bond?

But what happens if they offered to pay a return

of zero on a government bond?

Well, now we're back into the problem of money in

the normal world.

If you try to issue bonds with zero return and

I can buy capital that's just as riskless, that's going

to pay a positive return.

Or I can hold money that pays zero return, but

gives me joy.

Your bond doesn't get held.

So in other words, in order to have your bond

held, you're going to have to pay an interest rate.

And in equilibrium, that interest rate is going to have

to be the same as the other, perfectly substitutable riskless

assets, capital or anything else you want to embed in

a certain way.

So so what you're describing is there has to be

arbitrage between each type of asset, the economy.

Yes.

Or else they won't be held.

So that would require that there is some condition of

liquidity in the economy.

There are no illiquid conditions for us to.

We're going to.

Write that you'll see in this and we're going to

write down an equilibrium in which markets clear, which means

if there are bonds, they will have to be held.

If I issue bonds, they'll be held bonds for them

to be held, they're going to have to pay the

same interest as the amount of capital.

Now, you can't think about it in just partial equilibrium

because everything adjusts together, but all the equations will hold

and we are going to impose market clearing.

So we're not going to write out of this equilibrium

model where we can say, Oh, they issue bonds, but

nobody buys them because that doesn't they're not issued there,

are they?

I don't know.

This is not philosophy of bond market issuance, you know,

so that's the idea.

We're going to enforce that.

There is a that bonds that are issued or held

money that's issued is held, capital is or held, capital

is used is all held by someone.

Let's get through this.

I don't want to spend too long here.

What's here?

Okay.

Just in the instant.

You can read it.

You can you can work out elasticity of money demand

so you can see how there's money demand change, which

like one person asked me a quick respect to interest

rate changes.

So if you do log log, we call it the

interest elasticity money down or if you do the log

and related to I equal the semi elasticity.

Somebody asked me if this epsilon here is the same

epsilon as we write in some other models with utility

functions and stuff.

The answer's no.

This is a definition of a of a variable.

So just to be clear on that, it's not saying

there's some parameter.

There is going to be a parameter, always a parameter.

But conceptually, this is just a concept.

How much does money demand change?

If I change the interest rate, I do it the

log of the interest rate.

If the money elasticity, the interest elasticity of money or

the semi elasticity.

If we look at VR.

Okay, so you can look at the properties of this.

Again, I mentioned this briefly the other day, all that

stuff that you did in the pre maths course where

you're looking at how do you solve these infinite horizon

models and how do you discipline them and what do

we need to impose for these equilibria?

We're going to impose all of those sort of no

Ponzi transversal conditions.

ET cetera.

Okay.

But now now I'm actually going to get on to

the exact question.

This is the more conceptual, interesting stuff.

We we've sort of said, but we've asked a question

in a world where this money exists.

How much would they want to hold?

And we've got a condition.

And maybe this is part of the answer to the

question you want, Right.

What we're really going to solve for is a general

equilibrium world where if I issue more money, it will

have to be held.

But for it to be held, that that optimal condition

will also have to hold.

So how will that hold?

Well, things will have to endogenously adjust like interest rates

in the economy, like the return on capital, maybe because

they issue more money.

So people also put more money into capital because I

have more capital, the marginal product of it falls and

things start to adjust and that's what we're going to

get to.

We're going to write it.

And I think I can remember, I think it's seven

equations we have pinning down the real block of the

economy.

But actually this is not that interesting a model in

one respect, because we are they talked about last week,

we're still going to get this block of of nominal

and this block of real.

So the sort of the effects of money are going

to be there, but just not going to be that

deep.

This is not a this is not a model that's

going to really say, oh, monetary policy has big effects

on how much we consume.

It's going to affect things.

It's going to affect equilibrium conditions.

It's not going to affect these things.

So but we are going to be in a world

where we have a central bank.

We're going to think about this central bank in terms

of literally like monetary policy has little control of the

amount of money.

So do I put in a £100 or £100 billion

or 100 trillion?

I actually I should know this.

I don't know the exact amount of money that's in

the economy, but you can look it up.

And I think I talked about it last week a

bit.

There is this sort of.

Yeah, you can.

You can.

You can sit with a central bank statistician and talk

about the different ways to measure actual money in the

economy.

You can do that for hours.

They have these big, thick handbooks at the IMF issues

on monetary statistics.

Let's imagine we've all agreed on one of them, even

though privately we can all disagree.

I think that should be in that should be out.

And there's even.

How many of you have heard of it?

I just want to know if it exists anymore in

people's lives.

I mean, have you heard of a thing called Divisibility?

The of money is the idea that you essentially you

define some interest rate like, let's say cash.

That pays zero and that's pure money.

And then as you go to different things, I don't

know, like deposit account, your deposit account.

Let's say the interest rate.

Now, it's not not a good profit.

Let's say it's approximately five at the central bank.

What is it?

What does your deposit account pay?

1%.

And then you might have a savings account.

But then even after all these years.

Pens, analysis never work.

Savings account maybe pays 3%.

Now government bond pays like 5%.

Sit.

And so what the vizier does is it says it

gives each of these things a weight.

That depends on how close its interest rate is to

zero.

So because that actually pays zero, it's full money.

It's real hardcore, pure liquidity services.

So that's going to get a weight of 100.

All right.

So you're going to count the amount of money, just

cash and that gets a full weight.

And then you're going to take all the deposit accounts.

But, you know, they actually pay one.

So maybe that's only 80% money.

So there's a little bit of sort of a savings

vehicle aspect to it.

So if you had 100 trillion of that, you'd actually

make it 80 trillion in your adding up of the

amount of money.

And then this one, we're going to be down to

this one.

We're going to put a 0%.

So this one, we're going to be down at that

40% money in this.

And they did this that they literally would use the

interest rate as a measure of the liquidity services you

get from it, acknowledging that lower interest rate is really

getting closer and closer to pure liquidity services.

And then you get these weights and then you add

them up and it gives a different way of counting.

So I thought that was an interesting trip down memory

lane for me because the person who taught me monetary

economics taught me that stuff.

Pass it on.

Maybe it was more valuable 23 years ago, but now

you guys can know it.

You know, look it up.

You're going to spend all night on Wikipedia looking at

Tunisia money.

The Bank of England used to calculate that is your

money.

I obviously have not paid enough attention to see if

they still do, but that's the concept.

So we can add this up.

We're now going to have just an asset called money

and that's going to be sent.

And the central bank has perfect control of this.

Again, that is not correct.

If you do division or M3 or any of these

other more standard measures, why who creates money in the

economy?

Okay.

You said that.

Government.

Some who commit, who creates most money in the economy,

commercial banks.

Because actually in the real world, cash it's some of

it.

There's actually another element here, which is reserves, which the

central bank also creates, which are the accounts of the

of the commercial banks that they have at the same

time.

So they're creating some of it.

You call that inside money.

But what really matters is the money that we use

for transactions.

And most of that comes from sort of deposit accounts

which are at least in theory, can be created by

commercial banks.

So even when we sort of describe monetary policy in

the old world, as you said, the amount of money

in the economy, that's a bit of a nonsense because

the central bank would set an amount of reserves and

the commercial banks can make that a bit bigger, a

bit smaller, do whatever they there's some great paper is

actually going to mention them to you because they think

they're innocent.

Reader I might put them on the reading list if

I can remember to update the site for this, but

it's Rabiah McLay, Radia and Thomas.

There are two papers about eight years ago, maybe ten

years ago, about how money is actually created in a

modern economy.

And it's they're just excellent descriptions of the reality.

And the reality is quite different to how we're going

to talk about it, just so you know.

But we're going to talk about a world where the

central bank is going to just can be able to

choose how much money grows.

So, again, this is like they're creating reserves now.

Is it a big sin that we ignore?

McLay, Radia and Thomas?

Know, most of the time, because most of the time

if they increase the amount of reserves that actually feeds

through in a relatively consistent way.

And then.

We get more money in the economy.

So they tried to put more money in.

They get more money in five.

Do they have perfect like to the second decimal place

control?

No.

They have control to this nearest million.

Probably not to the nearest billion maybe, but yeah.

So we get the basic lever working.

Of course, there are times.

Where you.

Can see a central bank create a lot of money,

but it not feed in to the system.

And there are interesting times.

The global financial crisis is one such attempt at creating

a lot of money, but it not turning up.

We will not have that challenge in our models for

now.

In our models for now.

If they create more money, there is more money.

But we are giving them perfect control.

So this is writing down again, if you so you

will all have your own preferred ways of writing this.

You can either think about one plus mu t as

equal to the m t over m s t minus

one.

Okay.

If you think about that, that's just the sort of

the gross growth of money.

Or you can write it out like that where muti

is literally the percentage change.

But that's what we're going to be thinking about as

their policy.

So t equals zero.

They keep the money supply exactly as it was before.

You teach positive.

They put more money in.

FTT is negative.

They take money.

Now this.

So in the version of the model we look at

here, we're going to assume that they pay no interest

on the money they create.

Okay.

Again, makes a lot of sense if you think they're

literally creating basic cash.

And it was only fairly recently that that central banks,

most central banks move to paying interest on reserves.

So so not only was cash not paying an interest

because it was just paid for and don't get an

interest for it.

Equally, if a commercial bank like Barclays had money at

the Bank of England, they would not return any interest

on that.

Interest on reserves is a kind of last decade phenomenon

for most countries that.

Do you want to start looking to the future?

Imagine we're in a world of central bank digital currency.

It would be trivial for the central bank in that

world because we'd all have our app.

I don't my Bank of England app on my phone

and the money that's in there, they could easily pay

me an interest rate on that.

So you could live in a world where this assumption

starts to look real silly, right?

You could also live in a world where that's the

if that was the only money zero lower band is

gone.

Right?

Because if it's all digital, it's all on your phone.

If that app just says, Hey, now the interest rate

is -10% now, now they can't do that because if

the bank at Barclays tell you it's -10%, -30%, what

do you do?

You run to Barclays, you get all your money out,

you put it in cases and you hide it under

your bed and hope no one breaks in.

If it was all in an app and you had

no other option, you pay minus ten, -20, -30.

I don't know what the number at the moment.

Like I say, the Swiss got us below minus two.

And that's of course, there is a value to putting

your money in the bank and earning zero, just the

security of it.

But at some point that breaks down.

So anyway, we're not there yet.

So in ten years when we all have the app

to revise these slides, I'll have to go back and

resolve everything where the interest rate on these is positive

or negative.

Negative interest rate is.

I believe, because still there are some institutions that have

to hold a certain part of their funds in the

accounts in the central bank, like in my country, they

were charging negative interest rates.

So the Swiss did it, the ECB did it.

I didn't know Bosnia.

How would we follow your opinion?

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah, fine.

So, yes.

Yeah, I'll go.

With it because a lot of you are central bankers

or potential future central bankers.

So we'll go into a little bit of the practicalities.

It's always been a bit political.

You can impose it on banks through the reserve system,

but imposing it on households is seen as a much

more dangerous politically thing to do.

So, yes, so one reason you can impose it on

a lot of a lot of banks is regulatory requirements

say they have to hold a certain reserves after central

bank.

And so if they have to do it anyway, it's

like a tax.

So then there's a sorry that I'm wearing my fiscal

council hat and I should take it off always in

lectures.

But you know, the UK has talked about this and

talked about imposing particular charges on them and it's like,

well, look, we have other ways of doing that.

Coal taxes and taxes are very direct ways of doing

so.

If you want to just say we'd like we think

it's right.

I'm not saying it is or it isn't.

If someone should decide it's right to tax banks and

especially as different from greengrocers or pharmacies, just charge them

a tax rate that's different.

You know, it's very trendy.

But anyway, politicians also like little gimmicks that allow them

to do things without looking like they're doing things because

we think the banks should pay more taxes, charge them

more tax.

But it's simple.

Doing it through weird things where we impose a negative

interest rate and then we have to transfer that back

to the Treasury.

But negative interest rates can be beneficial if we don't

want them to hold reserves.

So so where the ECB was really thinking was there

were huge excess reserves.

Yes.

And then what you want to do is you want

to get those excess reserves out of the central bank

and you want to get them.

What we as a central banker to go to, you

guys just take the money.

I'll give it to you for nothing.

Take it.

Take it.

Because I don't want to be paying -2% to you.

So it's just another trick.

But like I say, once we get to Cbdc and

we all have the app, all of this becomes even

harder to lecture.

Hope it doesn't come, hope it is deferred until I

retire.

Okay, so what does the central bank do?

Well, the central bank also has to have a balance

sheet.

We're going to assume their only liability is the money

it issues.

So when we say it issues, it does not just

like throw it out the door and let people pick

it up.

How do central banks issue?

They create the money.

They create the liability on their balance sheet and then

they use it.

They inject it into the economy by purchasing either bonds

or capital.

Okay.

So they always have these assets.

And.

Ultimately they're going to have a sort of a potentially

profitable or they could be in the negative.

It doesn't matter what's going to come out of this

model, which is, I think, interesting because what some of

you said last week about where your interests are in

these models, the capital structure of the bank is not

going to matter.

So it's actually not going to make a difference if

the injection of money into the economy comes because they

buy physical capital or equity.

You can think about it like that, or they buy

bonds again, because of the general equilibrium, the asset prices

are also going to have to adjust and then we're

going to get to whatever the equilibrium is.

Now, why is that potentially of interest again, in reality,

what did we see in the financial crisis?

We saw QE.

What's QE?

Well, it's the creation of money and then buying of

a whole bunch of bonds, just like our monetary policy,

increasing money in the economy.

But some central banks stopped buying certain bonds and started

buying riskier ones or started buying particular assets.

Now, that becomes hard to study in a pure sense

because some of its monetary, some of it is financial

stability, some of it does both.

Some of it is liquidity policy.

So in the real world, we probably think composition does

have some effects in these models.

It will not be, but maybe it's because we've turned

off risk.

Maybe it's because we have too few assets.

But in here it won't matter.

Okay, now, so what does the central bank do?

Well, it buys ponds, it buys real capital.

There's also going to be this type of thing that

I talked about last week, which is senior revenue.

Okay.

So these you've senior age and how do they fund

that?

Well, they had bonds from the last period, capital from

the last period, and then they grow the money supply.

Greatest job in the world if you can ever get

it.

Monopoly supplier of money.

You can never run out of money when you print

it.

Okay.

And so.

In theory, there's a government there.

The government can get taxes or pay transfers.

It could do government spending, although we're going to shut

that channel down.

But again, if you want to build it in, it's

not that hard to build in.

And again, so going back to the question from earlier,

they're the ones who issue bonds.

So the issue bonds, they had previous bonds, which where

am I going here?

Yes, they had previous bonds, which they have to pay

back.

They have government spending, but.

Was that funding national security.

Okay, Put that in again.

How do we how do we get that as being

something we want in the model?

Well, either you go to political economy models or you

can have models where you put government spending directly into

the utility function or you put some kind of the

government creates public capital which enters the production function.

These are just tricks to get it in.

At the moment, in this model, higher G, lower G

is not going to do anything.

Okay.

What will do something is the corresponding effect on transfers

or taxes.

So if you impose like a balanced budget, then for

every time you increase taxes, then obviously that affects the

household budget constraint and you'll get effects through that.

Okay?

The G itself isn't going to matter, but they also

can issue bonds.

When they issue bonds, those bonds are going to have

to be bought.

They're going to affect equilibrium returns.

Everything else is going to adjust and you're going to

get a new equilibrium in the model.

Okay, so that's it.

But the fiscal is not very interesting here.

Sort of say it all there.

Okay, now we're on to the bit I started with.

This is what we're we're assuming goods market clear.

What does that mean?

Well, whatever is produced, this is a closed economy.

Whatever is produced has to be consumed either by the

government for investment or consumption.

Remember, we're in this beautiful world of what's called a

malleable good.

There is an output, a real unit of output that

you can eat.

You can turn into government services and government provision of

goods, or you can turn into machines.

We have a usual capital accumulation equation.

We have our production function, which I started with last

week, which shows that because it's constant returns to scale,

you're going to get exactly no profit.

You're going to get older.

The marginal product of capital times the amount of capital

plus the marginal product of labour, the wage times the

amount of labour is going to exactly exhaust all the

output.

So we sort of take the total output and we

split it between the workers and the capitalists.

The labour market has to clear.

What does that mean?

It means that we've constrained the amount of labour to

one.

We shut down that channel, but that just means that

the amount of n that goes into production has to

equal the amount that is supplied, which is one.

So they're forced to equal no unemployment in this world.

The rental market for capital just says that the amount

of capital used in production is equal to the amount

owned by the household last night and the amount owned

by the central bank last night.

Remember letting the central bank hold this so they have

it at the end of the night.

Then they come into the next period and they go,

Ah, you may rent this.

We already know what's going to happen in order for

that to hold.

X is going to adjust the rental rate of capital.

How is it going to adjust?

It's going to put more capital in the system.

We're going to have a higher amount of capital, a

lower marginal product that's going to change the prices standard

equilibrium in the general equilibrium world.

Bond markets, well, the bonds held by the household and

the bonds held by the central bank are going to

equal the bonds issued by the fiscal authority.

And then in the money market, the money held by

the households is going to have to equal the money

held when the issued by the central bank, just a

bunch of clearing condition.

So then you can take all them, take them with

the optimality conditions, chuck them in and we get 188

equilibrium conditions, fairly standard stuff.

The reason I told us seven is because.

Is that really one.

Just sticking a one everywhere.

Hey.

Yes.

Eight here.

Okay, so this is just a system of and this

is what I was going to say.

We're not going to go through it in class.

You've done it in pretty much.

I'll do it in the class.

Always remember the thing that's great about macro is general

equilibrium that separates us from the rest.

Macro has everything is endogenous.

So when you change one thing, you can't think, Oh,

I change, this goes up.

Not because I know you can do that.

Sometimes it's fun to do that as a thought experiment.

But remember, what actually happens in reality is everything adjusts

simultaneously so that there's equilibrium.

You try to work your way through it.

You're like, Oh, what if Z goes up positive productivity

shock?

Oh well, that puts up this return.

That means people start switching into buying capital.

That means consumption goes down.

You know, as soon as you start doing that, then

you have to work through all the other conditions.

But remember, all the markets have to clear all the

equilibrium conditions have to hold to the system that solves.

And if you sort of work through this, what you

notice is that the key equilibrium that we get has

essentially for the real variables, nothing related to money.

That's the classical dichotomy.

Okay.

Now, so I talked about that last week in that

there's ways of breaking it.

We will break it soon, but not yet.

Then you can go back and you can work out

given all of those things.

Can I work out the nominal variables like the nominal

interest rate and the nominal inflation variables?

The answer's yes, but you have a real sector and

you have a nominal sector, and that's the subset, but

it's still general equilibrium.

So if you change anything in the real economy back

in, what doesn't end up happening, though, is changes in

the nominal will just affect the nominal sector.

Okay.

I talked about the acid composition.

You can read that slide yourself.

So we have to choose what we mean by studying

a central bank, studying monetary policy.

Go here.

So what we're actually going to do, go back to

this one, actually.

Let me just here just let me see it actually

on the board behind me.

What we're going to do is we're going to think

about a monetary policy as the as determining what is

the growth rate of money.

So we're going to start with a world where we

say we're going to let mu t, I don't know,

B, just some constant rate and see what happens.

And we're going to ask what happens if that changes?

And then you can ask what if it changes up

for a while, then back down or, or permanently shift?

And that's going to be a way of studying the

effects of monetary policy on variables in this economy.

We already know what's going to happen to sort of

real equilibrium.

But the interesting thing is what happens to nominal.

Okay, so.

So we have this, which again, the first bullet tells

you how to derive it.

And so one way to sort of think about this

is you have this asset value type equation where you

are looking at the sort of flow.

Value, the joy, the relative joy that you get from

holding units of real money.

It's all real money now.

You have the sort of role for policy comes in

through this.

Why?

Because what what what's really going to matter in this

world is the money that you hold at, let's say,

between now and the next period.

But when we get to next period, there's going to

be some new money there.

That new money wasn't already held by people.

So you've got to sort of discount by the fact

that you've grown the amount of money in the economy

and.

Sorry.

I just jumped on.

I'll come back to this.

I've written a bit more nicely later on.

Okay, so let's think about the simplest world first and

then we'll go back and see where that comes in.

Think about a world where we have a steady state

for the real block, okay?

Shut down any productivity growth, shut down energy.

I'm just going to shut the door because we are

hitting the moment that we face and people are going

to walk past it.

We will open it again.

Okay.

So we have a steady state, so there's some amount

you put it in.

You can solve for a steady state in that block.

One thing you're going to get from the Euler equation

is this.

Now, this equation here is the answer that I gave

earlier.

Why is there an interest rate?

Well, one is because there is a time value of

money.

If you're in a world that's constant but you're not

getting compensated, what would happen?

You'd always want to have consumption today, not in the

future.

Can that be a steady state If the amount of

work and output is going to stay constant, you can't

be consuming more now and less because then you'd have

to get a Ponzi game yourself down to the end

and you end up with nothing.

So the only way in this equilibrium that we can

stay at a steady state is if we pay people

for their time in patience.

And that's what the real interest rate is going to

be pinned down by.

Okay.

So now once you have that, you can sort of

work back and figure out that this R is also

going to have to equal the marginal product of capital

S, the depreciation that's got a hold.

That's what I was talking about earlier.

So we can also just sort of.

We can choose this equilibrium without any loss of generality.

Just choose it so that the marginal utility is one.

And then we don't carry around the VM over term

because that just becomes one.

So we're just normalising things by that.

But we'll see this inside.

Okay.

So then this is with that little change.

You get this this equation, which is the other one

just rewritten with these simplifications.

I think it's easier to see here.

What does this give us?

It gives us.

A different equation that we have to solve for this

equilibrium.

So again, we've sort of pinned down the real block

of the model, and now we're trying to see what

is the equilibrium in the nominal block.

And what we're going to see is how does that

equilibrium depend on the muse?

Because remember, Mu is our policy variable.

So that's the sort of game we're playing with with

this particular setup.

Yeah.

The households know.

No, we are explicitly assuming that they know.

So there's no uncertainty in this model.

We're not going to suddenly bring it in now.

We will do one experiment which has now got it's

got its own name.

It's called an MIT shock.

And it's kind of a little bit wild because it's

imagine we're in the world, we all know and we

believe that new will.

Be.

New zero.

Okay.

Forever.

That's our belief.

And then we come along and the central bank suddenly

changes from zero to Mu one.

But we're going to assume that they see change.

But after that, expect it to be mu one forever.

It's a bit mad, right?

You know, you believe that inflation, the money growth rate

will be 4.5 and then suddenly they come along at

seven and you go, okay, seven forever.

Or are we going to assume we know exactly that

they're going to raise it and then at some future

date, they're going to drop it?

We are making very strong information assumptions here, actually.

Does anyone else want to Now's a good time to

attack the information assumptions.

It's not specific to this model, but it is worth

noting.

What else do we assume?

Woo money, Eugene.

Yep.

Fine.

So people understand fully the real value of things that

people can observe the price level.

We assume there's a representative household, so we don't have

some people who have slightly different goods they buy.

Why?

Because there's only one good.

There's a lot of informational simplifications that we make here.

And of course, we impose rationality.

Now, essentially, these people, when making their consumption choices, solve

these dynamical systems, including all the transversal conditions perfectly to

ensure they're at exactly the steady state of mind that

we'll be at forever.

Really good.

They've all done the two week math course before the

MSC three.

Is it three?

Gosh, I wonder what I missed out on in that

extra week.

So, yes, there's big information assumptions in these models.

But every time people want them to be more realistic,

they want those who want them to be less mathematical

and that don't happen.

The more you want to build in informational stuff, the

more extra equations you get.

You have to specify how they update their beliefs, what

you know.

Okay, so here's what we're actually looking for in this.

So.

So now we are in a world, let's say, because

remember, we're in a constant, steady state world.

We're going to allow there to be money growth rate,

new bar could be zero.

So the amount of money constant, but we can also

let it be anything so we can see is there

a solution to this different equation which is based on

this world in which the steady state of the real

economy is there?

Can we get a world where there's a sort of

a constant real money balance?

Now, of course, if Mu is growing, the nominal will

grow.

But real is what matters for joy in this.

Well, you can kind of grind through the maths.

I'm going to, in the interest of time, skip it,

but you should have a go with it.

And I have it.

I have it.

Actually, I wrote it out last night.

I was on a play back last night.

I wrote it out and you can sort of try

to find whether there is a.

You know, with a with a constant money growth and

a constant real interest rate in the economy.

Is there is there such a such an equilibrium in

which this satisfies this this marginal value?

Because remember, that's what you're doing.

You're always trading off the marginal value of the real

money balances versus some some interest cost of that.

And the answer is yes.

There is an Em bar.

There's a real constant level of air that satisfies this

equation.

Okay, so now what do we have?

Remember, we've imposed these various conditions, but the strong one

is we have this steady state in the real economy.

If the classical dichotomy scenario is in the nominal result

and we can show that there is for a constant

growth of money, nominal money, there is a real money

balances that is constant.

And then you have the whole system solid, nominal, real

or solid.

Then once you have that, you can ask questions Well,

what if we change?

And this is where we're going to get to these

informational bits.

We can ask what happens if we increased that rate

of growth or decreased it?

What if we increase it permanently or temporarily?

Let me do.

Now, let's take our five minute break now.

I'm going to see if we get to the temporary

and the third.

But now they're going to take a little they're going

to say, I can't explain them in three minutes, so

let's wait.

So we'll start again at like 12 minutes past.

Yeah, let's do that.

Ah.

Yes.

The next question goes to this.

So in equilibrium, the the real interest rate is owned

by Baker.

Yes.

And then on the production side, I mean, capital on

the capital side.

Yes.

And when.

They equalise, that's when we impose equilibrium.

Right.

So the only the only way in which you can

have a world.

In which consumption is.

Constant is a.

Beta by one, just multiply by one plus r from

the Euler equation.

Is equal to one.

Okay.

Then the marginal utility from the.

Equation.

That.

Gives us.

Right.

That gives us this condition.

Yeah.

Now we know that that interest rate is also going

to have to equal the return on bonds, which equals

the marginal product adjusted for Delta.

This is the only thing that is in this firm's

decision.

So then the well, no capital is the decision of

the households.

They will hold exactly enough capital so that that is

the marginal product.

Okay.

Yeah.

That's what I meant by general equilibrium.

It's an action that has.

Been offered to us.

There's no problem.

So how is that possible?

What is the return of capital?

What is something that, of course, know what.

The return on capital goes to owners.

Of capital.

The firms make no profit.

So that's because they have.

Right.

Interest payments.

They rent.

Their capital.

And they pay.

Exactly.

The marginal product times the amount of capital paid.

I think that's constant returns to scale because competition.

Is.

No problem.

Well, again, if you want to think of capitalists as

people who own capital, they make a return, but they

don't make supernormal profits.

They get they get paid the marginal product adjusted for

depreciation.

And the second question was the classical dichotomy.

You gave an example of a different kind of production.

What is shifted in with C?

We just talk a bit more about that.

So that's just you remove the additive separability to that

would say that directly.

There is.

An interaction between the amount of utility you get for.

Money and what you're getting around to.

So now the nominal side is directly.

Affected by the consumption.

So the nominal things.

Can affect marginal utility consumption.

So you build a linkage.

The real plot is it like the choices that we

just ideologically one.

It's a it's a question of which what you think

is not the matter tractable, but also what makes it

what makes sense to the view.

Of what you're trying to.

Model.

But do you think that the amount of services you

get from money and real money balances independent of what

you're consuming or depends in an interactive way on that?

Or if you actually if you hold more cash, you

enjoy consumption more or less, right.

But if you think they're separate, then you're in our

world that you think that they should interact, Then you

have a much more difficult mathematical problem.

You know, in nominal.

We be quite like the latest in market clearing.

We don't have anyone throwing away bombs or burning guns

or doing any work.

But then these are the assumptions that are dropped when

you start working for energy.

Well, I just.

Know we usually still have market clearing, but we have

friction.

We will usually put in friction.

But hold off on that question till you see that

specific model.

There are.

Probably disequilibrium.

Models of financial landscape.

They're not the ones that come up.

So.

Yes.

Yes.

I think it's occasioned by the Q as a function

of time and the timing, because I think you're going

to continue to build.

Bonds, pay.

One next period, or you're going to start.

You have to give you the money now to get

one next period.

I want to give you give me one at a

time value.

So you're getting a nominal one here so you can

get one.

Give it a one over one for this period to

get one with certainty.

Remember, if you put a risk premium in there, this

is with certainty.

So just just like your discounting this one next is

that's what a bond is.

This one is going to be another.

So I tell you what.

Oh, yeah?

Yeah.

What if he asks for.

So email me.

And then I have to email the MSC office.

Interesting.

And then they do something I not like giving.

And then they give me.

They give me the email.

Yeah, but this will this will be more I might

be applying because.

And you might even end up having to compete for

a prime mover or closer.

But.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

Maybe we do.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I've never heard that.

This is so much more.

Yes.

All right.

Okay.

So that's cool because I feel like.

So.

You do it?

Yeah, that's.

And.

So.

Okay, let's.

Let's restart.

Because my time delay is larger every week.

Okay.

So let me describe what we're going to do.

So in a world where this is nice and constant,

we have this different equation.

The question is going to be, what if we change

this?

Well, imagine we change this in the way I was

describing earlier.

So we go along.

We think it's constant at one level, and then the

central bank comes along and says, no, it'll now permanently

be constant another level and nobody in disbelief or things

are not credible or just worries that they may shift

it again in the future.

They've just shifted immediately into a world of yes, it

will be that higher value forever.

What happens in this world when you could actually see

everything from this equilibrium condition here?

If this goes up, this side of the equation increases?

What must happen for this equilibrium condition to hold?

Well, this side goes up, has to go up as

well.

How does that go up?

What's up?

Real money Holdings in equilibrium for real?

Real.

Because we know nominal is going up.

Growth rate of nominal goes from 3% to 8%.

The equilibrium real holdings must fall.

Why?

Because that means you're going to have your marginal utility

of money.

Holdings has to go higher because this condition has to

happen.

So what actually happens?

Well, what I'm going to I'm going to show you

is that what happens in that world is that's exactly

the maths of what happened.

But what essentially happens is you immediately just build in

higher expected inflation, which means the nominal interest rate has

to be higher.

And what was our key condition?

We had something like that.

Well, we know we've made the marginal utility of this

temporarily in this steady state as one.

So it gets even easier.

This is constant.

We're in a steady state.

Our new steady state value here as the equal I

well, this we know has gone up.

So what happens in this model?

You increase the growth rate of money.

Permanently and forever.

The real economy unaffected by skill dichotomy.

What happens to the nominal side of the economy?

Nominal interest rate and inflation both go up.

And as a result, because this nominal interest rate is

higher, we hold less real balances.

So we increase money, we create inflation.

We don't affect the real economy.

What do we do to welfare?

Some of us unchanged.

What's happening to em?

This is marginal.

What we really want to know is what's happening to

V of M?

Well, what's happening to em?

Em has gone down.

We hold less money because there's a higher interest rate.

The marginal has gone up.

We hold less money.

What's happening to this part of the welfare?

We get joy from having money?

Real money.

We now hold less of it.

Why?

Because, in effect, there's a bigger trade off.

So we've increased money growth.

We've done nothing to the real economy and we made

people unhappy.

Policy is not great.

And this model.

So that we can ask actually a question what would

be the optimal thing?

Do nothing to stabilise prices.

Actually, prices don't really matter here.

The real economy matters.

And this utility of money.

How do we maximise the utility from money?

How do we maximise this term?

Someone said.

How low?

Optimal monetary policy.

In this world.

Is going to be a zero interest rate.

So all of that is on the next slides, blah,

blah, says.

It's also true if you look medium run, if you

plot medium run countries medium long run, how much they

money grow, how much inflation grows, you get almost a

one for one, which is what you predict in this

model.

So this is not a terrible model of monetary policy

is a terrible model of the short run.

You probably think of it much, but it's probably not

far off how most of us think about the long

run.

Money is neutral in this world, but it's actually not

welfare neutral because you can actually affect people's unhappiness through

the lack of joy they will now get from real

balances.

Because as you drive interest rates, as you increase the

money supply, you drive interest rates, the nominal interest rate

higher to the Fisher Effect because you're just generating inflation.

And so you're just going to make people hold less

money and give them less joy.

Sorry I didn't connect up here.

What about you see?

What about consumption?

Face.

Remember, we're.

The nominal and the real are separated in this world.

So we've just we're looking at a world where there's

a steady state of cyber and we've normalised that steady

state so that U of C bar is one.

So you can actually just get rid of that.

But even if you have in it, it's a constant.

So this is a world where you start to see

where if you believe in the classical dichotomy, if you

believe that nominal stuff doesn't affect real stuff, monetary policy

or fiddling with monetary policies, not a great idea.

What would be the ideal thing you would do?

You would set this.

Mu.

Equal to something that generates AI equal to zero.

There'd be no role for central bankers changing policy to

help save the economy because there's no benefit to the

economy.

Who does this?

Like, what type of economists is this type of world

thinking associated with?

Possible.

What's that?

Classical economists.

In fact, this idea that setting AI equal to zero.

How do you get AI equal to zero?

By the way you think about the Fisher equation?

I'll leave that as a thought.

It's on the last slide.

And then the great reveal can be very exciting.

What we have just done.

I'll just tell you now in advance, what we have

just done is worked exactly through the logic in this

model, but what's called the Friedman Rule.

We'll see it in a second.

But hold it there.

Okay.

It needs a tie.

We're not going to talk through all of the maths

here.

You'll see it.

It's a question of this.

So in the model where the agent values having money,

it would be silly to assume that they would more

enjoy consuming more expensive goods.

And I suppose it may be the utility function would

be a bit scaled up.

So you can see var is not changing.

Maybe the functional.

Yeah, we have to enjoy consuming goods.

There's no such thing as more expensive goods.

So what you're trying to say is, Oh, maybe this

should be U of P times C?

Well that's money illusion.

Oh, I'm eating, I'm eating chocolate.

It used to be a pound.

Now it's £1.50.

It's better now.

No, I'm eating a block of chocolate.

So money illusion.

Right.

So that's this is important utility comes from real consumption

and real holdings of money.

That money illusion thing.

Yeah, we can.

We can screw this model up with money illusion.

But that's.

Yeah, it's not really.

There's a whole bunch of maths to talk about.

Oh, sorry.

And that gives you a.

Real interest rate just.

To.

Offset inflation.

Okay.

So, yeah, so like.

You're just getting compensated for or.

Say that in reverse.

Optimal inflation should be minus the real interest rate.

So since this is greater than zero, well, sorry, r

is greater than zero.

Minus R less than zero.

So what's the optimal money growth?

Whatever gives us a deflation equal to the negative of

the real interest rate.

That's exactly the Friedman rule.

Why?

Because if you think about it, money is not doing

anything in the real economy.

So the optimal thing the policymakers should do is get

out of the way and have it to the people,

hold exactly the most they can to give them the

most joy.

Let's drive that marginal utility exactly to zero.

How do you do that with the nominal interest rate

increases?

Zero.

So anyway, that that's the idea of the Friedman rule

shouldn't be surprised.

We don't give money a very special role in this

model apart from generating joy.

So the optimal thing to do generate as much joy

with money as you can does give predictions that are

tricky.

Okay, this model.

Doesn't value free form or.

What do you mean by free food?

No, it still costs something.

Remember that it's just the nominal interest rate to zero.

So so you're basically going to get to a world

where, you know, so if you think about the Euler

equations for a constant steady state of consumption, that the

amount we're consuming of goods is the same.

It's just due to we have inflation such that the

prices of them is growing over time.

In an RBC model that doesn't matter at all.

In this model it will matter because it's going to

change the AI, which changes how much real joy we

get from Money Holdings.

The joy we get from consumption never changes in this

model in steady state.

So in this framework we think of like paying out

the nominal interest rate as a positive nominal interest rate,

as giving out a subsidy that doesn't do you any

good.

It's a subsidy, right?

I mean, because someone is actually paying out their interest.

So then.

But he's not doing anything.

Can I.

If you're.

I don't know, because I have to think about it.

Let me try a different version of your statement, which

I'm happy to agree with.

We we we don't want to generate inflation that causes

a nominal interest rate to be higher.

Remember, this is an equilibrium where the real interest rate

is already pinned down.

So if you have more inflation, you have more I.

So so I think about it more of it's this

relationship AI is equal to R plus pi.

This is pinned down and does all the real stuff.

So now we're saying, well, how much of this inflation

should we have?

Well, the answer is we want that lower so that

we get this to converge on exactly zero because that

maximises happiness.

So I don't know if that's exactly the same as

what you were saying, but I think they're related statements

and that's how I would put it.

What you said may be completely correct.

I just haven't thought about it in that order.

But if you think about inflation as causing a joy

reduction, then, yes, you want inflation to be chosen to

get rid of that unnecessary joy reduction.

Right.

You can work through this yourselves.

It's it's messy, but it's just maths.

You can also do this sort of thing where what

if we went along, we increased money for a period

and then dropped it down with all the assumptions of

what happens if they know it's going to go up,

they also know it's going to come down and they

can work all this out.

You again get something that's similar, except you get a

less than 1 to 1 move in the price level.

So essentially what happens in the in the previous world

is the price level is just going to completely shift

to offset the world you're in here, you're not really

going to get that because it's going to depend when

on, you know, once once a change in money supply

happens, the nominal are all going to shift.

The reals are going to stay constant again.

So we're not changing that.

There's a real effect of money, but you're going to

affect the amount of the nominal holdings at the price

level.

And so that's again going to change the value, change

the value for M over time, and you've got to

see it.

But let me just go.

I think I've done all of this, but.

This.

This slide here and here are exactly what we just

worked through the logic of for this world of what

is optimal to do.

It is optimal to set inflation equal to deflation and

such that it's exactly equal to this r bar thing.

That's what maximises the joy of holding money.

So what?

Okay, let me get 25 minutes to talk about CIA

and next week.

But let me just say, so what is the sort

of point of this model?

Like I said, we start off with a model very

classically written down model, but we make money, have a

role.

Turns out that in that the best thing that monetary

policy could do is get out of the way and

let people hold as much money to sort of real

money balances to sate such that they get the maximum

possible joy from that.

That happens to be a world where monetary policy is

not activist.

It's not trying to do kind of cyclicality.

It simply generates.

People.

And we keep this sort of real money balances at

maximum.

Okay.

Now we're going to see another version of a model

like this.

The reason they come together as a team, I put

it as two a and to be we could have

had two and three.

But I think they go together as a team.

This is another model in which we're going to think

about how do we get a role for money in

the economy.

There are loads of cash in advance type models.

We're going to do a particular version that focuses on

households.

There's an alternative version which you'll see a lot, and

actually you'll come across.

Some of you will have come across before others you'll

come across in the future where people talk about working

capital constraints.

So this is the idea that you say that firms,

if you think about what a firm does or a

household does in these models, the representative household or the

representative firm enters into contracts with no money, where I

say, okay, you're going to work for me and within

this period you're going to work for me.

We're going to produce output.

I'm going to pay you bits of that output and

you're going to also consume those bits.

Or if you want to put it like a shop

in it, you would take your wages and then you'd

go to the shop to buy the goods.

But it doesn't matter the timing that this happens in,

because we're such a harmonious society that we can all

be trusted, that we enter into these kind of contracts

and nobody reneges.

So that at the end of the day we just

settle and you get the bits you want to eat,

you create the capital, you get it all back, whatever.

There's nothing about, well, if I want to get your

capital from you, I pay you first, then I get

the capital.

Okay.

We always just have within period settlement and it's all

perfectly fine.

What cash in advance type models do or working capital

constraint type models do is they start to impose, as

I said, through the constraints, some kind of timing issue

with that.

So in other words, I'm going to impose now, if

you want to consume, if you want to buy consumption

goods, you're going to have to have resources to buy

them in advance, because by the time you get paid,

those markets will be closed.

So we're going to do it on the consumption side.

On the household side, you can also do it on

the firm side.

If you do it on the firm side, you make

the firms hold money in order to pay for their

workers on their capital in advance.

You can start to see how those constraints are going

to start to give us effects of money.

If I don't have the resources, I can't hire Labour.

That means I can't produce.

Look how we'll solve for an equilibrium.

But we're going to get an effective monetary policy.

But it's going to be weird.

It's going to be unusual.

So it's not right neutral.

So how we all think about policy now?

Okay, so.

Yeah.

So those are.

The firms are going to look just like they did

before.

Except if you remember last time we had capital, but

we turned off the Labour channel.

Although we said firms used Labour, we didn't actually have

any labour choice.

So it's just inelastic supply.

Now we're going to just turn off capital Just because

it's going to make the matter bit easier doesn't change

things.

But we're not doing a lot of this stuff through

the firm side, so it doesn't really matter what happens

in this world.

Well, just like before we have a production function, it's

actually much easier now.

It's a constant returns to scale.

Production function is a constant marginal product of labour and

we're going to have that.

Profits are maximised such that labour is paid its marginal

product, which is the always.

Okay.

So again, no profit firms kind of standard.

Firms standard household.

Pretty standard, at least on the objective function side.

We have the same utility of consumption.

We've gotten rid of this joy from money.

We're going to have money imposed in a different way,

but we have a disk utility of labour term.

Okay.

So because we're going to have them actively make choices

about how much to work.

We're going to constrain that by basically saying they don't

like working.

That's fairly standard in our models.

You know, maybe they're academics and they love working.

Every day is a joy.

Do a PhD for health.

I don't know if it is work really long hours.

You get paid less than I could if I work

for Goldman Sachs.

But the joy I get.

Strictly increasing come that last hour.

Hour 23 of a 24 hour day.

I still coding in Python.

The joy is in service now we're going to see

people are normal about academics so you know why do

people therefore work in this model.

Well the ideal thing would be to have zero work.

But you need work to get C.

And so there's going to be again, we're going to

impose some innovative type conditions.

It's going to be all nice internal solution that there'll

be some optimal trade off and we're going to call

that and boiler equation.

This is going to be an intra temporal Euler equation

within the period.

We'll trade off the gains from working versus the misery

of working.

Okay, fine.

We see it here.

Consumption transfers or taxes.

In here they can buy bonds again, then sold on

and on.

They can hold money.

They can also.

What do they have to fund their lives?

They have the wages they get.

They have the bond holdings and they have the money.

Okay.

Now, this I said before, this is where we bring

it in cash in advance constraint in your three week

maths course.

Did you enjoy the coupon Tucker problem?

This is what we're going to live with today.

We have another constraint, which is in order to pay

your taxes and for your consumption goods, you can only

do that.

With your bond holdings, your net bond holdings.

So if you want to bring that across here.

And the money you have.

What we're basically making is a timing assumption that I

said is not there in our standard models.

One is that this little beauty called wages only get

paid after the consumption and taxation markets closed.

Again, if you don't like those, you can rewrite your

own version of this where you say, Ah, I'm going

to let this market be open and this will be

closed or this would be open always, and you can

get different results.

This is what we're going to assume.

So timing is all written here.

The timing was written somewhere right here.

So you go.

Oh, yeah.

That is exciting.

Hey.

I'm going to answer a question I was asked because

actually I think it is a useful one to ask.

And we had this in the last model.

We have it again.

It has been posted here.

What?

It's going to come.

It's become okay.

So that is why do we end up in a

world where the price of the bond is one over

one plus the nominal interest rate?

But the answer is maybe I didn't say this or

maybe I said it and wasn't clear.

But let me try to be fair again.

The bonds that we're buying are we pay today for

something that pays out one unit tomorrow.

How much am I willing to pay in nominal terms

to get something that's paying one tomorrow?

Well, if the interest rate is 10%.

I'm not going to pay one because I could put

the money in another asset and get 10% nominal.

So what I have to pay is one over one

plus I.

In other words, I pay a discount today to get

one tomorrow.

With certainty, we get if we built in uncertainty like

there was some probability that the bondholder would just not

repay, then I'd probably charge a premium.

But in a certainty world, I pay the I.

I pay the price.

Today, that's equivalent to getting the nominal return of one.

So sometimes you'll have seen a world where you pay

one today and you get one plus eye in the

future.

These are equivalent.

The timing convention here is just a little bit easier

to work with.

So, okay, so what do I get at the start?

I get my bonds at mature, so I get the

one in.

I also have whatever money I entered with.

So now my resources for my cash in advance constraint.

But multiply across by P to get nominal as I

have BT minus one, I have m t minus one

and that will pay for nominal consumption and nominal taxation

or transfers.

Okay.

So the first thing that opens is the bond market.

So from these resources, I choose whatever bonds I want.

What's going to be the advantages of bonds over money?

Same as before.

Bonds will pay a return.

Money, nada.

So again, the question is, why is there going to

be why would you ever make the portfolio decision?

To hold money.

What is the role of money going to be?

Well, what's going to happen is that now that you've

bought the bonds, the goods market opens and you can

use all those resources, whatever is left from there to

do nominal consumption and taxes.

And then that market closes.

So I should have put it in here.

Like at some point in this day, let's say at

the very start, you work to generate like in the

morning you get up and you work hard and then

the afternoon the markets start to open.

You bought the goods and then only at the end

of the day.

So if you think about it, only after the factory

has sold all the goods does it have the money

to give to you.

Suddenly you're working in a factory, you get the money.

Now what's happened is that when you get it, everything's

closed.

Hit your bank account.

On Friday night at the end of the month, you

got to wait till next month to spend you.

Okay.

That's the idea.

So then the question is, I've sort of hopefully you'll

have figured it out already, but the question is going

to be how much would I hold as money?

What do you think the answer is going to be?

Do you think you're going to want a lot of

money or do you think I'm going to minimise the

amount of money to be exactly the labour income?

Because that's what I'm forced to hold his money.

So loading the question, there is hints all over the

place such that I want to put everything into bonds

apart from this the main to get from wages.

Yeah.

So what I'm going to do.

But you can already start to see how in this

model and sort of affect on the real economy is

going to come because choices I'm going to make about

consumption today and tomorrow will depend on amounts of labour

I supply yesterday, which will affect money, which will affect

bond.

Again, it's going to be general equilibrium.

I don't want to do partial with you, but that's

where the link is going to come.

It's going to come through the supply side of the

economy, through the labour essentially side of the economy.

So we can have built in another different channel to

this little beast here.

Okay?

Beautiful maths, Katie.

Why do I love Katie Tucker?

Because one of the chapters of my PhD was based

on inventory models, and they're beautiful.

And I had a load of occasionally binding constraints.

So if you think like this is going to be

a world where actually we're going to look at a

situation where the Tuckers are such that the cash advance

constraint holds exactly all the time.

Imagine sometimes it holds, sometimes it does, and sometimes it

helps in a different thing.

That was my PhD.

Super fun.

But the Kuhn Tucker involved was a nasty piece of

work.

The first order conditions took up two pages in the

appendix.

I ran out of symbols.

I had to start using my currency symbols.

So it's true.

So there was a lot of Japanese students here.

Yen became an actual symbol in my inventory model.

That's when you know you've peaked.

That's when you go.

That's it.

I've got to leave the PhD.

Now I'm finished.

I've run out of Greek letters.

Okay, so we write it down.

Usual thing.

We have our constraints on our budget constraints and our

inequality constraint.

We write this in such a way.

Having the papers in here you can always do.

It's totally fine.

Just it's a renormalisation of them and it makes it

a bit easier with the maths work.

Through all of this, you get a bunch of first

order conditions.

Beautiful.

Love this stuff now.

And I apologise if you finished the free math course

and said I think I never see that again.

It really comes back into your life in a big

way.

Okay, so we get we solve for them and then

we get these inequality constraint terms, right?

And so you remember that you either have that the

shadow price is zero and the constraint doesn't bind or

the constraint binds, and then you have a positive shadow,

right?

That's the idea.

So we're going to look at this just that's all

fine.

All nice.

You get these first order conditions.

Let's see what they all mean.

We're going to plug a bunch of them into each

other and solve this stuff and get equations.

Let me let me break the clear, nervous anticipation that

I can sense in the room.

There will be an intertemporal Euler equation which will relate

marginal utility today with marginal utility, tomorrow with a beta

and a one plus R in it.

It's just there screaming to get out.

It takes a little bit more time to get there

than before.

Why?

Because we don't just have the lambdas like we usually

do.

We also have the shadow price on the inequality constraint.

We have our Fisher equation.

Bang, bang.

Here we go.

Thank you.

Oilers there.

I won't explain it again, even though it's the best

equation in macro.

Okay.

Why?

Because, again, bonds pay a return.

So you have a trade off to make between consumption

today and consumption tomorrow.

Okay.

Okay.

So.

Working with the bond holding.

First order condition and our definition that we just talked

about, about the price of these things.

You rewrite this equation here, you solve it down to

get this.

And this is key to determining what world we're in.

Well, what's lavender tea?

Well, lambda tea is is related to the labour supply

choice, but we're going to know that in equilibrium it's

going to be positive.

So if that's positive, then the question about whether this

new new tea variable is zero or positive is entirely

determined by the nominal interest rate.

If we constrain ourselves to a world where the nominal

interest rate is positive.

Then our inequality constraint is going to bind always.

That is just another way.

That is just a deeper mathematical way of saying what

I already tried to give you the intuition for it.

When I was back here, I said, you know, you

can choose how much you're going to consume and you

know, you're going to need to leave resources from this

amount after you buy bonds to consume.

And potentially you could leave extra em.

But you also know you're going to get the M

from your labour supply.

If the interest rate is positive, then you actually want

to put the money into bonds, not into money.

This is the same asset allocation problem that we started

today talking about.

You don't want to put your money into cash.

If there's another asset that's exactly equivalent that pays positive

interest.

So optimally, if the interest rate is positive, you're going

to put everything into bonds apart from the amount you

need for consumption so that at the end of the

period you're going to just have whatever you earn as

money.

The money is now, if you think about it with

this with this solution, money is sort of forced on

you by the timing convention.

So again, let's be critical of the model because it's

always fun to be critical.

The only reason people hold money in this I greater

than zero world is because we've forced them to.

We say we pay you late and we're going to

call that money holding, but you're going to actually adjust

that exactly to set you up for the next period

so that you can get there to make your optimal

choices.

But in doing that, so we've got a force.

We've got to crowbar money into your life.

But in doing that, money is going to affect your

choices.

So we're going to get effects here because we're forcing

it upon you because it's essentially the money that labour

supply choice you make last period determines the money you

enter this period, which determines how much you can then

spend on bonds and goods this period.

So you have this intertemporal effect, right?

That's about all I'm going to get to tell you.

Let's see if I can say anything else.

Nope.

Except this.

So all I've done from slide 11 to slide 12

is impose this I greater than zero.

So then we know that the inequality constraint binds perfectly.

So we substitute that back into the flow budget constraint.

We get exactly what I just told you.

Your well, put the p across there.

Your nominal money holdings is the nominal wages that you

earn.

Total nominal wages or real money is real wages.

We have forced money into your life.

And that was next week at the.

Start of the week.

From the start.

All the exciting things that come from that.

But we'll start there because it is feisty.

Next week.

We meet Monday usual time, and from now until fingers

crossed.

Eternity as I get struck by lightning or something and

can't be with the plan is week three to week

ten Monday in that horseshoe.

Room.

That's equally as hot as this sauna.

Good.

If anybody wants to talk to me, I'll stick around

for a bit.

I'm not saying if you have to talk to me.

It's not like a sort of friendship thing.

The question.

Sounds a bit of a weird thing to say.

Do you find this kid?

Yeah.

I'll have a jumper.

Where are you from?

Both countries.

You're obviously from home.

Yeah, but only in the summer.

All clear.

And.

Humid all year.

If you're Singaporean, you look hot this year again.

No.

And us?

I tell you, that's gonna be like another shirt.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

I got to do this last week.

Yes.

Yes.

About the like an open now and then you start

with and then.

You can listen.

I think it's a question about the history of all

to get something.

Let's go round the corner.

It's spacious.

Also getting something to eat or.

Something very strange to live in anyway.

Yeah.

You forget how in, like, lectures like this, we're eating.

Yeah, like you kind of like.

Lecture and get straight into life.

I think it's very inefficient.

Because even if you do something, you're much more.

Okay.

I mean, that's the way, you know.

I think.

So they didn't ask any questions, but try to get

a little.

And.

Thanks.

Yeah, we got.

If you.

Yeah.

I don't suppose I could.

You ask me one question.

So I don't think.

I want to.

Answer what you said.

But just to make.

Sure I was there when you.

Oh, yeah.

I can just.

Lecture 3:

I'm going to cost and it's going to cost you

a lot of money to push, obviously for colours, right.

So the question is, is it useful to you?

But again, never discount the self interest of lawyers advising

in these cases.

It's just incredible.

There's a reason why Isaacman and many other cases were

actually cases run by the trademark attorneys.

It's just clear self-interest.

They just want to broaden it.

It's not that industry always needs it, but you know,

if it's a client that can own a colour, I

think you can convince a client that for 100 million,

I'll get you a purple for chocolate.

Isn't that what happened with Vanderbilt?

Is that what happened with.

Okay, tell me, because I'm super.

Confused about your tone.

So mine was it was like a cartoon, like the

patterns, but also the name was trademarked, right?

Yeah.

And then they granted exclusive rights to America to.

To be the only artist who uses that colour.

But isn't.

Very weird and like, not like every single use is

like, oh my God, America has a trademark.

Or is it a trademark?

Because sometimes they try to claim copyright on colours.

Actually.

I think like everybody thinks he has a trademark, but

that's not what actually happened.

It's the company who invented the colour, had three patents

on the colour on.

The on the colour itself.

Yeah.

Over the name.

And then they grant rights to America.

I can probably believe them.

I don't know what happened.

Yeah.

But like how can you as a company grant exclusive

rights to an artist to be the only artist to

use that colour?

I think you know the answer.

Unless you have some IP, there's no way.

But.

But there's one thing to it, and there's.

There's a.

Trademark on the name and patents on granting a license

to use.

Yeah.

But like, like this, like he has a trademark like,

so I think it's really great.

But I mean there's a normal thing that you overcame

to protect yourself by coming in.

You have a class.

Okay.

All right.

We need to finish.

Sorry, sorry, sorry.

I didn't realise there's not another class.

Okay, So we'll continue the debate with the technical technical

functionality.

Because.

Because I think there's some things that are related there.

Oops.

Sorry for that.

I thought we were also here last week.

No, we're here last week.

We're here every other week.

Oh, that's why.

That's why.

Sorry for that.

I thought because there was no one here last week

that I don't have to rush.

Nope, Sorry.

Sorry for that.

So.

So.

Yeah.

He wants the middle seats.

It's a special one.

By special, do you mean highly undesirable?

Correct.

Oh.

What?

Is very much.

How would you post?

You know.

I feel bad.

I mean, these companies live off students.

Even in my daily.

It's probably the same posters.

Okay, I'm going to get going and let people join

as they arrive and.

I think I announced it, but I put it on

the Moodle page if you.

I've said it before.

If you want to arrange a separate time to see

me.

But today is not good for after the lecture.

You can tell by how I'm dressed about what's happening

in my life.

I'm not a generally formal person.

I tell people that the reason I became an academic

so I didn't have to wear ties, but I'm dressed

nicer than usual, which means I'm about to go get

on a plane somewhere to meet or do something semi

important.

So tomorrow is the budget in Ireland, so I get

to go there and see the enemy who says don't

spend all the money.

They'll spend all the money and then afterwards.

This is something you learn.

So those of you who work in central banks, but

any of you go into public policy, if you're a

technocrat, you're not allowed to be boastful when they get

it wrong.

So I told you so is not really what you're

meant to do.

So we get to say, Please don't do it.

It's going to be bad.

And then if it turns out bad, we just have

to go, Oh, it's a shame.

It's bad.

It's a shame.

Other choices were not made.

Okay, now let's see what we can do best.

So that's what I have to do.

But in general, if you want to see me after

the lecture, I said, Folks, quite a few of you

last week after the lecture.

Very happy to do that if you want to see

me before.

So I've shifted the office hours.

I checked the diaries.

She's updating them under whatever the official system is.

You've just come to the office.

I mean, is 218 upstairs?

But equally, if that doesn't work, then you can go

find it.

We'll find a way to talk.

And where are we in the lectures?

Well, this is week three, and we're on lecture two.

Be in my what?

We'll seem to you guys as potentially mad numbering.

But there is a scheme in my head and so

around two be now and we shall be today moving

into three.

Now let me give you the context of where we

come from.

You start with the well, I told you the big

picture in the first one.

Then I said, okay, well, let's start with a model.

And that's the money and utility model, clearly a shortcut,

but it gets money in there.

But that is a model like this model, the cash

and advance model, they're both models that really are about

money.

So they're monetary models about money.

That shouldn't seem like something you have to explain.

The reason you have to explain it is because the

model we're going to start on today and stick with

for a while, and those of you who go work

for central banks may have this model in your life

for years to come.

Actually, quite a few.

How many of you, because of your work in the

central bank, have already seen the new Keynesian model?

You know, I'm not going to ask you to derive

parts of it now to show you.

No, but how many of you have come across it?

A few nervous hands.

I promise I'm not going to attack or pretend you

know it.

We're going to start from scratch.

The new Keynesian model that we're going to touch on,

we're start today.

We'll do a bit more tomorrow, and it's actually going

to be with us for a few lectures.

Can we when we start talking about optimal policy, we'll

do that through the lens of the new Keynesian model.

The reason I'm making this distinction at this point is

the new Keynesian model is a monetary model.

So it's about monetary economics.

It's going to be about all of the questions I

was asking before What is the transmission of policy?

ET cetera.

But it's really going to be a and I have

to use this term carefully now a modern monetary model

Y, because actually the basic versions of it don't have

money in them, or at least they don't have money

explicitly in them in the way that the cash in

advance or money and utility do, they really weren't.

This model is not really about thinking why does money

exist or how is it affect things?

It's about thinking how does monetary policy work?

And modern monetary policy is more about crisis than it

is about quantities, or at least traditionally what, you know,

change interest rates, what happens.

So that's what we're going to touch on now.

Of course, then there's lots of things that follow from

that.

But the key difference is that absence of money as

the core thing, and instead we're going to put something

else at the core of the model, and that's going

to be this assumption about price behaviour, sticky prices, and

in particular, we're going to look at carbo and then

later look at some other alternatives to that.

So that's sort of where we're going.

I know we haven't finished cash in advance.

We will do that for the rest of the day,

but we are going to start working our way into

the wonderful world of the new Keynesian model.

Okay.

That's that's that's the plan.

If I get if I can get if I can

get to the slide that has Calvo on it today,

I'll be very happy.

I might not.

That's the excitement of the next two hours.

Will I get there?

How quickly?

Actually, I may not get there, but that's probably because

I've already decided in my head.

I'm going to give you a long soliloquy at the

start of the new Keynesian model to really tell you

everything that's coming so you don't get completely lost in

the weeds of all the different assumptions that go into

it.

But let's see how we do.

Okay.

We get myself in trouble here?

Nope.

There's got to be a button that brings it down,

but I don't know.

Okay.

You just.

If you want to see the headings, they're up there.

Okay, let's finish off the cash in advance.

Again, I don't remember exactly where I got to.

Do you remember 12?

Yes.

I'm going to turn to you every time as my

reliable bookmark where I got to and yeah, but what

was the point of this model again?

Different to money and utility in the sense that we

didn't put money in the utility.

Instead we put it in the constraints, we didn't put

it in the we put a constraint that made it

important, but similar to money in utility in that it's

about the role of money in the economy.

Okay.

And so the key thing that we would have gotten

to was this timing.

And the absolutely key part And again, as I said,

there are alternative versions, including in the problem sets.

You can look at alternative ways of writing cash in

advance.

But in this model, the key thing was here.

Within a period you work and you then do your

consumption and then you get paid.

And when you get paid, the goods and bond markets

have closed.

So in other words, you get paid what we in

arrears.

So you've done your work, you've had to eat that

day.

So at some point earlier in the day, you'd have

to buy your goods to eat and then your wages

come through and that will give you some money.

They come in the form of money.

And because the bond markets are closed, you actually can't

stick them into an interest bearing asset.

Goods markets are closed.

You can't buy any more consumption.

So what ends up happening is you're going to carry

this money into the next period.

Now, there's nothing in the model.

We had these inequality constraints.

There's nothing in the model that prevents you from carrying

more money in.

But what we're going to see or what we saw

last week, you never optimally want to do that.

Why?

Because the money you hold is cash earns no interest.

So at least in a world where the interest rate

is positive, that's not optimal.

To do so in an optimal thing to do when

the interest rate is positive is to only hold money

that's equal to the wages that you're going to earn.

Okay.

And you're going to see that the effect of monetary

policy in this model is going to come essentially because

it distorts the labour choice.

So if you remember when we did the money and

utility model, we did not include a labour choice.

We just said, Let's forget about that.

Well, we couldn't do that here.

Here.

That's the key choice.

Actually, the Euler equation there is going to have a

one plus I up in it and can't remember.

I think you're rubbing your eyes now, so that's unfortunate.

You're the one who asked me about deadweight costs with

you last week.

Deadweight loss.

Yeah.

We're going to have the exact same thing here, except

the interest rate is going to be like a deadweight

loss on because when you work more, you're going to

earn money.

Now, in a normal world, that money allows you to

have more consumption.

Today, it doesn't.

In this model, you work more, you earn.

But if you want to consume more today, because our

optimal condition is going to be a trade off between

marginal utility of consumption and marginal utility of leisure.

So if you wanted to do that, how would you

have money to consume more today to compensate for the

work you're doing today?

You would have had to have gone back to the

last period and held the money in a form that

doesn't return interest.

Essentially, you'd have to work more.

Last period to consume more.

Now that one plus AI is essentially then this sort

of distortion to your labour sort of returns.

And that's where all the effect is going to be.

Now I'm going to show you a whole bunch of

maps.

I'm going to show you a whole bunch of little

experiments that are going to show you there are effects

of, you know, monetary policy.

So changes in money growth are going to have real

effects in this in this world.

But actually the takeaway is if this is the only

effect of money and this is where all of money

derives its power for monetary policy on the economy, the

actual welfare effects are going to be pretty tiny.

Okay.

Once you put realistic figures on it, it ends up

not be good.

But, you know, again, if you don't like this setup,

you can try and boost them by adding alternative flavours

of cash in advance constraint, put them on more people,

put them on.

Firms do all this stuff, but you're going to get

real effects.

Yes, good.

But they're also not going to be particularly substantial.

And then we're going to move on to other models.

But number four in timing is the key one here.

Okay.

This is really weird.

This this screen, which is usually on, has decided to

turn off.

Okay.

It's appearing for you.

Best not mess with this.

Okay, So we went through.

We showed we had the beautiful coon Tucker that we

could set up.

We have our complimentary slackness conditions.

We have our shadow value there.

We have what looked like pretty standard first order conditions,

but we have this extra coon Tucker multiplier in there.

We could solve back through it.

We got our good friend the Euler equation back in

here.

And we got this key term and this was the

one that that I said, you know, this is the.

So long as I is greater than zero and given

we know that this this shadow price is positive, then

if that's the case, then we know that the the

optimal thing to do will be to have the the

cash in advance.

Exactly.

And that involves essentially taking enough money such that what

you get left with whereas our.

Where's our extra condition.

Here.

We're going to have this hold.

With equality in a positive interest world, things can change

in a in a zero interest world.

Okay.

Okay.

And the takeaway here is that it is optimal given

all that timing and given a positive interest rate, it

is optimal to have.

The only money holdings that you carry in real terms.

The only money holdings.

You guys multiply the PE across and you have nominal

money held is equal to the nominal amount of labour

income you receive in that period.

Remember, it comes in stage four.

It comes after all the markets are closed and you

carry that exactly into the next period as money.

And then of course, that's the money you have going

into the next period.

And if I jump back.

To the timing.

Oop.

One too far.

They come in with that amount of money and the

bonds that they bought early in the last period, and

that's their resources then from which they will buy new

bonds, consume and pay their taxes.

And they'll do that.

Exactly.

And so in a sense, the work they do here

is having its big effect on the money holdings, which

then affects what their options are for the next period.

Okay.

And that's where all the effect in the model comes

essentially from this.

Telling us that you want to have that.

That that cash advance constraint bind perfectly.

And so you exactly carry everything in and no more.

Remember, there was no choice to do less.

You had to buy by assumption by convention of the

model, by timing.

You had to carry this in.

But you could have you could have brought more.

But you don't because there's no interest rate.

Okay?

Then you start sort of plugging it back in.

You can work out the money, demand this, you know,

M is equal to P.

This is just like our Friedmann equation, our quantity theory

equation.

So you have velocity of one.

That's what I said before.

Fine.

And then here.

Now, this is the key slide, if you want to

understand.

I've already told you this effect, but this is the

slide where if you look at the second equation on

the slide, the first is just manipulating some of the

first order conditions.

But what you can derive is this this optimal marginal

rate of substitution between a consumption utility today and leisure

today, or the utility of getting rid of the utility

of work.

And what's key in this is that we have the

one plus I term, and that one plus I term

comes from this fact that the money you earn today

for extra work if you want to spend it, you

will have have to have made a decision yesterday to

carry it forward.

And in doing that you will have missed out on

the interest of.

There's an misses between things today.

But obviously if you want to consume more today, you

have to have more resources before you do the work.

That's the key constraint.

That's the in advance part.

That if we go to the deadweight loss conversation, they

shaped the entire first two lectures with that question.

What's going to happen?

Well, as AI goes up, we're going to end up

in a world where this distortion gets bigger.

Or if you're to vary, I as I were to

change you would see it affects the optimal trade, the

optimal balance between consumption and leisure.

So you get real effects.

Okay.

That's where this this is the sort of supply side

effect of the cash in advance constraint on the labour

choice.

He won.

Questions.

I don't know if it's because this room is warm.

You're sort of staring at me a bit blankly, and

I don't know if that's because I'm saying it so

well.

It's so obvious to you or it's such craziness that

you don't get it, or it's just really warm and

you're about to pass out.

Yes.

Why is money a plus value in this market related

product?

I couldn't follow that.

No interest.

Nothing to do with.

Well, I mean, if this is a central bank, digital

currency and everything paid at interest rate, even the I

was going to say the cash, of course it wouldn't

be cash.

It would be the the digital entries in your central

bank app.

Then the timing would no longer matter.

So it is because of the timing is because the

markets have closed.

So after, you know, money holding it is cash the

same as in money and utility money does not pay

an interest rate.

So it's in a positive interest rate world.

It's a worse store, you know, in the in the

money and utility model, at least it had the the

sort of endearing characteristic that it made you happy here.

It doesn't even make you happy.

But you have to hold it because of timing.

So that's what I mean.

It's like it really is.

It's coming into the constraint and you're forced to hold

it essentially, and you optimally choose to hold no more

because AI is greater than zero.

So, yeah, that's why it's important.

Okay.

Okay.

So then.

I'm going to get into some.

Some.

Heavy sums here.

But essentially all we have is we have our first

order conditions on our production function and some of our

definitions like inflation.

These are all equilibrium conditions to an equilibrium system we

sort of set about solving it.

You could add an extra condition in there and have

m t equals mass, but we know in equilibrium they'll

be the same.

We're going to forget about government consumption and we're going

to treat money supply and labour productivity as exogenous.

And then we'll, we'll look at what happens when you

vary money supply growth in a second.

That will be our experiment.

Okay.

We can go to specific functional forms for the utilities

and these are both fairly standard.

So here we will work with this constant elasticity of

substitution form.

I assume this was in the math course like a

lot you work with.

Did you all go did you all do the exercise

of showing that a sigma goes to one?

This is log double application of Patels Rule one of

the most exciting moments in the maths course.

Yeah, you've been through this and then this is a

sort of fairly standard functional form for this.

Where we're going to use this fee will be the

fish elasticity of labour slide, which says how much will

Labour respond to changes in the real wage?

Okay, so they're very neat.

They're they have nice marginal conditions and obviously we need

to stick them into first order conditions.

So the standard, if you want to use different ones

far away, but you can get messier.

Oh, I should go back to the start and remind

because somebody asked me about this, I think it's.

Yeah, remember, these are additively separable.

Okay.

If you want to make them interact, people do that.

But it gets harder.

Okay.

Fine.

Okay.

So this is this is the condition we just worked

with.

We're now working, though, with the aggregate relations in the

economy.

So Y is equal to Z and T, obviously, we

know that C is equal to Y by market clearing.

So we sort of plug in here.

We get this.

Few manipulations.

We get down to this expression for the supply side

of the economy, and this is just a restatement of

what I said before.

What I said before was I enters and it affects

it drives a wedge into the labour supply.

And this is just the next step of that, which

is that labour supply then has an effect on aggregate

output.

Okay.

So you see here again you have this one plus

I term, which is that if the objective of this

model was to show a real effect of nominal stuff

like the interest rate.

You're done.

That wasn't, I don't think, the original attempt with this,

but we get that.

Okay.

So we have this expression now that relates Y to

productivity and the nominal interest rate.

Of course.

While we said Z was exogenous or Z.

If you're American, I actually even though I'm not American,

I do sometimes say Z, There are times that Z

is more convenient, but Z try to stay true to

my European roots.

That is exogenous.

But I is not.

I is an endogenous variable.

So while this is nice to sort of say there's

a relationship, we then have to ask, well, you know

what drives I in this model later on I is

going to be policy variable.

It's still going to be partly endogenous, but there's going

to be an exogenous component, but not here.

So now we have to think, what is I?

Okay.

Well, we're going to go back to the relationship again,

if you prefer.

One plus one plus mu t is equal to m

t over m t minus one.

Sorry, I.

To.

Okay.

I don't.

Know.

I don't know where I can write this.

Let's see if I can write it.

One plus T plus one is empty plus one over

m t.

Well from the money demand we have that this is

p t plus one over y t plus one and

the bottom is p t over y t.

Well, that gives us we know a p t plus

p t plus one over p t is it's one

plus p t plus one.

And that's why T plus one over YT1 plus mu

t plus one.

And then this expression just comes from rearranging that multiplying

y t across divided by two and we get an

expression for one plus pi t And so we have

this expression we can, you know, stick it in to

the Euler equation.

Remember, the only equation is the real interest rate.

This is the expression for the nominal over the inflation.

We have an expression for inflation.

So we put that in, rearrange it a bit.

We get a term for what is the endogenous one

plus it.

It depends on.

See that ZTE.

Z, t and y t.

And then we put that back in up here.

We're going to manipulate this a bit, but you can

already see what we end up with.

We end up with a different equation in Y as

our equilibrium condition.

Okay, so this is going to help us if we

wanted, let's say, to go to Matlab and solve it.

This is what we'd be trying to solve.

This is just it rewritten.

And again, there's a lot of these things.

These are all just parameters.

Fish elasticity.

Intertemporal elasticity.

That's a condition.

There's a transfer salary, condition and.

We impose some.

For the next few slides.

We impose a few conditions.

Just to make sure this system is well behaved.

We're going to ignore some.

Zimbabwe type situations where the the real value of money

collapses.

And we're going to we're going to sort of constrain

the parameters such that the absolute value of this key

thing is less than one, actually.

Five.

C.

C.

C.

I always read a Greek in Greek.

Excellent.

I know the latent code for it, but I didn't

correct you full permission to correct it.

For one year I did my deltas the wrong way,

and a Greek student only told me at the end

of the year that I was drawing them backward.

Well, if I ever draw Delta, you can tell me

if I'm doing it the right way.

A wrong way.

Si, si, si, si.

Good.

And so, yeah, so we want the absolute value of

that to be less than one.

But this is not a particularly tough constraint to or

imposition.

You know, we said that this sigma, this instability.

So what's a reasonable value for that?

Well, if you want to do it, pen and paper

one is the ideal because then it becomes log the

function and that's much nicer to work with.

We often in macro studies, we'll stick this at something

like two.

If you try to write a macro model with this

intertemporal elasticity, but you try to max something like risk

premia in markets, you need a value that's much higher,

a ten, even higher.

Okay.

But you know, somewhere above one and and a positive

pressure.

We're going to work with a fresh elasticity generally around

two, two half one over two.

And so this is not a particularly tough condition.

Okay.

So now what do we do?

Well, we can start sticking the expression for y t

rewrite it for y t plus one and substitute it

in here.

Board.

I encourage you to go as far as you can

with this and you will get increasingly.

Complicated expressions.

Which ultimately you can boil down into this.

Now, why is this nice?

Well, this is nice because this is y t as

a function of only exogenous things.

So we have the growth rate of money, which is

the sort of policy parameter that we can or policy

variable that we can play around and this exogenous productivity

term.

So solve the model internally.

Consistent just depends on parameters and exogenous things.

Okay.

I'm going to show you that that that equation is

going to stay with us for a little while, I'm

afraid.

It's the top of the next two slides as well.

Okay.

So one thing to think about is, well, what would

happen?

If today the central bank decided that just today they

would print extra money.

So to some equilibrium that we're at where this mute

plus one, mute plus two, etcetera, all the way out

into the infinite future are known.

But the central bank today is going to change the

growth from yesterday to today.

What is the impact of that?

Nothing.

How do we see that?

Mute is not in here.

In a sense, this is capturing a sort of forward

looking.

Behaviour.

So just changes today with nothing going on in the

future.

What actually you can trace out is that you change

money.

You change the price level.

Real balances stay the same.

You get nothing with this one off.

Surprise effect today.

Okay, so in this sense, money is neutral.

That's like the warm up act for the really exciting

next slide, which is when you can already tell that

if instead they had a policy that was to change

all future growth rates or to change some future growth

rates, you would get effects.

So while money is neutral in the sense that we

change today, it doesn't affect real variables.

It's not super neutral in that if we tell you

we're going to change tomorrow or you anticipate we're going

to change tomorrow.

You do have real effect.

Now, this is the perfect bridge.

So I'm going to I'm going to spend a few

seconds on this.

It showed you something in the first lecture, which was

the bit where I said, I'm going to show you

a little bit of empirical because it's important that we

have, even though you're going to do a lot of

empirical after Christmas.

The imperative that we had before was a world where

if you raised interest rates, you lowered money and you

lowered GDP and you lowered prices.

I'm going to show you that again because that's going

to be our motivation back into the new Keynesian model.

Here we have a world where if you raise money

growth, printing more money, which we would generally think of

as expansionary what they do to GDP today.

Just lower it.

Why do they lower it?

Because in a general equilibrium sense, if you invent future

increases.

In money growth, either one off or over many periods.

You create the anticipation of inflation.

And higher inflation requires higher nominal interest rates.

Now, in a in a in an otherwise classical dichotomy

model, the real economy would be fine and the nominal

economy would just have higher nominal rates, higher inflation, you

know, higher more zeros on your bills like the notes

that you can, but no real effect.

Why is there a real effect here?

Because that higher nominal interest rate drives a wedge in

the labour supply choices.

So I said this was the key part of the

supply side response.

You drive up the nominal rate by promising higher interest

rate, higher money growth, which makes people believe higher inflation,

which leads us to higher nominal rates today, which basically

affects the the the question you ask about why is

money a poor store of value?

Well, because it doesn't get an interest rate.

You may get an even worse store of value if

that interest rate is higher.

So we have real effects, but they're coming through a

disruption.

In the in the usefulness of money, and that actually

has a negative effect on GDP.

Again, why did I mention the Christiano I buy Evans

in Paris?

Because this is the opposite prediction that you get in

that in that world, if you temporarily lowered rates, which

is equivalent to increasing the money, you would tend to

get GDP going up for a while and then coming

back.

So that's sort of where this model is going to

sort of diverge from how we think about policy working

and why we're going to move on to a new

Keynesian model.

Okay.

We can put.

We can put better numbers on on on these things.

Just sort of ask, well, how big a disruption to

labour supply choices is likely to be?

Well.

The assumptions of the model matter a lot.

Now, if I said if I said this was a

daily model, I think you would all be actually okay

with the cash in advance assumption.

If I said it was an annual model, you would

all think it's insane because at some level we do.

Again, it's hard talking to your generation because I was

going to say, you know, it's easy to imagine when

you're at work you can't buy goods or trade bonds.

Well, actually, of course, that's not true.

You can now go to the like.

Yeah, I keep getting I have a revenue to account

for my when I spend in Ireland and I get

messages from every day to like buy platinum or silver

or crypto or something, I can do it like on

my phone.

So you don't even have to imagine you're my age.

But not living today.

You work during the day and then at the end

of the day, if they paid you and off to

the shops would be closed or whatever.

So you have to carry it over.

But what's the burden of what's the interest for God

by holding it overnight?

Or it is what would be the interest for God

by taking out a bit of extra cash so that

you can spend it during that day or when the

markets were open?

Well, it's the I divided by 365.

In other words.

Pretty tight.

So a day, maybe the constraint is fine.

The cost is going to look tiny annually or decades.

Your model clearly makes no sense.

The cost would start to look big.

And that's what this assumption is.

Imagine it's a month and a month.

We're already stretching the assumption that you get paid.

I mean, people do get paid at the end of

the month, but especially nowadays, it's easy to have access

to your money whenever whenever you need it.

This constraint is mine, but even if you do that,

you plug in some of these numbers.

You can read them now.

Reasonable estimates.

I told you this fresh elasticity of about a half

and you know, somewhere between one and.

Two for sigmas.

Fine.

Plug it all in.

If the money grows.

Next period went up by 1%.

GDP today goes down by 136 of a percent.

It's not a big effect.

And again, if you think 1% isn't very much, well,

for those of you who don't remember, the ECB when

it started, had a money growth rule, which was 4.5%

growth of M3 as a reference rate.

This is an old Bundesbank carryover.

Now, there were a number of years at the start

of this called the monetary pillar of the ECB.

They've sort of gotten rid of it formally now.

But there were many years when rather than growing at

4.5, but we sort of knew the money would grow

in the area by like eight.

Well, let's call it eight and a half.

That's this suggests that if that if this was the

right model, that extra four over some reference rate would

be still.

A tiny decline in GDP time.

Sort of at rounding error levels.

And that's a big that's a big decision.

4.5.

Again, all of that assumes that people really thought it

would grow by 4.5 and they suddenly announced it would

be 8.5 anyway.

So when does this type of constraint really start to

bind in this world?

Imagine you were in Zimbabwe and you have to be

a little careful with imagining you're in Zimbabwe, because what

did I do in order to solve this model?

What did I do?

I ruled out full collapses of the currency.

So you have to be in a bad but not

collapsing Zimbabwe.

You have to be in a world where money grows.

Is triple digit or more.

Right.

And, you know, the reason I mentioned Zimbabwe is because

it did go there.

I spent three years as a kid living in Zimbabwe

and I managed to get my hands on.

Subsequently, from friends, all of the bills from 2007 to

2008, but don't have them on me now, am I?

Try and bring them one of the days, but I

have a $100 trillion bill that was essentially worthless in

2008 and Zimbabwe prices were doubling about every day.

To nominal interest in that world are thousands, hundreds of

thousands of percent.

So on a daily basis that that that I the

daily I which again remember I said I think about

it as a daily basis, I divide it by n

is still a big number and then the disruption becomes

serious in the UK or really anywhere with moderate nominal

interest rate.

It's not going to buy much based on what are

you seeing now?

I think that I don't understand is why if we

increase the supply, is it the is it a direct

effect that there is no dissipation of deflation because we

have not assumed something else so that we can say

that people will end this inflation?

Like I mean that when I think about Zimbabwe is

that there's like a huge disbelief in what how the

system works.

So we are sure that inflation will come.

So so.

I don't know which way you want to argue it,

but let me let me tell you how it is

in this world.

And then you can see whether this was the line

you were going for.

In this world, there's never any doubt in the system.

There's never any doubt in the model, in the system.

The model is a system of equations.

The question is why?

So everybody in the model solves the Matlab and knows

that if mu t plus seven goes up, I put

today has to go down because it is going to

be higher.

Okay.

Now in Zimbabwe, you're right.

You know this is being recorded so I won't give

any names to it.

I have old school friends who made money by driving

to Botswana and South Africa and essentially engaging in racketeering

of the kind of barter kind, like go there, get

petrol, get fuel, get steak, get other things, drive across

the border, bribe people, and then don't use money anymore

and just move to a barter economy.

But that's not going to happen.

We've sort of shut that channel down here.

So you're right that in reality, I'm not even sure

Zimbabwe is a good case for this.

The point is that even at the extreme of Zimbabwe,

where it starts to be, we know other things will

happen, like the collapse of the system.

So I am casting.

If your question is am I casting doubt on the

cash in advance as the source of money's effect on

the economy?

My answer is yes.

But.

It's kind of an intellectual stepping stone and you can

put it in in different places and you might be

interested more in the distortion free effects that credit constraints

can have on an economy.

So then if you want to put it on the

side of the Fir.

So I have a paper.

Anybody I like.

But I have a paper which has working capital constraints

in it.

It was written with some economists at the Bank of

England just after the financial crisis, just to see what

the numbers would look like when you have shocks, because

that was the financial crisis was in many ways a

working capital crisis for firms there used to before, like

2006, seven, it was easy for any firm if it

had to pay wages, had to buy new stock to

do it on credit either because the bank would lend

the money or the the supplier would say, Sure, you

take it, give you money back, whatever, because the supplier

could take that invoice and go to the bank and

say, I have an invoice now.

I'd like cash, no problem.

Not big discount.

What happened at the financial crisis?

The bank stopped lending and the bank stopped learning.

Their trade credit became more important.

But some firms, the smaller ones, weren't able to extend

it.

So we were trying to analyse that and you can

get bigger effects if you do it through that channel.

So I'm not saying that these these cash advance constraints

aren't at all ever useful, but for this type of

model for showing the effects that we think of of

money on the economy, I don't think there's a first

order that was even your question.

But you've got a philosophical run of an answer back.

I'm always happy to give a philosophical.

For the questions.

Okay, So.

But.

Let's see what else was in here.

Okay.

There's a bunch of versions of this.

Now, I'm not going to click on to the next

slide.

We're nearly done with cash in advance.

But before we look ahead, can we guess what the

optimal thing to do would be in this economy like

from a social efficiency point of view?

This is your favourite question.

It's your favourite answer therefore.

See.

You basically want to drive that AI then to zero.

Efficiency.

Social planner wants the MRSA to equal the rate of

productivity.

She's the real wage.

The distorted cash and advanced world has the one plus

I there.

When are they equal?

When are they the same?

We can drive the distortion to zero.

So again, in this type of model.

We we deviate from optimality.

There are social costs of not being at the Friedman

Rule.

Again, interesting.

Not that surprising given that the whole way from the

start of today I've been saying this money in utility

cash in advance, like in money and utility, it creates

a distortion.

So distortions are bad.

So policy that can get rid of distortion improves.

You can even achieve the social optimum.

Hey, last bit of the lectures again.

You can.

You can.

You can look if you if you ask right.

Imagine we have a steady state with constant growth and

we have an interest rate that's greater than zero and

we're just going to impose a ZT is a constant

and it's one at all times.

We're going to impose the log utility and the most

elastic labour supply we can and we're going to say,

well, what is the cost of this inflation?

So there's another version of growing through some math.

Remember, this is an upper bound, another version of what

I was saying before being stuck in that equilibrium.

You can you can.

These are very trivial arithmetic calculations.

They're all written out in there being stuck in this

equilibrium with positive nominal interest rates.

4% nominal again.

You guys, if I said that to you three years

ago, you would have been like, We've never seen 4%

nominal in our lives.

But folks, that nominal now seems reasonable.

If you don't like it, go with six.

If you don't like that, go in two.

Choose your value.

Plug it in.

Welfare cost is written there.

The welfare costs of inflation in this model are actually

tiny.

So, yes, there's a distortion.

Yes, you're away from efficiency.

In welfare terms.

Tiny, tiny numbers.

Okay.

Now, again, if you want to drive these things up

to high or hyperinflation levels, subject to all the caveats

I just gave about the model being written in the

world where you don't have the full collapse of the

monetary system, you're going to get bigger numbers.

But it certainly suggests that if this is the distortion,

it's not it's not one for us to stay awake

at night thinking about.

What was to drive.

But not interested.

Then you set the weight of money.

You set it equal to the real interest rate?

You set it such that the inflation rate is equal

to minus the real interest.

Yes.

In a perfect information world.

Yeah.

Yeah, I mean, actually, that's an interesting question.

What?

How would you want to resolve these models if you

had imperfect information where you could, like, distort people's beliefs

about behavioural stuff?

Yeah.

But again, this a lot of this research was sort

of initially done before we even sort of had thought

about that stuff.

Okay.

So that's that material.

Okay.

Two models so far.

Both explain money in the economy.

Pray Success.

But probably not useful models for modern central bankers to

set policy on on a on a monthly or quarterly

basis.

Question.

In all the.

What is the eventual triumph?

I think the key seems to be a body design

such that wonderfully policy cannot affect our.

And.

Okay.

So the way we think about art is it's determined

by real variables.

So productivity, demographics, there's lots of real things and.

Yes, we tend to think of central banks as having

control of nominal rates.

Now We're going to be in a world in a

minute.

Not yet, but in a minute where there are going

to be distortions called stickiness, which mean that when they

change nominal rates, they can actually open up real gaps,

like there's a real there's a natural real interest rate

and there's an interest, a real interest rate that will

prevail because of monetary policy.

But that's not been the case up until now.

And I think that's yeah, I think it's a fair

assumption to say that whatever we think of as the

underlying real interest rate, the natural rate or whatever, is

something beyond the control of the central bank.

In real terms, they can control.

Nominal.

And expected inflation can move around and that's determined to.

Then in order for markets to clear and generally.

We have some kind of explicit.

Expression that defines what the inflation rate should be.

The prices adjust.

The inflation rate is an endogenous variable.

Yes.

So then you will have an expression for that and

that will depend.

In some way on.

Yes.

So remember.

In general equilibrium, everything depends on everything.

Just be careful about doing the logic you were about

to start doing.

Which is the one equation at a time logic.

Because then once Pi changes, you say, Well, that changes.

I will.

I in this model that changes labour supply and labour

supply, then changes y and y, then changes py and

py the changes I and you can see where you

end up.

But if I solve for these equations, then it will

not be able to express them.

To say, for example, inflation in terms of just the

exhaustion.

Yeah.

Then I.

Then I have like a number that I can pin

down for inflation if I knew what The Exorcist.

To be like.

17 plus one.

Don't think I said different to that.

So we can actually get a I mean, I'm just

trying to see whether I can relate the, the optimal

money supply.

Money supply.

Because inflation is.

Let me think of it.

The answer is certainly yes.

The point about a general equilibrium model is you will

solve it.

And actually, when we come back in a few minutes

and we start doing the new model, ultimately the new

Keynesian model, how many of you in your lives have

had the joy of dinner?

Okay.

Diner is a programming add on to Matlab or Octave,

which allows you to solve rational expectations, general equilibrium models,

and it will always write things in a format of

endogenous variables as a function of predetermined and exogenous variables.

So that is a form of solution that we will

always be sort of somehow looking for.

And so, yes, you can you can write these things

as a function of Z or G if it's exhaustion

or shocks.

So we'll come on to that.

Okay, let's start again at quarter past.

So that gives you like eight minutes.

I think that's when the big the big is at

three.

So who knows where there's a water fountain?

That's the big question.

Charged for it.

Walk away.

I'm not sure what.

It's.

Thank you.

Thank.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

We have.

What it looks.

I think.

Somebody.

So basically, like, for example, I that if you feel

like.

So I don't have to work.

Yeah, sure.

I mean, of course that.

Yeah.

So what's your decision?

Oh, okay.

What you are doing.

Delta law over exemption.

What do you mean?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yes.

You think so?

Did you?

Yeah, I think.

Yeah.

Yeah.

It's just.

Yeah.

Okay.

Thank you.

Listen, you two.

But where's.

Also.

I dreamed.

So this is a good time.

Combined.

I want to say that the first time.

I.

Exactly.

Videos.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

Put those.

If you.

Not these things, but.

It's much cooler, right?

Just.

I didn't do the calculation either.

Yeah, well.

I'm buffering with how to reach this solution.

I.

Well, because.

And this comes from the let me check my notes.

And I did go through this.

And I also heard a similar statistic of GDP with

respect or money supply clothes, but I couldn't get the

same mindset.

Yes.

Numbers.

Can you just send me it as an email?

I need you for me as an email.

So would you mind uploading slides before Sunday or Saturday?

Because we have metrics from 10 to 2 Monday.

So if you upload in the morning, one thing we

couldn't.

So I uploaded these ones yesterday.

Oh, very sorry.

I couldn't watch it.

Okay.

So you will upload some material.

I'll try.

Thank you so much.

You were so helpful.

I can't guarantee it because it does depend on when

I finish them.

Okay, good.

Because.

Yeah, I.

I'm having to lecture.

I'm lecturing to the notation that I'm using is consistent

with the past notation so that it's consistent with exams

and problem sets.

Okay.

But it's not always the notation I normally would use,

so I'm having to adjust a little bit much so.

But I will try.

I will email you later.

Yeah.

Well, that's.

Okay.

Much warmer in this.

Room and inside this room.

This is.

It just goes to show me I'm physiologically built for

the winter.

When I lived in Singapore, I really struggled outside.

But inside, like everywhere is like 16 or 17°C.

So like everybody else was like wearing my wife wears

like sweatshirts and things when she's inside.

Like the cinema is the coldest place in Singapore.

You're Singaporean, right?

Sick.

Like, she'd be like, Oh, I've got to bring this.

I've got to bring woolly socks for the cinema.

I loved it.

It was about my perfect summer temperature outside.

Not built for it.

Okay, We've discovered I need to live in the cold.

Okay.

So early.

I was very careful when I said or I said

I had to use the term carefully.

A modern monetary model.

So why do I have to be careful?

Because this is a modern monetary model.

Why is it good?

Why am I going to call it a modern monetary

model?

Well, it's going to be a.

Sort of optimising RBC type model.

So we'll get Euler equations, don't worry, they'll be there,

but we're going to impose a rigidity and nominal rigidity

on the model and we're going to see what effects

it has.

Now, the literature on actually I'm, I'm going to first

of all criticise my own slides.

The new Keynesian model.

Strike that out.

This should say a new Keynesian model because there are

hundreds of versions of this.

Okay.

They all have the same flavour.

So I'm going to give you the basic flavour.

But there are hundreds of them.

And in fact, if you really wanted to be precise,

I would call it a representative agent.

New Keynesian model.

So they now have the acronym, rank rank models, Representative

agent, new Keynesian.

That's what we're going to be looking at.

There is also a literature on.

Tank, two agent, new Keynesian models and Hank heterogeneous agent,

new Keynesian models, and basically any other acronym that you

can think of for open economy versions or whatever people

have come up with.

I think endings for these bodies, but at their heart

they have optimising agents in an environment that's going to

look very like what we first of all, write down

for a real business cycle model.

But imposing some kind of nominal or real rigidity on

the system.

And then once you have that, you look at these

things.

I already stress this earlier in these models.

We don't.

You can put it in, you can analyse it, but

we don't actually put a lot of weight on money

itself.

Monetary policy, yes, but monetary policy will become the interest

rate as it did for most countries for a long

time and is again.

Not money itself.

We're not.

Funnily enough, we're monetary economists.

Not that concerned with money.

Okay.

That last bit I wanted to clarify because I said

this and I realise not everyone would have gotten my

reason to care.

The reason why I say I use the term modern

monetary model carefully is because there is a thing called

modern monetary theory.

How many of you have heard of this?

It's not the new Keynesian model.

Okay.

This is an idea that essentially we don't have to

worry about budget constraints.

And modern monetary theory is really about fiscal.

And not at all what I'm going to talk about

here.

And but actually.

Which of you guys ask the question?

One of your questions is the perfect question to ask

on modern monetary theory, because modern monetary theory is a

lot about accounting identities.

But don't seem to capture what's really central to general

equilibrium models.

Namely, if you say you're just going to print a

load of money, that automatically generates expectations of inflation.

If you don't generate that, you can have some really

fun times.

But once you start generating that, you can sort of

undo what you think are the good effects.

And that's where, you know, endogeneity of variables is so

central to me as a macro economist.

And I think most if you just use accounting identities.

But anyway, enough of that stuff.

Let's go on to thinking about this new Keynesian type

literature.

As I said, I was way too grandiose calling this

the UK model.

It is a mutated model, but it will have all

of the elements and flavours of the standard model.

And in particular, we're going to go with my favourite

shortcut in all of macro.

We're going to have the Calvo Fairy.

I talked about this on the first day.

Clearly not a true representation of the world, but we

will later, I promise, come back and examine it in

a little bit more detail.

What other types of sources of these rigidities you can

have and if you were to plug them in, what

essentially things like state dependent pricing, like you don't want

to change your price because your price is pretty close

to its optimal.

Sometimes it's above, sometimes it's below, but it's kind of

costly for you as a manager to change your price

so you don't want to most of the time.

Now, Calvo says, Well, sometimes you just get tucked away

and once you do, you will change.

You will change to some optimal, which we will solve

for today.

But whether you can change the price or you can

change your price, it doesn't matter.

She may be right near her optimal.

And the Culver Ferry contingent does.

Trip.

Just a little bit down.

You might be miles away.

Culver Ferry doesn't come as clearly a bit mad.

State dependent pricing would say because you're close, you don't

even think about changing your prices.

You're just 35.

It's just in the back room because you're a long

way from your optimal price.

You change your prices.

Now, what does it mean to be a long way

from your optimal price?

If the economy gets hit by shocks, we might have

a shot that suddenly puts you a long way away

and suddenly you change.

In Culver World, that won't happen.

The proportion of firms adjusting their price will always be

the same, regardless of if no shocks have hit or

big shocks appeared in a state dependent world, that wouldn't

be the case.

So just to go back, what the Culver Ferry does,

it's a random probabilistic assignment of who can change their

prices.

Today you tomorrow you, you and you.

Not you.

The next day you and you.

You and the fact that you got to change yesterday

in this world doesn't affect your chance in the lottery

the next day.

So there will be we're going to work with a

continuum of firms.

There are going to be some firms that is probabilistically.

There are going to be some firms who've been stuck

with a price they set a long time ago.

Question.

It's a little bit if you can insure against those.

Using, let's say.

Um, that's nominal rigidity still exist.

Or if you go back to the world where.

It was.

Well, I don't know what the security you have in

mind is.

I mean, like you can have like a state dependent

process.

Then like against every state you can always invest in.

You know what you want.

But this is not about the consumption.

This is just about the price that the firm can

set.

So so the question is, could you think of an

asset I have not thought of would.

I'm not I'm not asking this question and that you

will immediately conclude.

No, because I don't know.

But is there an asset you can think of?

Is there an insurance that somebody would be willing to

supply in this closed economy such that when her price

is a long way from optimal will pay them?

I mean, like, contingent on whether or not you get

picked by the ferry, Right.

So if if you don't get picked, then something else

pays you to compensate for that because you can't change.

So the question is, who's paid?

I don't know.

I don't know what the answer is.

Content market exists within the economy.

I'm asking you.

Next.

I don't know who's who's trading it, who's selling.

It's just a it's a random lottery.

You're all you're all competing.

So we'll come on to it.

You'll see it in This model is not going to

be that market anyway.

I'm not sure it can exist, but we're going to

do something.

That's a good question because actually what's going to happen

in this model is the following.

I'm going to stay picking on you.

I'm sorry.

You just happened to be in my eyeline for price.

So you're now my two price setters.

Imagine we were in a fully flexible world and everybody

can adjust their price every time.

What would happen?

Well, some shock has happened, and you're a long way

from optimal.

What do you do?

Change your price.

To what?

Optimal.

What?

Optimal.

Whatever is optimal.

Today and tomorrow, there's a shock.

What do you do?

Change your price to whatever is optimal today, the next

day, change the price.

So in a perfectly flexible world, everybody would always be

at optimal for today.

Now the colour fairy comes along and again, this is

a perfect information world we all know.

Not like the tooth fairy to you only comes when

the teeth fall out.

You don't know when they're falling out.

So that might be a very UK and Irish specific

reference.

Have other cultures heard of the Tooth Fairy?

Okay.

No.

Okay.

This is important because this will save if you end

up living in like the UK or Ireland or most

of Europe, I guess.

Certainly the US.

Anyone from the US aware of the 230.

Okay.

Kids get paid when their teeth fall out.

Don't ask me how we ended up here.

Well, your kids teeth fall out, which they do naturally,

baby.

Teeth to adult teeth.

You don't pay for adults because that encourages bad dental

hygiene.

I've had this conversation with my own kids.

Tooth falls like baby tooth falls out.

They put it under the pillow at night, and then

magically a fairy comes along and puts money there.

When I was growing up, it was like a pound

of tooth.

Now it's like £5 a tooth.

If you put inflation, I don't know if it's that

I'm more well off than my parents were or just

inflation.

Okay.

Now, how do you describe how many people have heard

of that little hands?

This is a cultural experiment.

Okay.

It's okay.

That's okay.

But if you guys end up living in a sort

of obviously Western culture where this is normal, save your

kids the embarrassment of going to school.

Oh 45.

Oh, you're rich.

What?

Why am I rich?

You have to sneak in and put it under their

pillow.

Quite exciting, actually.

They kind of get it in the waking anyway.

Unlike the tooth fairy.

Sorry for that cultural diversion.

The cargo fairy arrives with a probability, and everybody knows

that probability.

So I'm going back to you now.

Carbon Fairy has just come to you.

You have a choice.

You could set the optimal price for today, but you

know that your price won't get to reset for a

duration that's determined by the probability of the the carbon.

Now, the carbon fairy comes to half of the firm's

every time.

You would think, okay, well, I'm setting a price today

and I maybe I won't get to set it tomorrow,

but probabilistically by the third or fourth day, I'll definitely

have said, okay, so you're going to have a kind

of longer horizon, but not long horizon.

Thought about the optimal price.

If the carbon Fairy comes to 1 in 20 firms,

so a 5% chance you now have to start thinking

about not the optimal price today, but what the average

optimal price that you're going to have in the future.

Why is that?

Well, I'm sort of layering it up backwards with this

story because what's going to matter for how much you

sell is your price relative to the price of others.

So actually, the key building block, it's not even on

this slide is monopolistic competition.

Firms have monopoly power.

Each of you is a firm with a differentiated good.

And the consumer me, the representative agent likes all of

them, and they're differentially substitutable by a parameter.

And so up to me, I'm going to buy a

bit from everyone, but I'm not going to just buy

equal amounts from everyone.

I'm going to buy a mouse that depend on the

relative price of each.

So if you set a price today, you know that

in 5 or 10 periods time, that might still be

your price.

So you don't want to set a price that's really

high today and then find that you've got sorry, it's

really low today and find that you're way out on

prices in ten periods of time.

So you're going to have to be very forward looking.

So that's what's going to be key to all of

this.

But we're going to have to build up.

So I'm going to show you this.

So I'm going to give you a summary of what

the model is in a second.

I've already given you a bit of a narrative, but

I'll show you some equations and then we're going to

have to build up consumption firms, markets, and then what

happens in pricing behaviours.

And essentially, I've already described everything up to here without

any maths.

We're going to have a world where firms have individual

products that are just a little bit different, that they

give the consumer a little bit different utilities.

I'm going to want a bit from all of you,

but if you're a relative, price is high and yours

is low or buy a little from you and a

lot from him, I'll do that optimally because I'm going

to be an optimising consumer and there's going to be

an aggregate Euler equation.

So we're all going to be happy and then Discovery

is going to come along and you're all going to

be trying to maximise your profits and you're going to

actually have profits now, but you're going to be doing

it in such a way that you know, you've set

your price strategically in a forward looking way.

So what matters when the rate comes to you is

not just the optimal price.

Today, it's the optimal relative price today and is the

optimal relative price today.

Knowing how other prices are going to behave in the

future.

One of the first things I said to you in

this course was one of the most key takeaways from

this model and from modern thoughts on monetary policy and

inflation determination is that inflation expectations play a role in

inflation behaviour.

We will now see this because when you're looking forward,

you'll be thinking, okay, if I set my price here,

how are other people's prices going to evolve and how

bad is it going to look in one period, two

period, five periods, ten periods, a thousand periods?

Because again, remember probabilistically there's some poor firm who set

their price 100 periods ago.

They've had to balance.

Well, they just have to take it.

Actually, there's nothing you can do in this.

And so once we write that all down, then we

can think about, well, in that world, what happens if

you have monetary policy?

And the key thing is that when prices are sticky

so when Calvo is involved, you get real effects of

monetary policy.

What type of real effects?

This is what we're going after.

This is the Cristiano.

I compare him and Evans again and you will see

a thousand versions of this in your life as monetary

economists.

And you'll do a bunch of this after Christmas.

Raise interest rates, money supply falls, output falls with a

lag, prices fall relative to trend.

Bang Monetary policy in action.

Doo doo doo doo doo.

Said all of that said all of that.

Okay, here's the basic model, the really basic new Keynesian

model with all of the stuff that we're going to

go through, we'll boil down to essentially three equations one

and CPK, the new Keynesian Phillips Curve.

It looks a bit like the Phillips curve, but what's

the new Keynesian part?

Well, the relation between inflation gaps and output gaps, but

with this expectation term driving it.

There's also a dynamic is equation.

It really comes from an Euler equation.

The output gap depends on the expectation of the output

gap.

Plus this term, and this is what I was saying

to your question earlier.

Real interest rate gaps will now matter.

And the one thing that we're missing is going to

be something about monetary policy.

And in fact, we will write down monetary policy rules.

Actually, you could explore lots of different approaches to monetary

policy, but you tend to write a monetary policy rule

which says the interest rate is some function of output

gaps and inflation plus a shock.

We call that the monetary policy shock.

Now.

We could all go home.

That's all I had to tell you and not tell

you how you actually derive these equations.

Easy.

I have to tell you how we derive these equations.

Right.

Well, we're going to build it up.

And looking at my watch, I think we will get

somewhere around markets.

Maybe here.

But I'm happy that I've already told you all this

stuff up to sticky prices.

Okay.

Here is the technical assumption on this comes from a

Dixit Stiglitz work on monopolistic competition.

Did you see this type of aggregator before?

See it in the math course?

No.

Okay.

It's a.

Yes.

So we're not doing so we're not.

That's always scary, particularly if you were nodding, if you're

shaking your head going, definitely didn't see it.

And the rest of the class is going, yep, two

problem sets and four lectures on it.

Oh, this is we're going to think about utility as

driven by consumption of an aggregate basket.

That basket.

Aggregates a continuum.

Of consumer goods.

This is what I meant by.

There is a continuum of firms and they each produce

units of consumption that are a bit different.

This epsilon captures the elasticity of substitution between them.

So what you're going to get in this?

Is you're going to get a an optimal behaviour, an

optimal demand for each variety that depends on the total

amount you're consuming and you're going to spread it across

each of the varieties depending on their relative price.

That's what I was saying earlier.

Okay.

So you can there's some there's some sort of math

here on the slides that you can work through.

You can ask the question, what's the cost of one

unit of the aggregator?

Turns out it's the shadow price in this.

Lagrangian captures it and that is itself the that is

itself.

Next slide.

The aggregator.

Do I have it there?

Yeah, the aggregate price.

The price of one unit is the shadow price, which

is essentially this this aggregated prices of each of the

individual goods.

Okay.

But the really key thing that this optimisation does so

we're trying to maximise the minimise sorry, we're minimising expenditure

subject to having one unit of the consumption good and

then you can generalise it for any not rather than

one, any amount of CT total CT you derive these

individual demands given here.

So this is straight out of Dixit.

Stiglitz.

It appears a lot in these models where you need

monopolistic competition.

And what this tells us.

If you want bring this across here, the ratio out

of total consumption.

Apply to each individual producer is related.

To their relative price.

Now, if it was perfect competition, what would happen if

it was perfect competition and his good was cheaper than

her good?

I would buy none of hers.

Why do I continue to buy some of hers?

Not as much, but some.

Because her good is a little bit different to his

good.

And actually I maximise my utility by spreading across all

of the individual goods.

Okay.

So that ends up being a key once we get

to the firms.

But that is the idea, the logic of the consumption

behaviour.

What's really key is this relative price.

Why does that relative price come in?

Because as I said, the key in this is going

to be the price selling behaviour of firms knowing they

want to have their relative price not too far from

here.

Obviously, if they had a much lower relative price, they

would have more demand, but they would also make less

profit.

So there's some ideal that we want the firms are

going to want to hit, but this is the constraint

they're going to face.

That's how consumers are going to behave.

If I'm the consumer, the consumer is pretty dull in

this framework.

Okay.

Other than that, this stuff looks just like the models

that we've written down there.

The households problem, they discount the future stream of these

utility flows.

We're going to carry around the expectation term because there

are now going to be shocks.

They're aware there might be shocks, but they don't know

them.

We have the forms of utility and this utility that

we looked at before.

We're going to have.

So we were using theta for the first elasticity and

I'm very sorry to change notation.

I was saying to someone earlier that in order to

keep it consistent across years, I'm sticking with the.

I'm trying to stick with the notation that you'll see

in past exams, which involves me changing my usual notation

a little bit, but also because theta, which we use

before, is typically the Calvo parameter.

So we get on here, theta will come back into

our lives and that will be more consistent with most

times you see a new Keynesian model written there.

So just be aware that we now have the elasticity

of substitution and the fresh elasticity given by these standard

budget constraint.

One thing that we didn't have before that we now

have to take account of is all of these infinitesimally

small firms that we have generate profit, and those profits

do come back to households as dividends.

So there is genuine profit in this.

And then in theory, you can also, of course, add

in government taxes.

ET cetera.

Do the optimisation get a fairly standard intertemporal and Intertemporal

Euler equation type first order conditions and then rewrite them

into very standard Euler equation for the consumption across time

and within period choice between leisure and consumption.

Consumer pretty standard and really plays a bigger role.

The real excitement are the firms.

Standard Basic Lucasian model has no capital.

And this the next slide is going to have the

one bit of notation that actually I nearly changed, but

I thought it better not in case it's somewhere else

important.

There's no capital, but there is going to be a

variable K, which I'm warning you in the box.

So firms have this.

So one way you can think about this production technology

is that there is some kind of unspecified, firm, specific

capital, but there's no market for it.

So I don't know.

To make your differentiated good, you have a special label

that you put on it and that makes me happier

or differentially happy than his label.

But let's not get too deep into it.

Just think of it as you take Labour.

You combine it with an aggregate productivity.

There's no firm specific productivity here.

This is an aggregate shock.

Get the genus and the firm is going to face

this demand.

This is the demand that comes from the consumer's optimisation.

So the firm knows, again, if you want to bring

this across, the firm knows that relative to total amount

of output, their share of that will depend on their

relative price.

Lower relative price higher share.

So that's the that's the the firm's position.

This is the terminology I said to be careful of.

The labour market is perfectly competitive.

So again, the firms can hire all of the labour

that's available, making itself available and it will the real

wage will adjust to ensure equilibrium firms take that real

wages given.

This is a sort of.

How much how many hours of labour is necessary to

produce that amount of output.

This is the specific amount of output and the cost

of producing that therefore is the real wage times the

number of hours that they need.

You can then work out what the marginal cost is.

With a little bit of tidying up just of the

parameters so we don't have the one over one minus

alpha carried around.

I'm going to come back to that in a second,

but we have to just be aware of what the

market clearing is going to look like.

So we have the standard.

The amount that each firm produces is going to be

the amount of that good that consumed.

We have no inventories in the model, despite how incredibly

exciting inventory models are.

And.

Because this applies for all of them.

And so in aggregate aggregate consumption basket, the aggregate consumption

equals production.

You can also write the aggregate production as having the

same SES aggregator function apply to it to each of

the individuals, and then the total amount of labour used

at each of the little firms.

In aggregate, it has to equal the total amount of

labour supplied by the household.

Well, let me see.

Which is this.

Do I want to?

Okay.

So.

So the sort of set up to set up the

discussion that will pick up next week on this.

I actually think next week I will only do new

Keynesian models, so I may have some exercise and maybe

let me not commit to that.

Just looking at time and see if you have any

slides that are.

But.

As I've been trying to emphasise repeatedly in the last

35 minutes, the key in this model is the relative

price.

So actually what really matters for this economy?

It's going to be some measure of relative price distortions.

So we can.

Okay.

So this is.

The amount that each.

Each firm.

Demands of of labour.

Okay.

So this just comes from their, their their production function.

So for them to produce y t, this is how

much labour they each demand.

What we want to do is see how that is

linked to relative prices.

So the question is.

When your price is a bit too high, you will

employ.

You will be producing a different amount.

And because of that, you will be demanding a different

amount.

And that's going to be a distortion that we're going

to want to sort of see.

So we know what this y t is.

That's a relation related to relative prices.

So we can plug that in.

We then get a bunch of things that are aggregate

and we get some relative price distortions here.

We also know that when we aggregate this individually.

It has to equal the total labour supply.

So n t equals well, this is in all of

them and it's common and it's aggregate.

So we take it outside the integral and we get

this integral term over the relative price terms.

So what does this say?

It says there is this sort of effect of sum

integrated relative price terms with some powers attached that we

can then we can then measure.

We're going to call that a measure of price distortion.

Okay.

I make sure it's the same one.

Yeah.

So now.

What's up?

What is this like?

It's like if we lined up all the firms and

we were.

Looking at how their aggregate prices have their prices compared

to aggregate prices.

Remember, this aggregate price is itself an aggregate of all

the individual prices.

So this is like a series of firm, specific measures

of how different their relative prices to the aggregate.

At its heart.

Each of these firms is really identical.

They have the same production technology.

They have the same productivity.

The only difference comes in the fact that I value

each of your labels slightly differently.

And so you have a little bit of power to

set price, but you all have the same power to

set price.

So in a world where you were each individually optimising,

you would each come to the same price.

So in a flexible price world where you just set

for optimal today, you would all be setting the same

price in that world.

All of our relative prices would be one, and this

distortion term would be one.

In a world where because of rigidities as we're going

to impose or if you wanted if you wanted to

write a version of this where firms were stupid, like

where some people just set the wrong price, you would

get a distortion term that's greater than zero to say

greater than one.

Now.

If you rewrite one of the conditions from before, you

can write the aggregate behaviour of the economy with this

rather than a T on its own.

It's now 80 divided by this cap delta.

So one way every lecture come back to your dead

weight class type thing.

We are imposing if we prevent relative prices in this

economy where you're all the same, you are all the

same.

Really, apart from your stickers.

And I like the different stickers, but you're really all

the same.

You should all behave the same, so your relative prices

should all be the same.

If we prevent that from happening, we create distortions in

the economy.

And the bigger the.

The way this is written here is to show it

as like, it's like an aggregate TFP shifter.

So if you just put brackets around the A over

the delta T.

It's like variation in how much there's price distortion in

the economy affects aggregate productivity.

More distortion is like lower productivity.

Okay.

Now I'm sort of presupposing that there would be some

distortion.

We haven't shown any yet.

I'm going to pause here, but I'm just going to

fly you through the next steps of the logic.

You can then look at things like what the real

wages are relative to this distortion, but also how we

get market clearing.

You get the Euler equation in aggregate.

This is actually what's going to lead to our dynamic

is curve.

It's just an Euler equation written in aggregate.

And then we're going to go through all the logic.

I already talked you through what is the optimal price

setting.

When you set prices to get profits, you mark up

over you optimally mark up over marginal cost.

But when there's no problem with us all setting our

prices every period, we all set the same one and

we end up with no distortion.

Then we bring in we'll do that.

Then we bring in Calvo and everything changes.

We then have to think about this reset price.

What is the price you choose when you get to

set your price?

Well, it becomes hard because now you're maximising a probabilistic

term that you're going to have that price for a

long time.

And so you're doing it as the kind of profit

I get each period knowing that I have to go

out into the future, just discounting by that probability.

And that's what we're going to do.

I've already told you the full story of the new

model.

You should all be very happy and comfortable with it

now.

There's a lot of maths apart from that.

Okay, so I overshot by about two minutes, but we

did start a minute late.

Any last minute questions?

Burning questions?

Yeah.

I feel a little bit disconnected from consumer choices because

you said they prefer, like different stickers.

So like, they prefer different stickers equally.

Like, I think.

In the context they prefer.

Like.

I don't like eating.

It's going to be the most inane example.

I don't I don't like eating all red or blue.

And I like Evans and I like blue ones and

red ones, but I'm happiest if I get a bit

of red, a bit of blue, a bit of whatever.

But but and that is, that is the level we're

at now.

If the relevance cost more, I'll eat more blue ones.

Yeah but, but the joy I get is some balance

between them unless the relative prices shift.

Yeah.

I don't have enough knowledge of the colour spectrum to

go into a full, infinite horizon of colours of M&Ms.

Good.

Well, have a good week.

I still can't get this screen to.

Work in front of me, so.

Oh.

I have a question about intuition.

It was that you said that if we in the

money in the best model, you said if we want

to increase the consumption, then we should work more to

increase the money in the period time minus one.

This is intuition.

No, I said if.

We're going to work more in T and I want

to remember the marginal rate of substitution we're looking at

compares consumption, extra consumption at T with the extra utility

of worker T, Yes.

Okay.

So how do I get extra consumption at T?

I have to hold more.

Money at.

The T minus one and then I lose out on

the interest of t t.

And we want to.

Keep.

In mind that you have to figure out that.

It's equivalent.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Except the logic is always that time t.

That's our choice, period.

You have to go back to the when you reduce

control.

You t minus one.

So that you have more money at t.

Lecture 4:

Kind of hoping the room is warm today.

Cold out there.

Last week.

It was like summer.

Now it's winter in a week.

You don't have a jacket.

I mean, it's maybe I'll wear one tomorrow, depending on

the weather.

Yes.

You woke up and looked outside.

Hey, it looks nice.

I have.

But you can see what.

I said last.

I have been.

Thank you.

Yeah I know.

This expression.

Right?

Yes.

Yes.

And then?

Then I went on the next question.

Just so.

It hasn't.

To.

We do.

Nothing.

Just.

Last week.

When brothers.

Yeah.

It's.

I.

What is.

I'd like to thank you.

Okay?

Yeah.

Before this Sunday.

Morning.

So few of you today.

Probably everyone who skipped the matrix.

It looks like it's just a.

It's never skewed metrics.

Yeah.

That's good advice.

I'm always amazed how most of you guys do take

notes, but I.

For years I've been lecturing and there are people who

don't take any notes.

And I always took detailed notes through all my lectures.

And even if you don't have any clue, like what

the lecturer is saying, that applies to me and anyone

else, but particularly Matrics, right?

Just by being there and hearing the words and writing

them down, when you go back to try and study,

I think it improves your chances massively.

If not, you've no hope to hang anything on you

just see these things.

Well, I think I'm preaching to the converted because you're

here.

Or else everybody just took a five minute break to

get through.

This.

Yeah.

We're just the cold.

Weather's making everyone move a bit slower today.

Just.

Yeah.

Okay, well, it is five past.

So I am going to start.

And because you're here, you get rewarded for being here

on time.

That is with the question.

You get to decide our fate.

And so some of you have been asking me already

about extended essays, and I'm very happy.

And I've got some slides.

I can go to them at the start, or I

can go through them after the break, or I can

go through them just before the end of the lecture.

Or if you defer to next week, you eager to

find out about the extended essay and what it means

and what you should do.

Try to find it first or later.

Or I might wait till later because there might be

more people showed up after the break.

Okay, great.

So does it squeeze through?

Yeah.

Okay, fine.

Let's do that.

And okay.

So I'll do that.

So that means actually so so the other thing that

it's not the.

Very sturdy.

And.

I'll leave it there.

So?

So somebody asked me, and then it came to the

class about asking me to post the slides earlier.

I post them as early as I can, but I

do try and keep refine them that I could post

some earlier.

But then the big issue is.

So I'm trying to keep the same notation as was

used last year.

So that's the problem set and the exams are still

relevant.

If I switch notation and notes then I have to

change.

Well then the past exams are completely relevant and that's

annoying for you.

It's actually quite annoying for me and it's really annoying

for like so.

So I have to put what I would say on

the timing is, as I said on the first day,

I typically like talk a bit about some slides on

the first week, but then we go through them again

the next week.

So you have them for a full week while we're

still on the topic.

So I hope it's enough time.

But going further in advance is just is a bit

risky.

But we may do that today.

So I.

I'll see.

I have the material.

So suppose you just arrived.

The people who were here earlier got power and they

got to make a decision on your behalf.

And that is some of you have asked me about

extended essays.

And so I have I have a few slides to

discuss so we can answer questions on them.

And so I'm happy to do that whenever.

But the vote was taken that I will do them

after the break today.

So right after the break, we'll start with that and

then we'll see how far the rest of it we

go.

And okay, so so where are we?

Where are we in the world of monetary economics?

Well, I started to talk to you.

At the end of last week about the New Keynesian

model.

The New Keynesian model, as I alluded to, is not

a single model.

There are many New Keynesian models.

What the New Keynesian model really does, and why it's

become the foundation of a lot of models used in

central banks, is that it has, as it has a

kind of a basis itself of the real business cycle

model.

Now, the version we're looking at doesn't because, you know,

the big thing in the real business cycle model is

capital.

And we've taken that out, but it does in the

sense that it has optimising behaviour of consumers and all

the sort of what we call good micro foundations.

What does it do?

And so I had a chat with someone today in

my office hour, and I thought this was therefore useful

to have more generally at.

It tries to have those sort of foundations, and yet

have an environment in which the classical dichotomy does not

hold.

So in other words, nominal things like the nominal interest

rate can affect real variables, but not through these weird

tricks like money and utility or passion about education, about

stuff.

Maybe that's that weird.

Money and utility is a little bit weird to say

here that you like money and but actually the real

the heart of it.

And I'm going to say this now, maybe I didn't

say it last time and and even if I did,

it's worth emphasising a lot of the technical parts of

the New Keynesian model.

And there are lots of technical parts of the New

Keynesian model.

And there are some, as I joked about, even in

our very first lecture, there are some weird assumptions.

Calvin theory is a weird assumption.

You'll see today that the Calvo assumption is it's actually

very.

It's going to be weird for you to see this.

The equations become tricky and big and hard in some

sense, but actually they're about as tractable as they can

be.

And so we make that assumption.

But why are we doing that?

Because we want a world in which output in the

economy is demand determined.

And so there's a whole bunch of steps.

I'm going to walk through them again, and I won't

go through all of the line by line technicality so

that we get through it.

But I'd rather for me, you've got the big picture

and then you can grind through them yourself.

And if you if you struggle with any, I can

write them out in the intro.

But I mostly remain on the slides.

So what are the building blocks.

And we talked about these last week.

But I want to emphasise that again we have a

continuum.

So we have infinitely many minu shape firms who produce

goods.

And the goods that they produce are all different.

But this is the expression I use to explain it

to someone earlier, but they're all equally different.

So your sticker and your sticker are as equally different

or as equally the same as your sticker on your

sticker.

Okay, now I'm going to pretend I'm the consumer because

this is a world where there is one consumer or

a representative consumer I like.

I get utility from some aggregate consumption basket.

In fact, if some of you may have seen this

before, it's kind of a little bit different on the

narrative, but it works out to say mathematically, in some

versions of this model, we explicitly state that there is

a thing called a final goods sector that produce this

basket called kte.

Now what they produce is an aggregator like we used

of all the intermediate goods.

But what's key is because you're not all exactly the

same.

Maybe this is the logic that will help some of

you.

What would happen if your variety and her variety were

exactly the same and your price was epsilon higher?

You guys.

We don't buy.

Any from him.

I go all.

To her.

Sticky prices with perfect competition.

Kill you if you're a firm or bring you huge

rewards.

You get all or nothing.

Okay, so what is assumption?

This technical trick of varieties, these tiny bit different varieties

does is even though European price is higher, I'm going

to buy more from her because it's cheaper.

But as I have more and more of I'm going

to go with your Joker colour, your green labelled product,

the marginal utility I'm going to get by buying more

and more of that is going to start dropping.

So eventually I'm going to be willing to spend whatever

the extra amount is on the green colour.

I don't know if that's exactly what you called you

a jacket free?

No.

Okay.

What what colour would you like to be?

No.

No idea.

To be green.

We'll go with.

Your joker had too many colours on here, so I

felt like that was you were trying to monopolise the

market.

So at some point, I want expensive green stuff because

it's marginal utility will be high.

So you know again think about the optimisation.

What am I going to do.

Well I'm going to buy more of the relatively cheap

goods, but I'm going to still buy some of the

more expensive goods because I still get some utility from

that.

That is the trick that gives each of the varieties

some market power, and it's what means that if your

price gets stuck a bit too high, you don't just

get destroyed like that, okay?

So that's what we do.

We give market power through variety is your hand or

you just want in on the action.

But the dark green variety.

This is another functional.

To the good it does.

But and this is again this is just a.

This is what's being done with addicts.

It's what matters is this.

So I just care about the basket I can sue.

Now what is that basket.

Well it's going to aggregate each of these things.

And this is exactly going to matter.

The more substitutable they are, the more quickly I'll jump

from his to hers.

Now, if his is that bit different than I get,

I'm going to want more.

He'll have more market power because I'll just want more

of his because I get a little bit his margin.

It really counts for extra cookies.

So again, if you want to think about this, this

is not how I talk about it or think about

it.

But if you want to think of this as being

like Sainsbury's, aggregate all of the goods for us.

I just sell us a box of consumption.

That's also fine.

So as long as we think that Sainsbury's do it

in this aggregating fashion.

And then that's exactly what this question here is.

When we think about what is the price, the aggregate

price in this economy.

Well we worked that out.

We defined it as the the minimum price you can

pay to get one unit of aggregate consumption.

Now what is one unit of aggregate consumption.

Well it's going to be that added up bits weighted

by how substitutable they are.

So sometimes it could be a lot of green and

a little cream.

But don't worry the joy of this model is at

some point in the future her price will get stuck.

And then maybe your price looks really good.

But again, thinking about it in discrete individual people is

not fair because there's a continuum of these.

This is infinitely many of you, but that's the technicalities.

So that's what happened.

But but why are we doing this?

Why are we jumping through these hoops?

The key thing to remember in the background is you

as firms will now have market power.

But as prices get stuck in places, we will see

that when your price is a bit lower, a bit

high, you'll get more and less demand and that will

affect your production.

And then that has a knock on effect on aggregate

production.

So we get this demand determination effect.

And then monetary policy has real effects.

And then we're happy because that's what we didn't get

in an RBC type model.

That's what we do.

It's called New Keynesian because the idea of sort of

demand being what matters for output was the sort of

old Keynesian idea.

Keynes did not write down any of this stuff.

My question is a bit like.

Lower level conceptual discussion that we are having, but how

do you differentiate this thing?

Like the integral.

How do you take first order conditions of that?

We just discussed that.

I mean, this is this is you.

You did Hamiltonians.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Which is optimising.

It's an optimisation.

So there's nothing there's nothing non-standard about the integral because

of the I know.

Oh, if you prefer.

Doesn't quite work, but if you prefer just to see

it, right.

To say there's a summation and do the differentiation.

So does the men.

Okay.

Now we'll see where demand matters in a second.

What?

Where this model then gets you're getting into the second

level of the model where this gets.

Well, this meets the rational expectations revolution, right?

So what's one thing we could do?

In fact, I don't do it here.

There are papers, if you look at.

Stan Fisher and John Taylor.

I'm going to guess the years that they both had

related papers around 1978 1980.

They had versions of this where you had just like

this, this side of the room sets the prices on

1 in 1 period, and the next period this does

it.

And then you guys get to go again and you

guys have to go.

Other people wrote down versions of this where it was

like, okay, the the firm just sets the optimal price

for that period.

And then if they get stuck with that price, you

know, hey ho, that's tough.

What we're going to see here, the big anticipation of

the firms is you're going to know your price might

get stuck.

So there will be a difference between or and potentially

a difference between what is the optimal price.

I would set just for today if I knew I

could change it tomorrow.

And I know that whatever I said today is going

to be stuck with me for some amount of time.

What a major tone.

I'll start.

Let's talk this through.

It's on the slides later, but let's talk it through

now.

Well.

Make sure I get get my theta in the rice.

Okay?

Yeah, okay.

So.

Theta key.

Parameter.

Sometimes just called.

Calvo parameter.

It's a probability.

You can't change prices.

So eventually.

I know you've taken your jacket off.

Come on.

There's a probability.

Eventually, you get your chance to set prices.

You're sitting there and you're like, right?

In a flexible price world, every period you go.

I'll set my optimal price.

I'll set my optimal price.

I'll set my optimal price.

Now you're thinking if I set my price today.

If you reset your price.

How long will that price be your price?

Well.

It's your price today.

Is it your price tomorrow?

Probability is theta.

Is it still your price in two periods?

Theta.

Times theta.

Say the probability you didn't change it last times.

The probability you didn't change it.

That you don't get a change this time.

So what is your problem now?

Your problem now is you're going to try and choose

a price that makes sense today and probabilistically infinitely far

into the future.

Now, of course, at some point theta to the 150.

I mean, theta is a probability, okay.

If theta is .99999, right.

Theta 150 is still going to be a significant number

if theta is point five.

This is basically going to zero pretty quick.

Okay.

So .999999999 means basically nobody gets to reset their prices

at any point.

Theta equal to 0.01 means basically everyone gets to reset

their prices so that they can get us between pretty

much flexible.

Because then what's your reset price?

Well.

With basically zero probability, it's still your price tomorrow.

So you just behave as if you're setting it for

one period.

If 0.9999999 you're thinking this is my price forever.

Sorry, you might ask a question.

I just want to say that.

Great question.

Yes.

So once you get a chance to okay, there's a

there's a really important technical assumption in here that gets

us to what I'm about to say.

But we've already said part of it, and that is

you're all identical apart from this little label thing.

I know I joke, you make the colour label and

it's really sad.

I don't know enough colours.

I have three kids and yet I'm still stuck on

kind of primary and secondary colours.

None of my kids are good at art, so I

haven't gotten into the kind of magenta and the science

and all these other things that things that computer programs

tell me when I try and pick a colour for

stuff.

Okay.

There are infinitely many of you guys, and you're all

essentially the same, and you're all exactly the same in

how you're different.

The second key is submission.

So you asked whether when we when we sort of

get a chance to set our price, essentially do we

do the same thing?

The answer is going to be yes.

And the reason the answer is going to be yes.

And this is the again, it probably doesn't feel like

it at this point, like we've made big simplifications in

this model, but this is a big simplification.

The cow fairy is independent.

So it doesn't matter that she reset her price at

T minus one, and he hasn't said his price for

50 years.

At time t, they are equally as likely to be

selected by the Carbon Fairy.

Later on we will see models where we go away

from that assumption.

We're having made it to you said.

So once you get the chance to reset your price,

you all face the same world.

You all know the probabilities, so you're all going to

reset to the same level.

Sorry.

In fact, if.

If we moved to a world where theta equals zero.

So everybody gets to reset their prices every period.

There will be no differences in prices.

Relative prices will be the same.

You will all then produce exactly the same.

Looks just like the flexible price world.

So actually, we can even go back.

You know, like why when we write down a real

business cycle model, do we often write it as if

there's one firm?

Well, because it saves a hell of a lot of

pages of algebra, then saying, okay, there's infinitely many firms,

they all have some pricing power, but they all actually

do exactly the same thing optimally, do exactly the same

thing with exactly the same information.

So relative prices are not different.

So there's just one aggregate price and it's okay.

Where it's going to get interesting is we are going

to be carrying around some firms who had a price

reset last period.

So if you get to do it this period.

So we did a two periods go submit it.

And then there'll be relative price distortions when there are

different prices.

I will then allocate my consumption across them differentially.

And that has aggregate implications on labour demand and therefore

on aggregate output produced.

And that's the whole model.

I'm happy to stay on this bit for as long.

If I mean literally if.

If you get this logic.

The rest of the New Keynesian model is just a

bunch of equations.

But that's the key logic to get if you can

sort of see what they're trying to do and what

they're what they're generating, then it's yeah, you go, we're

going to be carrying thetas and one minus thetas around

and all sorts of fun things.

Yeah.

As firms get changing prices more often, then consumers will

still be buying a bit of every product or yes.

Yeah, that's really key.

Because of this type of aggregator, I will always want

some of all of them.

I basket will always comprise of a bit of everybody's

output.

I will get every colour of man in the basket.

The only thing that will happen is relative prices.

If you're a relative price looks good, there'll be a

bit more of yours in the basket.

If his looks bad, there'll be a bit less of

his.

If.

If you're all exactly the same price, you'll equally be

in the basket.

So sorry to follow up.

You mentioned as they get to change prices more often,

their relative prices equalise.

Yes.

So then the shares are also.

You'll see very laser like probably around slide 35.

Then you're basically going to get that there is a,

a price that will have this theta in it.

And there'll be an optimal reset price for today and

some live price.

And the closer theta is to zero, the one minus

theta on the optimal price becomes more and more prominent.

And the more and more prominent is the optimal reset

price.

That reset price just becomes what everybody chooses.

And it's just going to look like flexible prices.

And under flexible prices, every period everyone's going to shift

their relative prices so that they go.

And then there'll be no effect of demand determination in

this model.

Is the one.

Consumer facing the continuum of terms.

Yes.

And one representative consumer one represents.

We could have an infinite number of them, but they're

all doing exactly the same thing.

And they are perfectly flexible in terms of.

Reallocating the moments.

Okay.

Subject to, they will optimally do it within the basket

waiting that they will enjoy, and that will be cheapest

for them.

Yes.

So it's the very last slide.

How many of you have heard of snacks and vouchers?

Okay.

So that is a paper that was written in the

early noughties and by Frank Smits and rough voters, rough

voters at the Belgian national Bank, Frank Smits.

Well, it barely sailed the ECB.

He's been pretty ECB in the biz.

So I think yes, definitely.

So basically and.

They're like when.

People say central banks use a New Keynesian model, what

they really mean is they probably use a version of

the virus model.

It's similar to this except on steroids.

What do I mean by that?

Well, we don't make the simplification of no capital.

So we have a state variable called capital.

Right.

So now we have it's closer to the RBC model.

But all this stuff we were just talking about about

reset prices and relative prices and how you aggregate what

you get as a demand determines that all still there.

But then you also put it in a bunch of

adjustment costs so you can make it costly to change

investment.

Or you could make it costly to change consumption.

So this would be a world.

So there's the models version of this called habit consumption

with habit.

Then you don't want to change.

So even though his price goes up because I ate

a lot of it last time, I want a lot

of it this time, right?

These are all just even deeper bells and whistles tricks

to make the model have slower dynamics.

This version, the consumer will come along and go price

up.

Don't care about you buying shares, but I still like

some of his because I like a bit of every

place.

Okay.

Last one.

I just have the last one.

So since we are not investment in motors kind of

model are impulses.

Once functions and stuff, they have jumps in and illegalities.

Well, we'll see this sort of towards the end.

Yes.

That they.

So what adjustment costs typically allow us to get over

time on an IRF is something that goes like that

rather than our model, which would go something like, well,

it would go something like that.

It's a colour would work.

Like that.

Okay.

So all of those bells and whistles, they smooth out,

they give these hum shapes, they make it harder to

adjust.

You do it gradually.

But.

And in fact, the only reason we're going to get

a lot of persistence in our version of the model

is we're going to make the shocks persistent.

So we're going to say, okay, we get a shock

today, but it's still high tomorrow.

And then it folds and it folds it it folds.

In the post you can get spiky ones if you

just have them as purely transitory yet full adjustment in

a period, except for firm prices, because we make them

stick.

Good.

Okay.

Okay.

So consumption sort of talked about this last time.

The key bit of this.

Is this thing here?

You bring this car over if you prefer it that

way.

Your relative amount of consumption that I would allocate optimally

to each of the varieties is going to relate to

the relative price.

So that's the price of the individual variety I relative

to the aggregate price with this elasticity of substitution coming

in.

And that's the sort of definition we have of the

of the aggregate price.

Do all of the usual.

All of the usual optimisation.

Remember I went one slide too far.

Remember what matters for.

The consumer utility is the aggregate amount of consumption they

have.

All that relative allocation across types is just the optimal

way to make a unit of C, which is why

I said that in some people they talk about a

separate sector as doing that for us, someone else aggregate

for us and then just offers us C, in which

case then we just choose the C and the N

that we want.

And when we do that, it looks just like the

RBC model in that we get two Euler equations intertemporal,

where this is a measure of a real interest rate,

and intertemporal where we optimally allocate.

Our time, our time at work so that the marginal

utility we get from the extra consumption it generates, sort

of compensate for the marginal cost of doing that time.

Okay.

It's a very standard stuff.

Key thing for firms is that they then go and

they optimise, knowing that this is the demand that they

face.

So I just arrived to the Cty.

I that's the consumer's allocation to good.

I well then the output that that person can sell

again bring the why over here if you prefer.

The relative output that that person could can sell depends

on the relative price.

So we can we can work out what the the

cost of producing.

That amount of eight foot is.

This is the total cost.

Well, it's the amount of labour that we need to

produce that much times the wage.

Because you're small, infinitesimally small.

You take the wage as given.

So this double you will have to solve for in

general equilibrium.

Because obviously if we think about the flexible price world,

yes, you all take it as given, but you will

determine it too.

So we have to sort of think about that.

But when you make your optimisation, you just take this

as something that you face.

And then we can work with the, the, the marginal

cost therefore.

Okay.

Yep.

C is equal to y.

Consumption equals production.

Total labour used.

Is the integral over all the firms of the individual

labour that they use.

But again, going back, this is the.

Quickly ask something.

So there are infinitely many firms.

Everyone uses labour.

And who provides the labour.

There's only one consumer.

Do they provide each other with labour?

Or I am the consumer and I provide labour to

all of you.

Okay.

Yeah.

This this representative consumer.

Like you have to think of my, my labour as

fully divisible.

So I can do 12 minutes at your firm and

eight minutes at yours and 22 minutes at yours.

And there's no cost.

Like, I don't get confused as I walk from firm

to.

I don't waste time.

Right.

There's a lot of things left out from reality here,

but that's true for remember one thing and I'll come

back to a key thing.

Each of you.

I've made you all the firms.

Now each of you are producing with a technology that

has.

It's not a linear technology.

So as you produce more, what happens?

The marginal product is going to decline.

So you're about.

To.

See a utility function.

There's expectation about the consumption and the labour.

It doesn't mean that according to the distribution of theatre

aggregate level of consumption and labour also changed.

There's some uncertainty about aggregate function.

The orientation.

The optimal amounts of consumption and and labour will vary.

Yes.

So even each level of five.

And also I would think it will be far.

So but just just think about.

Right.

What.

Imagine we faced a shock that meant that we were

going to end up.

Producing a lot less this period and it will go

back to some normal level next period.

Now, what tends to be the case in the utility

functions that we're writing down, including this one, is that

consumers wish to smooth their consumption.

Okay.

But we're a closed economy.

This is logic that applies to any Euler equation.

So the question is what happens?

Why would we end up in a world where even

though I want to smooth consumption, but if output is

lower, how would I not?

Why would I not smooth consumption?

Endogenously.

Other variables.

For labour, it tends to be the price that w

the wage for consumption, it tends to be the intertemporal

value of that will have to adjust.

So the real interest rate will have to change to

incentivise me who originally would like to keep consumption constant,

to now want to have lower consumption today and have

it grow tomorrow, I'm going to have to have the

real interest rate go up, because if not because I've

got less consumption today, everybody is trying to borrow from

the future to keep consumption smooth.

So what you're going to see is that all of

these things will adjust endogenously to get this equilibrium.

But yes, we we will have N and C both

changing in response even to nominal shocks.

In this module.

Is it the case that normal wages are flexible because

the labour market is perfectly complex?

You can you can write a different version.

This is why I said that when I first introduced

this last week and I said the New Keynesian module,

and I said I was being a bit unfair to

call it the right, you can write a version of

this down where you put the stickiness on the wage

side.

And again, that has similar implications.

Not exactly the same.

There are versions of this model that have sticky prices

and wages you can choose.

But we're working with a world where it's sticky prices.

But but so the wage will adjust to get equilibrium

every time.

So that's again, that's the answer to the question.

If people certainly wanted to work a lot or work

a little, the wage will move to get us to

an equilibrium.

You know, I was thinking later.

Okay.

Okay, so I think I got to I definitely got

beyond this point last time, but I.

You can kind of you can get what the amount

of labour that each firm is going to actually.

So there's one other there's one other one other equality

amongst you that I didn't emphasise, but it's worth stating

clearly when I said you all have.

Diminishing marginal product of labour.

As you add more labour it declines.

Notice that there's no eye on the A term.

Productivity is an aggregate shock.

So you will all get hit.

Positively or negatively?

It's not that suddenly, you know, King wakes up and

he's super productive.

And the rest of you are stuck in yesterday's production

mode.

That can't happen here.

You're either all more productive or less productive.

Okay.

So you can work out how much labour.

So how many of my minutes each of you want,

which is a function of your relative price, which we

know determines how much you're actually going to produce and

what aggregate productivity is.

So we could have productivity shocks in this model.

And then if you aggregate that over this, you see

that you have this aggregate amount of labour used.

There's a function of this sort of these aggregate variables,

the total amount being produced.

We still have to solve for that of course, and

also the aggregate exogenous variable called productivity.

So they're there.

But we then have this term this integral term related

to relative prices.

And so this is I think I stopped just after

doing this quickly last time.

But if you look here now, we define this thing

as a measure of relative price distortions.

Then you can see that the aggregate amount of labour

will rewrite it.

The aggregate amount of output is a function of the

relative price distortions.

This is the demand determined part of this stuff.

This is also all this stuff that we talked about

earlier when I said, well, hey, if you can all

set your prices, whatever you want, you all set that

equal to the same amount, the relative prices would just

be one because you're all selling the same thing.

The distortions would be one.

And then the aggregate production function is just the individual

one.

Dropping the I subscripts, which is exactly the answer I

gave earlier to why do we not bother with having

load of firms in the RBC model?

Because in that world, without any relative price distortions, having

having an infinite continuum of firms individually set optimal prices,

but them all being exactly the same is just like

having just one firm.

So you can flip the question about, you know, is

there one consumer?

Yes.

But it's like having a continuum of them.

But we all behave the same, and we don't really

care that I go to work for you and someone

else goes to work for you.

Does it really make any difference?

So we just work with one and we think I

just divide.

That's the sort of behaviour.

Now of course, where are we going to get interesting

stuff going on is when we have price headed behaviour

that causes this price distortion term to not be one.

Question, can you please elaborate why the relative price distortion

means that it is in the long driven?

Well, which is no.

So we're not yet at the equilibrium.

I'd say this is a key to getting us there.

We still have to solve for the equilibrium values of

this, and therefore the equilibrium real rates and wages and

stuff that get us to an equilibrium.

But you can just see.

Here, when.

We're in a world where prices will get knocked away

from the same price chosen by equally different firms, we

will get price distortions.

And when there are price distortions, they will affect the

level of activity.

Let me put it okay.

Let me try and put it a different way just

by focusing on the production function.

Okay.

Let's see where the.

You're going to see that where the inefficiency comes from.

We're going to go back to you to your price

is higher and therefore I buy more of yours.

But as I buy more of yours, that means you

have to hire more labour.

Why?

Because you need to produce more.

Well, it's not just one for one.

As you produce more and more, your productivity essentially goes

down.

So that price distortion, which pushes me away from you,

towards you now has you.

Yes.

You're selling more.

You're happy.

You're doing the optimal thing for you.

But in equilibrium, we're now buying more from you, and

you're kind of at an inefficient point of production.

You're not selling much, even though your marginal cost of

producing is going to actually look lower.

You're stuck with this damn price that you've set two

periods ago, five periods ago, 100 years ago.

That's where you start getting real effects from these price

distortions.

Okay.

Let me make some progress.

You follow through to add a few things in.

Go back to the intro intro temple Euler equation.

We get an expression for the real wage.

The real wage actually increases with the distortions.

She has to start offering the more.

To work a bit extra so that we can.

You basically want to produce a lot.

While your relative price is low.

So in aggregate, because there's only me and there's not

all the complications.

So you could think about this if you if you

introduce this model also with sticky stickiness, not just on

wages, but like.

Search.

Frictions in the labour market where I can't just move

jobs easily, but I can I can reallocate perfectly.

So that's that's again, that's part of where you get,

you see people to stick that equal to one and

a bunch of terms fall out and you end up

looking like something that just looks like a distorted RBC

model.

Actually.

I'll pause there.

Why is this model distorted?

I think the answer to that question is something you

all got taught within the first two weeks of undergraduate

economics.

If you did undergraduate economics, if you did undergraduate engineering

or physics, you can now a wage and pretend you

don't have to know the answer.

Why is this model distorted?

What is the distortion?

Even if we put theta equal to zero.

Someone has made an answer on sticky price and I

just put that onto their.

Is it because of you?

Yes.

The first thing we learned in the first few weeks

of microbe, when they teach us about supply and demand,

and then we learn that monopoly causes a distortion.

I've given you all monopoly power, and that's a distortion.

It's not the interesting distortion.

I'm sorry.

That's really unfair on my, you know, industrial organisation colleagues.

It's not interesting distortion to me or to monetary economics.

It's not a distortion that creates the effect of monetary

policy because, like I said, have the distortion put theta

equal to zero.

And we're back to a flexible price world and we

just have a distorted economy.

What is it?

You all get monopoly power.

You set your price higher than your marginal cost, because

your price is higher than your marginal cost.

Quantity we get to enjoy is lower.

But if you have an infinite continuum of such products.

Then and also equally respect each other.

So doesn't that distortion just dissipate?

Zero.

It goes small.

It doesn't go to zero because you're each producing too

little.

Because his good can never be fully substituted for murder.

If we change the if we also created the elasticity

and made them really close substitute, it's going to become

infinitesimally small.

But at some level you're still distorting it.

But like I say, it's not the one I'm interested

in.

If that's the one that excites you most, you made

the wrong choice on your option, but you might be

too late to swap, so you're stuck.

Okay.

I'm joking.

I'm not really.

Okay so last step of this, we can then use

the Euler and the Euler equation to figure out what

are going to be the y's.

There are these expectation terms.

You also have the x until interest rate.

But let's get on to the stuff I just talked

about.

And then we'll come back and see this.

But.

Okay.

All of this is stuff that you will have learned.

Maybe not in this same detail, but when you learned

about monopoly power, given this substitute ability between this measure

of substitute ability between your goods, you get the optimal

Mark-up is epsilon over epsilon minus one times the marginal

cost.

Okay.

So in other words there is some non marginal cost

pricing that goes on right.

You work through all of this.

Okay, I've said almost all.

If you could all set the same price.

Sorry.

If you can hold.

Set prices freely.

You will all set the same price.

There will be no price distortions.

There will still be a mark-up over your marginal costs

because it's one site back.

Because the relative price, the flexible, profit maximising, flexible relative

price is some mark-up over marginal cost.

If everybody's going to end up with the exact same

price or the relative price is one, the left hand

side of that becomes one.

Which then tells us who did not didn't know.

That was a touchscreen, which tells us that you get

a constraint on the real marginal cost, which you can

then plug in.

You can work out then what the amount of.

Production is from this equation here.

But the key thing in all of this is once

you do that, we have gotten rid of the relative

price distortion.

So the delta is gone.

And instead we end up in a world where we're

left with a distortion just related to this mark-up.

And that's what we're left with.

Do the profits.

End up in this system household?

Is this okay?

Yeah.

I remember learning this very early on in my career

in the Bank of England when I said, oh, no,

I think I said something like, oh, no, but, you

know, that firm is owned by some other firm.

And then someone said to me, all firms are owned

by people ultimately.

So even if there's a holding company and another holding

company, some shareholder gets the final dividends.

Now, is this a good corporate finance model?

No, no.

There's no such thing as retained profits or reinvested profits

or anything like that.

All profits are paid out directly.

Remember there's no capital.

So it's kind of fun world.

In fact, you can then work out what's called the

natural level of output.

Which is the amount of output that would pertain if

all prices were flexible.

Now, I'm not going to pretend that this is a

beautiful expression, but it's a beautiful expression.

Why?

Well, it tells us that the natural level of output.

Will not be constant.

But what's going to drive it?

Ignored the.

Number of parameters.

They're just parameters.

What's going to drive it?

Time variation in a.

What does that look like?

Okay fine.

So.

So this is not an RBC model.

An RBC model has no monopolistic competition distortion.

So we throw a distortion in there.

That's a wedge.

Turns out it's a sort of fixed wedge over marginal

cost, which means that the input that would pertain would

only be driven by productivity shocks.

That is the same message as an RBC model.

So the natural level of output will vary over time

as this aggregate productivity goes up and down.

Now again, if you want to make this model a

bit more complicated, you can put other shocks in there.

You can put discount rate shocks.

You can put, you know, shocks to the willingness to

supply labour.

And they're all going to turn up in there as

well.

So the depression gets bigger.

But the same basic principle holds.

There's a natural level of output a flex price, level

of output that varies over time with real variables.

That sounds like RBC world.

Yeah, this shock has nothing to do with colour theory

tapping on someone's head.

Or it does.

No, no, this is this is productivity.

And then how common are those shocks?

I mean, are there shocks if they happen every year.

Every year there's something.

You have just asked what might be the most divisive

question in business cycle macro.

Let me I'm going to give two minute answer and

then we can talk about it later if you want.

RBC models come along and they go, hey, if we

just think there's this thing called aggregate productivity and we

assume it gets hit, you can explain most of the

business cycle.

And then people went, yay, that's brilliant.

And other people went, oh I hate that.

Like what is a productivity shot?

What does it mean?

We wake up in some days.

We're not as productive as others.

Yeah, but what is that?

What?

We forgot how to do our jobs.

So at the aggregate level, there are deep models that

try to explain time variation in aggregate productivity.

So you could think about it like.

Could be driven by.

Things that make trade more or less difficult over time.

It could be weather, it could be.

It could actually be know people die and their skills

disappear.

And then it takes a while for people to learn

them again.

In this model, we will simply say some days everybody

is more productive or less productive, but completely exogenous to

this model.

You have to start thinking about supply side models to

get to get into what is a.

It's actually if you if you want to look and

I could we could all go online and find the

numbers and do the comparison here.

Every if you want to do a cross country comparison

of well of GDP levels per capita, the main driver

of those differences is a whatever that is.

But we're just going to take it as like a

different ferry.

The productivity.

But we never called it the productivity ferry.

It's just called productivity.

And okay, so if you think now, well, we have

this thing called the natural rate.

We're going to plug those.

We want to keep that natural.

What is the real interest rate.

That's consistent with the Euler equation.

Holding.

With the natural rate level of output being held.

That's called the natural real interest rate.

Okay.

So this is something which will be driven by things

that drive the natural rate.

So if the natural rate goes up I make sure

you get it.

If the natural rate goes down today this was the

example I gave you earlier.

Natural rate goes down today.

Everybody would like to smooth.

We're going to have to disincentivize them from smoothing.

So in order for the natural rate tomorrow and today

to be consistent with the Euler, the real interest rate

has to go up in order to get us all

to save and have less consumption today, while the natural

rate is lower.

So when this productivity person comes along and makes us

less productive, the real rate goes up.

So so so we have these.

Concepts, these flexible price concepts of of of natural real

rates.

Okay.

Question.

How can we just give.

We should give the explanation for why output is directly

correlated.

To the marginal cost.

Where been on the side of the National.

Oh, that's from here.

So.

So why does this.

Do you mean the.

Do you mean the mark-up or the mark-up matters for

the natural rate?

Yeah.

Because this is the distortion.

This is the monopoly distortion.

The more monopoly power we give, the more it's going

to affect the natural level of output.

Because remember, if we have flex prices, everyone's going to

do optimal.

Except we're still going to have that wedge that we

didn't have in the RBC model.

That's why the epsilons come in here.

It's just the monopoly distortion.

It's the distortion I said was uninteresting because I'm being

unfair to colleagues.

Okay.

So we have to.

Okay, so now we go to sticky prices.

Ticket said.

I mean, I haven't obviously talked through all these equations,

but this is essentially the same thing.

I want to see if I can get through one

thing.

Okay, let me take this.

Then we'll take our break.

Then we'll talk about sentences and I'll finish these slides.

Okay.

This is essentially the problem that the firm has.

So when I described it they said there's going to

be some gnarly maths that's going to really kind of

just keep us all excited.

Intuitively the choice is very easy.

They're trying to optimise their price, but they know that

probabilistically the relevance of the price they choose tomorrow will

decline over time.

It might be quickly, it might be slowly.

But that's the theta thing that I talked about.

They also discount into the future there.

There are there are different ways that you can you

can do this.

If you've ever studied finance models, we tend to have

the use of a stochastic discount factor, which also takes

into account relative marginal utilities across time.

Here we're just going to do a a discount factor

that relates to the price of the bond in real

terms.

Okay.

So we're going to have some kind of discounting of

the future profits because we know money tomorrow is worth

different to money today.

I'm thinking of a world of inflation where it declines.

But of course in deflation it gets it gets implied.

So then what they're optimising is their profits with that.

Multiple period horizon in mind.

You grind through the maths.

Just.

First order condition related to real marginal cost.

Wage is the same as before given by the equilibrium,

but now it is an equilibrium where there are price

distortions so that delta term is carried around.

You get an equation that says, and this, this is

basically just capturing the fact that the price we end

up with today is an accumulation.

This is an aggregation of all the prices.

But it's not now all the prices just across everybody

that they set today.

It's like we take you and we group you.

You guys set your price ten periods ago and you're

a fraction of the world.

Another group nine periods.

Another group a another group.

Remember every every and every point in time when a

when the firms get to set their price, they all

choose the same one.

So now I just group you into when you set

your price and you've got the same prices.

And then we aggregate over those and that gives us

our aggregate price.

And you can see we carry a theta around because

if theta is very high then I'm going to have

to go way back in time 100 periods ago.

There are still people whose prices in fact, actually someone

will pick me up on this.

So I'll say it now mathematically, because there's an infinite

sort of continuum of these firms.

There is, with some really tiny probability, some firm that

set its price at zero and has never got to

reset.

Right.

So there is some we are counting some tiny little

measure zero firm that set a price a long time

ago, and their relative price is skewing.

It could be like if you imagine you have this,

this model where productivity is growing over time or declining

over time so that the price is set would end

up with trends.

You could set a price back here and just be

stuck with it a long time.

And so your price is so out of kilter and

yet someone is still buying from you because we don't

have exit.

So again, now my colleagues in industrial organisation can turn

around and go, well that's clearly a stupid model of

firms, right?

Why is there a firm that hasn't set reset its

price in 500 years?

And yet people are still buying its product?

Well, they're buying it because it's the same as all

the other products put a different label.

So that's why.

Okay, let's pause there.

Let's take our five minutes.

When we come back, we'll talk about the extent state

that I will allow you to that I bought that

was slow.

Like I went slowly but useful.

I think that if you get the logic, the max

is just max.

But if you can get a logic that you'll never

forget that.

You can.

Go get your water break.

Although it's nice in this room now, today it's nice

and warm.

Yes.

So when you.

Set.

The.

Expectations.

Towards kind of abusing its dominance of.

Well, he has let me.

I can tell you about it.

I mean, the storm is here, the one plus.

And then you kind of going yourself taking this outside

the expectation thing by this beginning and then here.

So that's like implicitly saying.

I mean, the other way you do take expectations of

the whole thing, work with the whole thing in expectation

space just to define this variable.

That's all we want to do.

We just want to define that variable.

Okay.

So it's just okay.

So if you want to forget that in and just

say I just want this.

Yeah that sounds great.

I see okay okay I see.

That's what we need okay.

Yeah yeah.

Yeah I think.

That's all we need.

We need, we need the.

The one plus r that defines.

Yeah.

When we put tildes on both.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

It's good if I do this and then I get

back and then it solves this equation.

That's why it's.

Yeah.

Yeah.

It's not that.

No no no it's not determinism.

Well it's a function of the natural rates which are

themselves functions of shocks.

Right.

Yeah.

Thank you.

How did we get this expression.

What's a Hamiltonian.

We have started.

Yes, we started this time.

Which is right as a summation, just to see it.

Okay.

This is good.

Yeah.

Just to see it.

It's not.

It's not mathematically exact.

Same.

But can you recommend some book in which it is

extremely.

Because then.

You could try.

God, you may have it, I don't know.

It's a it's a fairly standard result.

I mean, if you still, if you, if you write

it out and if you can't get it, then send

me an email.

And I'll get you.

I'll write it down.

But it's a pretty it's a fairly standard optimisation.

I mean, in fact, if you go back to the

original Dixit Stiglitz article on monopolistic competition, it's probably in

there.

Because I was.

Going to concentrate on story like that instead of internet

firms.

Like ten firms.

And.

So it was ten firms three months old change their

prices.

So when seven firms will change the price, I mean

that initially all the prices of all the prices of

the firms are same.

They could be.

Different.

And if they change then do the change to the

same.

They always.

Change the same price.

Change.

Even if the products are different.

The products are different, but they're equally different.

You know.

I think your difference is the same as his difference.

Yeah.

You don't have any special difference.

You still face the same aggregate consumer.

So you're still facing the same demand curve.

So if your price.

If you chose a different price to him, you would

have to be.

You know, you could.

Get that if you said, well, you think your price

will reset in a period and.

He thinks it'll be stuck.

Forever.

You would choose different prices, but you all have the

same beliefs.

You know how probabilistically likely it is you get the

same price.

So optimally, you'll always choose the same thing.

Okay.

When you get to reset.

And so then it doesn't matter if you all start

with the same or we all start with different.

What matters is that when you get the chance to

set, you will.

So there is no universal price at which all your

firms want to go to that price.

One reset price.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That's right.

So all of these.

Well, we have the expectation here.

So you are.

Not today, but in the future.

Yes.

So you've got that little.

Shop.

You know, the big shop.

The big shop here is is productivity.

So we are not talking about women anymore.

Right.

That's what I say.

This is exactly the of the one to a world

with no shop.

But yeah, but in general, I remember that's an expectation

over time.

So I don't know what the world is going to

look like in a thousand years.

So it was a different from we are.

No.

No, exact same as RBC.

RBC the only uncertainty is the productivity.

So you think like between to do this.

No no no no no no no.

We all we we all understand the calendar perfectly.

And because it's such a large number.

Probabilistically we can get it right.

So I couldn't say that you'll change your price or

she'll change your price.

But I can say that 10% will change prices.

And I don't.

Care to do this.

So we will have.

You know.

The distribution.

And that will.

Be that will actually improve.

Previous.

Next.

Yeah.

There'll be a well defined.

Because of the.

Well defined distribution of prices across different reset prices.

And we'll know that in.

About the.

Productivity or any other shots.

You put in.

Thank you.

So much.

I was going to say again 2000 is productivity.

That's a big.

Shock regarding what I.

What a constraint is what I mean with any well

defined with any.

Well-defined system of.

Consumption.

Anything, if it's going to bind at equal to what

I mean.

But imagine a world.

Where firms.

Gave away trying.

To buy one, get free, or.

Then you could end up with it being.

Cheaper to get.

More consumption than to get one.

But yes.

It's going to bind at one with the normal.

Assumption.

Okay.

I think of it as in like maximising the consumption

subject to constraint that the but the expenditure is going

to be smaller than the the wages.

So it's a slightly different concept.

We're asking this is.

Really defining a price index.

So it's just how much.

What's the cheapest I could pay to get one aggregate

unit of.

See.

Now the way you get that is you optimally allocate

using the aggregator for.

C I don't want you.

To get one unit.

So I'll all the spread.

And what's the.

Cheapest way you can do that.

And that's the aggregate price as we define okay.

So the way I think of that is using advertising

is a bit different because it's I think.

It's a different problem, but it's going to look like.

The same.

So you're going to take very similar derivatives okay okay.

But this is just a defined thing.

What is the price.

What is the price of one unit of at least

one unit of consumption.

The minimum price.

Okay.

Yes.

You.

Yeah.

Five.

Oh.

Yes.

Yes.

As they proceed.

Okay, I said I would talk a little bit about

extended essays to give us excitement after the break.

And I also remembered that I was going to I

was going to apologise for my slightly weird appearance today.

I moved house at the weekend and when I when

I was getting up to come in here this morning,

I cut out the shower and a I couldn't find

my razor so I looked a bit dishevelled on the

face.

This is not a new rugged Michael that we're going

for.

I just couldn't find my razor and I also couldn't

find my proper shoes.

So I'm wearing a pair of dirty trainers.

So there you go.

If you hadn't noticed them, I've just drawn attention to

it.

But there you go.

That was.

That was my panic around the house.

I'm sure you guys have all moved, including recently, but

as you get older, the number of boxes you have

gets larger and larger.

And so yeah, I don't I don't know where my

shoes are, but they're somewhere.

Hopefully by next week I'll find them or I'll have

bought new ones.

And okay, so you have to do an extended essay.

Extended essay is 50% of the course grade, and submission

deadline is 4 p.m. on my first child's birthday, May

28th.

There you go.

She'll be excited.

This is the type of thing she would get very

excited by.

I'm going to tell her when I go home.

And although if she ever comes here, she'd be very

disappointed with that as the submission.

Or it could be a good night out actually.

Finish and then go party.

There is a document I put this on Moodle as

well.

You will have been sent and I am sure I'm

sure it's on many Moodle pages or email boxes or

whatever, but I put it on the course page as

well, just so it's there.

And there are two basic formats and what is a

structured research assignment.

And and the other is an independent research essay.

So the structured one is one where sometime towards the

end of this term, I think the deadline for us

to tell you is week nine of this term.

But know.

So I spoke to the Ambrosia teaching the second half.

So we will we will coordinate on that and put

some of these ideas and questions and types of things

you might do on online, and then you choose to

work through them.

I'll talk about that in a second.

And the other is that do your own thing.

And so some courses they don't offer the first and

everybody has to do the second.

We will be offering the first.

So that's the first bit of knowledge you learn today.

We will offer the first.

But if you really want to you can make a

proposal to do the independent essay.

And so we're going to talk for five minutes on

both of them and then go back to optimal reset

prices, log Linearisation and model dynamics, which is what we're

all here for really.

And so typically.

That would be using old terms Nicholas.

Obviously Oxford hasn't changed.

We still use that.

But this is the first year LSC has shifted to

autumn term.

So autumn correct that and the idea of the structured

is you will get like a bunch of information might

be model code, it might be a model equations, it

might be empirical data, it might be a mix.

And from that you get some kind of broad question.

And then you select one of the topics.

And this is like most of the work for all

of this is after Christmas.

So sort of telling you this to get your brains

thinking.

And if you want to do the independent one, you

have to work it.

You have to be a bit more proactive sooner, and

you would choose which of the topics you're going to

work on by then.

And then there would be a series of sort of

meetings.

So three meetings is this track whereby let's say everybody

doing so I will set one of them and Roger

will set one of them, and then everybody who chooses

my one will get together.

We'll meet for an hour, we'll talk, and then we'll

meet again.

We'll do the same, and we'll go further in detail

and talk about how people are getting on, what's challenging,

what they're struggling with, what angle they're taking.

Because you don't all do things even though you get

the same broad topic.

You're not all doing the exact same thing.

You get to put your own little spin on it

and and then individually or collectively, depending on how many

people and how people want to do it, there's a

final sort of meeting to discuss it in the run

up to May 28th.

Okay.

And we'll announce the topics later this term if you

choose to do the independent one.

And again, that's fine.

You choose it.

If you choose it, you have to choose something related

to monetary economics and economic fluctuations, because it's half of

the course grade and if you want to go this

route, you have until Friday the 8th of December, the

day after my dad's birthday.

Not quite there.

That's quite a bit disappointing.

Wasn't 70 do you have to to then to sort

of submit a proposal?

And then once you've submitted that proposal, there is some

process of iteration and negotiation to find the right supervisor

and the refine the topic.

And then after that, there'll be a similar sort of

thing of meetings to discuss the progress.

But again, these are meant to be these are technically

your exams.

So they're sort of it's mostly your work.

I'm going to say this not because I'm obviously not

because I'm against a theoretical endeavour, but the biggest constraint

that you will face in life, but particularly in this

Masters, is time.

And doing an independent project that is empirical is lower

risk than doing one that is theoretical.

Okay.

Now risk is a wonderful thing because it means there's

some kind of underlying distribution.

Now I have well, actually I did one of these

myself a long time ago, but I've also supervised dissertations

now, going on 17 years of supervising dissertations of some

kind in a masters in Oxford.

We do it.

You do a full year and a half a year

and a bit in four months of dissertation.

So it's a much bigger exercise.

Warwick, it was over the summer here.

It's in through the year.

The theory can be awesome.

Like if you have a new idea for a model,

you write it down, you crank it out.

It all works.

Bish bosh bang.

Done.

You can be done and dusted with an original contribution

in a couple of weeks.

Khan is doing a lot of work in the optimism

of that statement.

Theory can also be a disaster because you come up

with some idea, you start grinding through it, you find

that you can solve it, or there's some reason it

doesn't work, and then it doesn't hold and you can't

program it.

And then it's it's May 28th and you have nothing.

And that's a disaster empirically are safer.

Why are they safer?

Because yeah, you can churn through them, do all the

analysis and get a whole bunch of statistically insignificant results.

You still have something that's probably not going to get

published in the American Economic Review, but you have something

to get you through the essay submission.

So that's kind of the risk.

And again, I've seen people I've seen people come out

both sides of that theoretical risk trade off.

I've seen people who've smashed one out and sort of

a few weeks later they're like, well, I've written this

all down, I've solved it.

It's done.

And then they spend some time adding some bits and

it's wonderful.

I've seen people really struggle.

Okay, I won't even put it.

You can read those online.

And if you do decide to go down the independent

thing and think of it, think of the proposal you

submitted in December as a, a, a first attempt at

engaging with the permission to do it.

And if you can't expect that, you'll get everything right

in that first submission of the proposal.

And the proposal doesn't have to be that detailed.

A couple of pages.

What the question is remember, all research answers a question

that's key sometimes forgot that's key.

And how you're going to answer the question and why.

It's interesting whether it's an empirical, if it's empirical, what

data, what method, etcetera do you plan to use.

And so yeah, so so if some of you do

want to talk about that stuff, just you can give

me a shout.

But otherwise I thought I would get that bit out

of the way.

But I will take questions if anyone has questions on

it.

Yeah.

We have an.

Idea of what previous year's assignment would be like for

example like topics.

Yeah.

So so the term one is typically empirical.

So it would be something like.

Oil price shocks cause price movements that vary across countries.

Here's a measure of oil price shocks, you know, can

you show what determines the the scale and persistence of

the effect of an oil price shock?

And so you get to sort of play with a

bunch of readings and stuff, and then you get to

play with it and play with the data.

Maybe you say, okay, well, I really want to look

at the effect on sub-Saharan Africa, because that's what I'm

really interested in buying, and you sort of do it

that way.

And someone else comes along and goes, well, I'm going

to look at it.

Look at whether the effect was different in 1970, as

it was in 1990, as it was in 2010.

So different angles you can take.

So that's where the originality comes in.

You get rewarded for originality, but that's the sort of

idea.

The modelling part tends to be something like, okay, here's

some idea that's out there, here's a sort of simple

model.

Sometimes we code given otherwise with sort of a layout

of what a model might look like, and then ask,

you know, why do we get this result in these

models and what makes it go away?

Or could even be the same question what determines the

persistence and severity of these shocks hitting the economy?

That's the type of thing.

But you get you get a kind of guide.

And then like you say, you have the structured sessions

where you get to talk about the issue.

Okay, I have actually two questions.

If we're doing this theoretical part regarding first part of

the.

You don't use empirical data where I'm missing something.

So I was talking to you about this earlier.

And if you do the structured essay, it will depend

what I design.

I would be surprised if I just did theory, but

I haven't designed it.

And for the independent research you mentioned, finding supervisor doesn't

mean that the supervisor could be some third person that

is not you and Professor Ambrogio, or is choosing between

the two.

I think it's choosing between the two of us.

I think I don't know what you come up with

as a topic.

Like if you come up with something really sort of

a bit esoteric and there's someone in the department who's

better.

But I wouldn't be in this course probably if I

wasn't interested in this.

So I guess I'll be looking for something.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So?

So take it as a given for now at least.

It's it's one of those two.

You.

Yeah.

My way.

Would we know the topic for the structure of assignment

week nine?

And then you have to decide it by sometime in

January.

Remember, the date was their 26th.

Yes.

Pretty close to my wife's birthday, but not really.

Close to mine.

I'll be.

Well, you can have your birthday and then choose your

topic.

See if slightly older, slightly wiser you makes a different

choice.

Okay.

Okay.

What do we want to do now?

Okay.

So let's let's get into model.

Solution.

You did love Linearisation as part of the course.

The math course.

Okay.

So so these models, how long have they been around

for?

They've been sort of heavily used I guess sometime in

the 90s they started to appear more heavily used since

the early noughties.

And it's probably the case that you can you can

more easily solve these models now.

And I mean you at your stage of education.

That could be then.

It was it was hard even for experts to solve

these type of nonlinear models a long time ago.

It's easier now.

We have lots of computer programs and stuff that can

do.

The traditional way of taking these models is to take

the linear version of the model and approximate it with

a linear version.

Okay, so lovely.

Normalisations is that a good way to go?

Depends, right?

What do you do?

You write down typically Taylor series expansions around some steady

state.

But if what you're interested in is big shocks that

occur when you're far away from steady state, not a

good approximation.

If you're interested in the normal behaviour as it bubbles

around steady state, probably fine.

Okay.

Always bear in mind that if you linearise a model,

even if you do things which are relatively easy to

do now, which is, rather than do a linear approximation

around the steady state, you can do a second order

approximation.

You're still approximating around that steady state.

There will be occasions where you think, actually, the interesting

thing would be having this model behave when I'm a

long way from the steady state.

But that's not what we'll do.

So you think about a world no shocks, no inflation,

no growth, actually going to answer your question publicly now.

So the question that came at the break was about

why there are expectations in the utility function.

Like what in the in the utility term for the

consumer.

Like what's the uncertainty?

And the way I've written and I was alluding to

this at the end, but maybe I didn't state it

explicitly enough.

The only shock, the only aggregate shock that there is

that really drives things is productivity.

You could have others, you could put others in there,

and they would also add to the uncertainty.

But things like Calvo is not really an aggregate uncertainty.

In fact, we always know because there's a large number

of these firms, we always know that there's a fraction

of them in each part of the distribution.

So there's a stationary distribution across different old reset prices.

That's the joy of the law of large numbers.

So but so if we shut down A then there's

no shocks, no growth, nothing.

And we worry about large deviations.

Okay.

Just because I actually really have to finish this today.

So it'd be good to know I've posted the slides

for next week already.

See, I didn't think I spent as long on this,

but that's okay and okay.

We can come back and talk about this potentially later

in the course you sort of grind through.

And I alluded to this one earlier.

You get this recursive looking relation for the price level.

You get that the price level.

Now deviation of the price from steady state is a

function of the last log deviation of the price level

from steady state, with the new term being related to

today's optimal reset price in log deviation terms.

Okay.

So this all all of these assumptions that sounded like

they're convoluted, maybe not easily verifiable in the real world,

but these are the simplifications that get us everybody selling

the same reset price.

And then this sort of stationary distribution that we then

just have, it ebbs along over time.

As we go along, we end up with this, this,

this expression for the price level.

And the first equation I showed you on the slides

of this at the very start the middle of last

week, you get this term which relates inflation to the

change in that price level.

To think about what drives the reset price.

You get the change in.

That is a combination of an expectation of inflation and

a real marginal cost term.

So again, there are particular coefficients on these that relate

to the Calvo parameter.

But this is the kind of key driver equation of

inflation in the New Keynesian model.

What drives inflation today.

Well, two things.

One, real marginal costs.

What drives real marginal costs?

What's the shock?

What's the driving shock in this productivity?

There's going to be productivity shocks that are going to

send marginal costs up and down.

They were affected.

Why do they matter?

Well, remember, when you're optimally resetting your price, you're thinking.

I would like ideally in a flexible price world, to

set a fixed mark-up over my marginal cost.

So if my marginal cost is higher, my price should

be higher.

My marginal cost is lower.

My price should be lower.

Well, I've got a Calvo problem on my hands.

If I set it an optimal today and then I

think marginal costs are going to fall, then I'm going

to be in a world where everybody else who sets

their price is going to set low prices.

I'm going to have high prices and my demand is

going to drop.

I'm going to be mispricing.

That's why I also think about what happens, what everyone

is going to do with their prices.

So we end up in this world.

And I think to me at least all of this,

we spend probably 90 minutes now on these slides talking

about the ideas.

What's my big takeaway?

What's the bit that still gets me excited about this

and actually is key in a lot of my research.

The idea that one thing that drives inflation is expectations

of inflation.

If you're a modern central banker, this is key for

your life.

It's changed how we do things.

Ascension Banks.

This type of logic, this idea that if I can

convince everybody, okay, forget about fairies for a second, real

world, people are just out there thinking, I need to

set my price.

What's the optimal?

Well, I don't want to set it every minute, you

know, they don't want to set it every minute.

I don't want to set it every day.

I don't want to set it every week.

I want to set it every so often.

Well, if I can convince people that everybody else is

going to set their price 2% higher than last year,

then I'm not going to want to then that one

firm who comes along and is thinking, well, I go

for 10%.

No, why?

What happens if they set 10%?

Everyone else sets 2%, their relative price changes and they

lose demand.

So you want everybody out there strategically thinking, I don't

want to be far from 2%.

And what happens if everybody's out there?

I don't want to be far from 2%.

What's inflation by 2%?

You get this self-fulfilling world that like that.

Beautiful.

Beautiful.

Forget the narrative of how we get there.

The model narrative.

Yet it's a bit of affairs.

That is a really key insight.

You can control beliefs about inflation.

You can control inflation itself.

Remember this one minus p theta.

Sorry, where's my Greek character?

Come on.

It's got to be on that.

It's like we're late the day spent all weekend moving

house fees.

Thetas.

They're all looking the same to me.

You've got to be one minus theta.

Theta is my favourite parameter, actually.

By the way, just of the Greek letter parameter.

That's my favourite.

It also turns up the key attacking more modelling as

a key parameter.

So theta.

I shouldn't have gotten that wrong.

I apologise as they as one minus theta.

Is higher.

That's the that's the number.

That's the fraction of firms who can reset.

So as this one minus theta goes up theta goes

down.

We end up with this parameter getting higher and higher

being more like flexible.

You put a higher weight on the marginal cost term

in the price setting.

As we have a greater nominal rigidity.

Today's real marginal cost plays a lower and lower role.

It's more about what people will do with their prices.

That's the derivation.

You can all enjoy that in your own time.

The other equation I told you that was key for

this model was the dynamic is curve.

The dynamic curve is a log linearised Euler equation using

the fact that consumption equals output.

So you get a relationship in linear terms, because we

realised between the deviation of output from its steady state

level is related to its expectation of that and the

real interest rate.

Oh.

Okay.

And we also do the same for the natural rate

levels.

We we have this concept of the the natural level

of output that, that would have that would be selected

again, not constant, although it would be constant in a

world where it doesn't move and, and we can look

at how output moves relative to that.

And we call that the output gap.

Okay.

Yeah.

So this just rewrites everything in terms of output gaps.

This is the term that I get excited about in

the in the dynamic is curve.

Because again, I ignore all the story of the New

Keynesian model and how we got there.

If you just have been watching the world in the

last few months.

Year, year.

And a half, this I think is a helpful way.

Some people hate this.

By the way, there's a there's an active debate about

whether there's such a thing as a natural real rate,

in cetera.

But conceptually, to get I like this idea to think.

When you're a central bank and you're trying to control

inflation.

Having written everything in terms of input gaps.

You now have inflation?

Depends on expectations.

That excites me always.

But at moments like the last 18 months, you also

have to think about what you're going to have to

do to get inflation down after a big shock.

Well, one way to do it is to try and

adjust the output gap in the US.

A lot of people thought that a lot of the

inflation was demand driven, so they had a positive output

gap.

So this was this was driving this.

Now why do you want to fight it.

Because you don't want this to cause this to then

go up because then you get stuck with inflation.

We get persistent inflation.

So you start thinking like how do I get this

done?

Well, the answer is you have to have an increase

in the real rate relative to some natural level.

So that's what central banks have been trying to do.

Why is that an exciting term?

Because it's really hard to know what the real rate,

the equilibrium real rate is.

Like I say, some people don't even like it conceptually.

I do like it conceptually.

You don't have to like it.

Exactly.

Just because I do.

I like it and it's in the bottle.

So what do you do?

You're sitting there in Threadneedle Street, in the fed, in

DC, in the Bank of Japan, and you're thinking, what

is the right level of real interest rate that I

have to set?

So I'm going to drive output.

That will affect inflation.

But without doing something so bonkers that I accidentally cause

people to adjust their expectations for the future output gap

or whatever.

Oh, I do policy.

I also do communication.

That's what I.

Like.

So the question is, is it.

All your life?

We allow coughing in the class.

Okay.

Some other cool stuff, right?

You can actually show if you take those equations and

start solving them back into each other.

You can show that inflation in this model is all

about expectations for future output gaps.

Which we know are going to depend on real interest

rate gaps.

So now you can start to see some of the

different types of strategies that you might choose to employ

as a central bank.

You might say, okay, we're not going to have a

really high real interest rate gap.

We're going to have a slightly positive real into the

gap but maintained for a long time.

So we're going to have a negative output gap of

just a little bit for a long time.

Now in this world that's fine.

It's a linear model.

There's nothing like there's no non-linearity that kicks in if

you hammer.

If you have an interest rate goes to high, the

output gap goes negative, the economy collapses.

There's no runs on banks.

There's no financial collapses.

There's no X.

Now in real world, there probably are balancing these things.

In this model.

You get this forward looking behaviour.

So you can sort of choose a dynamic pattern.

It also gets you you can actually start to have

big effects on the economy today by signalling future behaviours.

So Ford guidance takes on big important properties in this

model.

So one thing.

This is the fourth lecture.

This is the fourth.

Is it?

So week four we finally get close to modern monetary

policy.

End of week four.

Let's not get carried away.

You know, in this model.

The nominal interest rate can play a role, but we

have nothing that that sets the nominal interest rate unless

we introduce some equation of a central bank.

And a standard kind of equation for a central bank

is an interest rate rule.

Some people call these Taylor rules.

It's not quite precise.

The Taylor rule was an estimated empirical relationship between nominal

interest rates and inflation gaps and output gaps.

This is a theoretically specified reduced form equation describing the

behaviour of a central bank.

In other words, this is a log linear version of

a monetary policy committee.

This is the FOMC in equation form.

Now it's actually of course not because central bankers don't

just set.

If you ever want to really trigger me, say the

Bank of Korea sets interest rates according to a Taylor

rule.

No central bank does that.

A Taylor rule might be a reasonable approximation to how

they set rates, but they did not go in there

and just go what?

Today's inflation gap.

What's the output gap?

Oh, interest rates have to be four.

It's not how they work the much more detailed and

difficult job.

And I have the utmost of respect for central bankers.

But we want to stick within our model and we

want to do it carefully but quickly.

This is a good way to do it.

And then you can adjust things like the parameters here,

and you can adjust those in such a way as

to make the central bank react more to inflation or

less to inflation, more to output gaps, less to hyper

gaps.

And then we can also have UT what's UT?

And I'm not talking about a university in Texas.

That's a perennial gag.

Works great in America, a little less well in Europe,

but it's okay.

I think.

We actually called it a monetary policy shock, sometimes called

a Romer.

Romer shock because Romer and Romer estimated those empirically.

But it's a monetary policy shock.

It is basically this is like a systematic reaction to

endogenous variables.

And it turns out you need some conditions on these

in order to ensure the system behaves well.

But then you can hit all these random variables.

This is like.

Jay Powell accidentally goes to the press conference and says

we're going to raise by 27 basis points.

Oh no, I meant 25.

But I said 27.

There's two basis points randomly in there.

That's what we're thinking.

Random variation.

Why is that good econometric.

It's good because it's not related to the endogenous variables

that we want to analyse in the model.

It's good because this provides the sort of stability of

the system.

And these are just the random variations.

So once I have this.

Now back to your question about uncertainty.

We have a new source of it.

Monetary policy has just become a source of uncertainty in

the model.

Okay.

That's the summary.

So as you can see it basically boils down to

three equations.

I.

Is the nominal part of the of the real interest,

the expectations for inflation to make the real estate there

in godliness.

Inflation and expectations of inflation and output gaps are indicting

us and we have shocks.

So now we're going to call these natural rate of

interest shocks.

But they're TFP shocks.

We've just we've just boiled the model down.

Shocks turn up in our.

That was earlier in the slides okay.

There's a whole bunch of stuff here that I'm not

going to have time to cover now, but you can

sort of work through it.

I said this earlier, we put in a shock, say

for you or for real rates that are themselves persistence

of this row is what gives us this persistence.

You can grind through this, but here's a picture of

the impulse responses.

And so this is the type of thing I drew

here.

And the question was do we get pump shapes.

No.

We get things that have the big effect now and

then they go back to steady state.

This is a monetary policy shock.

This is taken straight from George's book if anybody is

interested in the source of it.

But you get the same if you programmed it yourself.

Again, I haven't actually talked about money growth, but you

can add money growth into it.

And Jordie does that.

So you sort of that back end of the effect.

The real key ones are the nominal rate.

That's the shock.

Then the endogenous variables are aggregates and inflation and the

expectations of those which give us the real rate.

That's the actual shock.

He calls it VAT.

We called it UTI.

I will stop there and we'll come back.

So next week I will start on the slides that

I posted last yesterday, last night, and which are about

taking this type of model and then asking questions about

optimal monetary policy, like what's the best thing you can

do in these models?

And we're going to get into questions about commitment and

discretion and all sorts of things.

Until then, have a lovely week.

Oh, by the way, the last slide is just.

It's just telling you the stuff I already told you

about Smith and Vader's and all the bells and whistles.

Must remember to make sure I take all of my

belongings with me.

This time I left.

I left my iPad here.

What about your shoes?

Are you sure.

I didn't leave them here?

So?

So last time I have to run to the.

Airport for a flight.

And I got on the tube.

And as I was getting on the tube, it's like

one of these people is sufficiently to in to the

Apple ecosystem.

They got on the tube and my phone, my watch

buzzed to tell me my iPad was last seen here.

And I was like, yeah.

I remember taking it out and putting it on the

side and then looked in my bag.

It's not there.

And like, but my flight was at like 630 and

it was already like 430.

And I was like, I got to get to Heathrow.

It was here, they got it.

And shoes, they're in a box.

I know they're in a box.

I trust they're in the box.

Outside of that, I'm not willing to talk about it

yet.

I'm still to roll my eyes.

Call my dad.

He just said I didn't like to play yesterday.

It's just like a day.

About?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I.

Don't know if we can talk about it next week.

If you.

Want.

Just send me an email about.

Just have to be able answer and.

Lecture 5:

To be extending so many times.

Thank you guys.

Ciara.

Hope.

Feel free and I can give you this right away.

Sorry, I almost took it home.

Nice.

Not a good idea.

Why don't you just ask to move out?

We have a class starting here.

Now.

All.

Yeah.

I think.

Yeah I think.

You don't get.

Five days.

Yes.

Pretty.

I.

Okay.

Right.

Just.

I.

Given that space.

It's.

Great.

Okay, I will get started.

So I posted.

I don't know if you guys get emails when I

do this, but on the announcements on the discussion board,

do you get emails when that happens?

Yeah, apologies for that.

Afterwards, I sort of realised that I was making a

question much harder than it should have been because I

was.

So I'll tell you the background to it, which is

if you want and this is, it turns out, quite

useful if you start moving to the world where you

want to do New Keynesian models with a lot of

heterogeneity, you can actually sort of rather than doing them

in discrete time, you can do them in continuous time.

Because I've been thinking about that.

And then someone asked me a question.

I thought they were asking about that.

And I was like, well, that's going to be on.

But I just made a fairly, I think, straightforward question

very difficult in my own head.

And in doing so, I may have confused you.

So I put a little note up just to show

what I actually was talking about.

Well, what I should have been talking about as an

answer rather than what I was talking about, I was

I was almost going to send you the exact thing

I was reading that got me into this continuous time

Keynesian model world.

But then I thought that might be even more confusing

to all of you.

So I had to it.

And if you really want to, I can tell you

where it is.

Okay, so today what we're going to do this is

really still it has a different lecture title.

I even put it as a different topic.

But this is still the New Keynesian model okay.

So if you will L three stuff is about deriving

some of the key equations, but the real fun not

to call it fun.

The real usefulness of the New Keynesian model is to

think about, well, how does monetary policy affect what should

monetary policy do?

What's the best thing it could do?

And you know.

The neat thing about these models, and by these models

I mean kind of modern macro approaches to these models,

which is massively attacked by and in some cases rightly

attacked for being sort of spuriously accurate or overly simplifying

or imposing preferences on a single collection of people who

are representative households.

But the neat thing about that is you can actually

do welfare analysis with these models, so you can actually

ask questions like if the central bank behave this way,

what would happen if the central bank behaved this way?

What would happen?

And it's what would happen in terms of the welfare

of the people in the model.

So that's sort of when we start thinking about optimal

policies, that's usually what we're thinking about.

What is the best policy we could do within this

model.

And that's what all of today is going to be.

I think there's like 38 material slides and there's five

kind of key things across those slides.

So that's that's what I'm going to try and get

done today.

And.

Yeah, but before I do that, any sort of big

picture questions that people have that they want to get

off their chest before before I dive into this.

I'm not waiting for you.

Just if it feels awkward that you opened the door

and it was totally silent.

No.

Okay, so let's go.

And so I've already sort of told you some of

the bits.

Let me.

Let me tell you two.

One thing I already told you and one thing which

again I've said, this is a very first class.

I said it when we first came to the New

Keynesian Phillips curve, and I'll actually sort of talk about

it again here.

But, you know, when we think about efficiency in this

model and this one I talked about quite a bit

last time, we're going to see formally that when you

start talking about optimal, like one of the distortions in

this model is going to be related to differences in

relative prices.

And one of the distortions is going to be related

to the monopolistic power that we give to we give

to the firm.

Monetary policy can do something about the former, but nothing

about the latter.

So, you know, if we think there's a deadweight loss

associated just with the existence of monopolistic competitive firms, we're

going to have to think of a different mechanism to

deal with that inefficiency for a lot.

It's not it's not a requirement.

But for a lot of the literature, when you start

trying to analyse the effects of monetary policy, we're going

to assume that the other, the other inefficiency is dealt

with in a sort of optimal way.

Again, you don't have to do that.

There will be times when you can sort of and

I'll show you a little bit of it today, but

it does make the analysis a lot easier if you

if you don't have the sort of welfare losses that

come from being away from the optimal level of production,

the monopolistic distortion, that's one thing I've said before the

other, which is, I think one of the key bits

and super interesting bits for policy that comes out of

this model and this type of exercise is this distinction

between policy that's set under a commitment regime versus under

a discretion, regime discretion.

And I'm going to give myself all of the power

here.

I'm going to be the central bank.

Discretion is the world where I every period re optimise

my policy.

And since that's what I'm going to do, I don't

have to try and convince you directly of anything.

You're going to know all of my incentives.

You're going to know all of how I behave.

And what we're going to find is that, you know,

I'll behave in the best possible way I will, but

I'll just take your expectations of what I'm going to

do in the future as given, because essentially, it's going

to assume I can't credibly come to you and say,

next week I'm going to do blah.

Okay, I could say whatever I wanted, but you wouldn't

believe me because you know that next week I'm going

to re optimise.

And whatever I said last week is no longer something

I care about in this model.

There are gains to being able to commit.

I'm just going to highlight these now and hope a

pen works.

This one's been left out.

Is that because it's broken or because it works?

Broken.

Excellent use of time.

It's so links being changed.

To get something that works.

Hey.

Yeah, you can write it.

And as you write versions of the New Keynesian model

down, you know, with different shocks.

And I'll show you some versions today or with more

and more bells and whistles, you get something that has

inflation today is a function of expected inflation plus whatever

other bells and whistles you want.

I think the version we saw last time just had

something related to the output gap.

A version we'll see later today has the output gap,

plus what we're going to call a cost push shock.

But you can write down more and more complicated versions

and add more and more things.

This part is all I care about for this particular

demonstration.

That is to say, if you have an equation like

this, let's say there's something.

Oh, yeah?

Yeah.

Let's say there's something.

It's going to be our cost per shock.

If we have something this cost push up that drives

up inflation today.

The benefit of commitment.

Credible commitment can be seen almost through simple arithmetic.

If there's something that pushes this up.

But I can tell you today that I will behave

in a particular way in the future such that this

will come down.

The Up isn't as much right.

You can offset the up today by committing to lower

inflation tomorrow.

And that means that this thing, rather than, let's say

this is a double up and you can commit to

down, you have a double up and a down.

They cancel.

You end up with a bit of inflation today.

It's exactly because this model is this forward looking behaviour

model with expectations mattering that actually commitment if you can

do it.

Can help you as a policy maker that the versions

we're going to look at, the versions that are traditionally

looked at, are a world of commitment, which is one

where I can't remember.

This is an expression used in lots of movies, but

I don't know exactly which one I'm remembering it from.

But my word is my bond.

What I say you can take as an absolute institutional

cast iron guarantee of how I will behave in the

future.

Once we start thinking about that, you know, we get

into funny worlds because, you know, today it might be

optimal to say I will commit to lower inflation tomorrow.

Because that makes inflation less bad today.

But when I get to tomorrow, I might no longer

want to do that.

The issue called time inconsistency.

So it's optimal today for me to have this path.

But once I get to tomorrow, that path is no

longer optimal.

So commitment is really a bit of an extreme.

It's a world where I will commit and that's me

for life, actually.

We often whatever went before we ignore it.

Now this is it and I only re optimise once.

Discretion is the other extreme.

I re optimised every single period.

And the fun thing about this is you learn a

bit, you learn while you're trying to get closer to

commitment.

But you wouldn't know policymaker would actually want to completely

tie their hands in reality.

They no matter what happens tomorrow, I will do this.

So in reality, you get to the world, which which

you don't model here, but which is the world I

enjoy, which is thinking about how you can convince people

that this is how you will react without fully committing

to it, and being in such a way that if

you were to deviate, there's no like complete loss of

credibility and collapse in how people react to the central

bank.

So I actually think that, you know, all this stuff

that I do my work on, which is about communication

and expectation formation, it's really operating probably somewhere between these

two.

You're trying to commit to a framework, to a way

of thinking, to how you communicate, to what you'll do,

but you don't want to have a cast iron rule

that everyone believes you will follow perfectly.

That's that's a space where I think there's lots of

work to be done.

Anyway.

That's what we'll get to by the end of today.

Okay, so a natural place, actually.

You can't.

I'm not going to fiddle with this.

I tried to turn this screen on, and I hit

the screen the buttons many times and nothing happened.

But I'm really worried if I hit them too many

times, this one will stop.

And I decided, I concluded, that I'm sorry to you

people on this side of the room, but having at

least one active presentation is better than the marginal gain

from adding a second.

That was my first best, second best world trade off.

First best is where we usually start.

What would happen if, rather than a bunch of individual

households and firms and everyone opt in, making their optimal

choices within the model, what would happen if somebody.

You don't have to be religious for this next part,

but some kind of economic god.

The central planner could sit looking down on the world

and say, I know all of the constraints, I know

all of the welfare.

How can I optimise what actually happens?

Well, you can do that.

This is made.

This particular calculation is made a lot easier by the

fact that the version of the model we have looked

at does not have capital.

In fact, it doesn't have any sort of proper fundamental

state variables.

So you can just do a period by period ask

what is the optimal thing to do?

Well, we know we have the utility function.

We know there are a bunch of resource constraints.

And then the social planner can just move the consumption

of this person around across each entity.

Each firm have them operating at some level of production

and see what happens.

Well, we sort of already did this.

We did this without the math.

We did this logically.

We covered it last week when we talked about this.

Each one of you as firms are atomistic.

You're basically the exact same apart from your labels.

But those labels impart you this power, but also mean

that as a consumer, I benefit from spreading my consumption

across each of your things because you're all exactly the

same.

And the only shock in this world at present is

aggregate so affects all of you.

There is actually no reason, if I could, to allocate

my consumption differentially across.

So remember we don't have to go through a market

system here.

So I, as the social planner, can just say we

will take this amount from you.

This dimension, this dimension, you this dimension, you just et-cetera.

Okay.

Now we know what that's going to look like.

It's going to look like a world where consumption, whatever

my aggregate amount of consumption, which will be determined by

all these real things like productivity and the total amount

of labour in the system, whatever that is, I'm just

going to spread it equally across all of the atomistic

firms.

That's what we discussed last week.

And that's what you find here if you grind through

all of the maths.

The first best is an outcome which requires that every

atomistic firm faces the same demand, or put it in

a more straightforward way.

The consumer takes an equal amount from each of the

atomistic firms for their utility function.

Okay, so once you do that.

You can work out.

How much that is.

I want you to work out how much it is

knowing that C has to equal y.

You can actually derive an expression for the natural rate

of output.

Okay, now I am going to sit.

I found a black pen that works.

I'm going to use it because we are going to

want to come back to this a little bit later.

That is not the black pen that works.

This is the one that works.

This must be protected.

Cherished?

Is there a bin anywhere?

You see a bin?

Probably been removed so people don't get rid of rubbish.

I see what people do is they just throw them

here.

There's about 100.

This whole I'm going to check them in the break,

which is the one that works the block.

Okay.

So.

One over one plus eight to the power of lots

of stuff, but 80 to the power of lots of

stuff over lots of stuff.

Trust me, the lots of stuff is to say.

I'm just going to leave that there so that we

can refer back to it later.

Okay, so so we end up in that world and

then we want to ask the question, well.

Can monetary policy achieve the first best allocation.

This is a really classic question in any kind of

business cycle analysis right.

We usually solve the models for what's called a decentralised

or a market based system, where you have firms hiring

labour and consumers making choices and everyone.

And then the question is, well, could someone just come

along and allocate the goods in the optimal way?

And are they the same.

So this is in the in.

So if you do an RBC model you find that

in that world the decentralised and the centralised are the

same.

So in a world without frictions you end up in

the optimal world.

First welfare theorem in applied in a macro model.

I've already sort of told you this.

There's a bunch of slides going through it.

We're going to find that in this model.

In this model.

Just.

There's nothing magical.

Unless policy takes a particular form.

That would get us to the first bet.

So if you just rotate the general world with a

general monetary policy and a general fiscal policy, there's nothing

that constrains that.

That decentralised world looks like the first best.

So you have to do a bit of work.

So remember there are two distortions in this model.

One is the distortion related to relative price differences and

the other is the distortion related to monopolistic power.

Well, so the first thing.

Is, we know that the central bank, through its monetary

policy, can influence prices.

And we know that relative prices determine relative allocations.

So if I want every in the decentralised world, if

I want each of you to face the same demand,

I need each of you to have the same prices.

And if you all have the same prices, the relative

prices are one.

And so we're going to just allocate our demand equally

across all of you.

So that's what it has to do.

But we still have the we still have the friction.

We still have Calvo going on.

So I did a really kind of strict world here.

I need it to be.

I'm sorry.

You start here.

So you're going to be my target.

I need it so that when you are faced with

a chance to change your price, you choose a reset

price that equals the reset price that he chose last

time, that she chose the time before that, that he

chose the time before that, and so on.

So that even though the Calvin fairy's coming around every

time, every body, every firm is choosing a p star,

the reset price that equals the same reset price is

chosen before.

And if we do that, even though you haven't got

to reset your prices for 100 years, and now you

get to reset your prices, you're going to choose the

same price that she chose 100 years ago.

And so even though her price has been sticky for

a long time and hers has just been is equivalent

to flexible price this period, we never generate any relative

price distortions.

If you can do that, no relative price distortions.

The allocation of well see which is the demand c

t over capital C t is going to be equal

across everyone, and then everybody is going to produce at

the same levels as well.

So that's really what monetary policy is going to have

to do.

So we have to find a policy that generates that

type of price setting behaviour.

If we do that, we go some of the way

to achieving the first best okay.

Now.

So let's imagine we do it in a way that

does achieve this, so that the reset prices get equalised.

We commit to zero inflation.

We get zero distortion.

We still have monopolistic power to deal with.

So whatever that reset price is, it has to be

consistent with your profit maximisation, which is this mark-up over

marginal cost.

Until.

If you rewrite this, you get this expression for marginal

cost.

You plug it back in and you get this as

the natural level of output.

Now, this is why I left this up here.

What's the difference?

Well, there's a one plus ETA to the power of

a bunch of stuff.

They're the same stuff.

And there's an A to the power of even more

stuff.

The difference is.

We have this monopolistic competition elasticity of demand related term

in there, which essentially relates to the mark-up.

So although we can eliminate the distortion from relative prices,

we cannot adjust the level of output up to the

optimal level with monetary policy alone.

Okay.

So instead we're going to have to think of a

way to try and get around.

How can you get around monopolistic.

Power the distortion of two low output under monopolistic power.

Micro 101.

Okay.

Okay.

That's it.

Even better answer than the one I was looking for.

And I set myself up for that.

So well done for kicking the open goal, right?

If we had in this model a competition authority who

could eliminate monopolistic competition, essentially we could make it so

that your labels don't matter.

We drive epsilon to infinity so that everything's exactly substitutable,

and then it goes away.

Fine.

You win.

One nil.

Okay.

Absent that taking the excellent is given.

So you have monopolistic power.

What could we do?

He's going for two now.

Yeah.

I would try to break up monopolies.

Now, that's still that's a different version of his answer.

You're all going for industrial organisation answers.

Is that an option?

Taxing.

Yet go further.

So to drive the relative prices.

You're going in the wrong direction.

They're producing too little.

So what do you want to do?

Subsidising.

Yes.

So if you can incentivise them to produce more and

you design that subsidy in the right way.

So the key thing is what we want to do

is effect the marginal condition of production of the firm,

but not introduce distortions elsewhere.

So we're going to do sort of a marginal subsidy

to the more that you all produce, the more subsidy

you're going to get.

And I'm going to have to fund that somehow, because

you have to be entirely in this with the magic,

the, the resources.

So we're going to have to fund that in a

non distortive way.

So we're going to do that with a lump sum

tax on households.

So again, this is a very specific fiscal policy that

we're now thinking about.

And so here's one version of it which is a

wage bill subsidy.

So now.

Who knows what this Greek symbol is?

I know you're Greek.

It's sigma, it's sigma.

It's var sigma in LaTeX.

Why do we use that?

Because it's an S and sigma was taken up elsewhere

in the model okay.

So var sigma.

So if you think about this this is the subsidy.

So we now give a subsidy based on the amount

of labour they employ which what it does is it

just reduces their costs.

So if they spend if they have this much labour

used, this is the this is the productivity, this is

the amount of their wage bill.

So w times that amount they have n times w.

And now we give them a chunk of money that

we fund through a lump sum transfer.

Then we change their marginal cost.

Now we're going to have to still choose this var

sigma thing, this sigma the subsidy to be the right

level.

But we're now going to put that into the optimisation

of the firm.

It comes in at the real marginal cost term that

we had before.

And then if you set it related to the epsilon.

So this is why I said one nil to you

guys for recognising that if you could move the elasticity

you could change this around.

But for a fixed epsilon, if you set this subsidy

inversely related to that, then you get put it all

back through resolve.

You get that the epsilons and the subsidies end up

cancelling, and we end up in a world that looks

just like the first best.

Okay.

Now, at some level, if you're interested in monetary policy,

this is secondary.

This is not monetary policy.

This is a form of fiscal policy.

Or the other solution was a form of industrial policy

or regulatory policy.

Competition policy.

But it does.

It does matter a bit.

It does matter a bit in the sense that we've

written our welfare functions as quadratic.

So the losses associated will depend on how far, say,

output is from an optimal rate.

So if you're trying to get it to the actual

first best, there's a loss from the monopoly.

And then how you adjust monetary policy.

Again if it's small deviation it doesn't matter the big

deviation.

You actually end up in a world where you might

do different things with monetary policy.

So this is when you start getting into discussions like

what first best in the second best world and all

of these things.

We are mostly going to be turning this off.

So we will say there is some wonderful fiscal authority

who will implement the sort of level adjustment to output,

and then we'll let monetary policy focus on the thing

it can affect, which is relative prices.

The question.

But are you really?

In some cities because that.

So I was trying to say because this is monopolistic

market which is going to have bias and the competitive

market equilibrium.

So in this case, we have subsidies or taxes that

will bring us closer to the buy side or the

competitive market equilibrium level of output.

And the key thing to achieving that is the fact

that you affect the marginal production decision of the firm.

So it's a marginal subsidy.

But you you fund it in a lump sum way

so you don't affect other marginal conditions in the model.

So every household just has to pay an amount of

resources every year to pay whatever is one over epsilon

times the total wage bill.

It'll be deducted from the household budget constraint where they

go to the dividend.

Yes, there's a lot of stuff.

They would be, it would be.

There was a term in the household budget constraint that

was transfers or taxes.

It would be part of that.

So long as they're lump sum, they don't affect the

Euler equations because, you know, a lump sum tax is

one of those things where it doesn't matter if you

eat a lot or a little, or you earn a

lot or a little, you just pay it.

In reality, deeply unpopular in models, deeply important for turning

off channels you don't want to think of.

Talk a bit more about the league where the lump

sum part.

So last time we were seeing the firms that produce

more differentiated food, there is a higher demand for their

goods.

And then they would be incentivised to hire more labour

or to drive down the marginal product of labour, making

them in a way that worse off.

So in this way, what do we actually do?

We are giving subsidies.

Well, in the end, in this world that I'm exploring

here, we're going to give subsidies to everyone.

Because remember, monetary policy is going to eliminate the price

distortions.

So you're all producing the same.

Now all of you are faced with the same incentive.

You are you are going to want to mark up

over your marginal cost.

And there's some optimal condition for that.

That optimal condition is one where you restrict supply.

Now I'm going to adjust your marginal costs in such

a way that you think, well, my effective marginal cost

is is is different.

So I'll produce more.

I'll still have the same optimal condition.

It's just with the subsidy adjusted marginal cost.

And I choose that subsidy in exactly a way.

So that where I get You Tube is where I'd

like you to be if you didn't have monopoly power.

So if I follow up so the way subsidy will

work, it won't push us the same way towards the

optimal marginal cost.

So further away I am the subsidy will have more

effect on me, or this.

Is going to be proportional to your total wage bill.

Yes.

So if we were in a world where there were

relative price distortions, the firms that had higher wage bills

would get more subsidy.

But in this world, it doesn't matter because the monetary

policy is going to eliminate that.

But yeah, it's got to be a proportional tax subsidy

based system and lump sum tax, that sort of key.

Okay, all of that is to say that this combination

of monetary and fiscal policy can, despite the presence of

the nominal rigidities and despite the the monopolistic power, you

can actually achieve first best with the right policies.

That's the kind of key takeaway from this.

Well, you can then start to think about is, well,

what does it mean?

I sort of I glossed over this.

I said implement monetary policy in a way such that

the optimal reset price is the same.

Always.

Now we have to think about what does that monetary

policy look like.

And.

Well, whatever it is, and we're going to have to

figure out how we achieve this.

But whatever it is, it's got to generate no inflation.

If you think about the the nature of the world

that we're living in, in this model world.

Everything's great while you all have the same reset price.

But imagine they appointed a stupid central bank governor.

And just for one period, they kind of messed up

and they didn't achieve zero inflation.

And it was the period where you get to change

your price.

So your reset price is now different to everybody else's.

Is that just a one period screw up in this

world from first best?

Yeah, we still have the fiscal geniuses who are offsetting

the distortion.

Is it a one period screw up?

No, because we will carry relative price distortions for a

long time.

Technically until infinite time, because she is not just she

she is a group of people who get the power

in this period.

Now, some of them will get the Calvo period power

next period, and they'll choose whatever the optimal reset price

is.

Then some of them will still have their same price

they chose today, in 20 years time, in 40 years

time, in 50 years time.

And so long as there are any differential prices in

the system, we have distortions and demand will be not

equally allocated across everyone and we will be away from

first best in spite of the great fiscal cuts.

So we're in a really kind of strict, tough world

here, but we're also in a world of full information,

and we don't assume there are idiot central bankers.

So, you know, maybe another interesting area for research is

what happens when there are idiot central bankers or humans,

as we call them.

Okay.

So what what does the world look like?

Well, this is a world that's a it's a term

that comes through, particularly in, in this basic form of

the New Keynesian model.

We'll see a world where we violate this a little

bit later.

But in a world where the fundamental shocks are either

demand shocks or supply shocks, we've got supply shops.

But you could add demand shots in here as well.

You achieve something.

This model admits what's called divine coincidence.

That is, the optimal thing to do is to have

no I put God, I no inflation and achieving no

output gap achieves no inflation.

And so you're always in this world of output.

It doesn't mean that GDP doesn't.

Move around.

Why?

Because GDP will move around with shocks that move the

natural rate.

But we get to a world where this is what

we're going to implement.

We're going to implement no output gap.

We're always going to move to allow output, to move

with the with the natural rate.

That will ensure there's no inflation.

In other words, we're going to track the real interest

rate as it moves.

So A is going to move the natural rate of

interest.

But we'll move the interest rate with that and thereby

keep the output gap exactly at zero.

So if again it's a world where we can measure

all of this perfectly, it's not got any of the

true difficulties that these people I inadvertently called idiots a

second ago have, which is, if you're a true central

banker today in the world, you might be trying to

do this, but you're trying to assess today's output gap

based on estimates of demand that are at least three

months old, subject to massive revision measures of inflation that

are themselves subject to noise.

And all the while, every bit of information is out

of date.

But even what you're getting are kind of the levels

of output.

Measuring what is the real natural level of output is

even harder.

So you sit there trying to figure out what the

output gap is, but it's hard.

Is that a plausible assumption that leads to the incidence,

that you focus your policy on price stability, and you

get output gap stability.

The key that we have and I'm going to change

this a little bit later, for whatever reason this screen

doesn't go down far enough.

But if you look at them online there's a last

section called cost push shocks.

Basically in this world that if not, okay, sorry, I

was about to be I was going to be too

generous to your question.

Hey, at the basic fundamental model that we've written down

so far, we get divine coincidences because there's no real

trade off.

You know, we get output gaps are related to inflation.

And so if we keep one under control, the other's

under control.

And if we do it in a way where, sorry,

I should have put it in here, I was trying

to show how it could be more general, plus something

related to did we call it no x?

T is marginal cost here.

Sometimes it's called x, t y hat, t or whatever

the little y t the output gap term a cap

in front of it.

In the notes you get the right coefficient.

That's a kind of fundamental property of this model.

Because of that, you know, these things are directly related.

So if you control this it helps control this.

And if you do it at a time where this

expectation is zero and that's all the equation there is,

is that a fundamental property of the model.

Or if there's some magic trick it's not really a

magic trick.

It's a fundamental property of the model we've written down.

But later on we'll add a new shock.

Now this is going to change the world.

This is going to lead us to a world where

achieving divine coincidence is basically impossible.

And we're going to then have to think about it.

We'll go there.

And then there.

You have your question.

No, my hand just sort of looking like looking like

you've got bored of waiting with your hand up.

So having an output.

Gap will not deliver market.

Oh no.

I perhaps would influence the labour market, but it's just

that if we can eliminate the output gap, we also

eliminate the price distortions and then we all end up

in the right place.

So the question I think, is that more important is

how do we identify or how the key thing is

in the model.

Natural level of output is going to go up and

down with productivity shocks.

What we want to do is have actual output.

Track that.

Now an output gap is if this goes up and

we don't go with it, or if this goes down

and we don't go with it, because once we get

the output gap, it starts generating inflation.

And if we generate inflation it's going to cause relative

price distortions.

And then the nominal rigidities of calver are going to

cause this to be with us for a long time.

But the hard part is and okay, so now I

very occasionally step away from this and think about the

real world, but what have we seen in the real

world?

And you see this debate a lot, this idea that,

oh, central banks shouldn't raise interest rates, because what we're

actually seeing is inflation that's caused by supply disruptions either

related to oil and gas markets or post-Covid supply constraints.

This is a world where the output gap has gone

like this.

We have a positive output gap.

Now what?

Usually there's a normal way that people think of it.

This is oh, the output gap comes because demand went

up.

We chose to have a party.

We chose to have a party.

And so it's only right for the central bank to

start taking the punchbowl away from the party.

And we'll get we'll get demand that's too high back

to a reasonable level.

There's nothing in this model, certainly.

So you'd have to think hard about a model where

you get something different, where we have a positive output

gap.

But it's occurred because supply has dropped.

We can't produce as much anymore.

We get a positive aggregate and we get inflation.

If you think the diagnosis to a positive demand driven

output gap is to raise interest rates, to get these

things back in line, because you think fundamentally the act

the aggregate driver is output gaps causing inflation, which they

are in this model.

And people dispute this.

But if that's the world then you still want to

raise interest rates.

Now the hard part in reality is how do you

know how much of the output gap is because supply

has fallen or demand has gone up?

Or do we think that output has fallen, supply hasn't

changed and then we should lower rates.

But these are the difficult jobs of central bankers.

Actually, the hardest thing a central banker does is they

try to figure out what all these variables actually are.

And in our model we don't have to do that.

We have them perfectly.

There was another question with regards to pricing.

He said ideal world, there would be no relative price

difference.

Yep.

And I just wanted to clarify it as in the

previous model.

This, firms also choose set prices, knowing that there might

they might not be changed for a while, but here

they set at the same because inflation is either or.

Is this they do the same because not only like

so again this is what I said.

The monetary policy has to be known by everyone.

So we come back to you when you are setting

your price, you know that everybody else has previously set

their price at this magical P star level, right?

There's some p star, no time subscript because everybody for

all time has always used it.

And now when she's thinking about setting her price, she's

doing the exact same stuff we did before thinking about

what will happen, real marginal costs in the future, thinking

about what would happen, relative prices, how over time, how

she'll be stuck with this price for what could be

one period.

It could be 100, it could be a thousand.

She's doing all of that.

But because in this world, she now knows that monetary

policy will be used to exactly eradicate this.

And everybody expects this to be zero because that's what

they're trying to do.

So that this would be zero.

Her optimal is to again choose that.

So it's a world where we've created a policy that

makes it so that she believes that p star is

the optimal thing to do, even though she may be

stuck with it for five, ten, 100 years.

But again, stupid central banker comes along.

Screws things up or everyone doesn't believe me.

Then we're in some trouble.

But that doesn't happen in this model because we're not

modelling stupid central bankers and people with lack of information.

Just to confirm if suddenly the expectation of future inflation

is 1%.

There would be there would be distortions and we'd be

away from first best.

Thank you.

Sorry, professor.

This might be, like, more related to the real world

rather than the strict model.

But assuming there's a cost, push shocks.

So there's none at the moment.

Yes.

Yeah, fine.

By assuming that the cost push drops, the natural rate

of output down, then cost per.

Shock doesn't push the natural rate of output down.

Cost per shot just directly affects inflation.

So would it be a productivity shock?

No.

Massively misunderstood fact.

The only shocks we have so far are productivity shocks.

So there's little why.

Variable is a function of productivity shocks.

And if we built them in you could have like

delta demand shocks kind of running out of Greek symbols

B using the yen shortly.

Did I tell you guys I used a yen in

my paper.

Could be back okay.

Right.

So the output gap is a function of supply and

demand.

So anything you think of as supply and demand shocks

are going to affect this output gap term.

And they're also going to affect the natural level of

output.

A cost per shock is different.

It's something that affects inflation.

Now of course things that affect inflation will affect output

will affect other things.

But it's not this is not a productivity shock.

You should think about this as like a like an

oil shock is a better description.

Right.

There's something I'm I'm Ireland, I produce no oil even

that's becoming hard because countries that don't produce oil like

Ireland have other great natural resources like rain and wind.

So we produce energy that way.

So let's pretend we just.

We just rely on the world for giving us energy.

And if energy prices go up, that just hits us

and our inflation just has to go up.

And then you can map its effect to the economy.

That's going to give us a genuine trade off.

But anything that operates through the output gap is admissible

with the simple version of the model.

But again, so the objective is to keep the output

gap at zero.

My question was that once there is a like a

positive output gap where actual output exceeds the natural rate

as a result of a productivity shock, and there's still

two options.

Like one is to raise interest rates to reduce the

output gap to zero.

And the second one is to enact fiscal policy to

reduce the mark-up.

Okay.

But okay.

So.

The link between fiscal policy and mark-ups is not one

we're going to consider here, okay.

There are all sorts of optimal competition policies that you

may want to think about, but that's not what we're

going to think about here.

So the question is going to be if we're asking

about monetary policy, monetary policy cannot affect the natural rate

of output.

It's turned up on about nine slides so far, with

natural levels of output that do not depend on anything

but things like a okay, so there is only one

option output gaps if you want to control them.

Monetary policy in this world operates through the demand side

of the economy.

You shift nominal sides and then you shift the interest

rate.

You affect demands which affect the output gap through the

overall wide.

That's where we are.

Okay, good.

So that's the world.

I've been gone long enough.

And if you if you sort of grind through this

now again, we don't have any of these problems.

We can identify this.

We see all the shots perfectly.

We react.

There's no time lags.

There's nothing that distorts this.

So we can perfectly implement this.

Work your way through.

What do you get?

I already said this.

You want to use the nominal rate to track the

real rate.

And remember, because everybody knows this is what I'm doing

and because I'm so successful at doing it.

And you know what?

This is what I'll be doing.

And you expect zero inflation.

The nominal rate is the real rate.

So what you're really doing is setting the real the

real policy rate equal to the real natural rate always.

And everybody acts within the period so that the natural

natural level of output and the level of output are

equal.

The output gap is zero or the ratio is one.

And then we end up in a world where we

get no inflation.

So you achieve what you set out to achieve.

Is that a hand or a stretch.

Right.

No that's fine.

Okay, fine.

So.

In this world.

You want to ask, what are the costs of inflation?

Imagine you're implementing this and we do have this particular

bad central banker who does something different.

Well.

This is just.

This takes the aggregate utility.

We know the aggregate production function can be written as

a function of price distortions.

We showed that last week.

And if you take that and sort of plug it

into this aggregate, you can solve for overall utility as

a function of y and productivity and the price distortion

term.

You plug in for what the natural rate of output

definition is.

You rewrite this utility as a function of price distortions

and output gaps.

Now it's an ugly expression.

I'm not denying this.

It's not, even though it's just big, complicated.

But it tells us something that is useful.

And actually, given the long discussion we just had, should

be kind of obvious.

What causes utility to vary?

If we don't implement this best policy, well, there's going

to be two things.

One is if I generate price distortions, we know relative

price distortions are bad because suddenly you have got to

lower price.

We're buying too much from you and not enough from

everyone else.

And we end up in a world where you don't

quite get as high a utility as possible, which requires

us to spread our consumption.

The other, and this is why I wanted to go

back to the question about the effect on the labour

market.

We know that output gaps and distortions also affect the

allocation of labour.

We saw that yes, yesterday, last week.

And so the output gap term also matters in here.

Okay.

So a deviation is going to have its effect.

Again very obviously you've given as much as we said

the ideal policy sets the output gap to zero.

And price distortions to zero.

If you don't do that both of them can generate

welfare effects.

So we plugged those in.

Okay, I actually I did it earlier.

I wrote all I sort of derived these earlier.

You should have a go at it.

But you can you can sort of derive an equation

of the dynamics of these price distortions and all of

this maths.

What it's really doing is getting you to realise what

I explained in words.

And I think it's quite obvious when you think about

it, is that if you deviate, these distortions don't just

disappear when you start deviating.

Calvo nominal rigidity is such that there are dynamics in

price distortions.

Which will interact with any inflation distortions.

So even if.

You set inflation back to zero.

Remember we had we had a one off deviation and

we generated this away from one.

Even if we go back to inflation from that point

on being zero we're going to have these dynamics that

play out over time.

And that's all that this equation is saying.

It's just giving you that logic.

Her price is out of kilter.

For one period you're with her now.

Yours might be eight for three.

You're with her when you reset.

Yours is eight for ten.

So they just sort of eke away.

Now, eventually they fade.

Or eventually there's just like that one really unlucky firm

who hasn't got to reset their price for 100 years.

They're the only one.

Everybody else has the same reset price, and they're just

this lone person entity out there and it becomes sort

of zero, essentially the effect.

But it fades only over time.

Okay.

Okay.

So.

You know, we have this utility function.

Well, we're not really interested in utility.

We're interested in deviation of utility from some steady state

level.

And so.

You approximate that without a first order, not a pure

linear approximation, but a second order approximation around the the

sort of optimal level.

Maybe it's the next slide that I want.

I'm sure.

Yeah.

Is that lot?

Yeah.

So this is assuming that we have the fiscal policy

in place.

In three slides time we get rid of that assumption.

Right.

So so this is assuming that we're at the sort

of optimal level.

Normally the policies in place.

Now we're going to deviate from that.

And we make these sort of approximations.

Again a lot of maths.

But what we're interested in is thinking about this, this

delta t, which is the sort of deviation effect of

through the relative price distortions.

And this is capturing the effect through the output gap

okay.

Again, I sort of explained all of this.

You can see how if you were to make a

mistake on inflation, you generate the distortion, the price distortion.

Now, in this model, the mistake on inflation will also

be associated with an output gap.

So there's kind of an immediate effect of the output

gap and inflation losses.

So if you plug this back up here you're going

to have an inflation squared term an output gap squared

term.

But you're also going to have this effect of the

lag of these things.

And this is capturing the fact that even though we

only deviate for one period so y and t a

pi t affect us this period if they were to

magically go away next period, which they won't, of course,

because they're endogenous to the relative price distortion.

But even if they did, you'd be carrying this delta

t minus one term, and that would fade at a

rate related to.

What's theta?

Call them.

So how persistent is this going to be?

Well, it's going to depend.

What fraction of firms are constrained from resetting their prices?

If Kelvin is 0.9 at this, theta is 0.999, so

that most firms are stuck with their prices.

This effect is going to last a long time.

If it's 0.0001, it's going to fade very quickly to

insignificance.

That's all they say.

And then we ask the question, okay, what is the

effect on lifetime deviations of utility from pursuing policies that

are not the optimal?

Yeah.

Question.

So here I'm a bit confused with this.

Essentially the rate of there.

Which one that when we say I don't really connect

how it is, the rate at which firms are changing

their price is connected to the how long the effect

of this deviation from the commitment will last.

Okay.

Let me give you an example.

We come along, we're setting the optimal price back here.

You'll never forget this lecture.

You'll you'll also never sit here again.

But some days I switched to this side.

So you just can't be certain.

Some days I took the people in front of you.

So maybe I'll do like.

From now on, I'll record a random number generator which

seat I'm going to take as my key one.

Keep it exciting anyway.

And so I've been selling the optimal everyone.

When they got to reset their price, they just set

their price equal to the optimal reset price.

It was the same thing.

Always.

Forever.

Fine.

No relative price distortions.

Now I come along and I generate some inflation.

And because of that and because of the pickup, it

changes the optimal reset price by an amount.

Okay everybody, she is representing the group of people who

the carbon fairy has struck.

Everybody now chooses a different reset price.

In doing so it creates a price distortion.

All of you, apart from her and her colleagues, they

all have you all at the same price except for

her, which is a bit different, but that creates a

relative price distortion.

Okay, now how long does that relative price distortion stay

in the system?

Well, next period we go back to a world where

I'm back to being a good central banker, and P

star is the optimal reset price again.

So the next period she gets to reset her price,

she chooses p star.

She had p star.

She chooses p star again on their price distortions in

the economy.

Not from her.

They're still from her.

How long do they live in the system?

Well, actually, some of the people who set the different

price are in her group now because some of them,

even though they got to reset last week, the Carbon

Fairy still strikes them with a probability.

So some of them reset.

How long is it until all of them have reset

back to P star?

It's a sort of duration factor, both the probability of

price change.

And that's why this term is in here.

Everyone will only change the price once will only be

tapped by how very well.

No, you can be topped every period if you're really

lucky.

Okay, I guess it's the same as when we were

starting with this.

This is the same Kelvin fairy.

Okay?

No, we're not changing the colour fairy is.

Or is it a fact of the economy.

Is that we don't have these edges from gift theory

when we were studying like game trigger strategies, when whenever

once someone deviates, everyone decides it's just like, not, oh.

You guys might all want to, but you can't.

Calvo is still stopping you.

That's why Calvo is different to some other price setting

rules will see later.

We'll come across rules where it's state dependent or you

know where you might say, well, actually, because there's a

price, there's now a price distortion.

Now I want to I want to change my price

too.

And then we get endogenous rates of price changing.

Calvo is very strict.

The fairy comes with the probability independently across all of

you and lets you change your price.

If you don't have the Calvo permission, you can't do

it.

To be eliminated.

No.

Why?

Which vital condition to change.

It changes the amount of output you produce, but it

doesn't change your optimal mark-up.

It doesn't affect the colour.

Okay, now maybe you think the cargo fairy is related

to some policy.

I don't know, colour fairy is just the cargo fairy

for a snack.

We have to.

We have to get into more complex models of optimal

price changing to start changing the cargo fairy.

We're not doing that yet.

We will go there.

This gets complicated enough as it is.

But no is the answer.

But you could write a different model down where different

things happened.

That's the joy of modelling.

Question.

The price distortion.

The ferry does not cooperate.

So that means.

And like.

Peace.

No no no no no.

Body policy always works in this model.

It may not achieve the optimal.

Correct.

So the theory has nothing to do with central bank.

No.

It's just like a probability from something.

Some existence without the Calvo, without some stickiness in prices,

without some nominal rigidity.

Monetary policy has no effects in this model.

We're back to the classical dichotomy.

We're back to a world where real allocations are determined

by real variables and nominal don't matter.

So, Calvo, the central bank relies on Calvo, but they

don't choose it.

No.

Again, when we get into the later lectures where we

talk about other like other approaches to price setting, there'll

be much more micro foundation based.

I sort of I touched on this at the very

start of this model.

Right.

The Calvo fair is clearly crazy, right?

But it's really neat for mathematical purposes.

But it's clearly insane that one firm that's reset their

price last period is as equally likely to get to

reset their price.

And even the idea is like we're living under a

very weird pricing dictatorship where the dictator says, no, no

changing prices until the carbon fairy has arrived.

Actually, if it was a dictator, it wouldn't be called

a fair.

It'd be something much more scary.

The Calvo beast has knocked at your door.

You choose which one you want and.

Okay, I'm going to do this.

Then we'll take a five minute break.

Sorry, I realise we overshot, but I took lots of

questions and.

Okay.

So so you got to, as I said, solve this

out.

Key thing to see.

Welfare depends on output gaps and price distortions.

Price distortions ultimately depend on inflation or the history of

inflation shocks.

And so we end up in a world where the

sort of deviation of utility from the steady state is

itself a function of output gaps and inflation gaps.

Now, you often see people take a model or want

to write a model, and they'll just go straight here.

They'll assume that this is the thing the central bank

is trying to control.

They're trying to control deviations of output and inflation.

All of these last few slides is just to say

that you can derive this as the sort of objective

function of a central bank as a micro founded, welfare

based approximate approximation to a welfare based effects of policy

in this kind of model.

Okay, so so this is not just a random we

think they care about output gaps or sorry application inflation.

Actually it's what the households care about.

This is a measure of household welfare in this world.

And then you can see all the things that it

depends on.

And so we've already kind of touched on this a

bit.

And you're right.

But I'm putting you down because I'm nasty because it's

not in the model.

You know, you could think about policies.

They may not be monetary policies, but you could think

of a policies that affect the elasticity, the elasticity term

in the consumption aggregator.

You could think about other policies that affect the nominal

rigidity terms.

You could think about things that affect reality.

Why are we sitting?

Why am I mean, and shutting you down?

Not because I don't think they're important, but because what

we're trying to do is understand the role of monetary

policy.

And, well, my experience of central banking and studying central

banking is that we don't generally think of a first

order effect of monetary policy on these things that might

be wrong, right?

Maybe when we get to a different model of price

setting, we find that actually the interest rate matters for

price setting behaviour, but it's not the world we're in.

Okay.

And then the final, the final little bit.

If you want to redo everything but have have monetary

policy, not have fiscal policy, not do the proper wage

subsidy to offset the inefficiency from monopolistic competition, you carry

around an extra distortion.

And this is what I was sort of alluding to

earlier.

The reason this can matter and it can matter materially,

is because it changes how you value deviations in the

output gap, because remember this is a quadratic.

This is a quadratic loss function.

So what quadratic loss functions do.

Is they increasingly punish deviations from some level.

But now because of the distortion we're starting somewhere away

from zero.

So the first little losses on the output gap which

usually would be basically you're still on the flat part.

So it's basically zero like a tiny output gap is

a zero effect here.

We're already a bit away and we're into steeper parts.

So it does change this.

Actually this approximation can only be derived and written in

this way when you when you derive it because it's

a it's a sort of an approximation term.

These deviations have to already be quite small.

So if you're really interested in is optimal monetary policy,

in a world where there's a massive monopolistic competition distortion,

you're going to have to re derive this and think

about it in a different way.

But otherwise you can carry around the extra delta and

carry on from there.

Okay.

Yeah.

Said basically all of this okay.

Let's stop here for five minutes.

So we'll start again.

22 minutes passed and I got nearly halfway in two

thirds of the time.

So that's positive.

But it was a good discussion.

At least I enjoyed it.

Yeah.

So in terms of the optimal monetary policy, yeah I

just don't know if there will be any changes in

terms of, of.

Like the.

Absolute consumption value, the trade off will be the same.

But will there be any changes in terms of absolute

consumption?

Because as we saw in the last lecture, it also

depends on the demand for each.

Food also depends on your total consumption level.

But but but that that's not affected okay.

And remember we're going to go to the aggregate.

So.

Let me go to the ad.

You're going to use y t equals CT.

Y t is determined the sort of the, the scale

of the economy, if you will, is going to be

determined by real factors.

Okay.

So so really what monetary policy is doing is dealing

with the relative price distortions.

Monetary policy doesn't make the economy bigger here.

It can make it better allocated.

And we can eliminate we can eliminate the output gaps,

but we can't.

If you want another way to think about this, if

you think about economics macro as being split between growth,

if you think about solo or the Ramsey model or

any of these, right, when you write those down, what

you're actually writing down is a real model.

We never talked about, like, you know, policies that affect

inflation.

We don't talk about prices.

We don't you know, we know there are people who

are increasingly thinking about models in which monetary policy can

affect, say, the amount of R&D and R&D then affects

a and affects a lot.

So that's a different channel.

That's not in our model.

So when we eliminate that monetary policy is none of

these long run type effects okay.

So I just.

Think so.

I'm thinking you know like in some time periods y

t can go up and that increases the output gap.

Is there a possibility that the increase in the storm

offsets the reduction due to the storm?

Because like I get that when small y t goes

up, this delta t will also go up from the

Phillips.

So there's also.

The y t here.

Right.

But like other parameters such that this is never offsets

this increase because there are these exponential I mean.

You could probably find calibrations.

Maybe you can find calibrations that do but not in

the standard calibration.

Okay.

So typically our assumptions are such that that person.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That's kind of weird world you're designing.

Yeah I'm just thinking of this kind of I mean

like some, maybe some policymakers might want, like, y t

going, like, might want to exploit the output gap to

increase utility in like a few time periods, like kind

of like.

So it wouldn't work in this.

You could probably build dynamic models that you can get

something.

But yeah.

No, I don't think I don't think it's a I

mean, you should have a play around.

I would just put all those coefficients into a, into

into Matlab.

The hard thing is like if you drive so what

you're saying is you're going to drive y t up

enough the natural rate.

Yeah okay.

So so fine.

So yeah I think the effect that you're also going

to get from y t onto inflation, onto delta is

going to mean that that and that are both going

to go up okay.

That's going to go on.

Yeah I don't see it.

But but if you find a parameterisation that's reasonable then

yeah you try it again.

But I wouldn't, I wouldn't, it wouldn't spend a lot

of your life looking for it.

Yeah.

And anyway that would be short lived right.

Because like in like say t plus 100 and the

effect is going to offset.

Well, I mean, the problem with these distortions are talking

about is even once you get back to y t

equal to zero, the delta t as a result is

going to carry on.

So you're going to have this.

Yes.

But again you could think about a myopic policymaker who

wants to try and do that.

But even even even in the contemporaneous one, it would

be, I don't know, it would be a weird world

where you could generate enough of an effect.

Maybe if you had a different type of rigidity where

the, the, the, the delta term is very small.

Yeah, I'd have to think about it.

But I think in general we think that these things

because this is a model with divine coincidence, they both

kind of contribute to bad, very bad stuff.

Yeah.

I have a question regarding the channel from the output

given to inflation in my head.

If we have a higher output gap, then we have

some firms that are allowed to change their prices because

of their.

How does how does it cost the channel.

The, the.

Essentially what happens is when we have an output gap,

some firms who are it's not because there are there's

not that doesn't affect whether like changing prices or not.

They are producing more.

I remember they have they have this sort of production

function that's such that as they produce more and more,

their marginal prices go up and up.

So because they're sort of overproducing, yeah, their costs are

higher than they should be because their costs are higher

than they should be.

They mark up over those costs, and therefore they have

to put up their prices higher than they would at

the individual level.

That would drive, but it's not related to their ability

to change.

Crisis or not.

Now, ultimately it comes when they're able to change price.

But what's driving it is the fact that.

The marginal cost.

Yeah.

And that's the the degree to which it impacts inflation

comes from the degree of real rigidity.

Yes.

Yes.

Okay.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Can I just make a short announcement before we start

because.

There's going to be a sales meeting tomorrow, and we're

going to reflect on how people see those classes and

lectures.

So like I just want to make sure everybody knows

that there's something they can come to me.

Sure.

Thank you.

You're the rep.

Yes.

Thank you.

Okay.

We're going to start.

We're going to start with an announcement.

Yes.

So hi guys.

As you might probably know I'm the coast rep.

And then there's going to be like a small meeting

tomorrow.

Then we discuss like people see back on those courses

and lectures.

So like if you have something you want to say

and for me to talk about tomorrow, you can come

to me or you can fill in the form that

I posted in the group.

Or if you're not in the group, you can also

come to me and I can get you into the

group or send you the form.

Yeah.

So that's it.

Thank you.

Multiple paths.

Yes.

All roads lead to you because you get the form.

Yes.

Good.

Okay.

And it's kind of reminiscent.

I used to be the PhD rep on the SLC

staff student liaison committee.

Is that what it's called?

Memories.

Okay.

Did did do.

Okay.

So now we're now we're going to get into.

We're going to get into this last part.

Well, the last two parts, which is sort of a

meaty part.

I have a feeling we'll get back to come back

to this bit next week, but maybe not, because actually

in these last slides there's a lot of like line

by line derived maths for you to enjoy yourself.

But actually the the, the logic, the intuition and the

logic of the exercise I think is quite straightforward and.

So.

So the question we want to ask.

Is to make it even more interesting.

Right?

We're going to we're going to be in this world

where we're going to allow there to be some deviation

from the the sort of optimal level.

So we're away from first best.

But we're now going to ask, well.

So let's take a step back.

We'll do two things.

If we were to ask the question, what's the optimal

policy when delta equals zero.

So we're at the first.

So we actually already saw that.

We know that before until we introduced some kind of

genuine trade off called a cost plus shock.

It's really nice.

This model this is like the greatest world for a

central banker to be in.

Very simple objective output gaps at zero, inflation at zero.

We're going to not only have, you know, no output

gaps and no inflation, but we're actually going to be

at the best possible attainable equilibrium.

Then the question.

So, so so the delta equal to zero case is

a little bit dull not dull.

It's super important.

And we've done it a lot.

What's more interesting is what if there is this delta

okay.

So now we're there is this wedge between the first

possible best that we could get.

And we want to sort of choose.

How we move over time to some equilibrium, or what's

the best thing we can do.

And so the first place we're going to look, and

this is where most of the matter comes in is

the case of commitment.

So again remember what commitment is.

Commitment is a world where a t equal to zero

or t zero.

As it's written there.

I stand before you and I tell you a path

for inflation.

AT0TT0, t one, t 2 to 3 to 4 to

5000 t 5 billion.

All the way.

I'm going to commit to this and I won't change.

And then the exercise is well, given that, what would

I choose today for each of the inflations at each

period?

Simply Grandjean, we get an optimal condition for each period.

Now we have constraints, which is the Phillips curve.

You'll notice there's no expectation in that Phillips curve.

Well, there is an expectation, but it's not listed as

an expectation because it's the commitment solution.

What I tell you remember, this is a beautiful world

where not only do I tell you what I'm going

to do all the way into the future, you actually

believe me.

So your expectation of inflation next period is whatever I

tell you I'm going to achieve for inflation next period.

It's a really great world in terms of at least

my feelings of power.

I have complete credibility and complete commitment ability forevermore.

Again, different to the real world.

Even if we think the Bank of England or the

Riksbank.

You know, these are institutions that have been around for

hundreds of years and we expect will be around for

hundreds more.

The people in charge of them who might make commitments

today have terms.

So whatever Andrew Bailey says today, well, he's started his

term in March 2020.

Very unfortunate time to start a term as governor.

And so he has an eight year term, which I

believe means that by February 2027.

For eight.

It must be 828.

He will end his time now.

Maybe his successor will feel obliged to make good on

some of the things he said, but maybe not in

even if even if the successor was, the public might

doubt that they would do that.

So there's all these issues we're getting rid of all

them full, credible commitment optimisation.

If I choose inflation rates, they have effects on output

gaps.

We know the output gap loss is going to this

is this term we're away from the optimal output.

So that's another cause of loss.

We get these optimal conditions.

And they have this sort of what they what the

commitment world does is it defines this is where there's

a load of bats here.

But ultimately what it defines is a path for my

inflation rate from wherever I am today into the future,

which implies itself a set of output gaps that come

through the Phillips curve.

Because if you think about the Phillips curve here, if

I know what inflation today is and inflation tomorrow will

be, I can back out what the output gap must

be in order to generate those.

And I get this over time.

So what do we see growing through a whole bunch

of maths.

We get this difference equation.

We solve this horrible quadratic for a particular parameter in

absolute values less than one.

And we get these two terms.

Okay.

Sorry.

Move that.

What you see is that starting at a level of

inflation today with commitment, what the person, the policy maker

will do.

Remember this is in absolute value less than one.

So the power of this is whatever T is today

minus the original time period.

So what we actually get is this path that starts

at some level of inflation and fades over time.

So you commit to a sort of gradual inflation path

ultimately.

Falling over time, and you have a corresponding set of

output gaps that go with that.

Okay.

And you can do this because you have that full

commitment credibility okay.

Don't spend too long.

And that's going to come back to it's way more

interesting with cost shocks okay.

With discretion.

Well I already described this at the very start of

class.

What is discretion?

Discretion is the world where.

Future inflation.

It's not something I can tell you today and have

you believe me.

So essentially, the only thing I can do under discretion

is I can see what you believe today.

And based on those beliefs, I can choose the best

thing to do.

And then when I get to tomorrow, I'm going to

do the same thing again.

I've already sort of alluded to this at the start.

I'll jump back one slide just to say it.

The problem with the commitment world is that if we

wrote down this optimisation at t one.

I'm going to get the exact same solution.

Except with t one here.

And that's not generally the same as the solution.

I would have tried to commit to a teenager.

That's the time inconsistency problem.

So even though when we do commitment, we assume not

only that they can, but that they do commit.

Now in practice, when they got to the next period

or a few periods down, they're going to want to

change.

The joy of discretion is that they just take it

period by period.

They do the optimisation, holding fixed whatever the expectations are.

We?

Get this sort of equation.

That depends on the expectations.

And now we're going to look at a particular solution

which is one in which.

The discretionary choice today is going to be the same

as a discretionary choice in other periods.

So there's some amount of trying to achieve some pie

and figure out what that pie is.

And you get a particular solution.

And this particular solution, which is greater than zero, is

going to be associated with an output gap.

What do you get when you compare these two?

Well, it's sort of listed here, but I think I've

said almost all of these things.

The advantage of the commitment world is that we can

start at a we start at whatever level of inflation,

and then we're going to commit to just gradually bring

it down over time, and eventually we're going to get

back to a zero inflation.

With discretion.

We're going to jump straight to some level of inflation

from wherever we are today, but we're never going to

get it below that amount.

There is an inflation bias in this world.

Commitment has the really challenging fact of being time inconsistent?

Discretion is time consistent.

So what is realistic?

But the problem is I cannot manipulate and use your

expectations to improve the trade off today, and particularly to

get me to a point where the trade off I

want to be at the zero inflation world.

So commitment gives a lot of power.

But the second I got a chance to renege, if

I was given that chance, I would.

And imagine a world where policy makers kept reneging.

Nobody would believe the stuff they said.

That's why I said to you earlier that for me,

this commitment versus discretion are two kind of interesting extremes.

And central banks actually operate in a world somewhere between.

And so some of you may have heard this term

before, but we talk a lot about monetary frameworks as

being constrained discretion.

So we don't let them do absolutely anything they would

want.

But we give them frameworks that make them predictable.

And but they're not quite full commitments.

So we'll, we'll we'll talk about that again I'm sure.

Okay.

All of this was kind of dull because this was

your question earlier.

Because inherently this model has divine coincidence and because it

was divine coincidence.

The only bit that got a bit exciting was this

world where we didn't have the offsetting effect on market

power.

And we want to think about then something that introduces

a trade off.

And that's where we get these t cost push shots.

I'm going to write one thing up here.

Trying.

Okay, so if you want to go back and add

a new shock to the model, now we don't have

an oil sector.

So when I think about it, in reality you can

think about oil or something else that exogenous the effects

inflation.

So one way you could do is resolve everything where

there's these time varying market power.

So I haven't gone as far as some of you

wanted yet.

Some of you wanted me to let the government control

this.

Again, that's another layer you could add on, but you

just have that.

There are shocks that affect market power.

I know scandals that cause firms to go out of

business and are just a number of firms in an

industry or something else that affects these things.

Now we're going to assume that whatever this average level

of market power is, is going to be affected by

the tax, but we're not going to have a fiscal

agent who's so good that they offset all the variations

in the epsilon t.

They just do the average correction for monopolistic competition.

And then then you're derive everything.

And your New Keynesian Phillips curve looks like this, which

is what we had before.

Plus this UT term which actually represents the effect of

these shocks on the economy.

So we suddenly go around epsilon changes.

And now all of you charge a higher mark-up over

your marginal costs.

So even if your marginal costs were exactly the same

as last period, your price that you choose ends up

higher.

Now again, when does that come into play?

It becomes a bit complicated because who can change their

prices?

Only the very people.

So then we get this effect on inflation and this

UT.

But that's what we're trying to think about.

Okay.

So we have this we have this this this term.

Right.

So we're going to get rid of the Delta term

again in here at least the average delta term.

And we're going to do this exercise again.

But now we have this UT term.

Now you may think well what's what's really changed.

Well these shocks.

Do not allow divine coincidence to hold in this model.

So we now are going to end up in a

world where central banker is going to have to choose

how much to fight inflation and how much to help

the output gap, because they're going to go in opposite

directions.

And the other world, they just went together.

So if you keep them both at zero, you're good.

They keep one and they're in the other to zero.

Good.

Now we're going to have this sort of effect like

this.

And they're going to have to choose.

So imagine you have the shock.

You think okay I want to fight inflation.

What do you do.

Raise interest rates.

What does that do.

Output gap.

If you don't, then you keep the output gap close

to zero.

What do you have?

Inflation.

So again go back to the loss function on screen.

Trade off.

How much loss do you take from here or here.

Or how do you balance it across the two.

That's when monetary policy sort of starts to get more

interesting again.

Okay.

I made the mistake in the break of not filling

my water.

So if you see me walk over here and open

my bottle repeatedly, it's just habit.

It's empty.

Do you want.

Me to go?

No.

No, no, that's very fine.

It's really just habit, okay?

I use water as a moment to think and drink.

Oh, well, you're asking questions, but I can.

I can last 15 minutes without water.

Same Lagrangian.

Again, we take expectations as given.

Redo the time consistent discretionary policy.

You see this?

You know that last equation should scream at you.

Exciting.

Why?

Because it's telling us a first order condition on the

relationship between output gaps and inflation.

It's telling us the trade off.

What is the trade off?

The trade off is such that if.

Bring it to bring one of them to the other

side.

Okay.

If inflation goes up by a bit, you're going to

try to bring it down in such a way that

output gap will become negative, such that you'll trade them

off so that inflation will equal minus the omega over

kappa the Y.

Or it gives you the sort of ratio between them

on how you do that adjustment.

Okay.

That's optimal discretionary policy.

What's neat about this?

Why is this exciting?

Why are these so prominent in our modelling of.

Of fluctuations and monetary policy?

Because when we look at the world, we don't see

central banks achieving inflation.

Zero output, zero, output gap zero all of the time.

We see it fluctuating.

And central banks are then faced with decisions to make,

like in the last 18 months, of how much to

raise, rates to fight inflation and how much to accept

a a recession with that.

So you sometimes see.

People talk about.

So this omega is the relative weight between output gap

and inflation in this loss function.

Now I told you that this is derived from some

welfare criterion.

But you can also just think about it.

And as what if this is just some parameter.

And sometimes people talk about well what if you appointed

inflation nutters.

That was a term I believe Mervyn King used in

one of his speeches or papers that 20 years ago,

but it may have predated him and inflation nutter would

be someone who put zero weight on the output gap.

They only care about minimising deviations of inflation from target

or steady state level.

What does that person do?

Their optimal policy.

If omega is zero.

Is inflation equal to zero?

So the inflation nutter in this world, faced with the

shock that we saw in the last few months, last

few years, you think of as a cost shock, drives

up inflation without affecting natural level of output or demand

directly.

They say, right, we're going to jack up interest rates

as high as we have to to get inflation exactly

back to zero immediately.

What's the effect of that?

We're going to have a big output gap.

Is that good for the consumer?

No, because we know the consumer has a particular weight

on both of them.

But the central bank, who only cares about inflation, the

inflation nutter.

They'd be happy.

Have I said any of this?

I said none of this, actually.

Okay.

Given this trade off that we derive, you can then

plug this back in to the Phillips curve and solve

for exactly how.

And you see that these are symmetric.

This is using particular weights on the last slide.

But you can see that how inflation and the output

gap have this opposite co movement in the face of

of cost shocks.

What does it say?

If you had a 1%, a one unit increase in

the output gap, type in the cost per shot.

If you did nothing, if you did nothing, you'd get

a one unit increase in inflation from the Phillips curve.

What this is telling you and this, this trade off

that we've derived is telling you is that in the

face of that increase, they will raise interest rates somewhat

such that they drive down.

This.

So this goes up.

They partially offset it with this such that overall inflation

goes up a bit, but also the output gap goes

down a bit.

And those bits depend on the weights they put in

this trade off.

So that's the decision that the discretionary policy maker is

having.

The key thing that comes with all of the next

slides, next few slides is the key thing I started

with, which is if you could commit.

What you can actually do is commit to doing something

to inflation next period.

Which can pull down on this term, which can further

mitigate the extent of this.

But then you have to do something next period because

it's commitment.

That's going to be the difference between the two.

Right.

But if you think these are just one off shocks

under discretion, you get an effect today.

You get it on inflation.

You partly offset it with some negative output gap.

It's a bit of a trade off.

It happens today.

The shock goes away.

We're back to optimal from from tomorrow on with no

no cost per shock until the next cost per shock.

We're commitment to remember I do not take expectations as

given, but I can now sort of commit to policies

in the future that could be beneficial today.

And that's what the channel we're going to go for.

So you redo the optimisation.

The targeting rule looks very similar.

Except you now have.

A sort of longer period of inflation.

Because of this commitment, you can choose your inflation over

a number of periods.

You now have these.

So some of these over which to average a little

bit like average inflation targeting type stuff we've discussed.

Or if you want you can think about this in

terms of price levels.

So you can say okay rather than having to do

all the adjustment today.

So shock occurs today.

I have to do something today.

And that has to be done via the output gap

today.

I can instead say okay, we've had the shock.

Now I'm going to generate small output, negative output gaps

for long periods and gradually pull inflation down, which is

like saying I'm going to bring the price level back

to some other, some level that it was targeting before.

Okay.

That's what commitment does.

It allows you to spread the effect over many periods.

As before, this policy is not time consistent.

When I commit today to lower inflation tomorrow, with the

benefit being that as a result, inflation doesn't go up

today.

So imagine a world where I didn't do anything to

this.

Just it's not what you actually do in optimal behaviour.

But imagine it.

You could if I didn't do anything to output gap

today under discretion.

One unit here is one unit here.

With commitment, I can say I'm not doing anything to

the output gap today.

One unit here, but I'll do something to inflation tomorrow

and that has an effect.

Now when I get to tomorrow I don't want to

do it.

I don't want to do it.

That's the time inconsistency.

But that's the power of commitment.

In this model.

I can allow these sort of future expectation terms, and

I can do this way out over many periods.

Why is this useful?

I wish one of these other colours worked because it

would be great to have a different colour here.

I'm going to bring my own pens in the future.

Why is this better?

Because if you think about it, you get a big

shock, right?

This is essentially what we're thinking about.

This is a way to think about what I've just

been saying.

If you've got a big shock.

On this you have two quadratic loss terms.

Why is it optimal to have a bit of loss

on both with this trade off.

Because rather than have inflation down here but no effect

on the output gap, I get a zero there.

But I get a really big loss here because I've

gone a long way from where I want to be.

Instead, I can go somewhere in here that reduces the

loss by quite a lot.

That's the drop in loss.

And how do I pay for that?

Will I have to have some negative output gap?

Well, that has some loss associated with.

But because of this quadratic nature we get a little

loss and a little loss rather than one big loss.

With commitment.

What you can do is you can dynamically spread these

out.

So you can say, I'm going to have a little

bit of inflation today and a little bit of inflation

less tomorrow and a little bit of inflation less tomorrow,

and a little bit after that, after that, after that,

and for a long period into the future, we'll just

have a little bit of reductions in inflation.

And again, you still do it with a trade off

with an output gap.

So you're doing both of them.

So commitment gives you more flexibility to spread this out

over time.

It's just that once you've gained all the benefits and

inflation hasn't gone up as much today.

So I went the wrong direction for inflation.

But you know what I was talking about.

And once you once you get the benefit today of

not a big increase in inflation, when we get to

tomorrow, you no longer want to commit to what you

said you would do.

And that's the timing consistency problem.

There's a bunch of slides on the solution under commitment.

But you see that the solution ends up being that

inflation is a function of the sort of shocks over

time, and it has its own dynamics.

So even these sort of one off shocks end up

having dynamics in them.

Just said all of that.

Fine.

I said it all.

That's what I wanted to say.

That's the big thing.

So again, I don't think we live in commitment world.

I don't think we live in a pure discretion world,

but I think they're both super interesting places to think

about optimal policy.

And the inherent question is, what is the best thing

I can do with monetary policy in the face of

shocks, to try to achieve the best for people in

the world.

Okay.

So in terms of commitment, void is better than our

discussion mode.

Yes.

Okay.

And if you ever want to wonder why under commitment

you could always commit to discretion.

So it can't be worse.

Now you can probably think of a world where they're

equal, but you could never be worse.

But you can often be better.

And again, why are you better?

You're better because of this forward looking bit.

By committing to things in the future, you commit to

impose losses in the future, which we discount.

So I'm committing to losses in ten periods time and

you've discounted ten periods ten times.

That's awesome for well there there's probably this next period.

They're getting closer and I don't want to do them

anymore, but I want to do them differently.

I'd like to spread them a bit further.

But commitment in this mathematically, once you commit you have

to commit.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But then why.

Would people choose not to prevent.

What do you mean?

Why would they choose not to?

Like, they can just say, I don't want to commit

to this an extra, but like this, like, generates more

welfare.

Okay, sure.

So.

So if you, if you tried to implement okay.

Great question.

That's a really great question right.

Here we go.

What happens I get this shot today and I choose

to do less on output gap today and say I'll

do more on inflation tomorrow.

And that looks like a game okay.

What actually happens is because I can't commit or I'm

not, everyone knows I'm going to renege.

Nobody expects inflation to be low tomorrow or to get

the effect tomorrow.

So now I don't do anything here.

I don't get the effect here.

Inflation ends up bearing the whole burden.

And I'm worse off because I did all the adjustment

through one one thing today.

Commitment is great.

If it's a commitment.

A non credible commitment could be worse than discretion.

And again, there's probably some middle ground where you could

have partial credibility or partial commitment.

And people have worked this out.

People have started looking at models, say, because let's be

honest, these commitment problems the way the way mathematically we're

writing them.

You are committing from t zero to infinite future.

You could think about a limited commitment model, right, where

I can set out a policy for four quarters or

eight quarters or something.

That's a bit realistic.

Many would argue, me being one of the many that

central banks recently, and I'm particularly looking at the ECB

here, they had given some forward guidance.

And then when the time came to renege, when it

became really obvious that it was time to renege, they

were too scared of losing their credibility.

So they waited, even though everybody knew they were just

waiting to do even more at the end of the

time, after which they said they wouldn't do anything.

So you could also end up in these times where

during your commitment, other shocks hit and now you're tied,

and that could be even worse.

So again, we could think about a more complicated rule.

Have you ever heard central bankers say it's data dependent?

When they say data dependent, what they mean is we'd

like to keep rates low for a long time.

But by God, if things go badly wrong, we're going

to change.

So that's the sort of quasi commitment world.

So but again I see your question.

I like the question.

But it's like central banks operate with discretion.

But trying to achieve some levels of commitment to get

some of the benefit through the expectations channel.

That's that's where things like communication come in.

And that's what makes the world exciting.

For people like me.

You may have your own interest.

Get your parents.

Actually, I have a question on average inflation targeting that

before.

And if the answer the central banks are too tied

up tends to be a problem.

Oh yeah.

Yeah, yeah, that's exactly the same thing I was saying

there.

So so if you sort of like just think about

what they did central banks wants to commit to like

forward guidance was the idea we'll keep rates low even

low after we need to start raising them.

And in doing that in these models in particular to

the Euler equation, you get really big powerful effects.

You get big powerful effects today for something you're going

to do in the future.

Great.

Now we get to the future.

You're still in the period where you promised to have

low rates.

I think this model, you would be tied to those

lower.

Lecture 6:

You.

I.

Like because like we just got off metrics.

So like, maybe there's not enough time for me to

fix the survey.

Okay.

So it's okay.

Like I do some estimation beforehand and then and then

I never found the survey or like should I do

it after the lecture?

I know maybe it's better to do.

What do you.

Mean?

Just.

Just email it to them.

Right?

Yeah.

But that has to be like.

That's fine.

Yeah.

I mean, I can also talk about it now if

you want, but.

Yeah, if you want to.

But I like I can I can email everybody after

the class.

Okay.

Did I tell them it's coming.

Yeah.

And then what should I not I don't know I

don't want to bias them.

You're the boss.

You tell me.

I think it's good.

Like to let everybody know that there are concerns regarding.

And then maybe I'll just talk through it like making

another small announcement.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, I was just that.

Yeah, yeah.

Let me give.

Over the.

I feel like.

Guess.

Selection.

Oh, yeah.

We start.

Okay.

We're going to kick off.

But Marcus.

Over to you.

Okay, guys, it's not a small house.

So like some some people have come to me saying

that like the math section in the lecture is not

covered enough in the lecture itself.

So like people are asking like, what are we.

Couple more math instead of collecting tuition during the lectures.

But then after talking with Michael, we found out like

there are certain trade offs of like intuition, economic intuition

and also math.

So and also that affects everybody.

So then what I will do is just I will

ask Kelly to email everybody a survey that asking essentially

asking whether you want more math or more intuition covered

during the lecture.

If that's that's what Michael means.

And so I really hope that everybody with both and

then I will potentially decide which which side will be

covered more in the lectures going forward.

So yeah, I don't want to bias you in any

way.

I don't care which way.

But you know, there are constraints in terms of total

time.

And we either have material how we talk about the

ideas of what the literature is trying to do, and

the slides have loads of maths on it that you

can go through yourself.

My personal opinion, as is reflected in how I teach

this course and every other course I teach, is that

I think it's more useful for you yourselves to grind

through the maths, because I don't think it's very useful

to watch me do maths.

It's like watching someone do a sport.

You don't get better at it by watching them do

it, but if you get stuck while doing it, ask.

But actually because I sort of inherited large chunks of

these notes and he asked me to stick to the

course as it's usually taught.

So it's consistent from year to year, as I said

to you at the start, and I don't think any

of you have had me as a lecturer elsewhere, but

I usually just have really cryptic links between the maths

and ask you to go figure it out and then

afterwards tell you what it is.

These I find very generous.

But that's the world we're in.

But you're cold.

If you want me to sort of wind up one

of these screens and sort of grind through the derivatives

on live, I can do that.

But I promise you we will cover less material.

So these are the trade offs, economics versus the maths.

And you get to vote and I promise I will

be democratic.

Lot of Americans Democratic, and they stormed the Capitol building.

So I'll do that too.

And okay.

Trying to think there's only one part of this, of

this entire set of notes that I think is one

where.

The matter is in any way.

It's not even new.

The Kuhn Tucker problem when we do the commitment problem

of forward guidance.

But it's one where, again, I think you would be,

well, positioning yourself if you were to sit and grind

through it just to see how it works.

But all the steps are there.

But if we have to talk about it a bit

more, we can.

But this is, this is a a lecture which the

name I changed slightly for reasons that are going to

become clear in the in the next few slides.

If you think about the kind of optimal policy exercises

that we've spoken about so far, they gave a very.

Sought a very clear prediction, in fact.

In the absence of cost plus shocks.

We got divine coincidence because the central bank would just

track the real rate.

There was some equilibrium real rate and they changed their

policy to track that.

In doing so, they'd ensure the output gap was always

zero.

So the only fluctuations that economy would experience are those

that relate to things like aggregate productivity.

ET cetera.

That monetary policy can't really do anything about zero output

gap.

Inflation would be at target.

Excellent.

Great achievement.

All done.

Now if we take that logic.

And then start to think about the last decade, which,

you know, when I was when I was quite literally

in your position, we studied this topic, but we studied

it as a curiosity.

In fact, it was a Japanese curiosity because everybody else

wasn't worried about this issue.

But Japan had gotten there.

And what was really funny was listening to people, academics

from other countries saying, ah, they messed up.

We would never let that happen.

Well, you know, the rest of the advanced world caught

up or whatever the negative version of catching up is,

fell behind sufficiently far that this has become a really

central issue.

And that is the idea that if you're trying to

track a real rate, if the real rate falls, that

equilibrium real rate falls too far, you might not be

able to achieve that just by setting the nominal interest

rate, because it may require the nominal interest rate you

set to go.

Very negative.

Now we used to call it the zero lower bound.

So if you've ever heard of the xlb this is

a lecture on the Xlb.

But it's not called the ELB.

It's called the ELB because the argument used to be

you couldn't go negative.

Why could you not go negative?

Well, if you think about the transmission being I can

I can sort of offer you a different interest rate.

And then you put your, your liquid assets into the

bank.

Well, as soon as I tried to charge you for

holding liquid assets, you always have a perfectly substitutable equivalent

called cash, which pays zero.

So in a portfolio, if you think about it from

a sort of portfolio allocation problem, you can either have

bank balances or you can have cash.

Now the first part of this course was the old

idea in monetary economics of trying to convince you, why

would we have a world where people held cash that

is strictly dominated as an asset?

You know, you get zero on cash, you get government

bonds.

They used to pay positive.

Why did anyone hold cash?

And so we got into all these ideas of liquidity

or transactions, values that come through cash and bond constraints

or money and utility.

Now we hit with the zero lower bound effective lower

bound type question.

It's the flip side.

Why would you ever put money in the bank and

get a negative interest rate?

If you could hold cash and get zero?

Okay.

Now you can start immediately to see.

Or maybe for your generation, it's even harder than for

my generation to think about this, because for you, it's

how many of you hold cash regularly.

Okay, a few of you do.

How many of you can't remember the last time you

used cash?

I give you notes and coins.

Yeah.

So, I mean, I'm still one of these people who,

because of my age, I sort of carry cash in

my wallet just in case.

I don't know what the just in case is, because

I have, like euros, US dollars and and and sterling

in my wallet, just in case.

But I also have a bunch of cards, physical cards,

and now I.

Well, actually, I don't have it with me now.

I typically have like an Apple Pay type thing with

a list of cards, and I know the list of

cards because I had to get my Apple phone part

of it fixed and they had to do a reset.

So I had to like re verify all my cards.

God, that's a pain in the backside.

So I have all these things and they're my money.

So maybe for you guys you'd think, well, if the

bank turns and says we're now going to charge you

1% a year, 2% a year, you just suck it

up and take it.

So that's why we don't think it's exactly zero.

So if they're charging you a little bit nominally, you

probably think there's a convenience value to that.

But at some point you would switch and you would

say, I'm not paying 10% to have my money at

NatWest and have them taking 10% nominal value off per

year.

I'm just going to go to NatWest and ask for

£50 notes, and then you'll have to figure out how

to secure them safely boxes under your head or whatever.

But you know, at some point there's a there's a

trade off to do.

So the argument is at some point you try to

drive nominal rate so low, so much below zero, that

everyone's going to switch out of the banking system straight

into cash, and you sort of lose the ability to,

to control the nominal interest rate anymore.

You can't push it any further.

So out of curiosity, how reasonable it is, because I

don't think that what forces people to take money out.

So let's say it's -10%.

And I would take my money out, but I don't

get anything from it, because now the banks have a

multiple other conditions, like if you want to deposit cash,

you can only deposit £2,000 at once.

So if I would ever go for buying an apartment

to take me like a decade just to deposit all

the money in the bank, so they are effectively making

another constraint to bringing money back to back once you

take it out.

So it's not the do you worry.

About that constraint?

So it is a constraint like if you need it.

So the thing is that they just disqualify.

Once you take the money out of bank, it's hard

to get it back into the bank.

I have never heard of that.

Has anyone else ever heard of that?

I am 100% confident that if I wanted to deposit

money at a banking institution today, I could easily do

it.

I don't think so.

Yeah, because of all the money laundering and that kind

of stuff.

Exactly.

To deposit money and get money out as well.

It takes time.

Oh, oh.

So don't get me wrong, it takes a while to

get established, but once you're established with an account.

So I think your concern is more about competition.

We're back to IO.

This is a half io course I didn't realise we're

back to the question of competition.

Now, the argument would be if there's no banking system

and this is a this is a genuine concern about

how the system would react if we did all withdraw

our cash.

And I mean, there would be no banks.

Would banks would start to exist if if people withdrew

all of their deposits once they exist.

If you have money, can banks make profit off your

deposits?

So you're funding the bank when you put your money

in there?

They are quite welcome.

I guess because I guess it depends on country to

country.

So it would take me every time, five days to

get money into the bank.

Okay, so again, I don't know exactly which experience you've

had in this country.

Okay.

It can take a while to set up a bank

account.

Some of you possibly didn't experience it because if you

set up one of the student accounts when you arrived,

they expedite the process.

I had a very difficult process when I first started

in the UK, but difficult was like six weeks.

Because the problem is, if you don't have an account

at all, if you don't have an address history in

a country, they can't do money laundering checks, but then

they can't get a bank account.

So then you have to do everything in cash, but

then you can't get a it's hard to become banked

because you can't actually get an address because, you know,

we get these horrible situation, but you can usually get

around them just they take weeks.

But once you have an account in this country you

can deposit money quite freely.

Now there are some limits on some accounts because their

special interest accounts or whatever, but there is nothing to

stop me depositing any amount I want in the banking

system in this country right now.

Because I thought it was like reverse cash in advance.

But no, no.

No, I don't think so.

I think we should worry deeply about the other point.

If we literally did all remove our money, our capitalist,

banking intermediate intermediate, its sort of system of trade would

completely collapse.

And we've seen what happens.

We saw it in 2008 nine inches the world.

What happens when banking systems collapse?

Bad things.

So I wouldn't worry about that.

Sorry, but there is some point at which.

Well, the question is whether it would ever happen, because

I think we were in a world where the Swiss,

I think have gone the furthest with with these rates.

But even the ECB, when they did negative rates, they

only did it on the deposits of commercial banks at

their institution.

So very few normal banks like the banks that you

and I would use, have actually imposed negative interest rates

on accounts.

Most accounts, even savings accounts in the UK, hovered around

zero for a long time.

But they did not go negative.

And I don't know in Ireland I don't believe they

went negative and they all went negative in real terms.

By the way, negative real interest rates are a very

normal natural phenomenon.

Don't ever think that negative real rates were just a

new thing.

We had them before getting to zero or negative nominal

rates.

That's fairly new.

So then the question is what is the best thing

you can do if you are faced with a world

where the R star you're trying to track goes to

a place where your nominal rate can't track it.

And I could ask you the question.

What policies do central banks adopt?

And you could know the answer in advance because you've

all lived through it.

What are the policies that we've seen?

Forward guidance.

Give me the other one.

Then I'll talk briefly about the two.

Okay.

QE, broad name asset purchases.

Okay.

Interestingly we used to call these unconventional policies and I'm

not sure that's the right name.

They're different policies.

But you know if you're the ECB talking about unconventional

policies you're talking about asset purchases which you've been doing

for more than you're more than half of your existence

as an institution.

It's not that unconventional if you do it more than

half the time.

Okay.

So alternative policies non interest rate policy.

But that's what we're going to do actually if you

think about all the logic I talked about last week

in the week before, you will see why these become

sensible policies in the face of a zero or effective

lower bound and a world, if we think it looks

like the New Keynesian model.

What's the dimension of the New Keynesian model?

That's very important forward looking behaviour.

So much like we saw when we did the comparison

of commitment versus discretion just in the face of a

cost push shock.

We said, ah, with commitment, if you can affect expectations,

you can change the way inflation behaves today and sort

of spread the costs out over many periods, which is

better than having to just deal with the whatever the

optimal trade off is in a discretionary period buy period

sense.

What's going to happen in the world of the zero

lower bound?

If you can do something like forward guidance, which changes

expectations today, you can make the pain of being away

from the optimal interest rate less bad.

And that's sort of what monetary policy tries to do

in these situations.

I think of asset purchases as being slightly different.

If you really want to model asset purchases correctly, and

we can talk a little bit about it, there's two

things I think you would need to break from what

we have here.

One, we have generally been working in a world where

there are stochastic shocks in the system, but there are

not things like default risk or other sort of risk

premia that get built in.

So there's not like risky lenders and safe lenders.

And we worry about those and those wedges that can

open part of the channel of quantitative easing asset purchase

type policies works through a risk channel, which we don't

have as standard.

The other is you have to think a little bit

about what we call a term structure of interest rates.

So in our in our in our models we tend

to write down there's debt you borrow today.

You repay tomorrow but then you borrow again.

So you kind of roll it over.

That's not how debt works for most corporates or households

in the real world.

Thinking that in the extreme, if I even calibrate it

to a monthly model, I would have to remortgage every

month, every month that I have to renegotiate.

Okay, I don't want any more, but I've paid a

bit back.

But now I need to borrow this amount.

But what do I actually do when I get a

mortgage?

I sign a contract that last 20, 25, 30 years

and depending on the country it might be like the

US.

The rate is fixed over that entire period.

It might be like the UK where it's fixed for

the first part and then flexible after that.

Or it might be like some other countries which are

flexible almost throughout details.

Key thing is there's a term structure.

So there's a difference between the price.

You might pay on borrowing for one year versus five

years versus ten years.

One channel of asset purchases is to say, I will

draw a little picture for this.

If you think about what policy is.

Let's call this maturity.

So at some end you have like 30 years.

And then here you have like one month.

You can see it plotted sometimes.

Has anyone ever seen a yield curve plotted?

A yield curve is just you know, the dots would

indicate different maturity debts and what their implied yield to

maturity or their interest rate is.

Okay, so you have this thing here.

Now what monetary policy actually does.

And this is in practice they typically control an interest

rate down here.

Again it varies by country where the.

It's a one day, one week, one month rate, but

it's something very short.

And when they move this thing around, they're also trying

to move the whole yield curve around.

So when they move it down here, they're trying to

influence how much it cost to borrow for six months,

one year, two years, three years.

At the long end of the yield curve, you might

think an average policy decision doesn't move the long end

very much like if you change even at.

We think the central bank will change rates for the

next six months, a year, two years, how that affects

the average interest rate over the next 30, it's going

to be pretty small, you would think.

But so one thing they try and do and again

this is another transmission mechanism I talked about this in

the first lecture, is you try to influence what people

think is going to happen, interest rates going forward.

So in other words you say, okay, I've lowered the

rate today.

So we've gone down here.

But I also want you to think that the rate

will be lower for a long time, maybe five years.

Whatever.

One direct way you can do that is with asset

purchases.

So you can come in and you can actually operate.

In the long or longer, medium to longer maturity part

of the market and drive down the yields there.

How do you drive yields down?

You drive prices up.

How do you drive prices up?

Economics 101 more demand central bank comes along, demands a

lot of these assets.

Their price goes up.

Their yield goes down.

So that's a sort of slightly separate policy, not one

that we directly have in the baseline model, but I'll

still talk about it in a minute.

Okay, good.

That's all good to do today.

Said all of this.

Okay.

So there's a little example here to get you to

get you sort of thinking formally about about how this,

how this sort of channel operates.

So this is our, this is our lower bound on

the nominal interest rate.

So this says that there's some number B and minus

b is the bound.

So we can have that as well.

Let me go a bit in so people can see.

We can have that as 0%.

And that's minus B.

Okay.

So you can come along and no problem at all

if you're trying to track an R star, so long

as you stay above this band here.

But as soon as you try to get it down,

let's say you wanted to get eye to here.

You can't do it.

At that point.

You hit the bound and you're just going to stay

along there.

Now one thing about the zero lower bound is, or

the effective lower bound is that it's asymmetric.

If you suddenly needed to raise rates.

That's easy.

So there's this big asymmetry in the in the effective

lower bound logic.

Now is there an upper bound, an effective upper bound

on nominal interest rates?

No, not really that one I've ever come across.

We've had countries like Zimbabwe who've hit.

Millions and millions.

Of percent of inflation.

And you can have nominal interest rates also be.

Millions and millions.

Of percent.

So of course the system doesn't work well in those

situations, but it's not because of the nominal interest rate

being unable to move up.

Question is what happens?

Will the economy work well in this in this world

here.

So here's the example.

We're going to assume that.

This r r tilde thing we're trying to track.

So here's what we're trying to track.

We're trying to get to our Tilda whenever that's below

B we're going to get stuck at the bone.

The nominal rate is just going to have to stop

at the minus B.

There'll be other times.

And this is a probabilistic model.

It's a very simple Markov model.

So with probability p in this world we're at a

band.

With probability one minus p.

We go above the boat and we're back to the

normal world where we can track the the tilde.

When it's at the bound.

This probability is like a transition probability.

The probability for were there and it stays there.

And then with this probability one minus v I exit.

And once I exit I'm out forever.

So we're not thinking about a world where we can

re-enter.

It is a much more simplistic than the world that

central banks actually face.

Well, again.

We're going to look at what what the policy is

and what the central bank can do.

Well, we know.

That the optimal in this world in general is to

track the real interest rate.

If we track the real interest rate, then we're going

to get zero eight and zero.

Sorry zero zero inflation gap.

So once we're in this world where we're tracking the

R star R tilde, we're going to be in this

world where we have, you know, we're at our our

best achievement that we can do.

In the other cases, we're going to be stuck in

a world where the interest rate is at the bound.

And then the question is, well, we know we're stuck

there for fee periods.

What is the.

What's the world going to look like?

Well, we're going to we're going to just say, well

in those periods we're going to be stuck with an

inflation and an output given by this.

Suboptimal constrained choice of of interest rate.

What's my expectation for inflation then.

Well with probability v I will get that pi that

I'll be still stuck in this in this suboptimal world.

And I'll have an inflation of pi or with probability

one minus v I'll exit will be back in the

world where I can track the the nominal interest rate,

and we go back to a world with inflation equal

to zero.

Same for the expected output gap.

So then, given that we can plug this back into

the Phillips curve.

Get these equations here.

Go back into the ease curve.

This is the bit I think you should grind through

yourself.

It's not hard.

The steps are written right through.

Put them in.

You can solve for what this y and pi are

for those periods where you're stuck at the effective lower

bound.

What's the key thing in there yet?

You can look at the effect of all the different

coefficients.

But the key thing that you notice is the b

plus r tilde.

Now what is b plus r tilde.

Well if you look here at the top you've got

r tilde is less than minus b.

So r tilde plus b is less than zero.

What happens in this world where you're stuck at the

constraint.

You get stuck.

Persistently with output.

That's lower than its natural rate.

An inflation that's lower than the target rate, or it's

not its desired rate of zero.

Is this surprising?

No, because in this model, what you basically done is

you've been forced to have an interest rate that's too

high.

That is essentially the problem of the effective lower bound.

You're forced to have an interest rate that's too high.

As a result you have output.

That's an output gap that's negative.

And inflation that's too low.

Is that good for welfare?

No.

You don't like deviations of output gaps or inflation from

their desired range in either direction.

How bad is the problem?

Depends on the size of this as a key determinant.

So what is that?

If the minus B is like 25 basis points, you

could only go 25 basis points negative.

And the R tilde is down here and you actually

need 5% negative nominal raise.

That's a big problem.

If you need five basis points negative and you can

and you can't go, sorry, you can only go to

25 basis points, but you need 30 basis points.

You're not that far away.

The effect is going to be smaller.

What else determines it.

And again you should have a look and show this

yourself.

Have a have a play.

The probability that we exit matters endogenously for the outcome.

Now, this is a very simple world.

We didn't say anything in this version of a little

model to illustrate this.

We didn't say anything about where fee came from.

Fee was a magic exogenous probability.

It's the zero lower bound theory, if you will.

But do we think in reality that that exit probability

is exogenous of policy and of communication and of what

policymakers do say, how they act?

No.

Probably not.

I can imagine lots of worlds where we think central

bank.

Is.

You know, so able to convince the world that they

will stop being stuck at the zero lower bound, that

people then behave in a way consistent with them not

being at the zero lower bound, which gets them away

from the zero low bank, a much more complicated model.

But still, if you think about it, just even the

simple world.

If you could do things to affect this fee.

You get out quicker.

Question if that.

If there's an output gap at the time of zero

bound.

How can the bank set the optimal policy after time

capital D?

Wouldn't do like in the last lecture we saw that

the distortions are persistent and they carry over.

So not in this world because we've assumed that we

just jumped to a world where the are so part

of the persistence in the other world.

Some of it is through the system dynamics, which are

not very powerful, but the other is through the R.

So we'd get shock to like productivity.

So it would have to grow here.

Here we're assuming like this R which I'm saying could

be very negative, can suddenly jump very quickly.

So I wouldn't think about this as quarter to quarter

or month to month.

But if you thought about it like a year or

two years or five year groups to five year groups,

okay, from when we go from there to there, we'll

go back to a world here.

None of the proper dynamics that you wouldn't get home

shape responses or anything fun like that.

It's a good question, but in this world, if you

could just jump back to tracking it, it's actually true

in our other models that you would be able to

exactly offset to.

But again, I wouldn't think about this as higher frequency.

I think of it as real medium term sort of

analysis.

Yeah.

There's another question.

I'll go back to my question.

What are the exact mechanisms that drive the real interest

rates below zero?

Okay.

So so the real interest rate like so in the

UK Indian model that we had, it was dependent on

all these productivity parameters that we said were sort of

real and outside of that model.

And so what do we think.

What what are the why have we had real interest

rate.

Have you ever heard of secular stagnation?

Okay.

So your question is one of and the guy is

called Alvin Hansen was the one who came up with

that term.

But if you want to look at research recently, people

like Larry Summers and.

Antonio Farkas has done some stuff.

Lucas, Lucas, Rachel at UCL who was here as a

PhD student.

He's got work on it.

So it's a big question.

If you plot real interest rates over the last 40

or 50 years, they have tended to trend down.

And so this is a this is a big open

question for macro, maybe marginally less open now than it

was two years ago.

Because essentially, if you looked at that same period, we

had inflation rates gradually drifting down, and then we had

countries that were trapped in deflation.

We've had obviously Japan famously, Germany hasn't had high inflation

for a long time.

You know, we've had this sort of general nominal rates

going toward zero.

Then we hit the big crisis and rates were actually

at zero for a long time in lots of parts

of the world.

And the big question was, are we going to be

stuck there forever?

So secular stagnation says that my answer to your question,

that this thing will just jump up won't happen, that

we're just on this like there's all these factors.

And I know your question is, what are the factors?

I'm going to answer that in a second.

There's all these factors just driving this thing down.

And that's just going to make a world of tracking

that with nominal rates basically impossible okay.

So who knows what the factors are.

Well one way to answer is I'll let you answer.

But one way is to compare which country got there

first and what what are characteristics we know about Japan

that are and I also mentioned the other ones, Germany

that are different to other countries.

You are catching up.

So I told you post the question, I am posing

the question.

So now I know.

The average age of the population is.

Ageing, so demographics are part of it.

We have we have countries, Japan being the most mature

in this, in this direction and that was chosen on

purpose.

I'm glad someone appreciated my careful choice of words.

And you know, as you get an older and older

population, you have more and more savings building up, because

obviously the way our societies work now, we work for

a period, we build up savings and then we sit

on savings.

And as we're building up more and more savings, because

we're going to be old and have to spend out

of our savings, there's this abundance of savings.

And with less and less young people, there's less and

less general need for that savings.

So the interest rate falls.

That's part of the driving driving factor.

There's actually a whole you know, there's people who've now

also considered whether there are issues of inequality that give

rise to to secular stagnation.

So one reason why I said two years ago this

was a much more pertinent concern that maybe it is

today, although I don't think it's completely gone away.

So I don't want to pretend, but actually the world.

That I was describing in the last answer about the

R star seemingly just jumping, and we're suddenly back in

an inflationary environment where we need raising interest rates happened.

Right?

Very suddenly we went to this inflationary world.

So even central banks this there's no no major central

banks.

Look at the the effect of lower bound.

Any more big open question.

Will we go back there like is this just temporary

shocks.

And then we're going to go back.

But that's where that's where the debate is.

But there's an entire literature on secular stagnation that asks

exactly these questions.

And in answering that question in a very detailed way,

I've now forgotten what my next line was going to

be.

I had a brilliant next thing to tell you.

I kind of did that.

Brilliant.

If I forgot it.

Oh, I remember it.

Sorry.

The reason I think it was.

And I remember why I think it's brilliant.

Because if you want to, if you want to start

thinking about part of the impetus for central banks to

move toward digital currencies, one of the big advantages of

digital currencies is the zero lower bound goes away.

Imagine there is no asset that public perfectly substitutable that

you can switch into.

So we move to a world, and there are people

in the world that you may be some of them

and I don't I'm not going to judge, but there

are some people who really panicked that we're going to

move to a world where we are obliged, if we

want to transact in any sort of normal way, that

we have to use a special token or coin issued

by the government.

They think this is like some people value the anonymity

and ability to use cash for crime and stuff, not

just crime.

I think the real criminals, it is very popular.

Cash is very popular among criminals for reasons that should

be obvious and but a central bank digital currency could

get away with all of this globe thing.

So when we were talking about secular stagnation and this

worry that this thing might just be trending down and

we're just going to be stuck here forever, a digital

currency was offering one way out because with digital currency,

you could just say the normal interest rate -10%.

And then all of your concerns are second order, because

if you pull out of that currency, you basically are

out of the system.

You can live off grid and forage for your food.

So yeah, if you're interested in central bank digital currencies,

that's one reason why we got very excited about them.

I think they're coming, but I'm not sure they solve.

They certainly right now don't seem to solve that problem.

And I'm not sure what problem they solve, but we'll

probably have one soon.

That said all of this.

And we've had this discussion already and.

Had you?

Had you all heard of explicit forward guidance before you

came in today?

The idea of it, so I.

The reason I'm saying this is I have a very

particular interpretation, which I know does not correlate perfectly with

everybody's interpretation of forward guidance.

So I'm just going to lay that out there.

I want you to know in advance my own personal

interpretation of forward guidance is much broader than most people,

including.

I had this discussion with a central bank governor on

Thursday evening, and I have to explain that I do

have this broad view.

Okay, so this is all on the slides.

So it's all coming, but I want to have that's

my sort of my red flag up front.

So you know where I'm coming from.

When most people talk about forward guidance, they refer to

basically what happened after the financial crisis.

After the financial crisis.

And central banks came out with statements like this one

from the Bank of England.

The NPC intends not to raise bank rate from its

current level of 0.5%.

Fun fact for a lot of the UK's history at

the effect of lower bound, the effect of bound was

greater than zero.

For reasons that I won't go into, but a bunch

of technical market reasons they chose that they couldn't lower

rates from below 0.5.

Other central banks went to zero, and then obviously the

others were negative.

So even the E doesn't have to mean zero or

lower.

You can't have a bound that's above zero like the

bank did.

So its current level of 0.5% at least.

So wrong emphasis level of 0.5% at least until the

Labour Force Survey headline measure of unemployment rate has fallen

to a threshold of 7%, subject to.

And they gave these three dockets where they talked about

medium term inflation expectations.

CPI will be sufficiently above the 2% target 18 to

24 months out and the FTC being happy.

So what these markets meant were they were meant to

serve as a this is what we intend to do,

but that bad things are happening somewhere where bad things

were defined as inflation clearly going up in the very

near term aggressively.

I'm not sure 0.5 above the target would be considered

aggressive given what we've just seen.

But there you go.

Inflation expectations becoming anchored or this policy causing financial stability

issues today were the three things that they basically said

that could get them to change this guidance.

But the last thing I want to stress about this

guidance, and I'll talk more about this in later slides,

is.

At least until.

This is a really important issue in communication and central

banks.

These words here, at least until were meant to indicate

that this was a threshold, not a trigger.

So in other words, if the labour force survey had

a measure of unemployment rate.

Went to 6.9, it did not mean they would definitely

raise rates.

But what they were saying was if the headline measure

was at 7.1, they would not raise rates.

That distinction was very much misunderstood in the UK.

And it became a huge problem.

And I'll talk about this over the next few slides,

because unemployment rate ended up falling much more quickly.

So we got to a point where the unemployment rate

was well below 7%, but the outlook for inflation was

still pretty weak.

So they weren't even considering raising.

And the markets started going, oh, but you said 7%.

There's now 5%.

You have a raise.

What's happening.

They said oh at least until why didn't you read

the words properly.

At least until it was fun.

Okay.

So that's what most people think of.

Let me now be very clear on what I consider

to be the, the the things that also count as

forward guidance.

Well, basically anything where central banks reveal their future intentions

with monetary policy.

So I and I have published papers on this.

You know, you can trace back the fed doing forward

guidance in the 90s.

Once the fed started communicating they started communicating.

Not explicitly like we will keep it at this rate

until certain conditions.

That's a very explicit form.

But they would say things like we have decided to

lower the federal funds rate today, and the balance of

risks remains tilted to the downside.

That's not an explicit statement of what they'll do, but

it's an indication that the next move is likely to

be another cut.

So the balance of risk statements also in my very

broad church interpretation of guidance to be included there.

But if you choose to have a different interpretation, that's

also fine.

I'm not here to try to indoctrinate you into some

broad forward guidance club, but just have it in the

back of your head when you hear some of the

things I say, because you might hear central bankers and

you think they seem to be different to Michael.

That is why I have a broad interpretation.

Okay, so here are, here are the the broad types

of forward guidance that that we had.

I've already told you the trigger versus threshold issue.

But some forward guidance was open ended.

Then it generally shifted until time dependent and other places

tried state dependent.

So state dependent would be, you know, until certain conditions

are met.

The time dependent, which is the fed used a lot

for a period, they would say, until at least late

2020, 2014 or until the middle of 2015.

And open ended is just we expect them to stay

low.

And not give any date or time on it.

So again, did any of you work in markets?

Are you're all too young to have certainly worked in

markets during this time.

You did did you were you there for the whole

lift off debate?

I was working in did what?

I was in Asia.

Oh.

Yeah, it's amazing how much fun markets are on days

of surprises.

And it's also amazing what is a surprise, by the

way, if you ever you know, sometimes the surprise can

be the insertion of one word in a statement or

the removal of one word in a statement.

And sometimes it surprises.

They didn't do what you thought they were going to

do, and then you get called an unreliable boyfriend if

you're the Bank of England.

That's not fun.

Okay.

The independent yeah, you can sort of see that the

fed started out with open ended move towards time dependent

and basically stayed there until, until lift-off, although they also

had knockouts.

And this is my this is my broad church slide.

I think I said basically everything the versions used in

Japan.

Have a much more similar to what other countries followed

when they went to explicit forward guidance.

Again, some slight differences about open ended versus dependent.

But as some of you will know, this sure, somebody

somebody here is from Sweden, aren't they?

You're Swedish.

Do you have any Norwegians?

No.

Sure you follow.

Your.

Riksbank publications, but some banks publish a path for actual

interest rates.

Now it's a huge debate.

So if you if you if you have this debate

with people in the UK, the Bank of England is

vehemently against this action because they worry it'll be taken

to be a commitment like this is our path for

rates.

But the countries that do it.

Don't seem to have that problem.

They publish a forecast every in almost every at least

I'm going to say every.

But I'm sure some will find an exception.

All the major inflation targeting central banks.

Part of what they do is they publish projections for

inflation and output and these key variables, and some of

them also alongside that, publish a projection for the interest

rates.

That would be the case over that, over that set

of events.

I'm in favour of that.

But I'm also okay if central banks don't want to

do that.

But I do think that the key thing that they're

trying to communicate is their reaction function.

So there's something really powerful if you like the BNZ.

That being said, being of course, the very important inflation

targeting central bank.

Why they're the first.

He was the first central bank recovered?

Yes.

Good.

It's a test.

I don't want to look at you guys in case

you were like.

That's obviously us.

Yeah.

First, inflation targets were the reserve Bank of New Zealand.

You can also you can also convey your reaction function

in many ways.

And this forward guidance that I'm interpreting as forward guidance

is another way of doing that to say look as

we see it, the economy looks weak.

And if it continues to look weak, it's likely we

would choose rates that look like this.

So I don't give you an official path, but I

give you a hint or a direction or a you

know, how I would behave.

That's really what forward guidance is in my book, what

they're trying to do.

And I think lots of central banks have done it

in different ways.

And I think it's important.

I've already answered for you why this should matter.

Go back to the last two sets of lecture notes.

You will find a bunch of things that you get

as the answer to the New Keynesian model, where expectations

forward looking expectations are the key to the driving of

the variables today.

In fact.

This is where.

We get the effect of commitment versus discretion.

The benefit of commitment is I can do things today

that, you know, I can say things or commit to

things today that will come in the future, and they

affect how you believe the world will be.

So you change the outcomes today, and as a result,

we can do much better smoothing of shocks.

We can change the time path and all of these

things, and it all comes from this type of I

think I put last time, I think I put the

inflation version of this, I put gaps and inflation in

this model are all forward looking reflections of all future

interest rate gaps in the economy.

So actually in these worlds you can manipulate all these

things over many, many periods and change output today.

So again going back to the simple transition probability model,

if you can sort of tell people today that there'll

be a big interest rate gap in the future and

in many periods in the future that would encourage you

to spend more today and close the output gap.

So that's really this sort of first thing I probably

said to you.

Thing I think is most important about the new command,

or most important, about how we think about monetary policy,

broader monetary policies.

Now, and as a result of these type of models,

is the central role that expectations have in these models.

And so in those models, forward guidance is just such

a natural policy or thing to think about.

And so for me, I like to think about the

sort of communication dimension of it.

But I don't.

I just don't believe it's completely new.

If you think about the RBNZ's decision to move to

inflation targeting, what they were trying to do was to

anchor inflation expectations and to have a framework that then

allowed them to communicate how their policy would adjust when

beliefs about where inflation was going were away from their

target.

So what you're really doing with inflation targeting is communicating

an anchor and reaction function to achieve that.

That's all communication.

That's all through expectations.

That's kind of what monetary policy is now.

After he left, he, Ben Bernanke wrote a wrote a

blog, I think, on the Brookings website in which he

said that.

Monetary policy or interest rate policy is 99% talk and

1% action or something like this, just to reflect that

importance of expectations, management and communication in really how things

are done.

Hey.

Yeah.

Okay.

So then when we want to, when we want to

sort of take that idea into our models, what we

have to do is we have to think a little

bit about what new information we're going to be adding.

Now, most of the models that we would write down,

this is actually not true for some of my research,

but for the standard model we think that there's generally

full information.

Okay.

What does that mean?

It means that I, as the central bank, know as

much as you as the market.

So we both see the same output gap data.

We observe it perfectly.

We know we can all form optimal forecasts.

So what are optimal forecasts in this model.

It's a model.

It's a forecast where you know the whole model.

You know the structure.

You know all of the coefficients.

And you can iterate it forward in Matlab perfectly taking

account of endogenous reaction of policy to get the optimal

forecast.

Well in these models we used I've done this and

I've done this for you a few times.

We've done something like it is equal to I don't

want to use fee again, but that's what we usually

use.

Let's go Alpha pi times pi t plus alpha y

times y t something like that.

And maybe a shock at it.

All right.

So everybody knows that coefficient and that coefficient.

So they know how the nominal rate will evolve if

they think the economy has more inflation or less inflation.

We write these models down where everybody understands everything.

So we have to think about what the source of

new information is.

So the source of the new information could be I'm

going to change that value here from this to Alpha

hat Pi two.

And that was pi one.

Right.

So it goes from a number of 1.5 to 3

798 whatever you want.

Okay.

Or you could think about it like there's a shock

that's added on.

A monetary policy shock.

And I'm going to communicate what those shocks are going

to be.

Because what's the one thing we don't know in these

models of perfect, of full information?

Not perfect information.

Full information.

We don't know what the shocks that are going to

hit the economy are.

That's where the uncertainty is.

So if the central bank came out and could commit

to a policy that had the difference to what you

think, either just a linear offsetting difference that would be

new information, or if they could change the coefficients, that

would be new information.

Or you can think about worlds where maybe the market

has a different view about what inflation is going to

do or doing.

That also matters, but you have to communicate something for

you to update your beliefs about something.

I have to tell you something new if you're going

to react to it.

Okay, here is the one hard part of this.

So let's take a break until we just take the

six minute break today.

So we'll start at 12 minutes past.

And then we'll do the one hard part of this.

This was not a question.

That people completely trust those.

So in in which version of forward guidance do we

assume that in theory we're going to assume something?

So I like to do it with a commitment problem.

Commitment problems assume full trust.

Okay.

So but then you.

Said but in practice central banks worry a lot about

whether they'll be believed.

Is that right?

UK doesn't.

That's why they are very reluctant to do it now.

Yeah.

But you say we work for other countries, right.

So what's the difference?

Is it because previously central Bank of UK did not

commit.

People don't really in practice.

I don't think any of them ever committed.

Okay then.

I usually work for a few, but doesn't work for

the other when.

It comes down to how credible they are and sometimes

how lucky they are.

Yeah, central banking is hard.

We assume that.

In the model we're going to assume they can commit

fully, and you'll see that they want to do the

same kind of trade off, and they want to actually.

Do something that might.

Potentially.

Yeah.

You know, if they, if they if the situation.

So just think about what I mean by this.

Imagine inflation goes back above zero and output gap goes

back above zero.

This tells you that you've got to raise rates.

But if you've committed to not raising rates then you're

going to offset that.

That's like a negative shock.

So whatever the shock is going to be exactly offsetting

the.

The.

Systematic response.

I feel compelled to ignore.

Yeah.

You have to raise it then.

Oh but but in a commitment problem you can't renege

in mathematically when we do it you don't renege.

Now if you want to write those gains down, then

you have a sort of a like if you renege

then there's some kind of punishment off equilibrium threat or

something like that.

That's a different model in these in these commitment problems

you deliver.

But that's why we worry about time consistency.

Because remember, when you get there you don't want to

be in that world again.

I have a question about.

See you like this.

Yeah, yeah.

I believe.

It.

Yeah.

That's okay.

So this is my world.

When you start.

To have, like, a policy.

I would expect them to have gravitas about the market's

response.

Is that a wrong decision or.

Like what's like when you start to get the nuggets?

How does like how can you argue that the central

bank will always be dependent on like market activity or.

Okay, so so like a biased.

So so in these models we always make the assumption

that the independent and they implement these policies and they're

believed and they go on okay.

And you know if they don't have commitment power then

they do.

Discretion and discretion is always optimal regardless of what the

market is.

Okay.

But there's two extra dimensions that you've raised.

One is what if their policies could cause market volatility

and they don't like volatility?

Well, that's not built in.

But you could add that in and that will give

a different response.

The optimal policy could change the other which I think

is the more interesting part of the question but not

one I have an answer for.

Maybe why I find it more interesting because I don't

know the answer.

There are these interesting questions about, you know, if Central

bank's set policy, looking at market expectations, there's a kind

of circularity there.

Right?

So this is.

This is the the.

Old question used to be posed, as you know, is

is the dog wagging the Taylor is the tail wagging

the dog.

And I don't know, I think that's a hard problem.

But I don't know what the answer is.

But it's absolutely right that it changes the predictions of

these models.

But remember, we don't have a proper marketing.

Like even when we have expectations there, like a single

expectation.

You can imagine a world.

And this is, I think, an interesting question as well.

And I.

Work on other people I know are.

Working on it.

Which is like what happens if you have a market

that has these dispersed views?

You might say something that fully is agreed with by

a chunk of the market.

But another thing, you're insane.

All the time.

How do you communicate in that world?

It's very different, this world.

So I think these are very bad models to actually

do optimal communication.

They get the logic across, but they don't.

They don't pin down what a central bank should do.

So like any central bank.

Governor or a board member who was here listing these

like, like optimal.

Policy predictions would be like.

I don't even get to communicate this to the market

fully because it varies every period, right?

Whereas in our market, in our model, it's like fixed.

It's fixed and communicated perfectly and perfectly understood.

So I think thinking about the relaxation of those things

is super interesting.

That's what.

People do.

Thank you.

Where are you going to be so.

I did this because I lost my lot.

I know my.

Why I like this.

It's interesting.

If you think about the labour condition.

This is a given condition given you can do the

math.

Is very interesting, I think.

I think to me that this is I am going

to be where I can do the math.

If I cannot get.

It's all of it.

It should be the other way around.

You can get into it, but cannot do that.

I don't know if I can get.

You are not the right.

You go way better off.

Like.

That.

Yeah.

I think.

Yeah.

Okay, I am going to get going again.

Even before I show you the heart.

Hardest part of this, although again, I think that the

basic logic of the the maths is just a token

problem, but the basic logic of the finding.

I think you get some of it from this.

It's not exactly this, but this is what forward guidance

is in these models.

This is a pictorial representation of what I was trying

to say.

You know, imagine this dashed line.

Are what the interest rate should be.

And there's a bounded zero.

Okay, so we're at some point in time and we

would like to have and we'd like to have negative

interest rates but we can't.

So we have zero.

And then as the economy improves and we get to

a better world.

Well we're going to go back and we're going to

go above above zero okay.

Part of the effect we get from a commitment solution

is essentially to change the reaction function of the central

bank such that you say even when conditions are better

and I would normally be raising rates, I'm now going

to keep them at zero for a period.

So what I'm committing to, if you will, if you

look at this.

The bound is forcing me to have too high an

interest rate.

I have a real interest rate gap that's positive, which

gives me the low inflation and the low output.

But I can partly offset that.

If I commit to having.

The reverse in the future.

Like I'll be at a point where normally I would

have interest rates at 2%, but I'm still going to

be at zero.

And then when they would usually have been already at

4%, they're only at 2%, and so on.

I'm sort of committing to creating this future offsetting behaviour.

And again, if you remember the if you remember the

the sort of equation all the way back here, which

I keep going on about as being so key in

these models, except I went too far.

This type of thing by committing to negative real interest

rate gaps in the future, I can offset current real

interest rate gaps.

Now, if I asked you how much do I have

to?

How much should I optimally sort of offset in the

future?

How much should I commit to doing in the future?

Well, the answer that you would naturally think of it

depends how big the problem is today.

If I'm a long way below where I should be,

there's a big gap today and therefore I'm going to

have big output gaps and big inflation gaps today.

The the optimal policy that's going to help offset that

today is going to be something really big in the

future.

If I'm only a little bit away I just need

a little in the future.

It'll be a load of maths that's going to show

that.

And what it's going to show is essentially the amount

you're going to do is going to get bigger and

bigger the further behind where you would have been falls.

In fact, what you see in a lot of these

models is the optimal thing to do with commitment is

to commit to something that looks like price level targeting.

So I am going to do the till the vote

comes in.

I'm going to stick with the intuition and then we'll

do the maths.

Okay.

So let me show you this.

So one thing with inflation targeting.

We usually do inflation targeting.

We think about the fact that what we're trying to

do is hit.

This is a price level chart.

Imagine you're had a positive inflation target.

The slope of this.

Is a target of 2%.

Okay.

So things just trends up.

Now that's equivalent.

At some level to a price level target that follows

the same blue path.

Yep, you can see that you can.

One is the change, the other is the level.

If you just plot, the level is going up.

It's the same as having a target that's constant at

2%.

They're equivalent except in one important dimension.

Imagine we suddenly were going along and at this point

we didn't have 2% inflation.

We had -1% inflation.

Inflation targeting, then says, well, from this new price level.

We grow at 2%.

A price level target says.

We've got to go back to that line.

What if we had a -1% and another -2% inflation

targeting?

So as we then grow at that inflation target from

there, what does a price level target say.

We are a long way from home.

We're not going to bring it all the way back

up there.

Imagine you're stuck at the in deflation for a few

years like Japan was.

If you were trying to get back to a price

level target.

What are the implied inflation targets?

And each of these points.

Well, initially it was 2%.

Then we're going to have to commit to a period

of more than 2% to get back to there.

It was only 1% down, so we're going to have

to spread that 1% over maybe a couple of years.

Maybe we do two and a half, two and a

half.

We get there.

But here we were 3% below the target plus the

2% that we missed out.

We might be having to do a 4% inflation target

for a few years to get back, but here we

might be having to do even more.

That's essentially what we're going to get.

We're going to get a world where optimally, as we

get further and further away, we commit to going back.

And by committing to going back, I'm going to have

to get higher and higher inflation.

So it's endogenously going to get me more and more

looseness in the future, because I'm not just trying to

get back to zero anymore.

I'm trying to go back to the price level.

That turns out to be the optimal thing you can

achieve.

And by committing to that, you get better outcomes today.

Because looking at this, you go, ah, they're going to

have to run huge, you know, real interest rate gaps

to get really high inflation to get us back to

that price level.

That's the answer to the optimal policy with commitment.

Now let's see it mathematically.

What are we going to do.

We're going to write down the usual Lagrangian.

We're subject to the same kind of traditional Phillips curve.

We don't have cost push shocks here.

So this is a sort of world that is very

nicely.

Ordinarily we have an ES curve same as before.

But we now have the interest bound, the same sort

of challenge.

Except now we have this extra sort of potentially binding

constraint.

Right down to sort of optimisation.

So we're going to have these these extra constraints in

here the grandes multipliers the chi and the mu.

Taking derivatives.

Again, this is an optimal policy question.

So you're giving it to like some social planner and

asking them what would you best choose if you could

choose levels of inflation and output gap and interest rate

for this economy?

That's just eliminating an equation.

Don't worry too much about that.

But we end up with this kind of a.

Kuhn.

Tucker.

Problem, the complementary slackness condition.

So again, if we're in a world where mu t

equals zero, the constraint doesn't bind.

If t is greater than zero, we know the constraint

is binding, in which case we know that I will

be at the bound.

So that's sort of.

Okay.

Take the optimal conditions.

Solve for the Lagrange multiplier from the the output gap.

First order condition.

Plug it in.

Okay.

I'm not claiming that this is a beautiful equation, but

its equation.

It's a dynamic equation.

You plug in for the price levels.

You get these terms here.

Now this is the only part of this that I

don't this is not even a mathematical trick.

This is just to recognise something that there is this

repeated term of the price level and this.

Omega over kappa times the output gap term.

So we're just going to define that as some kind

of important target variable.

That is some combination of output gaps and price levels.

It just allows us to replace this p t omega

plus kappa y t with an F.

And the p minus p t minus one, and the

equivalent term for the minus one output gap as f

t minus one.

Okay.

Then you end up with an equation that has these

F's in it, and these other Lagrange multipliers that we

still have to solve for.

Okay.

But it gives us this kind of dynamic equation for

that, that sort of target variable f this price output

gap target.

So.

Just rewriting it.

This muti.

Remember this muti is this question.

That's the question.

Is this a condition?

Which, when it's greater than zero, implies we're at the

lower band or at zero.

So.

What does it mean?

It means that this f t thing has to take

on this particular set of values, that we're just going

to call that set of values, this f star term,

and then solve it in terms of that.

So we're going to solve this in terms of an

f star and an f t where the f t

is just this perhaps basic arbitrary, but this interesting combination

of price levels and output that come naturally out of

this optimisation.

So the central bank is going to be thinking is

where you're going to start seeing this sort of logic,

this importance of a combination of the conditions on output

and the conditions on the price level that are going

to matter most for what they're trying to do.

Okay.

You say here.

Okay, so so since this.

Has to be greater than or equal to zero, we

know one thing has to be true for this economy.

This.

This is probably completely obvious.

Actually, when I was reading back this slide, I thought

that this may be obvious without showing you this slide,

but I'll say it anyway.

F f t were to go above f star.

We go away from the zero lower bound.

So in other words, this thing.

Has to be either positive or zero because muti is

either positive or zero.

This is the asymmetry I was talking about before this.

This binds in one direction and not the other.

That's all I wanted to say there.

Yep.

So there's a bias in terms of the central bank

wouldn't want like a negative output.

Yeah.

That is the bias.

No, no the bias is just on what they can

implement.

The whole point here is that if everything swings the

other way, they can always raise rates.

Yeah.

The constraint here is they can't always lower them.

But but this is actually a very important point.

If we were.

So we haven't done it.

We've just written down the equations of the economy.

But if you were to write down the objective function,

I know you did write down the objective function.

Sorry, I'm even lying.

Let me go back to the Lagrangian.

This remains a symmetric quadratic loss function.

The central bank distilled dislikes inflation deviations above and below

equally, and still dislikes output gaps above and below equally.

The constraint is the asymmetry, but that causes them to

have to adjust their policy.

As a result, they themselves just hop.

It looks like they have an asymmetry, but it's coming

from the constraint.

I configured the intuition in which direction is the bias

in.

Again, what do you mean by bias?

They have no bias.

Or the asymmetry as a result of the constraint.

Does it mean that they are not reaching the price

level, or does it mean that they not reaching the

output gap?

I haven't said anything about that yet.

Okay.

We're just deriving what their optimal policy is in a

world where they may occasionally not be able to lower

rates enough.

And then we're going to ask, what is their optimal

policy?

Their optimal policy ends up being I'll just tell you

the intuition.

It ends up being quite a complex equation.

You get an optimal target.

This is why I drew this picture first, because I

thought it would help.

So let's see if it did help you derive this

optimal F star.

Which is a function of a starting price level.

And then with a bunch of coefficients, a series of

terms reflecting how you missed the target in the past.

So what is the what is the optimal F star

today?

What is the optimal price level plus output gap term?

It's something that if we were just at the starting

period, we'd be happy we're at the starting period.

But as as we go forward from today, if I

end up having Mrs..

I'm essentially going to change this target.

This is like saying if I have.

I raise what I'm going to do and I'm going

to keep going.

And they're going to be functions of all of the

Mrs..

Over the history.

Now, if you remember most of the policies we've written

down, they've been history independent.

The optimal policy here is now committing to a policy

that's history dependent.

If I missed my target and again, think about it

like a price level target.

If I missed the price level target, I'm going to

commit to build back up to it.

This isn't a bias.

Say this again.

This is not a bias.

This is an optimal commitment policy.

Why does it look different to the optimal commitment policy

we derived before?

Because there's a constraint that they want to avoid.

And what does this avoid.

It gets us so that as we start, if we

miss it for exogenous reasons, shocks that hit, we miss

it on the downside and we end up constrained.

This is increasingly making our target go further and further

away, which is meaning we'll committing to do bigger and

bigger actions, which in a New Keynesian model is affecting

policy today.

So so that's again, it's not a bias.

It's just reflecting a constraint.

The central bank commit to a policy.

That's one which says as I get further and further

away symmetrically, if they were up, up, up, up, up,

they would also respond with a bigger and bigger adjustment

in the other direction.

But they've built in all of that extra commitment technology

because it really helps in one direction.

But this is again, mathematically, this is the best you

can do with this system of equations.

You cannot do better than this dynamically.

What's the problem with this policy?

It's not a new problem.

It's what we always have with commitment problems.

Shocks and unexpected shocks are just there.

What's the problem?

Time inconsistency.

Which means what?

In this case?

Which means that you can just commit to a new

trend instead of committing.

You can act on a new trend instead of going

back to the old inflation.

Yes, broadly.

Essentially what it is, is that I have, in order

to minimise the effects of this first shock that are

hurting us and getting us below the Xlb or ELB.

I have a commitment to a policy that involves going

back, so if I have big shots, I have a

long way to go back.

All of this past dependence means that I probably I

at that point, I don't want to do it anymore.

At that point, I want to re optimise.

At that point I want to say I'm here.

Well, let's pretend here was here.

And so starting from here, what's the best I can

do?

Well, actually mathematically the best you could do would be

to follow a commitment path that goes like this.

And if you miss, you commit to doing bigger and

bigger moves.

Why can't you do that?

Well, because every time.

So this goes to your question in the break.

If every time you miss it, you're optimised.

Well, it's not a commitment.

If it's not a commitment, expectations wouldn't adjust and expectations

don't adjust.

You don't get any of these positive effects that we

get.

So.

So we had a I got asked a question in

the break, which was about a.

I think it was actually.

I ask you a question again.

Me.

Was it your question?

What was your question was about this?

Was it?

Yeah, it was about commitment.

Sorry.

It mixed up the questions.

You ask your question again.

So it was basically like what?

There you go.

Yeah.

Then what if they don't commit?

That's not even a choice in these.

Like, I can't answer that question mathematically because this is

the answer for a world where they do commit.

I can also tell you the world where they can

do discretion, which is they're optimise every period.

Now what we really need or what is really like,

the way the reality is, is quasi commitment.

A world where they come out and they say, look,

no, no, no, no, I'm seriously I'm going to bring

it back.

But I think you also asked me a question about

why some countries did well and some countries do badly.

Apologies.

Don't think there's anyone from this country here, but if

there is, I apologise for using your country as an

example in a negative way, like Argentina reneges on institutional

frameworks all the time.

Is there any relation to union?

Good.

Very good at football.

Very bad at sticking to policy.

Regime.

Right.

I mean, and when does it happen?

Well it happens when bad things happen.

They have some kind of overthrow of a government there,

and the new government comes up and says, no, we're

starting again.

This happens everywhere, right?

Happens more frequently in some places than others.

But why is that bad?

Because if you've got a policy where we're here and

I'm saying, you know, it's bad, but it would be

worse if I hadn't committed to this policy.

And then as soon as the government changes, you know,

I'm not going to commit to that policy anymore.

That weakens the beneficial effects.

So if we're in a world that has low credibility,

that policy suggestions become questioned by markets who then don't

think they're actually going to do it, then the yield

curve doesn't move, interest rates don't move, expectations don't adjust,

and we don't get any benefit of them.

If you're super credible.

You get better effects in these models.

Yeah.

So my question was like when you have your.

Um, lower bones and.

Don't look.

Then.

It's a crisis.

Keep trying, keep trying.

Do bigger things.

So okay, so it's a good question.

Let me answer it very briefly.

And then we'll come on to you when I show

you some of the data.

So one option is we come along and we say

oh we're going to bring it back.

But you know, central banks don't actually do this optimisation

in practice.

They're sitting there going okay, yes we've had an inflation

undershoot.

But we're going to do is we're going to commit

to having low interest rates for longer.

I already showed you some of the quotes.

Initially the fed was like yeah, we'll keep rates low

for a while for a foreseeable future.

Actually not until this happens.

Okay.

Not until this day actually.

We're going to push it out.

Push it out, push your date, push your day.

They basically were failing in these models.

You should be able to optimally choose the rate to

go to.

And that should bring the you know, the xlb should

be something that binds for a couple of quarters and

you get out quickly.

There's one thing I was going to touch on earlier

when I was talking about this fee model with the

probability, the transition in an A what another way you

get out of a Xlb.

It's Michael's other half.

Fiscal policy.

Right.

If we think it's a shortfall of demand, and demand

isn't going up because people expect us to be in

this place for a long time.

If the government comes along and does a huge amount.

But again, we saw that tried trialled in Japan, sometimes

they didn't do enough.

And then, you know, and this is the bit where

academics were coming out.

Like I said, I had meetings with academics in 2002,

one, two and three who were going, oh, Japan.

Oh no, no, that that happened in the US.

It would never get to this because we'd do a

would do the full bazooka approach.

And we do all this QE and we do all

of this fiscal policy, and we'd be out of it

in no time.

And everybody knows that.

So we'd never get in it.

Well not true.

They were stuck there for many years.

Point is it's hard, right.

So these models give you some sense of what type

of policy you need.

But we're never in a world of full commitment.

Even the fed.

A couple of years ago under Trump, Trump started questioning

the Fed's independence.

Which then got people thinking, gosh, what does that mean?

Like what policy we're going to have from the fed?

That's really scary stuff, because the fed is usually the

sort of the beacon of institutional independent central bank guidance,

the world's safe asset, etcetera, etcetera.

When they if they if they went, gosh, that would

have been horrible.

You had it in the UK, anyone who lived through

Liz Truss and Kwasi Kwarteng and their fiscal credibility, you

know.

But so I think we in reality central banks operate

in a world of not full discretion, not full commitment,

and they're trying to achieve some kind of optimal, optimal

stuff without fully tying their hands.

So I think if you want to know one thing,

I think the central banks, like the ECB, really goofed

recently.

They made a mistake because they had committed essentially with

forward guidance policies to not take action.

And inflation was starting to race away.

And they still said, oh no, we better not.

We better not renege on what we said.

And the markets sitting there going, are you stupid?

You know, you've got to rate.

And then they came out and even said, okay, we

know we should raise and you know, we should raise,

but we don't want to lose some credibility.

So we're not going to raise we'll raise next month.

And then everyone's like like if you know, if everyone

knows this, then why don't you just do it?

And I thought and now central bankers are more worried

of trying to offer those commitments because they get burned

by it.

You ask the question as well, like the Bank of

England, this unreliable boyfriend.

If you don't know what it is, just Google Bank

of England unreliable boyfriend.

They get very upset, but they basically promised things and

then didn't deliver.

That's where the reference to the unreliable boyfriend comes in.

And as a result, they are more scared about offering

anything that commits or communicates too strongly.

And I think that makes it less easy for them

to achieve optimal type policies.

Yeah.

So?

So essentially, you get this world where you, you are

committing to a world where the further you are away,

the more you're going to do.

And that helps through this forward looking channel.

Oh, it's not what I wanted.

There's a special case in there, but I think I've

gone through enough of this to show it.

And I've talked about the time inconsistency.

Time inconsistency is the real challenge to these things.

It's actually not a problem in these models because in

these models, I mean, this is again where the logic

versus the maths comes into conflict.

In these models you write down a starting date and

a commitment, and commitment is a policy forever.

And that's what you're optimising for.

If you want to build more interesting dynamic models, you

can think about models where there are dates at certain

points in the future where you get to renege, but

then the effect of your your optimal policy will have

to take that into account.

And the effect on expectations will take into account that

at some date in the future, you're going to renege.

So imagine and this is how some of it was

done.

So it's a friend and colleague of mine up in

Barcelona, de Bertolli, who did this work where you essentially

have like a policy renege fairy.

Like if you wonder why we keep bringing the fairies

in, it's because, like, having random probabilistic events are much

nicer to solve mathematically than these state dependence type things.

But this one comes along as being big, and allows

the central bank or the policymaker to occasionally renege.

And you get this world of partial credibility or partial

commitment.

And again, you can't do as well as the full

commitment, but then you don't have as much of a

challenge of time inconsistency where a policymaker in reality would

get there and go, I'm not committing to 8% inflation.

Let's just let bygones be bygones and start again.

That can't happen mathematically, but it does.

It is a real concern.

Okay, what about the evidence?

Well, there's a bunch of empirical work on this actually

the one I'm going to point to if anyone is

interested in.

It's a Journal of Applied Econometrics paper listed on the

slide.

Sutherland 2023.

He was working at the Bank of Canada.

I engaged with him a lot during his writing of

the paper and and I think it's a sort of

neat one.

And he tries to do a pretty careful analysis of

how open ended versus date based versus state based and

all these things operated.

He found essentially no difference in the behaviour of the

different ones and find some model wrong way, some moderate

effects of the of the different things.

Most of these studies are done using event study methodologies.

So event study methodologies are the ones where you typically

take high frequency market data.

And you look at what was the expectation before the

announcement.

And then a few minutes after the announcement.

And you can vary the window.

The advantage is you can isolate just that one communication

event.

So a lot of my research uses event studies.

Again this questions about how fine you can get the

data, how big the window should be.

Obviously the bigger the window the more other events might

have affected things.

The narrower the window.

In some cases, the more you should worry that the

market hasn't understood what was the implication like, if you

make a really complicated announcement and you give them five

minutes to digest it, you often find that this volatility

for a while and then it settles on some new

price level or new expectation of it.

So that's.

Various studies.

To sort of try to do this and they find

sort of moderate effects of it.

And.

Here is an example of this is sort of intraday

data.

So this is on a given day.

You can look at the prices for like 930 in

the morning 1040 12 etcetera.

And the fed announcements are at 2:00.

So here you can see a sort of powerful effect

on fed funds futures.

The two year ones drop pretty aggressively around an announcement

a forward guidance announcement.

The 18 month ones also drop.

The one year ones were already quite low.

And then the six month ones basically don't move.

What does that tell you?

Well, it tells you that the announcement provided some information

that made people change their view of what fed policy

would be in two years time.

That's essentially it.

And you could do this repeatedly across across different assets

and different events and try and cut into it.

Question.

Do you see this as an increase back rate?

Is it because over reacted to the news.

So this is this is part of it.

Like if you just if you want to attribute all

of the effect to this narrow window, you get a

different impact to if you.

So what happens after they make the initial announcement.

They then have a press conference.

So during the press conference which would have been around

here, you can see it kind of jumps up and

then drifts.

So you might want to say oh the announcement effect

was big.

But then when they clarified exactly what they meant it

undoes some of it.

I mean, let's not over blow the effect of this,

right?

Look at the look at the the y axis.

Two year rates were expected to be 20 basis points,

and they dropped to ten and then went back up

to 12 or 13.

It's you know, if you put this in the full

history of US rates, you would have the 70s.

When interest rates are up at 15%.

That would be the, the that would be a number

15, not 0.15 15 on this axis.

So these are in a small window you're knocking.

But actually for announcement if you if you do 10

or 15 basis points in an announcement that's a an

impactful announcement.

And.

Oh.

The literature has also focussed on one distinction.

I'll finish here and we'll do.

We'll do Balanchine policies next week.

And.

So if you think about what what we were, what

we were, what we've been thinking about in these in

these models.

As I described earlier, we have full information in these

models.

So the central bank has no special information on the

state of the economy.

And so most of the time there's not even any

role for communication about your beliefs about economic conditions.

Because one type of forward guidance, if I go back

to the reaction function, one type of forward guidance is

I stand before you and I say I'm the central

bank.

I think inflation and output are going to be low

for a long time, and therefore interest rates will be

low for a long time.

I'm trying to correct your view of the world.

If you think if you think interest rates will be

back high soon, I say I think you're wrong because

you have the wrong views of the world.

That's often called again.

Apologies for any advantage given to our Greek colleagues.

There's a there's a Greek link here as well.

It's called Delphic Forward guidance, which is a sort of

signal about the way the world is.

The other one is the one that the models tend

to focus on is Odyssey and Forward guidance.

This is where you commit properly, fully to a different

policy.

So a way of writing that if you wanted in

this short hand would be to say, okay, epsilon, this,

this monetary policy shock is going to be exactly equal

to minus the systematic part, so that rates will be

zero until some future date.

Okay.

And you commit and again there's no reneging.

So I'm just stuck with that.

And I'm going to get to some future period.

Maybe the economy is booming.

It's the ECB.

It's May 2022 I should be raising rates.

But they're just refusing because they don't want to break

their commitment or they can't okay.

Actually in in a lot of models if you write

imperfect information models Delphic forward guidance can be really damaging.

Because what is Delphic forward guidance?

It would be a world where you all believe the

economy's not so bad, and I come and tell you

it's bad.

If I do that credibly, you end up in a

world where your beliefs shift to the world is bad

and that can be counterproductive.

In practice.

I would say most central banks were closer to Delphic

and like would edge toward reaction function, but never, in

my humble opinion, a full commitment.

Even though they sometimes went a bit far with their

commitment.

They were all operating in this grey area.

So you'll hear central bankers always say, oh, we're going

to keep rates low until whatever.

But this is why we have knockout or this is

why we have exemptions or this is why we say

it's state dependent or data dependent.

This is they're always unwilling to go full odyssey in.

And forward guidance type commitment low for longer commitment.

I've said that one.

Is there anything here?

There's a lot of words that are about.

Yeah.

Bank of Canada tried with conditional commitment.

That's the Sutherland paper I mentioned.

Uh.

Let me just end on state dependent forward guidance.

State dependent forward guidance.

So this is the idea that you say where I

started with forward guidance.

Until unemployment is below this rate, we will not raise

we will not consider raising rates.

That worked okay in the US.

I think and I think it was a bit of

a disaster in the UK.

If you compare the two policies, I think they're to

the untrained eye they are the same policy.

Obviously one refers to UK data, one refers to US

data not that different.

So why was one so badly interpreted in one place

and so much better interpreted in another?

Again, this goes down to this interaction with markets, the

imperfect information, how they react, whether they think it's credible.

One thing that really killed the UK's forward guidance when

they started it, which is why they're so sensitive about

it, because as I alluded to earlier, they had this

knockout about we won't do it at the time of

this, this guidance about the unemployment rate, the state dependence

was on the unemployment rate.

That unemployment rate fell really quickly.

So we were very clearly still in bad times, but

unemployment was below the threshold they had given.

And then they got into this whole threshold versus trigger

thing, which the US did as well, which is they

then had to come out and say, oh yeah, I

know we said that number, but we're still not moving.

And then markets thought, why would I listen to them?

They said this before, now they're saying something different.

May I don't like it.

And this is one of those things where once you

get into the sort of bad cycle with the markets

beliefs, you're in real trouble.

So it's all communication.

Okay.

Last slide for today.

I'll leave balance sheet policy next week.

Said.

All of this unemployment threshold not really a success.

Like you say, there's a big push and some people

really push for this.

I'm much more agnostic.

And because they have, they have other problems.

I don't know if you if you instead of thinking

about a price level target, if you think about nominal

GDP target, which is P times y, you can get

a policy that has very similar effects to this, a

world where in theory, as you get further and further

away in either direction, but it really pays off in

the negative direction, you commit to more and more recovery.

They have very nice optical properties.

They look sort of therefore very similar to this type

of thing.

Why am I much less enthusiastic?

Because I'm a realist.

Nominal GDP is one of the noisiest variables we have

in practice.

GDP gets revised massively.

It comes out with big lags.

Inflation data.

This you may not know, but you're going to learn

something.

Inflation data in most countries is measured at relatively high

frequency in the sense of we will get the October

number in a couple of weeks.

So we're a couple of weeks out of October.

We know what inflation was in October, and in most

countries probably not all.

But in most countries, inflation data is never revised.

That's not to say it's measured perfectly, but whatever the

number you're told it is today for September will be

the number for September when we get the first GDP

release for Q two.

It's quarterly.

Some countries have monthly, most of quarterly.

That first guess will continue to be revised for at

least five years in most countries.

So if you're trying to target something and you're like,

oh, we're we're here, therefore we'll do this.

And then a couple of months, it's like, oh no,

no, we weren't there.

We were there.

Oh God, we should have done something different.

Oh no.

We were actually there.

Oh gosh.

Oh we did the completely the wrong thing.

Oh no.

We're actually here.

But by now we're already over here.

We're looking back.

That's a mess.

But theoretically very nice properties.

And this is not one I get behind.

Okay.

Let's stop there today.

I will do the rest of this next time.

And then the lecture.

Six material.

You know.

Hey.

Yeah.

Oh.

Don't worry.

Just send it.

Whatever.

You have.

It.

Oh, it's just a stupid idea.

Oh, then I mean, like.

Yeah.

I think as soon as you are ready.

Yeah, I.

Know that.

There's no there's.

No pressure on my side.

So are you.

Yeah.

You.

So right now I should be able let me just

quickly check my emails to see nothing has exploded in

my life.

Otherwise you.

And right now, what are we going to do?

This.

Yes I know.

Yeah, yeah.

Well, let's at least get out of the room before

I answer a lot of questions.

Broke two boxes today.

That's my first time to show you.

Actually a just sorry to learn everything I do about.

I've had it for years and most of the Greek

alphabet.

Lecture 7:

Look what I brought.

They are mine and I will bring them home with

me.

You.

I.

Okay.

The Olympics.

The next.

Okay, I think most of you are here and others

can join as they wish.

A little bit later.

So let me update you on where we are.

So I got through the majority of this lecture which

was on their lower bound policies, unconventional policies.

There's a little bit left to do on balance sheet

policies, but actually.

Policy policies, I think are relatively straightforward conceptually.

Obviously, analysing them in our models is tricky, and I'll

explain why it's tricky in our models.

But also there is a lot of empirical work and

actually a lot of heterogeneity in the results we find.

So I will come back a little bit to some

of this later.

Then I have and I've split it into two separate

lectures, although they're both going to be called L6.

So there's an L6A and B which I will start

today.

Looking at the material, I will almost certainly not get

through all of eight today.

And then I'll start B next week at some point

after I finish A.

And then that will probably drag into the second to

last lecture.

And then the whatever is left, including the last lecture

I'll spend on these questions about sort of macro finance

type models.

So this will be I can tell you exactly what

I hope to do.

I will look at a couple of flavours of key

attacking more per 90 Gertler Gilchrest type models.

These are models where essentially we want to ask the

question how can finance?

Affect the fluctuations that we get in sort of otherwise

standard business cycle models.

And then there's a last little bit which will tie

back to today, which is going to be asking a

question that sort of builds off those models a little

bit, but also just asks.

Can things like the type of assets that a central

bank buys or the shape of its balance sheet, can

that give rise to extra lending by the banking sector?

So for that, we have to start thinking about what

a banking sector is, which we don't in a lot

of models, not because we don't think it's important, but

just because these models get complicated enough as it is.

So that's a sort of plan for where we're going.

Now, I didn't see the very final poll results, but

the general consensus was to keep the balance, as is,

between covering more maths in the lectures or less maths

in the lectures and covering more topics and more intuition.

And it was, I think it was maybe five wanted

just more maths and less economics and like three wanted

less maths and more economics.

And then everybody else was in the middle.

So there's a slight skew towards more maths and if

that's what you want, you're going to see it today

because there's a lot of maths today.

And if we redo the poll we'll see if everybody

flicks back.

But let me just reiterate what I have said many

times.

And so.

I know it's a horrible time, but I'm not here

all the time.

So feeding in an office hour at exactly the optimal

time for you is tricky.

But as I have done many times, I am happy

to meet outside those you just have to email and

ask.

I don't think anybody has emailed in after not been

able to find a slot with me.

I have stood outside this lecture room for an hour

and a half in the past, speaking to people, answering

things, and I just want to reiterate that there are

no dumb questions.

So if there's something that you're struggling with, ask it.

Now.

There are times when I will tell you to go

back and try it, and then show me how far

you've got, because I feel really quite strongly that watching

someone else do a derivation is not very helpful for

you.

And I say that from personal experience.

I have watched things being done and gone.

That's totally trivial.

I've even got notes written out of it.

Then I've tried to replicate it myself and it's taken

time.

I think that's time well spent, and I'm going to

dig my heels in pedagogically to push you towards doing

that.

And but you should also remember that this is not

an individual marathon race, right?

We're like a team.

The first aim is to survive and thrive this year.

Okay?

You're not so much in competition with each other.

So do work together.

Do share ideas.

There is an option on Moodle for a discussion forum

if you're struggling with something.

I don't think it's anonymous or I don't think you

can do it anonymously.

So there is a little bit of pride you may

have to swallow, but you can ask the questions.

You can ask them generally, and then I'll push and

I'll get you to show things and know.

But we can have the conversation that way.

Or you can just email me.

And like I said before, I can jump on zoom

if it's that way.

But but there will be times when, you know, fishing

for just I don't know how to do this optimisation.

You're going to you're going to encounter a little bit

of resistance from me, which is like, okay, how far

have you gone?

Let's see how you set up the problem.

What are you struggling to get?

Is it the first order conditions or with them you

can't get them?

As I said, you may or may not appreciate this,

but these slides are more detailed than I'd usually give.

I thought I was being super generous by not deleting

half of the stuff that Kevin includes on his slides.

I already did delete some of it, but you know,

yeah, there is a value, but but you know, it's

not a it's not a value that you have to

suffer.

You have to get by just suffering on your own.

You can talk about it and figure out, you know,

it just takes a little bit of work.

Okay.

Any questions on where we are so far or anything

before we get into balance sheet policies?

Yeah.

Next year we have availability to contact you.

Office hours.

Something like that.

Yeah.

In fact, next time will be even easier because I'll

be here full time.

Yeah, this is a weird.

I'm actually on sabbatical from from Oxford, and I'm visiting

UCL at the moment, and I'm visiting LSC after Christmas.

And they said, oh when you're.

They said, when you're here after Christmas, could you teach

some hours.

Can you do this course?

And it's a course I I've taught many times before

and I was very happy to teach.

I said yes and then they said ooh timetabling issue.

Could you do it before Christmas?

And I went, but I'm not here before Christmas.

So I am here before Christmas.

But just for you guys.

But yeah.

So, so after Christmas you'll see me floating around much

more.

Yeah.

Because I'll be here.

What you have now is a hologram has got very,

very fancy.

No, obviously UCL is not very far away.

It's just up the road.

But yes, that has been the confusion that led to.

Other questions.

No.

Okay, so just to recap the big picture issue, central

banks ordinarily set monetary policy.

This is a this is a sorry, I just realised

that I wasn't being fully fair.

Even the use of the word ordinarily.

In your lifetime that statement was untrue, or at least

in your adult lifetime when you may have been paying

attention.

And there are quite a few Japanese people here.

For Japanese people is in all your lifetimes.

Definitely.

And most of my lifetime.

Okay.

When I was in your position, I had lived in

a world where every country in the world who set

monetary policy had some instrument, typically the interest rate, and

they would use that interest rate at the short end

to then affect interest rates and everybody else faces in

the economy, like businesses borrow households, save households, take mortgages

and they would adjust this interest rate and other interest

rates will adjust.

And then they try and manage the world that way.

It's very exciting because in the in the sort of

five years up to when I started at LSC, suddenly

Japan had been confronting this problem that nobody else had,

and that is they actually wanted interest rates to be

lower than zero in nominal terms, and we didn't know

what to do.

So there's all these papers written around that time about

how we would deal with it.

Now, obviously, that became much more prevalent when a big

chunk of at least GDP weighted world hit the zero

lower bound after the global financial crisis, and largely stayed

there for anywhere between 4 and 5 years or 8

to 10 years.

Okay, actually, I haven't paid attention.

Has Japan raised interest rates yet?

Not yet.

Okay.

I was there at a big conference in end of

May early June, and they looked like they were just

on the cusp.

They were starting to talk about it at least.

I didn't follow up, but okay, we're not there yet,

but soon we could all be off the field.

And so so at that point, central banks, as we

talked about last week, are faced with a constraint that

they have this short term interest rate that they'd like

to move around.

What they'd ideally like to do is pull it lower,

but they can't pull it lower because it's their lower

bound or the effective lower bound.

Or maybe they can go a bit negative, but there's

some limit to that.

And then the question is, how in this world do

you stimulate an economy without that?

Well, we talked a bit last week about forward guidance.

Forward guidance.

Tie policies are about using expectations to influence the economy.

And in our models we can include that because we

have Lucasian models that have this hugely forward looking nature

to them.

So that inflation today is a function of all the

expected interest rate gaps over time, because that's what determines

the output gap today.

There's discounting in everything, but you'll see one of the

problems that questions get you to look at this problem.

And these are this is a function of the way

the model is written and the forward looking nature of

it.

You get these very powerful forward guidance effects.

There's a sort of.

If you will.

I could have maybe I should have done balance sheet

policies first.

But we don't tend to have like and I'm not

going to show you any detailed models of balance sheet

policies.

The reason being that more balance sheet policies are literally

about a sort of asset portfolio rebalancing exercise and creating

demand for certain assets in the market to affect their

prices.

And we don't tend to write like a New Keynesian

model with a full array of different maturity bonds.

The bonds that we would have in models tend to

be one period bonds that just roll over, and it's

a simplification, but it makes it much easier.

But if you want to understand balance sheet policy, if

you think about this, this is the maturity I've shown.

I think I should do this last week, but with

worse markers.

This is something like the yield to maturity, some measure

of an interest rate.

And you have at the short end.

And you know, the typical yield curve slopes up a

bit and this thing moves up and down with shocks

and news and beliefs and all sorts.

Okay.

Now the usual thing is what matters for people's economic

decisions.

If we were thinking about the economy and the Euler

equation, it's things like how much if I put money

in the bank, will I save over the next year

or five years or whatever?

What I think about a mortgage, mortgage rates, you can

get fixes for five years in this country.

In the US you fix for 30 years.

So it's much longer term borrowing.

So what you really want to be doing, it's not

about overnight interest rates or weekly interest rates with the

central bank.

That's the instrument.

But what they're trying to do normally is move that

up and down and have that pull these bits down,

maybe more at the low end that's at the top.

Maybe this doesn't move at all.

Maybe it just goes back up to some long term

equilibrium rate at 30 years old.

But this is what monetary policy is trying to do.

When we talk about the effective lower bound, what we're

saying is we're stuck in that this thing has gotten

to some low level, that we can't move it lower.

That does not mean there's no policy that can get

this bit lower, right?

So typically when countries are at the at the effective

lower bound, the short term rates are all over, around

zero, maybe a bit negative whatever.

But the ten year rate yeah it's probably come down

but it might still be above zero.

So now we're in this world after the financial crisis.

This is now the yield curve.

So if you buy borrow for ten years you pay

3%.

Now if we think they're the type of rates that

matter if we can get 3% to.

1%, then that's even lower.

And that's going to incentivise people to do more spending,

to do more construction of residential property or whatever, in

the same way that they were trying to get this

rate to go from 5 to 3 by moving the

nominal interest rate at the short end.

But since we can't move the nominal interest rate on

the short end, we need a different policy.

Well, if you think that the interest rate.

On these bonds.

These ten year bonds is what you're targeting.

If you buy bonds, you increase the demand for them.

You drive up their price, and that drives down their

yield.

Key thing.

Price and yield.

Are inversely related.

You drive up the price, you drive down the yield,

you drive down the price, you drive up the year.

So you can actually do all balance sheet policy thinking

with the first class you ever did on basic microeconomics

of supply and demand.

Financial crisis hits.

Governments start to.

Governments start to have to borrow loads because they're desperately

trying to support the failing economies and bail out banks

and do all of these things.

What happens?

Loads of government bonds.

What do loads of government bonds do?

They increase supply.

What does an increase in supply tend to do?

Price up?

Price dead.

What does it do?

You increase the supply of something.

Price.

Price tag.

Yes.

Good.

It wasn't a trick question.

It is literally based, right?

So?

So this is the.

So then what?

What the central bank can do is they can become

a big source of demand in the market.

And so the central bank comes along and announces we're

going to buy 500 billion of ten year government bonds.

Increase in demand.

Increase in the price.

Decrease in the yield.

Now is the multiplier that 500 billion of US government,

the fed purchases would lower it by two percentage points.

No.

In fact, when we did this, if you were sitting

in a central bank in 2008.

When all of this sort of started coming to a

head and you were thinking, we're going to need a

policy, we're cutting rates, cutting rates, cutting rates.

They had no idea what the multipliers were, but they

sort of knew that in theory, something like this should

work.

We should be able to buy these things.

And every other balance sheet policy that you will see

has some flavour of that logic to it.

Many of you heard of Operation Twist.

The idea of Operation Twist was not to just buy

a load of stuff.

How was it that you should ask this pre-emptive question

before I get on to twist?

How does how does the central bank buy 500 billion

of government bonds?

He creates money.

Yeah.

Very simple.

It has a balance sheet that's on screen.

If it just creates reserves.

Reserves are literally the accounts held by banks.

Almost almost every country.

They're just banks.

Used to be me.

I used to have one.

We have a reserve account at the Bank of England.

Creates reserves and says, okay, we're going to buy.

Hello, Barclays.

We'll take 100 billion of your government bonds.

Barclays go.

Okay.

So Barclays transfer government bonds in the central bank balance

sheet goes up on the asset side by 100 million

because they now have 100 billion of assets.

And they put a liability into Barclays Reserve account at

the central bank that says there's 100 billion balance sheet

just expands ten.

Now you do that again and again and again.

The balance sheet just keeps getting bigger and bigger and

bigger.

The important fact for you to carry around with you

in your central banking heads, that is the only entity

that can create or destroy reserves is the central bank.

So Barclays may not want to have reserves.

In fact, this was a big idea of this.

You're buying government bonds you may say like that just

helps the government.

It doesn't help Joe the Plumber with his company trying

to borrow.

Well, the idea was that government bonds have now left

Barclays balance sheet.

And on their balance sheet, they no longer have government

bonds.

They have these three called central bank reserves as an

asset.

Now central bank reserves as an asset.

Don't pay a very high interest rate.

That's really not what commercial banking is about.

It's not about taking a super safe, super ultimate safe

liquid asset.

What did they do is they tend to take they

take their liabilities and they use it to generate low

costing liabilities like consumer deposits, borrowing from other banks, etc.

they do that and they try to lend it there

to people at profitable rates and their whole thing is

maturity, transformation and risk pooling.

So what they're trying to do is make sure they

lend to a whole bunch of people who will be

successful and pay back their 5% loans, even though they

only paid 1% to borrow.

That 4% is their if their profit margin for their

skill, their skill as bankers.

I hope this lecture never goes public.

I say like a public relations specialist for banks.

No, I actually, I tell you, this most nerve wracking

time of my life was once when I found out

that I was going to be cited, quoted in the

Guardian.

I've been quoted in the Guardian many times, but it's

going to be quoted in the Guardian arts section.

You may not look at me and think there is

a man who, naturally will be cited and quoted in

the Guardian Arts section.

I will tell you the quote and you'll then realise

why I got nervous.

Because by your reaction, I think you already know what

the Guardian art section readership might be like.

The exact quote from me was you wouldn't want to

live in a world without banks.

This is just after the financial crisis, and there was

a show made for kids inspired by me.

This is a true story.

You could all Google it because someone came wanting to

write this piece about capitalism and how it's a disaster,

and how it's like the cause of all our misery

and everything.

And I started it.

I said, look, this is nonsense.

Yeah, things went badly wrong.

And there's bits of capitalism and markets and banks that

don't work, but they facilitate most of the good stuff

that happens in our lives.

We basically couldn't afford houses with banks.

Most businesses wouldn't exist.

Pooling of risk and maturity transformation are hugely beneficial to

society.

This is the point they made that they wrote them

this very positive piece about banks for kids.

It was an immersive experience which I took my daughter

to you.

There you go.

Fun fact and soon Bridgewater was the name of the

person who directed it.

I got very nervous, but I thought I'd have crowds

turning up at my office with pitchforks to kill me.

But it was fine, because it's also true you don't

want to live in a world without banks.

And so the idea is then that Barclays it in

their capitalist desire to make profit, they will switch from

reserves and they'll start lending it out.

So they'll lend it for for Joe the Plumber, Joe

the young new professional who wants to buy an apartment

in London.

But surprisingly, having just started work, doesn't have half a

million in her back pocket to pay for a one

bedroom flat in south London.

The bank will then.

And because they have so much reserves that are paying

so little, they'll lend that at lower than they would

have otherwise.

That's the idea to portfolio rebalancing that you initiate through

the central bank policy.

Okay.

Operation twist is the same type of idea, but one

where we don't create reserves.

The central bank can also just reallocate its holdings across

different asset classes.

So what would happen if the central bank started selling

short term debt that it holds and buying long term

debt?

Well, supply in the market of these short end stuff

would increase, which should.

But what do they think they're doing?

They're selling it too short and buying it the long.

Right.

We're going to get that.

This will start going down and this will start going

up.

You get the yield curve twisting.

Actually it's something the fed had originally tried in the

60s, a try had done in the 60s, but then

in the later stages of balance sheet policy.

Try to do this okay.

That's the general idea.

Now let's go into some of the specifics.

What was the central bank doing now?

Here's where.

This this line here.

The brackets QE is not quite truthful.

So I'm going to tell you the truth in real

life, but leave it on the slide.

Not all of the balance sheet policies are QE, even

though all the QE policies are balance sheet policies.

What does that mean?

Well, some of the things that central banks do with

their balance sheet, they do not because they are trying

to quantitatively so focusing on quantities ease conditions in the

market.

Well, at least these interest rate conditions, they're not trying

to ease monetary policy with all their things.

Some of them are.

And it's listed in the bullet point.

Right?

I knew it was.

Why I'm pointing a slight inaccuracy here.

Some of them are purely for market function or liquidity

purposes.

So maybe it's a world where regulations require that banks

have a certain amount of government bonds on their balance

sheet, and for some reason they're hard to get.

Central banks will often go in and start providing this

liquidity.

Well, actually, because there's never just about one type of

bond, the ultimate liquid asset is reserves.

So sometimes a liquidity policy can just be saying we've

got loads of reserves available and you can have them

at for a month, for three months, for eight months,

for 12 months.

There were initially these were things that happened in short

windows over the crisis.

Some of these became long term liquidity facilities.

So you could go to them and say, okay, I

need I need to borrow against some other collateral for

a year.

Fine.

You have it, you get it at favourable rate.

But some of them were then purchasing assets.

Now then the question is which assets should the central

bank purchase?

Well, if you're standing in the UK it's pretty simple.

Almost everything in the QE operations was government bonds.

Not quite true, because if you look at the original

discussions and then more recent versions of QE, there were

corporate bonds included.

The very first QE announcement was that they would purchase

government bonds and Q and corporate bonds.

The problem with corporate bonds in the UK is the

bond market is not very deep for corporate bonds.

So there's only a small number of companies that do

it.

And essentially you are then giving like a government support

indirectly to specific companies.

Central banks used to worry more about this.

They still worry a bit.

They used to worry a lot about them being seen

to be taking on credit risk.

I actually sat on I like to say this.

I won't tell you the details.

I'll tell you that I sat on something which in

the bank I used to provide briefing for it, which,

as an Irishman, you'll get why.

This was amusing to me, but it was called the

Crack Committee.

Crack is what Irish people say for fun.

So I was like, oh, the crack committee.

That's really great.

And now a member of the Bank of England's crack

committee, actually, it was Crack the Credit Risk Assessment Committee.

And what we would do is we would do like

internal bond ratings for all of the types of bonds

that the Bank of England market operations might consider buying,

to determine what limits we would put on, how much

they could buy, because we wanted to limit the credit

risk there.

As close to the answer is it was so risk

averse.

There are many countries that were rated reasonably well by

by the sovereign bond rating agencies, but that the Bank

of England's crack committee wouldn't allow the bank to buy

very small c conservative in its allocation of assets to

avoid risk.

Okay.

So they stopped buying corporates.

They just bought government bonds.

In the US there was a slightly bigger array of

bonds.

Remember the initial problems were in the housing market.

The housing market is also a little bit unusual in

the US, in that large amounts of the outstanding debt

in the US housing market has some form of government

guarantee.

So this is the Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, Mae sort

of government housing, debt underwriting, pooling of assets companies.

And so they bought a lot of mortgage backed securities

to try and help the functioning in that market.

They also were buying long term government bonds, and they

sort of mixed it up.

Logic is still the same if the mortgage rates are

going too high.

If you buy a lot of mortgage debt, you're going

to increase demand for those, increase the price, lower the

interest rate on.

So that's the idea of all of these policies.

De de de de de de de de de de.

Oh, have I gone the wrong way there?

Hold on.

Sorry.

So.

Why is it doing that?

Let's get a hand.

Okay.

I'll just click down there.

So here's a picture of of this.

Okay.

Balance sheet must balance liabilities and capital equals assets.

You can sort of see the effect of the financial

crisis and the subsequent fed operations on the balance sheet.

Went from under $1 trillion to about $4.5 trillion in

4 or 5 years.

And you can see that the vast majority of this

expansion is just by creating reserves, the magic power that

comes with being a central bank.

You can just create a value in an accounting computer,

and then use that value to purchase something from one

of your counterparties.

Once you have that thing, you could sell it.

I mean, if it was possible to be the central

bank and a private profit maximising entity.

Yours.

Very easy money.

Actually.

Oh, stupid thing.

And I should say, the fun thing as well, is

one of the reasons why the prices of some of

these assets that the central banks were buying were so

low in the yields went so high because there were

lots of worries about whether, you know, these entities would

survive, whether the default.

So I'll bring it back to Europe.

If you think about the sovereign debt crisis in 2012,

in Europe, Greece, would Greece survive?

Would we have a Greek default?

Actually, as it turned out, and partly endogenously because of

the central bank and policy interventions, we didn't.

So at times in the market you could buy Greek

assets.

Let's say you bought 100 million worth of Greek government

bonds.

They they might have had a par value of 100

million, but you could have bought them for 20 million.

That's essentially the market saying there's an 80% chance they

default.

If you buy at that moment, and then you hold

to maturity and they don't default, you make the profit.

Through central banks, where they did this and expanded their

balance sheet for a long time.

Great business.

Made a lot of profits.

What's the problem now?

They mostly still have large balance sheets, but as central

banks start driving up interest rates to fight inflation, the

value of those assets is now falling.

Central banks are currently, in most cases making losses on

those assets.

So it's even becoming a bit of an issue about

whether how do we deal with this now.

At some level I'm going to go back.

So I wasn't going to cover this, but I'm going

to cover it because it came up at something last

week at some level, equity capital, which is so key

for a private firm and less key for households, but

still key for households.

This is just a balancing item between the value of

assets and the value of your liabilities.

If you are a household, let's be the most simple

household.

Basically me, I don't have.

I'm not a very complicated multi asset portfolio person.

I have a bank account with very little money in

it and I have a big private asset called my

house.

How do I pay for that?

I have a thing called a mortgage.

That's also big.

And the net position is thankfully positive.

Okay.

Now, let's say we wake up some day and my

house has halved in value.

Let's say I had a house worth a million, but

I borrowed 900,000 to buy it.

Let's assume I have nothing else in my bank account,

so my balance sheet would be house 1 million.

Mortgage 900,000.

Equity 100,000.

If we wake up tomorrow and the house has fallen

by 50% in value, my asset would now be worth

500,000.

My debt would be still 900,000.

That's the problem with debt contracts.

They're not state contingent.

So my equity would now be negative.

So the phrase negative equity or in the red.

Indicates that.

Now it turns out as a household I do not

have to mark to market my balance sheet every day.

So actually, so long as I still have enough flow

income to pay the mortgage contract off, it's okay.

It's not great.

Of course.

I mean, I'm not going to pay back 900,000 for

an asset worth half a million.

Not a great situation, but they don't get to kick

me out yet.

Tony, if I start paying, if I have a private

company and I had machines and debts, and for some

reason, the value of the machines drops or the value

of my company suddenly drops.

If that goes negative, it can be bad.

If I'm a small, privately held one and like a

household, if I have a big corporate people, shareholders are

going to start looking and go, well, actually, he looks

like he's a negative situation that's going to get bad.

If I'm a financial institution, like a commercial bank, I

have to have positive equity capital at the end of

the day.

That's the sort of frequency at which you have to

look, some assets you have to mark to market, some

you don't.

It gets complicated.

Central banks in theory.

Can just ignore negative equity.

But different countries have different approaches for how they deal

with it.

And so in the UK it's very transparent which is

a good thing.

But it's also a bit of a pain in the

backside because what happens at the moment is they have

to ask the Treasury to give them money for the

losses they make on the asset portfolio that they bought

in QE.

Now, this is just the reverse of money that used

to be sent every quarter from the Bank of England

to the Treasury.

Hey, we made 50 million.

There was 50 million.

Hey, we made 120 million, 180 million.

Now they're doing the opposite.

They're saying, hey, you made some losses.

Can you send us some money?

The fed is just ignoring it.

But they're not ignoring it.

They're saying, right, well, we're not making transfers in secret

and we're just going to write this off against future

ones.

So if we if we're down 120, it just means

at some point in the future we won't make 120.

And the sort of infinitely lived present discounted value thing

bites.

You may think it doesn't matter, but it actually matters

for optics, not for economics.

So that's the only reason I'm mentioning.

But it came up as a big issue that some

people in the market are worried about political independence.

Yeah.

So when it comes to the effect of QE on

real variables, we need, for example, interest rates are driven

down by the central bank or the private banks to

make loans, need some sort of estimate of a degree

of confidence that they have in households.

Sure.

So, so.

Yes.

This goes back to my question, my my discussion that

we have in probably in the first lecture about there

being an interest rate in our models, it's clear you're

driving the interest rate down the Euler equation logic kicks

in.

It's all all good.

Now the question is what if I drive down the

government bond rate and the banks are just so nervous

about everything that they just say, oh, this is awesome.

I love reserves and they don't lend any more mortgages,

corporate debt.

ET cetera.

And those interest rates stay very high.

So there's two parts to your question.

One is whether they pass on the interest rate change,

and the other is whether they adopt more lending.

So there's a quantity and a price element to it.

I'm only covering the first stage.

We're going to have to check later.

And this is what the last part of my slides

in the whole course are going to look at.

Is there an effect of creating all these reserves where

the bank actually responds and goes, yeah, that's that's led

the surge.

And it's going to depend on a lot of things,

including confidence.

Yeah.

Okay.

So.

Yeah.

Okay.

So for instance, this is all I'm going to skip

most of the next slides because I've said all the

words.

But you know, if you if you think about one

thing, if you create all these reserves but the central

bank or the markets think the central bank is going

to reverse that decision next month, the next quarter, next

year, they're not going to want to lend cheap mortgages

with reserves that are going to be taken out of

the system very quickly.

So there's the markets passing on of this depends on

how confident they are in who they're lending to.

Of course, as always, but also how confident they are

in the sort of persistence of the cheap loans that

they get access to today.

To be honest.

Okay.

This is this is now this is just X post

this unfair on central banks.

So I'm not going to even criticise any central bank.

But at the time the QE started around this point

here, I don't think anybody was projecting that we would

still be at the Xlb even in 2013, and they

were not predicting that the balance sheet would be big

even in 2020.

Let's ignore all the Covid related extra stuff.

End of 2019.

Most central banks still had massively inflated balance sheets.

In our models, these policies only took 4 to 5

quarters at the xlb.

And then we got out.

Remember I said last week that everybody was super confident

that everybody but Japan would get out quickly, and they

just messed it up.

Yeah, spoiler alert they didn't.

Everybody just followed the same path Japan did.

They try a bunch of stuff.

It helps a little bit at the margins, but you

stuck there for quite a while.

What really gotten to say well Covid and then all

the price shocks that have gotten us away.

And now, I mean, now we're in the other world

where people are asking, Will we ever get low interest

rates again?

Or is your generation just never going to live in

a house?

We'll get something, I'm sure.

I think I said all of this asset side.

Yeah, this.

But I do want to stress.

So everything I've been describing so far has been a

central bank that has sort of gone in just on

this almost, I don't want to say a bit unfair,

but almost a mechanical, basic economic effect.

We don't put that in our model because we don't

tend to have models or in the Argentine models, we

don't tend to write them with this full yield curve

in there with different maturity assets.

People have done it.

They've talked about it just it gets complicated.

The other thing that we don't have in our basic

Lucasian model, which is an important channel for this type

of intervention, is risk.

In fact, one of the papers that comes later and

very famous.

The.

It's the Krishnamurti, this one Krishnamurti Jorgensen paper.

They put a huge amount of weight on the effect

that.

These central bank interventions.

They look specifically at the fed that those interventions have

on the risk appetite in the market.

In particular, if you start buying assets that people certainly

think are too risky to buy, you can help the

world, the market by being a large demand player in

that market.

So they don't think, if I buy this, let's go

back to the point at you, because I'm going to

go to Greece again and let's go back to Greece

in 2012.

People are panicking like, oh well, will I buy Greek

debt?

Oh my God, what if I buy it and they

start to default?

I can never do anything with that.

ECB steps in and they say actually not just can

you buy it, but you can also use it as

full collateral of the central bank.

I mean, what's more attractive for everybody else to buy?

And what was the real change in the sovereign debt

crisis in Europe was the big moment.

Whatever it takes, everyone always leaves out the rest, as

I said, the rest of the sentences.

And you know the full quote.

I want to say to whatever it takes because that's

what grab the headlines.

What he actually said was, we will do whatever it

takes and it will be enough.

That wasn't in the original speech, apparently.

He added that on a whim and changed the mark

there the most.

As someone who studies central bank communication, that is the

most powerful sentence ever uttered in financial terms in my

view, that not like yields on many countries in Europe

down saving those countries governments potentially billions.

Billions and billions and trillions.

It's amazing.

But what was it?

It was a statement that there's always going to be

a market for these things.

So if you're worried, don't be.

We'll be there.

And why can we do with the balance sheet.

We can create reserves.

So we sort of make it available that you can

convert this thing you're a bit worried about into reserves.

And we'll even buy it after you.

We've increased its liquidity, we've reduced your fears about it.

And that risk channel contributes massively to other people going.

I'm willing to hold it.

That increases everybody else's demand.

That drives the yields down further.

Whatever it takes.

I think I said, I have a question.

Isn't there a.

Oh yeah, massively big panic.

More recently.

Like, what is the right like?

Okay, sorry, I jumped into the answer too much.

But yeah, you know, there's a link.

At what point does a market cease to function?

If all of the government bonds are held by the

central bank?

Yeah, most countries, certainly the all European countries are bound

by this.

No direct financing of government positions.

Well, if we live in a world where if you

could just have the government get you into the market,

the market buys it knowing full well the next day,

they can just, you know, give it to the central

bank and they'll take it off them and the central

bank go.

We didn't buy it directly.

We bought it from the market.

Why did the market buy it?

Because they knew they could sell it directly.

There's a load of questions about that.

Those are questions which we tend to worry about after

the crisis.

In the crisis, like the house is on fire.

You don't worry about water damage, but, you know, if

you put out the fire by filling the room with

water, you then start to think, well, is it usable?

What do we do?

What do we how do we fix this?

Yeah, that's been a huge issue.

Huge question.

Like what's the right level?

So this was actually if any of you are interested

this will be online soon.

This is a conference I was out on Friday.

Called Andrew Houser, who's executive director for financial markets at

the Bank of England, was essentially asking the question, what

is the right size of a central bank post GFC?

It's pretty clear we're not going back to the old,

very limited central bank because the rate at which we're

undoing QE with what's called quantitative tightening is just not

quick enough, and something that will be determined by monetary

policy makers, not by the central bank on its own.

That's in some countries, of course, that is the central

bank on its own.

But here there's a committee that decides.

But that's not that's such a pace that we're going

to sort of unwind those positions quickly.

So what is the right optimal level?

I think there's still a big discussion to be had

on that.

And now I'm going to park most or a chunk

of the material on, should it matter what assets are

purchased.

Because this is what I'm going to come back to

specifically when we talk about financial frictions.

But but just you can think in your head about

the.

About the.

The idea that you're removing risk and matter, or buying

assets that are dysfunctional and taking them out and putting

in others some kind of fiction.

This Krishnamoorthi.

Your paper.

This is a Brookings paper.

Very readable.

I do encourage you to read it.

It is like they are the ones who are going

to stress the impact coming, particularly through a risk channel.

And they sort of show that there's a bit of

an effect.

When they first announced that they would be they would

be purchasing.

There would be, you know, setting up a scheme in

order to be able to purchase these assets at the

time.

And I sort of alluded to this.

We ourselves, those of us within sort of central banks

at that moment, although I wasn't technically working there, I

was hanging around them a lot and people didn't know

what the number should be.

Like, if you look at the UK, it's kind of

hilarious.

Like we have a norm that we try not to

be spuriously accurate with interest rate decisions, so we move

them in 25 basis point units.

There's no reason for that.

There's no technical reason for that.

You could say the bank of it.

The embassy has today decided to raise interest rates by

12 basis points.

In fact, if you look back at the records, an

academic who was an external member of the committee back

when it started, I called Villa Beutler.

He voted for a 37 basis point change in interest

rates.

Just because he thought it was important to signal that

you could.

It was nothing that constrained, just the 25, 50, 75.

That's what everyone does.

So what happened when we went to make purchases?

Asset purchase decisions.

The Bank of England's first decisions were in units of

25 billion or 50 billion.

Just complete.

What's the right number and see what happens.

The question was that work the other way around?

But if everyone.

I would expect 20.

Oh, sorry.

Sorry.

Just to be clear.

The point is.

The point is not that.

The point is not that this was not a surprise

or a surprise.

It was just the fact that, like when you look

at the market.

So even if I show you on this screen, I

do a lot of market events just before the announcement.

This is like one of the market interest rates.

It's at like 32.95.

Now why is it a 2.95.

Maybe they're pricing in no change with 95% probability at

a cut with a certain probability.

Right.

So the actual market rate does move in units that

are not 25.

And you can surprise by doing 25 when they expect

zero or whatever.

This point was just that unit wise, we just got

stuck in doing 25 zero, 25, 70, 50, 75, etcetera.

We had no idea.

But once they announced it, you saw a big effect

because it looked like why the Fed's not going to

just do something, they're going to do something big.

And you know, if we go back to the balance

sheet, you can see that they did do something big

right?

This was in here.

When they really start to ramp it up the first

bit was all liquidity operations.

And this is the Joe Gagnon and co-authors paper.

This is where they show that even where they were

focussed on government debt and.

And agency mortgage backed securities products, you can see that

even corporate debt that's not that highly rate.

I mean bar is not terrible, but it's not the

highest rate of corporate debt.

Those rates also fell.

So you did get that.

There was some knock on effect some some portfolio rebalancing

channel.

And so yeah it's no no like that side.

And that's the idea.

And we've all come back to this when we look

at financial frictions.

But that's all I wanted to say there.

Right.

Any questions.

I load up the next one.

On one.

Slide 41.

What is the time it was this change instantaneous?

No, this is measured over, like the first couple of

months.

This is so there's a bunch of different ways you

can do it.

You can either do events studies where you track the

thing along and you look at a specific announcement and

then you average over there, or what you can do

is you can work out.

This is what I think Joe Gagnon and his co-authors

do.

They look at the sort of multipliers over the whole

of QE one.

So QE one was the first round of it, like

let's say the first year in a bit.

And you look at overall how each of those announcements

affected each of these different assets.

You have to control for things.

You have to pull out some, you know, statistical co

movements that you want to take care of.

But then you look at and you say, okay, this

is what I am isolating as the multiplier of the

effects of the QE one.

So overall, QE one takes out 156 basis points out

of ten year agency death.

I'm just a bit less here and you know, much

less here.

Again.

Should we be surprised about this?

No, because the two year stuff had already been driven

massively down by the fed, cutting rates from like 5.5%

to zero.

That does it work at the short end that was

done.

Then we ran out of that and we went to

the new stuff and people have done this.

So if you're interested for the UK, there's an economic

Journal special issue, probably in 2011 or 2012.

And the paper that most covers the UK effect is

by Joyce et al, says Mike Joyce.

And it does the same kind of calculation and it

works out similar kind of when people have gone back

then and looked at the effect of QE two and

QE three, they generally find much weaker effects.

So the multipliers this is an open question.

Still please let's say we take 156 basis points as

the truth of course approach.

But how much of that was the normal multiplier and

how much of it was the kind of what's called

the the the announcement effect, the big signalling effect.

Because when they first did it, you got the effect

that not only were they doing it, they were doing

it big.

You get all of that.

It's like going from a central bank that doesn't use

QE to a central bank that does use it aggressively,

right?

That's part of it.

And the rest is what is the actual multiplier of

buying 100 billion of assets on each of the rates?

A lot of the studies put a big chunk of

this down to the the signalling effect.

So when you do it the second time, there's no

news part of the model.

So even again at this conference on Friday because people

are now thinking about it in reverse, why are we

thinking about it in reverse?

Because we're starting to tighten.

So the question is, if I start selling all those

government bonds, what's that going to do to ten year

rates?

People were saying, you know, numbers like.

Uh, make sure you get the quantum right.

I think it was 100 billion doing ten basis points.

That's pretty small.

I have no idea if that's the right number.

This is the number that I'm citing from some other

people too.

But if you're not that view, then this question of

how quickly do we do cut is actually much less

important because you do like.

A trillion of I think they were UK numbers.

So if you if you did a trillion of cut

in the UK you're done with cut and it's 100

basis points.

So huge.

So the question of speed.

I think I think they're currently selling at something like

80 million a month.

That's pretty small.

So anyway, these are the questions that are in people's

minds right now.

Nope.

It's really.

Other questions.

Now it's break time.

It's a natural point for a break.

Let's take five minutes.

So we start again at ten past.

Oh.

I don't have an email to respond to for you.

I will do.

It.

I'm not hunting you down.

Don't expect instantaneous responses.

I wanted to ask a question about the lecture.

Yeah.

If it turns out to take time, I'll leave it

for office or something.

Yeah.

Would you mind going through how it works?

So when the central bank buys government bonds.

So this side of the balance sheet goes up, and

then you said reserves.

So.

So what happens here?

Can I write.

Anywhere?

Yeah.

CB.

This is going to be the change okay.

Okay.

So.

Government bond up at the central bank.

Reserves up at the private bank.

Reserves.

Government bond down.

Reserves.

Why?

Could it be reserves up an equity or something like

that?

Anything else on this side?

This is this is the bit that you control.

Okay.

After this, what the bank does with its reserves.

Yeah, maybe.

But equity.

What do you mean by equity.

Equity would go here.

So equity is an asset for the bank.

So if they take the reserves and choose to put

them into equities sure.

Then the next operation stage two would be this is

the portfolio rebalancing.

They would go down and they would go up.

It's neutral.

It's neutral for the bank.

It's expansionary for the central bank.

Okay.

And could it be that when.

So as reserves increase and then they are way excess

the minimum reserve requirements.

Yeah.

Okay.

So now you're talking about another thing.

So so this is the other channel.

This is what we'll come back to after from this

reserves rather than do green.

They could do pink reserves go down loans.

Well sorry loans which are here.

That's exactly what I was interested.

Loans go up.

But when they do that what would actually happen.

Okay.

It's not fair.

So this is deposits okay.

Okay.

So the first step would be loans up.

Deposits up.

Yes.

And then start being unfair with that pink.

Then the next step if you have another colour blue

we've gone to blue for the next step.

Then obviously people spend their money.

So then they would this would go down and then

the reserves would go down.

Oh okay okay.

So it's a two stage thing with the loan okay.

My name is very general.

Okay.

Yeah.

Cool.

I have a question.

So all of this.

We did see like the sort of like inflation in

markets, right?

They went up up up up.

Why didn't that fit through to like is there are

there any like theories.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So so one is that we'll come back to this

a little with the financial frictions.

But it goes beyond that.

So one is that maybe.

You create all these assets.

We know that the reserves went up, but we didn't

see big effects on lending to the real economy.

Where we did see lending to the real economy often

was concentrated in very particular.

Very I'm going to call it sort of relatively safe

types of lending, lending that at least would be protected.

So, you know, mortgage lending tended to go up, but

particularly concentrated in areas where you thought that there was

still positive equity in housing.

So London.

So London, the house price in London was going up.

It took a little dip for like nine months.

And then it went again.

Why.

Because a bunch of this money went into loans to

them, but not to Joe the Plumber.

Okay.

Again, why?

We can keep asking deeper.

The bank even designed the Bank of England, designed a

thing called the funding for lending scheme, which basically restricted

how much you could borrow at the discount window if

you weren't increasing your loans to the real economy.

And that worked to a degree.

But ultimately, it's still a lot of it went in

and this was okay.

So this is of course, not just a there's two

elements to your question.

One is central bank policy transmission question, which I think

is vital and important and what we should talk about.

But I'll mention there's also a hugely political element to

this.

If this looks like the central bank, which is an

arm of the government to most people, is just helping

the richest people with the biggest, you know, highest equity

containing mortgages and not helping the little guy.

That's a disaster.

I think, you know, if you look at trust and

satisfaction with central banks after the financial crisis, it plummeted.

People used to think central bankers were like doctors.

I don't know what they do, but I trust them

right now.

They're like, I don't know what to do, but I

think they're corrupt.

That's a disaster for central banks.

When you think about expectations management.

Does it have anything to do with like the capital

requirements of banks?

Sure.

The interactions with Macroprudential policy are super interesting.

Yeah.

So so again, this is why I said a lot

of the excess reserves got channelled into particular asset classes

that were favourable from a regulatory point of view.

So that's what funding for lending was trying to tilt

against.

But it's still really hard, right.

Do you want your central bank telling you which sectors

to lend to?

I mean, I've worked in the central bank.

I don't know if I, if I knew which sectors

are going to boom, I wouldn't work at a central

bank.

I work for Goldman Sachs and I'd be rich.

Okay, I'm being too simplistic, but yeah.

I'm wondering whether expanding policy is kind of supported.

These are general questions.

Yeah.

Why don't we all sit down and ask you general

questions in the class?

And I'll just answer it publicly, because I'm going to

start again with just a specific question.

Ask it after class.

So I guess.

And if it's time for those three dogs for them,

okay.

And there is another thing.

Like they said, they will contact the referees if it's

a city.

Actually.

You'll have to send me an email and I'll get

you something to fill in and make sure I send

this to someone else in the class.

I don't know.

I don't know how many you have to have, but

make sure you have someone who is like from your

undergrad who knows you really well, because the problem you

have is.

That they say, I just have to give details.

Okay, no, that's fine, but send me an email anyway

just from me and I'll send you something to fill

in.

Okay.

I decided to to take public questions now, because.

I'm wondering whether the expanding volunteer is kind of supporting

the view of MMT, like the government is.

Oh, no, MMT has come up.

No.

I'm sorry I'm exposed to so much pressure to spend

more.

I come from ministry finance, so a lot of people

were calling them reversible and empty because they would like

us to spend much more.

Okay, for those of you who don't know, this is

the how many of you know what MMT is?

Is it sufficiently permeating amongst the youth of today like

the power with MMT, we'll all houses and okay, MMT

is this idea sort of.

It's not actually originally hers, but the person I guess

most associated with it now is Stephanie Kelton.

And she wrote a book called The Deficit Myth.

And which actually, if you read it, can be quite

convincing because each sort of section is sort of ballpark,

right, in some regards.

But there's a bunch of bits of it that are

not right.

Okay.

So let me I'm going to give you the quick

so I could give you the very quick answer to

your question, which is yes, QE is a large reason

why ideas like MMT have.

And actually the response of governments to Covid were also

to an untrained person, they look like the government can

just wake up and choose if they want to spend.

I mean, the UK.

At one point the government was underwriting 9 million workers

from the private sector.

That's a huge sort of government just guaranteeing income for

people with no work needing to be done.

Awesome.

Why don't we do it all the time?

Okay.

And MMT takes that forward by basically putting together a

series of accounting identities that do stuff like, well, I

want to exercise like, oh, well, you can just increase

reserves and increase the spend.

And then everything's great houses for everyone.

Okay.

So I'm going to give you now my quick fire.

What is missing from MMT because MMT is not a

model.

It's a series of accounting identities.

And they write very convincingly.

What is missing is endogenous credibility.

The idea that an asset has value.

And you know what?

Maybe, maybe the more surprising thing by QE and other

in various countries is that the pound, the dollar, etc.

still had quite a bit of value.

People were still willing to use them.

Now they assume that you can print as much as

you like, and everybody will still be perfectly happy to

use it for all their transactions.

Mary may not have told you this little fact about

myself.

I grew up in Zimbabwe.

Always work out so well if you just without constraint,

print as much as you want.

So why did Covid and QE not cause a complete

endogenous collapse of belief in the monetary system, whereas in

some places they do.

And is my statement therefore one that if governments try

to spend a bit more money, the system would collapse?

Obviously not.

At what point did they break?

It's obviously very dependent on countries, Japan, a lot of

jobs are held domestically.

Actually, this sustained sustainable fiscal policy calculus is very different

there.

It's like, oh, do I default on my debt?

They're all Japanese people.

What's the alternative to defaulting?

Well, we'll tax them more.

Okay.

So you're either going to tax them or take away

their money.

But the same where it gets where.

So Japan has been able to sort of expand the

fiscal side, expand QE and not have a complete cataclysmic

assumption of collapse with the government.

It's also a sort of well run democracy, which people

think is not going to do this to the point

of just like screwing over everyone completely.

But again, if 98% of jobs are in the hands

of the Japanese or a lot of it in the

social welfare system or a social pension system, it's not

really such a trade off.

If you're a country, Mexico and a lot of the

debt is held internationally, your trade offs are a little

bit different because if you default, the people who you

default on, they'll vote.

So those countries would tend to have a lower threshold

if they try to do something a bit funny because

people would say, oh, they're going to do something bad.

It also depends on my country, like Zimbabwe at one

point considered a well-run new democracy.

And then not.

And when it was not, it started to print all

the money.

And then everyone knew they would default.

They were subject to all these international.

Capital constraints.

You couldn't take them dollars out.

So they just print it all domestically.

And they just they did have the complete collapse of

the system, full hyperinflation, full loss of government to hold

on.

So did it lead to this?

Yes.

Does the fact that we didn't collapse with Covid spending

in QE type spending suggested that MMT would work if

done by the US or any other big sovereign country

with its own currency?

No endogenous default and endogenous expectations are really important.

So why does the why does it work?

And I'm going to put my fiscal council half on.

Why is it okay when when the government says right,

we're just going to spend billions during Covid because we're

thinking of that as temporary, timely and targeted, right?

It is not the government going, oh, we've decided there

are no budget constraints forever, right?

What really matters is an intertemporal budget constraint.

So you can do a lot in 1 or 2

years, so long as there's some belief that in the

other years you'll offset it.

Where do countries collapse when people don't believe they'll they'll

go do it again.

And MMT would be an announcement that will never stick

to a constraint.

And that's a problem.

There were a couple of hands that went up.

Yep.

I read the book that you had mentioned, and I

thought that in the book it was mentioned that only

if you issue your own liabilities and most of the

liabilities, if not all, are held by your own people

in your own monetary union.

Okay.

No.

Fine.

So a it doesn't apply to most countries.

So when it starts coming up in Ireland as a

we should do MMT.

It's like you need to read chapter one.

Okay.

But even then let's take the US.

Let's take Japan.

If if these countries said we are just going to

print as much as we want and without care or

concern for the actual underlying value of this asset, we're

just going to use it like a piece of paper.

That assumed idea is that people will still use US

dollars for transactions in the US.

They will not.

They will return to barter.

They'll start trading cigarettes.

They'll do whatever.

If you go to an extreme.

And what matters is the extreme is not.

I do it for ten years or 100 years.

Extreme is a signal that I've given up on the

constraint.

So it's important that you have institutions that are committed

to the overall constraint, like a ministry of finance, that

even though you've increased the size of government spending by

orders of magnitude, not quite possible.

We still think you are a group that will one

day rein it all in and pay people back.

That's why people call that we are like.

Again, you don't want to announce that you're a liar

once you accept your alliance, game over.

That's the key.

That's a credible institutions offer.

That's the endogenous credibility.

Okay.

Were there other questions?

I'll handle them publicly.

The discussion?

No.

Okay, fine.

I will then get on and talk a little bit.

At least I'll get much less of this done than

I had intended, but that's okay.

Okay.

Essentially lecture six and lecture six.

We are both.

Trying to address all of my scepticism and criticism of

Calvo pricing.

Carbon pricing is a very particular type of assumption of

nominal rigidity.

In which the probability you get to change your price

is completely independent of everything.

Apart from this random, magical, exogenous stochastic process called the

Calvo theory.

It's a very extreme assumption.

Now six A is going to look at other time

dependent pricing namely.

What if we said that the likelihood you change your

price is related to how long it is since you

last changed your price?

What if we think about the fact that maybe some

sectors, like we had two sectors or three sectors in

the economy, there's three, three areas, maybe you have very

flexible prices, your Billingsgate fixed fish market.

So every day, every five minutes you can re wipe

the whiteboard and put a new price for red snapper.

When you realise that everybody has loads or nobody has

any, you change the price.

You guys are are Argos.

Sorry, but you print catalogues once a year and that's

just a number.

And then you just have to sell at that price

and you're somewhere in the middle because you're literally somewhere

in the middle.

And you guys set some prices and you kind of

have a sticker.

I'm going back to my childhood here.

There used to be guns.

Not real good like sticker guns, because every CDs we

like, people were paid in a shop to take every

kind of coke.

But when it went, the press would look at it

and then we went to barcode pricing.

All good.

So you guys are somewhere there to change.

Price is not completely trivial, but in some kind, right?

Does that change what the aggregate effect of pricing is?

Or can we just take the average and say we

apply that to everyone?

Does it look the same?

And then there's the question of well.

In Calvo it's like every period there's a, there's a,

there's a sort of a population of people reselling.

So there's a sort of if you if you were

to watch, if you were an alien watching the Calvo

economy evolve, you just see prices ticking over.

And sometimes they tick over a bit more, a bit

less.

But if you looked at who's changing, there's always the

same measure.

I was going to say number, but measure technically of

firms that are changing their price.

I didn't see that.

And they'd just be all, all be driven by how

much they change their price.

Okay.

Well, what if what if we had a world where

there were large periods where nobody was changing prices, and

then every so often, everybody changed their price?

Does that change?

Staggered versus synchronised.

And there are models of this.

And I've actually referred to a bunch of these before.

So I talked about some work by Taylor and Fisher.

And they looked at versions of worlds where some people

change their price in odd periods, some and even periods,

or what if everybody changes them at odd and no

one and even you can sort of play around with

this.

We'll do that and we'll have a look at what

that does.

And as we go along, like I say, into most

big chunk of the first half of next week as

well, we'll look at what this sort of means and

what the evidence is like.

What what is the evidence on price changes.

That's what.

So now in my head, I've reset my target for

where I'm trying to go.

My objective is to get to the point where I

show you the first bit of evidence.

And this is a literature that was huge about how

many of you have heard of Emmie Nakamura and John

Stevenson.

So Nakamura and John Stevenson are cool.

That's just a fact.

And.

There are married couple write their papers together like the

Romans did.

And.

But they also just write really, really amazing papers.

And this paper is papers called like five facts about

Price Setting I think was written when they were both

graduate students.

So that's that's your next life goal?

I didn't achieve any of my papers that I wrote

as a graduate student, being quoted in in people's lectures.

Actually, I maybe I'll start quoting my own papers, actually

I haven't I'm going to mention one some of my

graduate student work next week because I did a work

on inventories, and we're going to talk next week about

a type of pricing that is not time dependent but

is state dependent.

And those models, like inventory models, are really hard to

solve.

If you don't like the sort of complexity of the

models we've done so far, you're going to hate next

week, right?

Well, there are some of the same techniques that are

used in inventories to to think about this.

And there are sort of some sort of rules of

what are called SS models, where you have a lower

bound and an upper bound, and every time the price,

the difference with the optimal price gets to the lower

bound, you reset the upper bound, same as inventories.

You have a stock, you keep it.

You don't buy anything.

Don't buy anything.

When you're stuck in some lower bound level, you restock

to the upper level.

I like those models, but we won't get there yet.

But.

So this paper on five factors is awesome.

You should definitely have a look in it.

People started looking more and more at the microdata.

I have only one critical comment.

I think they are friends of mine.

I once had Valentine's Day dinner with them.

That's you and me.

I mean in a restaurant with love hearts everywhere.

It was a beautiful moment.

I forgot it was Valentine's Day.

They obviously had to rearrange that.

Dinner turned up.

It was like, this is awkward.

I think it was more awkward for the other guests

who are looking at weird relationship examples anyway.

A lot of times, whatever, whatever works, and so I'm

a huge fan of theirs.

But let me just say one thing about this.

This whole literature got deeper and deeper into micro-level analysis

of price setting data.

So you can get like the individual store level responses

to CPI.

Back then, this was revolutionary.

Now most countries you could probably get access to just

think about all the computing power advances we've made.

The only question and I could pass this on to

you, for you to carry with you every time you

see that type of study is the following.

Just because prices don't change does not mean they can't

change.

If you did an observational study of me on this

lecture and you could have the most, you know, because

of the video recording stuff, right?

You could make that sort of video.

But if you've got a video of it, you could

say, I've watched Michael for hours and I watch every

one eighth of a second and I check, how often

does he touch his toes?

The answer, I'm pretty certain, is never.

I don't know if that's true.

Don't check that.

There's a reason I have touched my toes.

I apologise.

It's not a weird.

It's a weird thing to do in a lecture.

But just because I haven't doesn't mean I can't keep

that in mind when looking at this.

Particularly when you then start thinking about next week with

the state dependent.

Are we getting enough moments where firms want to change

their prices?

That's not again, this literature is huge.

It's massive.

It's good.

People do it well.

But it's it's always the question I have in my

head.

Okay, let me get on to the basic model.

To sort of make this tractable.

The first half, half the first 15 slides here.

Basically take all of the dynamic is curve away and

replace it with a large linearised sort of cash and

advance type constraint and removes all of the shocks to

the natural rate.

Okay, so we're now going to be in a world

where the log of the output gap.

It's proportional to real money balances.

Again log so m over p log.

Okay.

That is not actually that important.

It just gets us a link between M and P

and the output gap which we got before by deriving

the Euler equation.

And the dynamic is and all of that.

But we we just want to sort of simplify.

That's not going to be super important.

It just makes our lives much easier.

Okay.

So.

Hello.

The other thing that we simplify is monetary policy.

We're going to go back to being traditionalists.

So because before we had an Euler equation, we could

move to being modernist central bankers.

In other words, with an Euler equation you have a

term that has the real interest rate in it.

You have expectations of inflation.

So you have a nominal rate, expectations of inflation a

real rate.

You can compare that to the other real rates, the

equilibrium real rate.

And then you could work out whether you wanted to

increase consumption or lower consumption.

All came through that Euler equation logic.

Since we've thrown out the Euler equation logic, we're going

to move back to a world where we're going to

have monetary policy actually be about money.

Again, not super important given I spent the first 2

or 3 sets of lectures talking about monetary policy as

being about money and not about interest rates.

There is a link.

Okay, but where we are going to be much more

simplistic is we're going to have these unit root shocks.

In other words, shocks that come along are going to

be assumed to be permanent on the level of money.

So UT is a monetary policy shock.

I.i.d monetary policy shock.

But note that the r one coefficient that isn't there

is one.

In other words, full unit root.

If we get a positive shock, the level goes up.

And the best guess of where it will be a

thousand periods from now is that same level.

That's a, that's a that's a feature of unit root

processes.

Random walk processes.

They jump up.

That's where you think.

I mean you also know that they're almost certainly going

to jump up and jump down from that point.

But given it's a symmetric distribution, there'll be some jump

ups.

There'll be some jump down.

Your best guess is you'll be still stuck there.

Whereas if we have a row here and it's less

than one, then if it jumps up, we know that

the process is going to eke its way back to

some steady state value.

Zero typically.

Right.

Okay.

Oh, every time I hit the keyboard, it goes to

the start.

The way we have models of learning and speed of

learning.

Mine today seems particularly slow.

I think I've done it seven times now.

Just out of habit.

Just hit the down arrow.

That's called constraining oneself.

Okay.

Right now, I'd already written these up in the hope

that we would get here.

But you have seen in lecture four all of these

relations.

Now, you saw them as part of the derivation of

the full Lucasian model.

So we had the Euler equation.

Still how you read all I'm going to do is

merge these with the simplified demand side.

This real balances side to get a sort of simplified

version of a type pricing model.

Okay.

And then I'm going to use that same simplified model

with different assumptions.

And we're going to see some different effects.

Okay.

So you have seen all of this.

Now when we saw it before, I didn't go on

and on about what I'm about to go on and

on about.

So now you get me going on.

This is the flexible price.

Fully flexible price.

This is the way the pricing decision of the firm

would look.

Where this is the real marginal cost.

And this is some coefficient related to the structural parameters

of the economy.

We call.

A very low v.

Calling it VA.

Apologies to my Greek colleagues.

What would you call this?

Ni ni.

We're going v apologies.

I do my best on all the others, but this

one looks too much like a V for me.

Okay.

This is a measure of what we call this is

written on the side.

But I remember when I saw it, we were running

low on time and I decided not to talk about

it then, because I knew I was going to come

back to it now.

This is called a measure or related to real rigidities.

So if you think about this, why would that?

Well, if this is real marginal cost, if this is

very low.

Remember this is a log equation.

If this is very low, this is telling us that

despite movements in real marginal costs, prices are not varying

very much.

And it's driven by epsilon, which if you remember is

a structural parameter related to the degree of substitute ability

between all of your individual versions of the good.

So it's a real concept and it's driven by ETA

who remembers what ETA is?

I wrote it on the board.

But it's dark.

None of you can see it.

Oh, I don't know how to turn on the light,

to be honest.

Pop your button here.

There's a non-zero risk.

We get plunged into darkness.

Yes.

Okay.

Maybe they're okay.

Can you see it now?

It's alpha over one minus alpha who's been studying the

material that they know what Alpha is.

I won't put you under pressure.

Do you remember?

We have a Y is equal to a n to

the one minus alpha.

So the closer alpha is to zero, the closer the

production function is to linear, which would be a constant

marginal cost.

As alpha goes up, we get a more curved production

function.

Okay.

But again, so what this is just telling us is

there are some real parameters that determine how responsive prices

are in the flexible price world to movements in real

marginal cost.

And we're going to call that part of the driver

of real rigidities.

Real rigidities should be separated from the type of rigidity

that we're really talking about today, which is nominal rigidities.

Nominal rigidities are things like Calvo, where we just come

along and say, you can't change prices.

Or next week will come along and say, you can

change prices whenever you want, but you have to pay.

Some kind of menu cost or whatever.

Hey, follow it through.

You get another relation between the output gap and real

marginal cost with again another group of the data is

still there.

The sigma is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.

So it's a consumer utility function parameter.

And this is the PSI is the fresh elasticity of

labour.

So it's another utility thing.

So again all of these parameters are related to the

sort of real structural parameters of the of the model.

And then you get the profit maximising flexible price.

You already start to see what's on the next slide.

Once we let me send it in, I'm going to

sub in.

The demand side, which is from over here, and this

sort of profit maximising, flexible price.

You get a relationship that looks like this.

It's the flexible price.

Optimal price choice is a function.

Of the average price chosen in the economy, and this

term because it's representing demand.

And Chi.

Relates to the measure of strategic complementarities.

The question is how important in this economy is it?

When you set your optimal price to take into account

what other prices are.

So already this is on the next slide.

If you want to look ahead, you'll see that if

chi is exactly equal to one.

Other prices don't matter for your optimal price.

If Chi is less than one.

Higher other prices mean higher prices for you.

If it's greater than one, you go the other way.

So if it's greater than one.

If other firms have higher prices, you lower yours.

We call the latter strategic substitute ability.

We call the former so key.

Less than one strategic complementarity.

What drives it?

These parameters, which, as we just discussed, are simply functions

of the structural parameters in the economy that capture the

real rigidity.

We tend to talk about this part of the real

rigidity as being an aggregate measure, an aggregate source of

real rigidity, and this being a firm level one.

But together they measure this real rigidity, and that real

rigidity turns up in the complementarity term.

This is what this slide here says.

I know you can.

You can.

You've got to work through things like if I give

you all more market power, there's a greater real rigidity.

The further we are from a linear production function.

The greater the real rigidity.

These I find personally less intuitive.

But the aether is in there again.

But you know, how willing is the consumer to substitute

across time?

How willing are they to work more or work less?

They also drive this ETA term.

Okay.

This is just a repeat of what we've done before.

So actually these equations.

Are lecture four slides like 32, 33, 34, something like

that.

These are the optimal reset price.

This is the optimal reset price in the Calvo model.

With this being the the optimal reset price in a

fully flexible world.

Again, remember firms have a probability one minus theta of

choosing a new price.

So if theta goes to zero.

The optimal reset price is just the flexible price.

If you can if everybody can reset their price every

period.

It's called flat price.

That's.

Don't think there's anything new here.

So?

So the only thing that I would stress here is

that we get this sort of Phillips curve relationship that

we had before.

But now remember the demand side is not the dynamic

is curve.

It's this particular term we're going to sub that in.

We're going to get this effect.

Now the only thing that.

The one thing I really want to stress.

And if if a fire alarm goes off now and

we start to stop here, I'd be sort of okay

and happy.

Not not about the fire, but about the fact that

I got to this point.

What do we have here?

We have.

And remember the way we're going to do demand type

shocks in this is we're going to shock this M

with these UT unit root shocks.

The effect of those on the economy depends on these

two composite terms.

I always put I know it's x, I, I'm going

to call it see.

Is that okay.

Pass pass.

Basic Greek Greek alphabet 101 C is a composite related

to theta.

What's beta.

That's our measure of nominal rigidity in this model.

What's chi.

Well, that's the thing I've just been talking about.

Again, it's a horrible composite measure of all these structural

parameters related to real rigidities.

And what you get in this model is an interaction

between nominal and real rigidities.

So this is a model that has both nominal and

real rigidities.

And what we'll see is the effect of a monetary

shock will depend on the values of both.

So if you sort of.

Interact these in an interesting way.

What gives you the overall effect.

Of the demand shock.

Okay.

But I get to talk about Emmy and Jon and

I get to.

Except.

So this comes from their paper that I talked about

five facts about price changes or something like that, or

price stickiness.

Maybe they called it now.

So some of you should read it.

So some of these.

Some of these are the.

Are reported as percentages.

So how many firms change their prices in a given

period.

So this is 20% per month.

Change prices.

Or this says then this converted into a duration which

is like a price set with this particular cut of

the data.

In this particular period of time, the average price was

set and not reset until 4.4 months later.

Okay.

That's sticky.

Is it now?

Not very sticky.

It suggests that slightly more than once a quarter.

Say slightly less than once a quarter.

They change prices.

Prices last for slightly more than one quarter.

Okay.

Now remember what I said about this paper.

This is a paper where they take, like, huge reams

of data.

Well, again, nowadays with big data and those of us

who work empirically with large data and texts and stuff,

this isn't that big anymore.

But back in the day, this was massive.

This is like most of us would work with a

spreadsheet that had maybe 50 years of quarterly data, maybe

20 variables.

This was like every price observation over nearly 20 years.

Monthly buy outlet buy good for all of these price

reporters.

This is huge.

Wow.

Amazing.

What they really show in this paper is you have

to be super careful when you look at this data

or data like it.

So what they really do is not this is not

the number.

The real nuance of what they're doing is looking how

the number changes as you look under different situations or

particular.

The two big things that they stress are sales and

substitutions.

Now, we could spend the last five minutes simply discussing

whether we think they should be included.

Let me give you both sides of the argument and

you can choose yourself.

One argument is.

I guess their argument is that if you exclude sales,

like the fact that in January people lower the prices

of toys because everyone's bought them after Christmas and they

want to sell some more.

If you exclude those.

The number goes up.

In other words, prices seem fixed for longer.

So one reason it only looked like four months is

because a lot of the goods there price is sort

of fixed, fixed and in the middle they cut the

price by 30% in January.

It doesn't have to be January.

Not every good is seasonal in that way.

What argument is?

Well, that's like just robotic pricing, right?

I'm going to there's my price.

I'm only going to optimise that price every year.

Nine months, ten months.

But I also know that I'm just going to knock

30% off.

And that doesn't take any brainpower or reset.

I'm just going to multiply it by 0.7.

Bang.

So we want to take that out.

The other is you still changed price.

The prices did change.

So you could change it could have changed it by

40%, by multiplying it by 0.6, or by 20% by

multiplying by 0.8.

Why do we exclude them?

The other thing that they focus on is what are

called substitutions.

This is where you bring in new goods when people

bring in new goods into a class.

So again, just to be clear, this is this is

done at the micro level of.

I know I'm going to embarrass myself if I choose

that example.

I'll choose it anyway.

Like phones right?

New phones come in once a year from Apple, so

it can be hard when you ask what's the price

of an Apple phone?

Again, I know they can do it more.

Disaggregate in this one I'm going to embarrass myself.

But you know, we just say, ah, the Apple phone.

Is this the reason it's hard with technology?

Is this also what's called hedonic pricing.

Like the quality in these is different and it's getting

better.

But if you imagine I just bring in a new

version of this, when people bring when companies bring in

new versions of a good, it's like a chance to

reset the price again.

I think you can have the argument, but you chose

a new price.

Like, why is that?

Not like the Calvo Ferry?

You've got a chance to choose a new price.

The other is, well, no, that's just the life cycle

of a price is when a product is born, it

has to get a price.

And then from there it gets sticky.

And we had none of that.

Right?

We don't have a we don't have a New Keynesian

model with new products coming in.

So since we don't have that, we should strip them

out.

We should say for the goods that are there, what

are their prices like?

Bottom line is the estimate is somewhere between four, which

seems quite flexible and maybe up to a year in

terms of how sticky prices are.

But again, I ask my pertinent question that you should

always carry with you when you look at this type

of stuff.

Just because they didn't change their price doesn't mean they

couldn't change their price.

That's the question.

Where do we get to?

Let me just jump to the result.

This is the bit where I said I could kill

you at maths, but I almost every line is written

out here.

The only bit that's hard to do is you have

to figure out the, the coefficients.

And we have one that's linear in in the.

It's this one.

Zita.

Yeah, I wouldn't have gotten that one.

Concede getting a B in basic Greek alphabet and fee.

Okay, so you have to solve for these.

You postulate that this is what the solution takes.

You plug it all back in, you gather terms.

You get these equations.

That's linear that's linear.

That's quadratic.

So you've got to solve this.

You get a big mess.

It's all written out here.

And then you you fill in and you see that

the price level that's what we postulated and that's what

the solution is.

And then you solve for inflation.

And again we've made our life easier by having these

unit root shots okay.

So then you ask well what drives this fee term.

And you can go through and you can see that

it depends on the extent of the nominal rigidity.

This is just telling you what you already saw with

the Calvo model that we wrote down with the normal

demand side.

But you end up in a world where the effect

of monetary policy depends on the value of of theta.

And in particular, if theta is zero, when all of

you can change your prices every period we're in the

flex price world.

A nominal monetary policy shock has no effect on the

economy.

It goes immediately into prices.

And if you went to completely sticky permanent prices, you

get these permanent effects of of M on the economy,

which shouldn't be surprising given that.

Given that we've made this sort of hugely stark, rigid

economy okay.

Then the other.

The other sort of point to draw out, which comes

from this point back here, it's this interaction with Chi

that also plays a role.

So you can see that we're carrying around chi in

here as well.

And in the interest of time, I will come back

and start there next time.

But the key thing is have a look at it.

You get this interaction between nominal and real rigidities in

this economy.

Now what what's the roadmap from here.

Roadmap from here is to look at.

Other.

Non Calvo assumptions.

So for example tailor where the firms that get to

reset now are all the firms who didn't get to

reset last time.

So having three of you doesn't work anymore.

We have to split the class in half.

One half will be even.

One half will be odd.

And you know, the people who reset now are going

to be the people who are furthest from when they

last reset.

I'm going to look at what that does to the

pricing.

Then I'm going to tell you something because this is

going to be about hazard function.

So if you've never seen a hazard function, have a

look at it in the week.

A hazard function is a mapping between how long you've

had, say, the same price and the probability that you

get to reset it.

This Taylor model is one where the longer you've had

a price, the higher your probability you reset.

It's very obvious and stark.

It's like if you just reset it, the probability you

get to reset it again is zero.

And if you've had it for more than one period,

the probability you get to reset is one.

What's the hazard function in the Calvo model written on

there.

And the second last bullet points I want to ask

it give credit for anyone who gets it right.

It's flat.

The probability you get to reset your price doesn't depend

on how long you've had the price.

Some firms have had them a thousand periods and don't

get to reset.

Others have just reset and get to reset.

That's the constant probability.

That's mathematically fun, but seems a bit mad.

I will end.

Now I'll just show you one thing.

This is an estimated hazard function again from Emmy and

John's work.

Which should blow your mind.

Why should it blow your mind?

It's not flat.

Good.

Calvo.

Put in your face.

Why else should it blow your mind even more?

What were we all thinking?

The hazard function should look like upward sloping.

If anything.

You look downward sloping.

And this is again, you might say, oh, that's not

fair, Mike.

But you're looking at the fish market and then and

you're comparing it to the Argos people.

That's not fair.

It'll be interesting to see if nobody sits on this

side next week, because they don't want to be called

the Argos people.

It's not a reflection of us people.

Okay?

No, this is within the sector of processed foods.

Right.

Let's stop.

We see you next week.

Can I get out of here?

Lecture 8:

Yes.

Yeah, yeah.

Is a close friend of mine.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Do you know we're from.

Yeah.

You.

He's going to buy a shirt.

Yeah, totally.

I'll give your colleagues another minute or two.

We've all chosen.

Today is not a day for monetary.

Okay, I will get started.

I'm sure others will join as I speak.

I am going to keep going with the assumptions on

price setting and all of this topic that goes under

L, six, A and B and is really just about.

We've solved the model, and it's the sort of the

core fundamental model of monetary at the moment.

It's a New Keynesian model, and it's easiest to solve

with this idea of carbon pricing, this idea that just

randomly selecting firms that can change their prices and the

others are stuck with the price that they're going to

have.

It's clearly nonsense.

I've said that from the start, but it's very neat

mathematically, and it leads us to sort of solve the

models.

There's a huge literature on other assumptions or modelling things,

perhaps more explicitly.

The first, the a part of this is thinking about

other other types of time dependence.

So for instance, what if rather than saying you can

reset your price only if the fairy arrives, one MP

said you can reset your price every year.

You could get one shot every year.

How does the model look different in the world where

there's random arrival?

And so that's what we're going to sort of cover

here.

And then the other assumption, the B set of these

slides is a world where rather than time dependence we'll

introduce state dependence.

Now state dependence to most of us is that is

the normal natural right way to do this.

If we were thinking about how we would set prices

in a firm, we would think, hey, if the price

looks about right, we're going to keep it.

And then if it looks really wrong, we're going to

change it.

And a lot of those models are based off what

are called menu costs, menu costs.

There's something you will have heard about if you studied

economics before.

It's one of the costs of inflation.

This is the idea that you have a menu and

you have to reprint it because not just the menu

and the printing.

It's also thinking about things like the management time required

to re optimise the price.

And that's that's costly.

There could be doing something else.

Those models are really quite hard to solve.

So to solve them we're going to make simplifying assumptions

and we'll see what they do.

But just trust me.

And believe me, if you decide that that's the only

way to go.

Menu cost type models.

There's a very large literature and it gets very technical,

and the models are hard and you have to make

lots of simplifications there to make them tractable.

But we'll come on to that.

I will also apologise.

One other thing, that's why I.

I was quite sick yesterday, but not in.

You could catch it away.

I ate something which did not agree with me.

So if I sit down for part of this is

because I have decided not to eat much today.

So I'm a little shaky, still having nothing left.

It's also why I posted the slides.

I was going to post them yesterday and I was

not in a good state, so I was very close

to even not coming today.

I made it, I powered on and we'll see how

it goes.

But if I if I seem a little less enthusiastic,

it's not that I love Calvo, and all these others

are evil pretenders to the throne, and I don't like

them.

Just.

I'm not quite 100%.

Anyway.

So when I got to last week in this, you

know, was this sort of version of a Calvo pricing

model, remember you could, in theory, take the whole knew

all of what we're about to do with the entire

Lucasian framework.

But we've made it a bit easier by we've worked

with this sort of demand side that's just given by

m over p y.

The output gap is proportional to real balances, and we

made our lives even easier in the sense that we

have these unit root shocks to money.

So these u t shocks are unit root.

So they're just going to sort of shift the level

up forever more.

And then we got this type of equation.

Where you can see the effects of monetary policy on

the output gap.

This fee is a value which depends on a bunch

of the coefficients.

The assumptions that we make.

The effect is largest in the first period.

This is between zero type in absolute value between 0

and 1.

So this is larger than that is larger than that.

So if you think about tracing this shock out, a

shock today has its biggest effect today.

And then it will fade over time.

And the rate at which it fades over time will

depend on these things.

And the point I was making last week is two

things.

In this model, we get an interaction between real rigidities

and nominal rigidities.

There's that sort of coefficients that that sort of interact

and form a part of the solution to fee.

And the other, the other sort of point that comes

out of this is we get to think about different,

different types of complementarities that that could exist greater than

zero neutrality or larger than zero.

We're going to sort of carry those around to actually

oops.

All, I hate this.

Inter temporally not consistent with my own disciplining device.

No, I just don't want it to hit buttons.

There.

Okay, so where is it?

Yeah.

We're going we're going to see versions of this equation

again and again.

And we're going to sort of compare other pricing assumptions

to that.

So the first other pricing assumption that I sort of

touched on, but I don't think I got into any

of the detail, was the idea of oops, not there.

Duration dependent probability of adjustment.

So this is the idea and unlike Calvo where you

changed your price.

Now the Calvo ferry came and you haven't changed it

for 100 years.

We go one period forward.

Both of these are equally as likely or equally as

unlikely to be a life.

Change their price.

Duration dependent probability of price adjustment says well, whatever you

wanted to say, the further you are from having changed

your price, the probability might be higher or lower or

whatever.

Calvo has a flat hazard function.

No matter how long it is since you last changed

your price, the probability you change it this period is

the same.

Okay.

But we can we can think about these.

And again, I've already done it.

And I think this is what I left you at

last time.

I kind of because it seems natural to me.

I've told a story like you've just changed your price.

You probably don't want to change it again because literally

just did it.

100 years might be time.

Right now.

Might be 100 period, 100 days, whatever you want.

Well, I left it last time.

Is at least for goods.

A lot of the hazard functions go the opposite way

in the sense that they are downward sloping.

The estimated hazard functions.

That means that prices that have been changed for two

years are less likely to change than prices that have

been changed two months ago.

Again, this is the Nakamura Stevenson facts about price setting.

That's very counterintuitive to how I built up the story,

but we're still going to go through it, see what

happens, and then think about the hazard function okay.

And then we'll think a little bit about heterogeneity.

So what if there are you know I often use

this example.

Billingsgate Fish Market is a fresh fish market in London.

They set their prices multiple times per day, like when

they're standing there and they realise they're the only ones

at red snapper.

They change the price.

But then you have the Argos people, if you remember

they're sorry.

Stick with this side.

Is Argos right.

They have a fixed brochure and they maybe don't change

them for a year.

Okay.

I've got to think.

About what about if we have a world where some

of the firms are flexible and some of them are

sticky, what does that mean for the effects of policy?

And then lastly we're going to think about just staggered

price setting.

Or you can think about synchronised price setting if you

want.

Like this is a world where just every second period

or every third period, you can set your price every

day, then the next one you guys can, and then

you guys can, and it will just sort of work

its way around.

So you may say that sounds a bit like Calvo.

It's not because in Calvo you set your price and

then some of you set it again next period.

And some of these guys said it and then it's

always mixing away.

So we're going to look into that okay.

Right.

Let's start with the hazard function.

Okay, so this is tailor pricing.

This is going to be a world where.

You set a price and that price has a life

of end periods.

That would be to play around end.

But that's it.

There's no uncertainty.

There's no probabilistic element.

You know with certainty your price will be alive and

the only price you can have for those end periods,

and then you get to reset it.

So this is a very stark version of a hazard

function.

If you are within any periods of setting your price,

the probability you can adjust is zero.

If you are exactly.

And since you've set your price, probability is one.

So it's upward sloping.

So there's no chance for some here.

And then it's 100% chance you reset your price.

And then that happens again okay.

So.

If we think that we've kind of split the economy

up into chunks.

There's a group in each group of firms in each

of these blocks.

Then each each group will be setting a price today

and knowing they're stuck with it for end period.

And the next group will set it tomorrow and stuck

with it for end periods.

So, so when we think about the aggregate price, it's

just one over n.

This is the average price across those N groups.

That's going to have nice properties for us to analyse,

because it means that there's kind of like a lump

of each of the prices reflecting.

You could think about this in a different way.

You could think, I know 60% of firms set their

prices once a year, but they do it in January

and then, you know, another 10% do it in July

and then the others are scattered around.

Then you get more lumpiness in it.

Like it turns out then that the January price is

super important.

So if conditions suddenly change in February, they get stuck

with those prices.

People have used that.

And actually Sylvana Henry, who's here, she has a really

nice paper where she looks at the seasonality and the

non even seasonality in wage setting to look at how

the effects of, say, a monetary policy shock that come

just after you've reset your wages, let's say most wage.

I can't remember the exact date they are in the

computer.

That's it.

Most wages are reset in January.

Then a monetary policy shock that occurs in February has

11 months of fixed wages to operate through.

Whereas if the same shock had occurred in December, wages

would adjust a month later.

And they show that that sort of wage stickiness has

an important role.

But again, we're not going to do that.

We're going to have everyone evenly done.

So it's just a nice average.

Okay.

And so now.

Because we are going to want to compare this to

our Calvo model.

We're going to want to have a Calvo model.

The equivalent Calvo model is one where theta is equal

to n minus one over n.

So that means that this is a Calvo model where

one over n firms will reset their prices every period.

What's different is that in the Taylor world, it's going

to be a fixed group than another fixed group, than

another fixed group that another fixed, then another group.

Then we're back to you with Calvo.

There'll be a random selection making up one over N,

so the hat that the average probability of adjusting your

prices the same.

It's just now, rather than having a constant probability, we

have this 0001 after n periods.

So they're going to be the same basic comparator.

So you can compare apples with apples.

But there is this this this different nature of it.

Let's just think in advance what this is going to

mean.

Do we think that monetary policy remember monetary policy in

these models has effects because prices are sticky.

If we have a one off monetary policy shop, do

you think it will have a bigger effect when we

do the Taylor Standard pricing or when we do Calvo.

It'll be bigger with Calvo.

Why?

You never know when you're okay.

So one thing that I want to be very precise

on, that you are not quite precise on, is not

every period it's after.

But your logic is exactly right.

After any periods with certainty.

Everybody will have gotten to adjust their prices under Calvo.

You could be stuck with the price.

After 100 years, you're dead unlucky.

He could have reset his price.

Let's say.

Let's say there's five and is five, right?

Or let's do six, because then it's every two months,

like you guys do it first two months you're in

the first two month group.

I'm done.

Then you the new, the new, the new, the new.

Fine.

Everyone's done it.

After one year, everybody's done their price adjustment under Calvo,

you might never have gotten selected.

So his price is still sticky.

Yours could have changed six times each time the ferry

came and just randomly picked you.

Okay.

Statistically, he shouldn't be picked each time, but, you know,

lotteries and all that.

So that's right.

That's what's going to happen.

Question three.

I didn't say it works better.

It has a bigger effect than.

What do you think the degree of.

The degree of fairness.

I feel people are being highly effective over.

Well, again, I can't say that with these models.

Why?

Because there's only one household.

So we can worry a lot about whether or not

fairness should come into it.

It's not in there now.

We can't.

So if you want to ask those questions, there's an

entire class of models called Hank.

They are like rank.

We've been doing rank representative agent, new Keynesian models.

It's a genius.

Agent models add heterogeneity, but then you have to specify

the type of heterogeneity you want and what you're really

describing.

Because now I'm going to dig into your question a

little bit.

What you're really saying is some firms are affected.

Now again that doesn't matter in even a high tech

model, if everybody has a portfolio of equity that's evenly

across each firm.

So yeah, I own some shares in the firm that's

been stuck with a price for 100 years, and I

own some shares and the profits might be a bit,

but I don't care.

I get the sort of share of that.

Now, if we had something where some people owned one

company and some people owned another and they lost out,

yeah, then you'd start answering this question again.

We can't say it here.

Question was in which of the cases the monetary policy

has larger effect.

And we said it's in.

Not capable.

Carlo had similar effects.

No.

Carlo will have more effect.

And more effect in terms of the expected value.

How do you come to.

Mathematically, you'll see it.

I'll show you.

I just want you to get the logic.

The logic is as soon as people can change their

prices, the effects of nominal shocks should go away.

And so if we have a world like starting price

setting, where after end periods, everybody will have been able

to adjust their price.

The effect of that shock should have been, you know,

killed.

Calvo is going to be more persistent now.

It turns out that that's in this world of this

upward sloping hazard function.

If you what we're going to do, there's a slide

coming up in about ten minutes where if you flip

it, like I said, and you say that, you know,

for lots of goods, if you if you change your

price a lot, it happens early, like every change breaks

every month for six months.

But then if your price is still there after a

year, you basically don't change it.

That's going to add to the persistence in a Taylor

type world.

So it's going to matter which direction the hazard function

slopes in for whether we get more persistence or less

persistence from the real effects.

But we'll get there.

Okay.

So.

Okay.

So we typically with these models I'll go back here

just to remind you where this comes in.

There's a group.

There's this strategic complementarity the chi function.

Okay.

So.

Super interesting, super important.

We talked about it last time for the Taylor model.

We're going to set it to neutrality, which is going

to be the value of one.

And we'll do that for I think all of the

models I may be forgetting one of them where we

do it at the very end, but because of that

you get this.

Optimal flexible price is just tracking money.

So this is the sort of money neutrality world if

you had flexible prices.

And again, this is where our trick of having unit

root shocks kicks in.

Because they're unit root shocks.

You have a random walk process.

So the best guess of today of any value of

this variable in the future is today's value.

If you haven't seen that before comes from the fact

that it's like an air one, but with a coefficient

of one as the parameter random walk shocks.

Okay, so.

Remember, every period one over N of the firms are

going to set the optimal reset price.

But they know.

They know that their price will last for exactly six

periods.

When we did this before the price, they of course

they treat future revenues differently today, but they're still trying

to profit maximise.

But they know with probability one that this price resets

after n periods before we had that parameter in there,

and an infinite sum because there was that chance.

You're the person who gets stuck with 100 years of

price.

So all you have to do then is figure out

what is the overall price level in this economy.

Well, again, by splitting you up into these even groups,

the overall price today is today's optimal price, which is

held by one over N of the firm's yesterday's optimal

reset price, which was one over N of the firm,

and so on.

And because the optimal reset price is proportional to M,

we can relate price today to the M averaged over

these N periods.

This is our simplified demand side of the New Keynesian

model.

This is the output gap related to real money balances

that we had last week.

So go read derive this y thing in terms of

these reset amounts, and you can trace the effects of

the shocks, these unit root shocks in the way that

we just did.

Whereas before we had p v squared.

ET cetera.

We now have n minus one over n.

And we're going to compare that.

So you ask me how mathematically we did this.

This is what we do.

We solve for the output gap as a function of

these shocks.

We have it for Calvo.

And we can then do the comparison to see how

big the effects are, how quickly they die out.

In terms of difference in output.

To gaps.

Yeah.

That's what I mean by the real effects.

Yeah.

Okay.

Oh.

Well.

So you can.

You can see what the effect is each period from

those coefficients n minus one over n and n minus

two over n minus three over it, and so on.

You can do the cumulative.

What's the total effect on the output like the total

amount of output gap effect from that new T.

Remember T today is tomorrow's UT minus one.

And the day after you T minus two and so

on.

This is just a one off shock.

So you just trace it through.

And you can then work out the take the solution

for the price level which is in terms of EMS,

subtract the price level yesterday p t minus p t

minus one.

That's inflation.

While p t minus one is a function of m

t minus ones and all the things from there.

And then you can get this expression for the effect

on inflation.

So we can also compare inflationary effects if you want.

What you see here is that the effect on inflation.

Of a one off shock is a constant effect until

we get after n periods and then there's no effect.

So that's just the logic we went through.

This shock is going to you get your chance to

reset.

It affects you.

Then you guys do and it affects you and then

you and it affects you and you all do the

same thing.

And then once we get back to here, that shock

is no longer relevant.

You've adjusted you've adjusted, youth adjusted.

There's no more price changing as a result.

Now of course if you simulated this model there'd be

shocks every period.

But this is just analysing what happens if you have

a one off shock.

How long does it last.

How does it persist through the system okay.

So now we can do the comparison we have.

This y t is equal to.

Function.

So now we have.

So this is from earlier slides because we're assuming strategic

neutrality in the Taylor model.

We're going to do the same thing.

We want to compare apples with apples.

And we said we wanted to have the average one

over and firms resetting their price.

So we impose that on theta.

So theta is related to n minus one.

And again we know what this effect is.

So you can then plug in the theta over n

minus n minus one over n.

But what do we see.

N minus one over n is the same impact effect

that you get in Taylor and in Calvo.

Should we be surprised about that?

No, because from a sort of a world of steady

state, we've shocked the world.

And one over n firms can react.

That means that all the rest cannot.

And they're the same world.

The only difference between these two worlds is we've selected

this group to do it in Taylor and randomly, if

we selected the same group, that's equivalent.

Where the two differ is this object, this idea that

in Taylor, we're going to move on to the next

group systematically through everyone in Calvo we're going to randomly

select.

So we're going to have some people who turn up

again.

Affect the prize setting.

Behaviour of the farm, like in.

That is.

I'm sorry if I said my price today.

I might not know if I can change it.

That's all built in.

Doesn't that.

The implications of wondering possible because of the uncertainty.

Yes, but that's going to.

That's going to come in.

But but your probabilistically.

The duration of your price in Calvo is the same

as the expected duration in Taylor.

In Taylor, your expected duration is with certainty.

In Calvo it's probabilistic, but you're a risk neutral firm.

But realising the probability that you will change is different

from an.

Thing, right?

None of your is neutral.

If your is neutral, you don't care if it's a

coin toss or you get one with certainty.

If you wanted to build in like risk averse and

price firm price setters, that would be different.

These guys just maximise expected profits.

So I know where you're going, but it's just not

the assumption we've made.

So that's why you have to be super careful here

to compare apples to apples.

And the apples with apples.

Are that the same?

They both live in a world where they think they

expect their price will last for the same amount of

time, the duration, because one over N gets a reset.

It's just under Taylor.

It's with certainty.

Under Calvo, it's uncertain.

Copper pricing strategy is similar to.

Yes.

In fact, the underlying model is exactly the same.

And so when these guys get to reset their price,

they will choose the same reset price.

The difference between the models is that after the first

period, Taylor is just looking at this group who have

not had a chance to react.

And so they will all choose to react in the

same way.

Now, if we had Calvo and accidentally selected that same

group, we'd get the same answer.

Problem with Calvo is some of these people reset their

price as well, but there's been no new shock.

So we've selected some of these again, and they don't

have to adjust their price.

They're at this sort of optimal level within another shot.

That's what's going on.

And so.

And you can see why then.

Let's stick this through with the logic for that last

bullet point that's there.

Why would the inflation effect die away with Calvo?

But it doesn't die away except after the end periods

with Taylor, because every period after the first one, the

first one, nobody's had a chance to react to the

shock.

So everybody's resetting in the second period.

Some of the people selected have already reset, and if

they've already reset, they don't reset.

So only, let's say, 80% of the one over N

people selected from selected will reset.

Then the next the third period, we're selecting from two

groups of all reset and some of them are in

there.

So maybe only 60% change their price.

So the number of people changing their price over time

in Calvo it's lower enough.

So the effect is bigger and then fades and it

gradually fades away.

If Taylor, everybody gets the first chance, everybody's first chance,

everybody's.

So everybody's doing it and then it's completely gone after

end periods.

That's what's happening in this type of model okay okay.

So there's some logic here.

What's the logic.

If you think that the price stickiness is what's given,

it's the price stickiness that causes the effect of changes

in nominal money supply to have real effects.

As soon as we can get to a point where

we've all had a chance to adjust, there should be

no real effects.

Taylor gets us there efficiently.

There is no accidental leaving out of people.

Everybody gets covered in one over end periods.

Chomp chomp chomp chomp chomp.

Yeah, for your inequality point, if you're in the group

that goes last, you've had to stick it out for

a bit longer.

And some of them got lucky.

They went first.

Okay, under Calvo, first group goes fine, the exact same

world.

Then as we go further in time, some of these

people get called forward again.

Do you want to reset your price?

There's been no new shops.

You're like, nope, I'm fine.

So we get stuck with a bunch of people who

haven't reset their prices for longer.

Usually policies are like for optimising, right?

Like what wants to do, what bands want to optimise

their firms and profits or consumers and utility.

So if there is this inequality between.

What inequality are you talking about.

The price.

Okay.

So if these firms are being left.

And the prices are.

Like we said for a very long time.

What does it affect the profit and ultimately the aggregate

profit in general?

Then that wouldn't make it so.

We never we have never optimised over Calvo.

Calvo is a parameter that we've imposed.

We've never talked about.

In fact, if you want these economies perform first best

when prices are flexible.

Okay, so we're not optimising over that.

We're saying in a world where prices are sticky to

a degree given by this data, what is the best

we can do now?

This is now.

Today we're asking a question what if we had a

different type of price setting?

You know, what would the world look like?

Would it look different?

And the answer is it does look a bit different.

But you get these you know, these hazard functions do

matter.

You get smaller ripple effects of monetary policy.

But more persistent inflation dynamics.

That's what the world looks like.

Now remember that's for Taylor, which is this upward sloping

hazard function for goods.

If you look at the Nakamura Stevenson paper you'll see

the estimate that the hazard functions are certainly they're certainly

not upward sloping.

They're probably not flat if they look like they're downward

sloping for goods for services they tend to look upward

sloping.

So what would happen?

Well if we apply the same logic.

But now we have a downward sloping hazard function.

Let's think about that logic again one second.

What's that logic.

That logic would be there is a set of people

who never change their price.

The probability that they'll change their price is zero.

That means it's going to be a subsection of the

firms who will never change their price.

So what's going to happen to the persistence?

It's going to get larger, at least with each period.

We're taking a bunch of them and giving them a

chance to draw.

We draw that over many periods.

This would be a world where some would behave flexibly

and others would behave like they never get a chance

to reset.

That's going to flip all of these.

We're going to get this really persistent, effective policy question.

Yeah.

Yes.

So the optimal reset price, that's what I say.

They know in Cabo.

They knew it probabilistically here.

They know with certainty what price they set today will

be theirs for end periods.

And then they get to reset.

Yeah.

No, no, they're not behaving suboptimal given the constraints that

may or may not be optimal.

We know they're not optimal.

He said that.

Okay.

So here's the here's the estimates from their paper.

This is 18 months.

You know.

Firms that have had one month since they last changed

the price.

For processed food.

I have a 40% chance of changing it again, and

if they haven't changed their price for 12 months, that

probability of changing it is 15%, whatever that value is.

Very big picture then if you if you're a monetary

policy committee member with a Taylor model as a as

your view of the world, you would want to go

big every time you reset interest rates.

And.

You would you would operate in a world where your

policy changes.

So which tailor are we going with?

Are we going with tailor?

As I wrote the model down or tailor as would

fit this downward sloping hazard function.

So an upward sloping hazard.

Okay.

If you have an upward sloping hazard function then your

price changes.

Your interest rate changes are going to have a bigger,

more persistent effect on inflation.

So if your job was to control inflation, you might

take smaller steps because you know you're going to have

a bigger effect on inflation for end periods.

Actually.

But in these models, what optimal policy would do.

Is it would try to just.

Get us to first best, which would be inflation equal

to zero and output gap equal to zero.

Now the problem we have with the reason it's hard

to do is we're analysing the effects essentially of policy

mistakes.

UT you can think of as monetary policy suddenly went

up when it shouldn't have that.

So the best thing you could do is eliminate those.

But that's not the question we're asking.

We're asking about the effects in the economy.

So you would be living in a world where you

would have a more persistent effect on inflation, and you

would have a a less persistent effect on aiport.

So conversely, for a downward sloping as.

You flip them.

More real effects, but for less time.

And less persistent effect on inflation.

But again, think of the logic there's going to be

with an upward sloping hazard function.

Everybody sort of eventually gets to change their price with

a downward sloping one.

The first few periods everyone's going to be changing their

price.

But if they haven't changed, then they're probably never changing

that relative to where eventually, eventually will get round to

them.

Okay, good.

Good questions.

Okay.

So here again and again, this is the type of

thing that you should think carefully about yourself.

If you look at this say take the grey line.

This is the regular price of services, excluding travel, the

98 to 2005 hazard functions that are estimated.

What screams at you from there?

Some firms.

Set a price and leave it for like three months.

There's this sort of seasonality.

After three months, there's a high probability of changing price.

But they didn't two months or four months, there are

lower probabilities.

Similarly a bit of a spike at six, whereas the

massive spike 12 months.

Again, if you think about menu cost models, which I'll

come onto later, you can imagine a world where firms

go, okay, well, let's set our price, let's tell people

our price and then every January will renew, will review.

Sometimes you say, oh, that's still the right price.

Or sometimes you go, actually, no, you know, costs have

gone up.

We're going to put them on.

There's all sorts of interesting questions here.

How does this frequency of price setting depend on the

state of the economy?

These are estimates for the US in a period when

inflation was pretty low.

How regularly do you think people set prices in a

country like Zimbabwe experiencing hyperinflation?

Every day, every hour, every 30 minutes, at its worst

prices in Zimbabwe, we're doubling just over every 24 hours.

Somebody was revising their prices pretty regularly.

You know, the famous stories like so we often think

about these as nominal phenomena and blah, blah, blah.

When you get into hyperinflation, it starts having really disruptive

big effects, like the effect I always tell people about

in that to reflect that is these famous cases of

kids in in the hyperinflation in Europe after the war

and kids being taken out of school so that they

could go to the factory gates and collect their parents

wages at 3:00 or 2:00 or whatever, so they could

get to the shops at 230 rather than 530.

Now, I mean, look, you guys have experienced inflation.

Of a serious kind.

For the first time, this recent episode was the first

serious inflation I really had to deal with in my

life.

But we're talking numbers like.

10% 12% per year.

So it didn't matter if you got to Tesco's at

230 or 530 usually.

Okay.

Hyperinflation.

And the one I was describing in Zimbabwe was 100%

inflation every 24 hours.

So do two to the power of 365.

If you wish to know what the annual rate is,

it's a heck of a lot of zeroes.

So, you know, that's one extreme.

You don't necessarily build in those kind of real effect.

I just think of the kids not getting an education

because of high inflation.

That's a scary world.

And anyway.

Right.

So now two, two, two last things to do in

these in these in these slides.

So one is, well, what would happen if we sort

of split the world up into part of the economy

being fully flexible?

Billingsgate Fish Market and part of it being sticky?

How does that change things?

Well, again, we want to compare apples with apples.

So we're going to compare a world where the fraction

of firms who can adjust their prices is the same

across the world, where everybody is sticky, and this world

where some are fully flexible and some are sticky.

So the stickiness is going to have to be much

greater on that section of the economy.

So we're going to have these weights.

Omega.

Oh, sorry.

There's some data here.

So this comes from the the clinical article that's on

on the Moodle site.

It just it just looks at the fact and makes

a point which I guess.

And.

Wouldn't be that surprising.

I've already sort of used examples of it, but there

are some sectors where the price is set seemed to

last for much longer than in other sectors.

So the big standout here is medical care.

Of course this is American data.

So in America medical care has prices.

And those prices tend to I mean of course medical

care has prices everywhere.

I have no idea what the price of medical care

is in the UK because I go to the NHS

and they do it.

I may have to wait a while, but they do

it.

And so in the US these things last about a

year, maybe a bit longer, the mean versus the median

in the distribution.

But they also show this chart which is just to

sort of highlight that.

So this is a cross.

This is a cross.

Different product types.

So sort of you take a raw product type at

some disaggregate level and then you stack them by.

This is the product that has the lowest fraction of

firms each month resetting their price.

So this is a firm that resets that.

That's like 3% of firms in that industry on average

reset their price every month.

And at the other end, you have sectors where over

90% of firms update their price in a month.

So you can think about this law as super flexible,

basically monthly, right.

Fully flexible prices.

You're looking at like the stock market, right.

Those things update every one eighth of a second when

the markets are open.

But for what we're thinking about, which is stickiness that

causes economic effects, we're really talking about shocks that happen.

And like you can't reset your price at the end

of the week, end of the month or whatever.

Okay.

So even if you took some of these down around

here, you might think, well, if 40% of the firms

can update their price in a month, then within a

quarter, you would imagine most of the firms will have

gotten to update their their price.

If it's not randomly selected, then more than all of

them would have reset.

But you can see down here some of these are

going to be stuck at those prices for a long

time.

It's going to take you a lot of months to

get through those.

Okay.

So that's the idea.

The idea then is to have these weights one sector

flexible a weight omega one sector sticky weight one minus

omega.

We're again going to have the same optimal flexible price

that we've used all along.

And we're going to again assume strategic neutrality.

So there's price that other firms set is neither pushing

my price up or pushing my price down.

It's just not going to matter.

And so we get this exact relation between the optimal

price and the nominal amount of money in the economy.

And then we're going to ask, well, you know, within

this sticky price sector there is a fraction determined by

this theta s.

So that's the theta for sticky.

And we're going to compare that to a world where

everybody has sticky prices and see what the difference is.

Again just a different exercise to ask about the effects

of price setting.

The aggregate price is the weighted average of the price

in the sticky and the flexible price sector.

Flexible price sectors.

Easy.

They'll choose the optimal flexible price so they're nice and

fun.

Then in the sticky price sector it's now we're looking

at a world where we have like a localised or

a sectoral carbo behaviour, which is exactly what we've worked

with.

So we know the sort of solutions to the profit

maximising reset price.

Given that probability, I get stuck with it.

Same equations as we had before, but now it's at

the sticky price sector level.

Maths is just written out here.

Go all the way down.

You get an aggregate price level equation.

This one I'll mention so.

So this sticky price you get, you get this totally

predictable effect of the stickiness, which is for those firms

who can't adjust that their prices are the prices that

they had last time, by definition, because they can't adjust.

Remember last time their prices could have been the ones

they had the time before.

This is just this is the aggregate price for that

sector.

And then the ones who can adjust exactly towards the

the new money shock that we're going to have.

Ooh.

Thought that was a spillage.

It's okay.

And.

We get down with a bunch of algebra that's all

written out here for you.

We get down to this output gap equation that again

has these coefficients on it, and it depends on this

shock.

But you also have a term related to the last

output gap.

So there's some of the persistence in there.

Okay, so given that we know why t minus one

is itself a function of the shocks, we can sub

in, and we can get this just as a function

of all of the shocks, which is what we, we,

we sort of want to work with.

And if you sort of do it for the homogeneous

Calvo world versus this heterogeneous world, you, you get these

two equations.

So they look very similar.

Except this has theta S's.

And this is the one minus omega.

Because that's the there's only a fraction of the economy

that has sticky prices.

And now the apples with apples comparison we want to

do now is we want the the the price setting.

For the homogeneous sector world to have, it has to

have a different favour in order for us to be

able to compare the two economies on a fair basis.

It's not just we're going to say, oh, this one

has more stickiness or less stickiness.

And so for that, given that this heterogeneous economy has

a bunch of people who can always adjust their prices,

we have to make the stickiness on the others to

be higher so that the aggregate price setting resetting is

the same across the two economies.

That's what we're trying to do here.

We're trying to make sure that we sort of take,

as given that a bunch of people can reset their

price perfectly, and then the others have to be stuck

with even stickier prices.

So that's the sort of comparison we get.

If you plug this in and you note that this

theta s, this sticky theta is larger than the other

theta, then comparing this with this.

You can see what what happens to the effects of

monetary policy.

Well, they're the exact same in the first period.

But what about the second period?

What's the effect of a shock next period on T

plus one?

Now we're going to have theta times theta S as

opposed to theta times theta.

Is that number bigger or smaller while theta S is

bigger than theta.

So this effect is bigger.

Same initial effect.

Again remember we're just having a bunch of people reset

their prices first period.

They look the same.

Why do we get greater persistence here.

It's the exact same logic as we had before with

Taylor.

Yeah, well, because we have a bunch here who are

constantly readjusting their price in this, in this world, actually,

we end up with to do like for like comparison,

the people who have sticky prices have even stickier prices.

So one period after the shock, there's more of the

firms stuck with the wrong price because they're stuck with

the wrong price.

We get more of the real effects.

It's going to take longer in this alternative economy to

have everybody adjust their price, because every period some of

the people who can adjust their price are these people

here, but they're always the same people.

They do adjustment after the first period.

So you guys are left waiting longer and longer and

longer, which just means it takes longer and longer for

a nominal shock to fall out of the economy.

It's the same logic.

We've just made the inefficiency even worse here, because we've

given a bunch of people a pass to always get

the ferry.

Good question.

When we compare the last equation to the first equation,

the effects of the.

Eyes are higher, but it's still the case.

Within the equation as we move to the next time

period.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah.

These things will always die away.

Yeah, that's a sort of feature of these models.

When I say, let's think about why is that?

Because when the shock first hits, there's a bunch of

people.

You all have the wrong price now.

So the effect of that on demand comes because of

the mispricing, the nominal rigidity.

As we go through time, more and more people will

have the right price relative to that shock.

But of course, if we if we move, if we

let people adjust less quickly, it lasts for longer.

That's what's happening.

And that's what we get in this last equation.

So again but it doesn't fundamentally change.

I think I said all of this.

Yeah, I think that's fine.

Okay.

These last two slides or one slide.

Two slides.

Is is basically just looking.

Out a world where we had staggered price setting, right?

So we had one over n one over n one

over n, etcetera.

Now you can sort of ask, well what happens.

And.

If we have this synchronised.

So this is sort of the thought experiment I gave

you with thinking about.

Imagine every January we all set our prices.

And then when you get shock, fitting is going to

start to matter.

Okay.

Let me.

Okay, so now we just asked the question.

Everybody can do it.

Even with none in art.

What's going on?

What do you think is going to be the example

here?

What's going to be the effect here?

Well, let's just think through the logic.

We've just done all the logic.

We know that the effects are going to depend on

new changes, prices, shocks that occur in even periods.

What will their effect be?

We just reset.

Reset.

Optimal.

Reset.

It's like we're in flexible price world.

What's the impact going to be in on periods?

The maximum possible because nobody will adjust their price.

That shot that occurs in OD.

How long will it last?

One period till the next period.

Now again, the odd even, which was the example that

was used for this standard.

Sorry.

Synchronised twice as it.

Gets more fun if you like I said earlier, you

start thinking about like 12 month and there being blocks

of people in month one six whatever where people do

it, and then you get these differential effects.

And that's what Silvana tested in her paper.

But on the weight side.

Okay.

So the only thing that that's sort of.

Becomes more interesting in this is if we then start

allowing for strategic complementarity, where the price that others set

affects the prices that I set.

What I was describing was the strategic neutrality world.

That's very simple, kind of dull.

You start putting in this this remember this comes from

here where the optimal reset price will now depend on

the existing price.

Then you can start to build in some dynamics in

this model.

Where is that?

Yeah.

So the only thing you get now is when you

do get to reset your prices because of strategic complementarity,

you may adjust them more because, you know, other people

are adjusting theirs.

So your optimal price is higher than just tracking the

neutral rate.

And then you do get some persistence.

You could reverse it and have strategic substitute ability.

Imagine that you know that there's a shock.

You all get to reset your prices, but because you

want to set a price that's lower than everybody else's,

you actually don't adjust by as much.

But everybody doesn't adjust by as much.

What happens?

The price doesn't get to the flexible price world as

quickly.

That's the basic idea.

And here again, sort of interesting.

One of the first things I was working on in

my PhD was seasonality.

It's very non sexy topic, by the way.

It's not it's not what the cool kids do.

But it's super interesting right.

Because it's exactly things like seasonality that allow you to

test some of these ideas.

Best example of seasonality that there is Christmas.

If you want the most extreme volatility that the economy

faces.

Nights, but weekend nights, probably even more, right?

If you really like, if you really thought that these

things mattered, right?

Most firms operate in a window somewhere between seven in

the morning and eight at night, and then at eight

at night.

About 80% of economic activity stops.

Completely goes to zero and then comes charging back the

next day.

The weekend, a lot of them stop.

So yeah, lots of interesting stuff there, particularly if you

like inventories like I do, but nobody else does.

That's okay.

That's okay okay, I'm going to stop there.

We're going to take our break now when we get

back from our break.

I have to go.

Have to reignite this.

You get.

To do a survey.

And I've been sent this so that you can just

scan it on your phone.

I remember what I used to have to hand out

pieces of paper to everyone and then get them collected,

signed on the seal sealed over, and have someone else

bring them to the office so that I wouldn't nick

them and fill them in and just replace them all

with stuff like he's awesome.

Well, okay, so you have.

Why don't we start again like 25 paths.

That gives you 50 minutes to do the survey.

Okay.

Okay, let's choose this.

Do you want to do the survey during the break

or do you want to.

Let's do a during the break.

Yeah.

Quarter to at 15 minutes.

That gives you time for break and time for survey.

I don't know how long the survey takes.

I've never done it, but it's there.

We start again at 2:25.

Quick questions first.

I'm here about one great shot.

And then every agent.

Expects zero shops in the future.

And is correct.

So what if we imagine the world?

This would be the exact same.

The math is the same.

It's just we have to introduce in every period we

would have a u t and a u t minus

one and a u t minus two, all with different

values.

Yeah, okay.

But we just average it out.

What we're interested in.

What is the effect of one shock?

Because that tells us about the transmission mechanism.

Now, once we know that yes, you want to I

said this in this lecture, if you if you simulate

this, you're going to get a different world, a lot

more noise, a lot more stochastic variation.

But that's just.

Yeah.

You.

Is it possible to write all the time?

That's.

Like a degree of like we are comparing it with

like the cowboy, I get it, but I want to

see what it is like compared to everything.

With everything.

Obviously the flexible prices and the.

But while it comes to the others.

To see which one is the best article, like hydration

and stickiness and how it changes.

If only that changes could get better or worse than.

And even synchronised.

Yeah.

I mean, I mean, you can't do it just objectively.

It would depend on the calibration, but for a given

calibration, you can compare across.

All of them.

That is the thing.

All of them together.

Oh, you want me to just, like, make one?

I mean, the slides, the things are all there.

I just have to copy and paste from each slide.

It's not.

Yes.

It's not hard to do.

Can you send me an email?

Because I'll probably forget to do it and I'll do

it.

I'll try and get it done by next week.

Otherwise, any it's worth, I think there's not a lot

of work.

It's literally copying and pasting from five slides that are

there, and then you put.

But you can't say like one is better than the

other because it will depend on what calibration you want

to put in.

So yeah, but once we have it, you could even

put them in, you could put them in Matlab and

then you could play around with different values.

Let me just remind you that this doesn't work, at

least for me.

I don't know why.

We're like.

Does it work for anyone?

Do someone else find?

I can, I can, I can ask them, have you

tried going directly to that link?

Yeah, but.

I have no idea.

I literally got this email that said, stick this up.

It's the same.

It's the same address.

Yeah, it's the same address.

Okay.

So it's the same thing getting the QR codes.

Because I mean I can get access to it, but

that's correct in the sense that I'm not.

I don't know whether it has open.

Maybe that's not open.

I decided to.

Start a bit later in the term.

I think so, right?

I think so, not sure the time is right.

Yeah.

Honestly.

Like for a certain amount of time.

Okay, fine.

Let's not do this.

They will do it next week.

Okay.

This is week eight isn't it.

Yes.

And then.

After class.

Okay.

So the calendar said.

This is just a possibility.

It's not working well but.

I get the results.

By.

Week eight of term.

That is from Monday the 13th November.

Okay.

He gives us back this Wednesday.

But I mean let's see, it is not always not

always possible.

Okay.

We'll do it next week then.

Okay.

Cool.

Yes.

Thanks.

Yeah.

So I have a question on the front.

So because we have different implications for the output gap

and inflation as compared to cargo pricing, would that mean

the optimal monetary policy will be different like I believe

we saw with depending on the regime, it's either flexible

inflation target or a flexible price level target.

But will the implication be different with different price?

It could if we.

Change the preferences of the policy maker, so to say

which is optimal, we have to impose a set of

preferences on the policy makers.

So do they.

So do they want is a little bit like a

colleague question.

Do they want to get inflation have a bigger effect

on inflation.

So they have more control of it.

It's a little bit.

Yeah.

But again remember how monetary policy is in this world.

It's it's.

Not the full world.

Which.

Is hard to.

Impose those.

Preferences because we have monetary policy is now the level

of.

Money with these unit.

Shocks.

Yeah.

So so there's not really a policy.

Right.

There's no optimal policy in.

Here because.

You have simplified the money demand.

Yeah.

But but but in theory yeah.

You could get a different optimal policy if you have

these different price settings in.

A little bit.

So there's a big debate at the moment.

It's slightly like people ask what what's optimal policy in

a model where the policy maker cares about distributions in

a market.

Right.

They give you different predictions.

Now why?

Well, you've changed the preferences.

That's where you're going to get the biggest effect on

on these things.

I think in this world the optimal is still going

to be to achieve divine coincidence.

If you can get inflation equal to zero and output

gap equal to zero, that would be the best.

And as I said to your.

Colleague.

In this, in the version of the model we have

here, which is I'm just going to close this so

people don't keep trying.

That you.

Just reach.

Yeah.

In the version that we have here, the optimal thing

to do is to remove the UT shocks.

And if you think there are policy functions, yeah, if

you can remove them, you remove the stochastic variation in

your cost would be how it's supposed to be optimal

all the time, which is not the question I know

you're asking, but that's.

But yeah.

In any case, like irrespective of the preferences, there must

be some optimal weighing of the output gap inflation.

That's the best policy, right?

That's right.

And but as we saw before, that depends on whether

you have discretion or commitment.

The weights depend on.

How you're targeting.

Rule depends on what regime you're in in terms of

of policy setting.

We don't really have that here.

Because there's no policy process.

So it's a tricky one to answer.

And again, so let me state a slightly different way.

Imagine a world.

Where.

We have the full New Keynesian model.

There might be a different optimal when, you know cost

per shops are more dominant and you may need to

have bigger effects on inflation more directly versus if demand

type shocks are more I guess curve shocks are more.

Positive.

Then.

Yeah.

And so there could be like the whether the transmission

being quicker on output versus inflation is more desirable or

not might depend on the shocks up here.

Okay.

So again to answer that question properly you have to

write the full thing down.

But that would involve redoing all of this with the

full New Keynesian model and then imposing some set of

preferences on the policy making.

Just fun.

Could do it, but.

Complicated to solve analytically.

Yes.

You do that on a computer.

That would be dynamic.

Right?

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay, just so you know, don't do the survey.

Well, do it if you can, but you can't.

Don't know why.

I have an email that tells me that from Monday

the 13th of November, which I still believe is today.

Uh, I should show this slide, but instead I will

try figure it out and I'll bring a slide back

next week.

I'll bring the same slide back next week.

Potentially.

Yeah.

Don't know why.

Yep.

Could you tell us when we could expect, like, recommended

topics for the extended this week nine?

Yes.

Sorry if I.

Okay.

A lot of people have come back.

Goodbye, said 25.

Probably.

You can't ask.

Is everyone back?

Because everyone who's back is back.

Anyone notice if anyone who was sitting next to them

is no longer here?

Okay, we've missed one.

Okay, we'll wait two more minutes.

We are waiting.

One more question to fill out.

Could you suggest the approach of work study preparing for

the exam in terms of the suggested textbooks?

Reading materials?

How to organise.

That is a horrible question.

I could tell you how I would prepare.

But different people study and prepare in very different ways.

So, I mean, I would spend most of my time

trying to figure out like what the assumptions are in

each of these models and what drives them and where

they come about.

And then working through the problem sets and seeing, do

I understand why we work our way through those and

why I get answers to those?

And then I would have a look at some past

exams from recent years and look at those and see

if they make any sense to me.

Like I said, there's one topic that I'm not covering

this year and one new topic that I will cover.

So if there's something on search theoretic models of money

and you're like, oh my God, I have no idea

what this means, what's happened is because wasn't covered.

And you know, I'm a I'm a reasonable human.

I'm not going to put questions on search theoretic models

if we haven't covered them.

It seems like a decent, reasonable thing to do.

So that's what I would do.

But.

Yeah.

The things that are mentioned in these textbooks if we

don't cover it in slides.

That's always slightly dangerous because you're not here to learn

my slides.

You're here to understand things, right?

So.

So if something comes up and they're like, oh, that's

not something Michael talked about, but I want to read

about it and learn a bit.

That's also fine, right?

That is useful for life.

He's back.

We identified you are the only missing person, so the

survey doesn't seem to work.

So we moved on with our lives, and we'll come

back to the survey.

But I have given.

I told you 25 passed.

I thought it would be unfair to charge on without.

So we waited.

Now we will charge on.

Okay.

This is the material that simply shifts attention away from

any of the time dependence in the nominal rigidity, and

moves towards a state dependence.

State dependence, as I alluded to earlier, seems at least

intuitively to me.

And I should caveat this by saying I have never

worked for a firm and set their prices.

I have obviously worked for firms, but I've never said

their prices.

But it seems to me logical that if my price,

if there was a cost to changing price, namely either

a physical cost or printing cost, a thinking cost or

a strategic decision unit cost, I might choose to not

set it every 10s.

I might instead set it and leave it for a

while.

But the probability that I change the price would not

just depend on time since I last changed it, but

would depend really most importantly on conditions.

So if nothing changes, I could leave the same price

for 2 or 3 years.

But if I set my price yesterday and then there's

a big shock, I might still choose to reset it

today.

What would that optimisation look like?

Well, it would look like a world where I would

get some measure of the cost of changing price.

I get some sense of what the benefit of changing

price would be, and whenever the cost was exceeded by

the benefit, I would choose to re optimise.

That is exactly what state dependent menu cost models of

nominal rigidities build in.

So they'll be they would give a much more nuanced

look at the behaviour of different sectors.

So if we go back to the thinking I gave

you from the old chart where I showed you that

there's a some goods where only 3% of firms change

their prices in a given month, and in other words,

90.

Time dependence is, I don't know.

This is a sticky price world and that's a no.

Maybe the 3% are in a really settled industry with

very minimal cost shocks, various stablished set of capital, and

very little labour variation.

That means that they don't have wage demands that go

up or down with the aggregate price level.

So they just kind of don't need to change their

price very much.

They could whenever they want, but they pay a menu

costs so they choose not to.

Where is the 90%?

Maybe the menu cost is really small and the shocks

are really big.

So the benefits or the cost of doing it, of

being away from some optimal price is really large.

So they do it a lot that actually I've already

alluded to it, but that's why in Billingsgate Fish Market

they don't print brochures with their prices.

They have whiteboards and they write them up because, you

know, when they discover that you're the only one with

red snapper, you you rub it out, you put the

price of the law.

And then when you find there's a queue of people

from all the top London restaurants waiting to try and

buy from you, you put the price up even more.

Japan has this famous sushi fish market that, like the

wholesaling of the like the tuna that like these things.

If there's someone you get to, I don't know, sushi,

I apologise.

I'm going to show my ignorance here.

If you get a particularly good type of tuna and

everybody wants it, these prices go astronomically high very quickly.

So they've even built in price revelation mechanisms, which are

things like auctions that take place.

Right.

So is there some sectors where there's a sticky price

and some sticky price and some where there's not?

No.

There are probably different menu costs, different costs and benefits

of being away from that optimal price.

So that's obviously cool.

Awesome, great.

Hugely problematic to solve.

Why?

Because if we think about the world, what was nice

and what made this sort of the flat hazard function

really desirable is the fact I don't have to remember

who set their price when.

I don't have to know anything about individual firms and

where they are in the state of the economy.

It's just if you get the carbon fairy, we're all

basically the same, even though we're different, and you reset

your price to some amount.

Very nice attractively allows us to aggregate easily.

These models are hard.

So we're going to look at a couple of models.

I'll get through I think the Kaplan and School Burn

model.

And then I'll touch on some of the the variations

that come from there.

What might happen in Lehigh.

And then there's one by Danziger.

Okay.

There are far more menu cost models out there, but

they get much more difficult.

And you have much harder problems of aggregation, because now

I need to know whether you reset your price, what

all of your costs are, how do they reset?

And they could be different to you and different to

you.

And so now I have to keep track of all

of these things.

And that's hard okay.

So what does Kaplan Spielberg do?

Oh.

Oh, sorry.

There's this important thing to say.

One neat thing about what we do now is we

will.

As with time dependent pricing, will still have firms choosing

the optimal size of their price change.

It's just we didn't previously have them optimising over whether

they changed price.

That was exogenous.

So the key thing in time dependent models is the

intensive margin.

Where do you get to change.

How much do you change.

Here we're going to choose both.

We're going to choose whether or not to change.

And when we change how much.

And so the other thing to remember in these models

is.

Imagine we had a world where the same fraction of

firms are optimally changing price.

In Calvo.

We have that every period and everybody in that group

would choose the same reset price.

Here, we can.

Get a world where the composition of who changes can

also affect the size of the inflation effect.

So we can get that the bunch of people who

are changing all of them are at really low prices,

and they all jump a lot, as opposed to you

can have the same group, a same size of group

changing, but they're much more dispersed prices.

So they all reset to somewhere, with the average price

increase being different.

Composition can also change here.

You start to see why we get much more complicated

wealth.

Kaplan is going to simplify this massively, unrealistically you might

say, but it's a way in okay.

Yeah.

This is just to show that.

You know when.

When firms change price.

We sort of see this quite a bit.

Also varies quite a lot.

Like there are some some years where things not only

not only are there lots of firms changing price, they're

also on average changing by higher amounts.

And then there are periods where less change and they

change by less.

So there's all the effects in the real data.

So in order to deal with this, the.

The sort of.

Trick that was used in the two main books that

we're going to study is this work by Andrew Kaplan,

who's super interesting British guy, actually, that NYU.

But he sort of he was working on these kind

of models, but then he's moved on to like experimental

and behavioural macro type things.

Very cool.

The tricky uses here is the same trick that's been

used in models of inventories, which is why I also

love that.

And that's what are called SS strategies.

Under certain conditions and SS strategy can be optimal in

others.

It won't be.

But let me just describe it before I show you

the details of the model.

It basically says the little s is like a lower

trigger value.

The upper.

S.

Is the reset value.

So I to tell you the story in terms of

inventories, because I think it's even more natural in inventories.

And then just tell you that we're going to apply

that to price setting.

What's the idea in inventories.

Well imagine a world where I had to choose how

many bottles of water to keep in my cafe.

Now, I live in a world where the amount of

water my customers by the number of customers I have

is stochastic.

So I can't know perfectly, but I have some sense

of the rate at which they disappear.

And I don't want to.

I don't want to have customers come in and not

be able to get water, because then they get angry

and they never come back.

So in an inventory management point of view, I also

don't want to be doing sort of continuous ordering because

there's a fixed ordering cost that's going to be like

the menu cost, the fixed cost of changing prices.

So because of that, what you do is you design

a strategy that says any time the amount of water

I has drops below lower s.

I will optimally reorder an amount to get me to

bigger up uppercase F.

So if at the end of the day I discover

I have less than the amount of water, that is

my trigger value, I say, okay, well, let's say my

trigger value is 20 bottles of water.

I go in, I realise I've got 18 bottles and

I say, great, 18 I now reorder, how much do

I reorder?

Enough to get me up to the upper.

Let's say it's 60 bottles.

So on that occasion I will order 42 bottles of

water.

They'll come in.

I'll go back to 60.

Well, actually, depending on, you know, the real fun stuff

with inventory and when you start building in lags.

But let's imagine they come immediately.

It's like Amazon Prime.

So I order them, they come in and I go,

excellent.

They start the next day with 60.

And then gradually over time customers come in and they

buy some of days.

Lots come in Sunday, a few.

I don't have to think about ordering.

I don't do any ordering and then buying it drops

again.

One day I turn up.

I've got 19.

I now order 41 bottles.

That's the idea of the SS model for inventories.

What does it do?

It provides the right level of kind of insurance against

stocking out.

So you have a trigger point, but also you don't

want to be ordering too frequently because then you end

up paying this cost.

Take the word water and stocks or inventories and turn

it into prices.

And instead of cost of ordering, think of it as

menu costs.

What's going to happen in these models is firms are

going to have some price level that they set things

to.

And then as time goes along, the price can move

around.

So the optimal sorry o say the words probably Michael.

Let me start that again.

They're going to have some.

High level above the optimal price, the flexible price that

they want to set to that they reset to.

And then as the as shocks hit the economy the

optimal price will vary.

And so your gap from the optimal price will change.

You're going to start above it.

Over time you'll go below it.

And then at some lower s if you're sufficiently far

below the optimal price, you will then reset to above

the optimal price at that time, and then the optimal

price will vary at each point.

And so this gap will open and close.

That makes it fairly neat, because whenever we keep track

of firms, we can aggregate just by knowing where their

price is relative to the optimal price.

So that's going to be a simple strategy that we

can then aggregate from.

Now where does it get difficult.

Actually Caplan and Burr what they what they originally did

was they assumed a world where money only grows.

So it's going to look like the world we had

before, where the nominal amount of money is going to

grow.

We know what that would do in a flexible price

world.

Prices would just keep up with it.

But here what we're going to do is we're going

to have like a nominal rigidity.

Money will be growing, but some firms won't change their

prices.

But as money grows, it means the optimal price is

going to effectively get larger.

And so your gap to that from a given price

is going to get wider and wider.

So your price gap is always going to go in

this direction.

And then you're going to reset up and then it's

going to same again.

So it's a trick becomes more technically difficult in Kaplan

and Lehigh where they allow for two sided shocks as

opposed to just one way traffic.

Okay.

Oh, so this is what I've been explaining to you.

You have a current price, and there's a current optimal

price.

And what matters is your gap to that.

Once you pass the lower threshold.

You reset.

By a fixed amount back up to the upper threshold.

And again, like I said, it's kind of when you

know that this thing is moving in that that one

way direction, when there's only ever inflation, the upper case

is going to be above today's optimal price.

So you're going to kind of have a period where

you're pricing a bit too high.

You'll have a period where you're a bit too low,

but you're not going to have to have all this

re Re optimisation in the interim periods.

Okay.

Still, aggregation would be tricky except for this second third

bullet point and it's still bullet point.

What makes it possible to aggregate nicely in this model?

Well, one, we have this one sided rule and they

all follow it.

The other is we assume that the initial distribution of

individual prices is uniform.

Which means that as the optimal price goes up, it's

going to be.

Like a ladder system.

You've just reset your price.

You're at the top, you're above, you're the highest point

above.

Everyone's using the same rule as the optimal price goes

up.

Optimal prices here, you're here.

Optimal price starts going up your distance to that.

First of all, you get closer and closer.

Now you're the same as it.

Now it's above.

Now it's above bang.

And all that time you do nothing until you get

that gap being sufficiently large that suddenly you drop out.

Now, having a uniform distribution of firms with prices means

that there's always the same amount of each point.

So as I left the top spot, some people fell

below S and they're optimised into the top spot.

Have you ever is going to be a very potentially

very UK and Irish based thing.

There was a there was a nursery rhyme about like

kids rolling over in a bed or bears rolling over

in a bed and one falls out.

No means nothing to, you know, not even the Irish

people know this.

Okay, this is obviously an ancient thing.

You guys all grew up with iPhones, which take all

the joy of nursery rhymes.

Okay, so imagine we have a line of these things.

And as they move down, everything shifts and the last

one goes across some threshold and gets stuck in at

the top.

You get this constantly rotating system.

But what does it tell you who's adjusting their price

in any one period?

Only one set of people, the people who are at

the very bottom, who cross the threshold, everybody else does

nothing.

But the process is such that because it's only moving

in one direction, the people at the bottom, they drop

out, they go up to the new reset price, they

determine all of inflation.

The rest of us do nothing.

But the person who was second to last near the

threshold is now next to it.

And when the price moves again, a chunk of people

will do.

That's the that's the whole aggregation in the in the

model.

And.

What's actually interesting is that you with these assumptions and

you can break this with other assumption.

And we don't get despite nominal rigidities and, you know,

a form of price stickiness at individual firms.

We do not get that there is a effect on

the real economy.

And you'll see that through the maths.

But the logic of it is that that subset of

society that resets in price does.

So knowing it's sort of getting to go above.

So it sets by more than it should and sort

of compensates for all those people who are not.

And the average price equals the average flexible price that

we would have.

So you'll see it in a second.

But that's again, this is the simplest version.

And yeah, not particularly simple okay.

Same basic profit maximisation idea.

We're going to do everything now in continuous time, but

it's essentially the same world that we had before.

We have the same simplified demand side of the economy.

Again, if you want to go a loop and Lucas,

you can have a full, fully fledged New Keynesian model

with this stuff.

And we're going to have strategic complementarity.

We have the optimal reset price same same as we

had before.

We define this gap for any individual firm I, which

is the difference between its price and.

Its the.

Optimal reset price for that period.

And as I described.

You start off with a positive gap.

It will eventually be negative when it's negative enough at

lower s.

You reset and what you reset is the difference between

the s and the.

The two s, the big S, and the little.

That's like getting your bottles of water back to 60.

Now we have the uniform distribution.

Fine.

Set all that.

Yeah.

So my question.

Is are there are they time variants and do they

depend on reset as a.

Price.

Do they also reset the thresholds?

We keep them constant.

They're going to be kept constant, but they're going to

be related to the optimal price.

So it's like 1.4 and 0.6 right.

So I reset to 40% above the optimal.

And I and I reset when I'm at 60% of

the optimal okay.

So it's always relative to optimal.

Oh, yeah.

Sorry.

Remember what I was about to say?

There are circumstances, as I sort of alluded to, when

an SS model is optimal.

It's not always optimal.

There are going to be situations where this type of

SS rule is not good.

And in fact, the assumption that they make to even

get us in any way.

Sensible.

Imagine a world where money are there for the optimal

price could also fall.

You could end up in a world where you grow

above.

S.

Bigger, big s, and in fact, you could just keep

going.

So I'm thinking of Japan here, right?

Deflation starts happening.

And you're saying, well, I'm never getting to my rule.

I never reset my price and I just keep drifting

further and further from it.

That is not true.

That's why Kaplan and lhey actually come in.

They invoke two sided SS model.

But this is.

Yeah, this is this is fine for what we have

here.

Okay.

So so we're going to think about these sort of

tiny intervals of time.

And this positive remember that we're constraining this that this

increase in money is always positive.

So there's this.

Expansionary monetary policy in this world.

So this is now just our term for how the

aggregate general price changes in that small interval of time.

We have our.

Our.

Strategic complementarity term built in here so we can reflect

that also in the change in the in the optimal

reset price.

So the change in the optimal reset price in that

small interval of time is going to depend on the

monetary shock, but also on the other change in prices

because we have the strategic complementarity.

Yeah, you'll see this.

We don't have to know it yet, but it is

going to be the case that this is going to

be a sort of Friedman Friedman consistent world where as

you increase money supply, you're also going to increase prices.

And given that money's going up and prices are going

up, then the optimal price is also going to go

up.

Now, given that, remember what I said, there's going to

be a bunch of firms that are in the distribution

between lower s and upper s.

They're not going to change their price.

But what is going to change is their gap.

Because if they don't change their price but the optimal

price goes up, then that gap is going to widen.

That's what's going to get you the move from s

down and then reset.

So this is what I this is in words what

I had said already.

Because we have this uniform distribution.

There's only going to be a small fraction of that

that are that where this change in the optimal price

is going to knock them over the lower threshold, and

when they get knocked over the lower threshold, they're going

to raise their prices by that gap.

I lost the big picture.

Why?

Why do firms not want to set the price equal

to the optimal price?

Do they want to keep a mark-up over the optimal

price?

It's profit maximisation.

It's the same New Keynesian profit maximisation that we had.

So they want to set but still their optimal price.

What we're imposing on them is an SS rule I

don't know are you confused about their profit maximisation or

their SS rule?

I'm confused about the the the logic of why you

would want to set a price higher than the optimal

price, always.

Because you're not going to reset it, okay?

And if you know the price is going to go

up and you know you're going to be stuck with

a price for a while, if you stuck it exactly

to the optimal today, what's going to happen tomorrow?

You're below it.

So what you do is you set it at a

level above and then reset it when it's sufficiently below,

so that on average, you're added.

That's what they're doing.

But we're imposing that.

We haven't we haven't done that optimisation.

We've just said this is the rule.

They're behaving badly.

So sorry, but if the money supply goes like this,

we would expect the price level to sort of fluctuate

around that.

Why is it fluctuating?

You mean your individual price or the aggregate price?

We haven't solved for the aggregate price yet.

Your individual price will fluctuate.

Your individual price will be somewhat above the optimal price

for a while.

Then gradually drop down and keep dropping dropping dropping till

you reset.

Then it goes up above it again and then we

do it again.

So for an individual firm relative to the optimal price,

you're going to have this kind of like a zigzag

pattern.

It went the wrong way.

You're going to have this kind of pattern where you're

above it.

You drive and then you're going to go above it

again.

Then you go dead, and then you're going to go

above it again.

Then you're going to go down.

The question is what happens overall to the aggregate price

level.

I haven't solved for that yet.

I can ruin it.

I can give you the big reveal.

We're going to have some firms above some firms below.

These firms, when they drop out, are going to do

all of the inflationary work, but they're going to inflate

by more, but such that on average, the optimal price

is going to be.

The optimal price.

So I said that the average price is going to

be the optimal price.

That comes from uniform and the uniformity that we're assuming.

But that's what makes us really able to solve this.

If you want to do it with other assumptions that

get much harder.

Is that okay?

So the constant growth rule is like an automatic stabiliser

here.

It's it's neither a.

Stabiliser or nothing.

It's just a fact.

There's no optimal monetary policy in this.

There is just a money that is growing in a

fully flexible world.

What would happen?

Money would.

Grow.

Prices would go grow, reels would all stay constant.

Now, what we're doing is we're saying if firms are

going to set this rule and the rule, we haven't

done this, the solution to it.

But you could imagine and I described it as motivated

by a menu cost.

You don't want to reset prices all the time, so

you sometimes set them above, sometimes below.

The question is going to be we have now imposed

quite a lot of rigidity at the individual firm level.

In fact, if I were to look at this economy,

there would only be the lowest subset of firms in

the distribution who would do any price changes.

Everybody else would be rigid.

To an external observer that's going to look like Calvo

squared, like Super Calvo.

Most people do nothing most of the time.

The question is, does that have the effect, like it

would if we put Calvo at a really like sticky

level?

The answer is no.

Why?

Because we're all sort of doing this SS type behaviour,

which is going to keep the aggregate price actually moving.

Let me just quickly yeah, we'll come back and do

this again next week.

So what is what is the actual change in the

price.

Well.

For a load of.

People they do nothing zero.

But for the few who fall off the bottom of

the bed.

They do a big change.

With the uniformity.

You can again see it.

You have a bunch of people who are 30% above

and a bunch of people who are 30% below, and

everyone evenly distributed in between.

What's the average price?

He started.

So the change in price equals the change in the

optimal price.

It's just it's coming about in a slightly more unusual

way.

We have a very small part of the distribution of

firms who choose to change their prices a lot.

But it looks like loads of rigidity at the firm

level.

But because we get that the change in P and

the change in M are the same.

There's no change in the output gap.

So we have this.

Huge.

Rigidity or what seems like a huge firm level nominal

rigidity.

Everybody has these menu costs that make them not change

their prices for most of time.

And yes, the aggregation leads to full neutrality of money.

So this is just like we had a flexible price

world and we didn't care about the price setting.

We just let everyone set them.

Now that's true in aggregate.

Now I'm going to come back to your question from

earlier.

If my care wasn't the aggregate economy, but my care

was individual firms, then at different points in time after

discounting, they'd be like, oh yeah, I've got to hire

price for half the time and two lower price for

half the time.

Are they completely okay with that?

Well, it depends how they discount how they weight being

above versus below.

So maybe there's interesting firm level but at the aggregate.

This economy looks like a representative firm with fully flexible

prices.

It just it gets there in a weird way like

one of you sets huge price changes every period but

such that the aggregate moves.

Yeah.

So this is the picture.

This is from their paper.

I actually prefer to think.

Of it as a line, but a.

Circle.

But essentially.

Your.

Each of you are at some point on this, and

it's only when you get past this that you jump

back up to the top of the ladder.

But because you're doing that constantly, every period, this economy

looks like just a uniform distribution with the price that

optimal.

Price gap distribution is invariant.

You yourself would move along it.

But to the outside observer there's nothing.

Yep.

Since all the firms are identical, the G function should

be identical.

No, no, because some of you started a long way

from the price, and some of you started exactly at

the price, and some of you started above the price.

So it is like there are folks.

Only heterogeneous in the fact that some of them are

distributed differently across this gap to start with.

Once we start there, we stay there and the economy

looks like the flex price, even though we put loads

of rigidity in here.

So there can be some welfare analysis done to sort

of.

Whose welfare?

The firm's welfare.

What does firm welfare mean?

Distance from optimal price.

But then sometimes above, sometimes below.

But what does it mean to say Apple is happy?

What matters in our models consumers.

So this is that going back to the answer I

gave earlier.

Yeah.

If you wanted to write a really complex world, then

you'd have to have portfolios that are not evenly held.

The consumer in this model doesn't care because in this

model, the consumer owns shares in all of you because

there's only one.

And again, I'm not even sure you would get a

difference.

Right.

Sometimes you're below, sometimes you're above.

Sometimes you make extra profits as long as you make

less profit.

On average.

We're quids in.

There is some crucial assumption that I am not able

to follow.

How is it that on average, it cancels?

Because at each point in time there is an even

mass of firms at each point.

Uniform distribution evenly, symmetrically around the optimal price.

So the average price is the optimal price.

And because we only move in one direction, people only

fall out.

Everybody moves down in the same direction at the same

pace.

And when you get off the end of the bed,

the SS will put you back at the other side

with the higher price.

So that distribution stays the same.

So did all that work.

We're back to.

Money is neutral.

Milton Friedman was right.

Monetary policy is no effects.

Let's see what.

There are debates on this.

I'm going to have to stop.

You get my question some more.

Yes.

Yeah that's right.

But again.

The way you build it.

So again, going back to hey, I looked at the

data and prices of lots of firms don't change is

not equivalent to saying there's a parameter and monetary policy

will have non neutral effects.

You would look at the price distributions here and most

of them wouldn't change their prices at all.

But when they do they change in the stonking great

amount.

And this full neutrality again this is the simplest version.

You can have menu cost models where there are effects,

but whether those effects are big or small, depending on

lots of things, doesn't just follow.

That rigidity necessarily gives you neutral, non neutral monetary policy.

Lecture 9:

This is what you want, who's ill and what you

want for your career.

You don't even know what a career means.

Just get your foot in the door somewhere.

And usually where you start off is not necessarily where

you land.

Okay.

I like that.

Thank you.

Thank you so much.

Thank you.

That was probably okay.

Exactly.

I have to run.

Now, but.

So I see you tomorrow.

So we started nine.

So 8:30 and and.

Yeah.

So after that I'm free so we can.

I think.

You see that?

Okay.

Thank you so much.

Yeah.

We should be.

If you have a.

Yeah.

It's.

Okay.

So you keep on coming up.

As you.

You're back.

You weren't here last week.

I didn't do well.

I didn't feel well last week.

Yeah, you said I was okay.

I thought it was something I ate, but it was

actually not because.

Because if you eat something bad, like, it takes, like,

a day, and then you're okay.

I felt bad, like, most of the week.

No, no, no, it's not, but you can see it

or, you know, it's just like.

Some kind of stomach issue.

No, no.

There's ones where every day I kept going.

Oh, I'll wake up tomorrow and I'll be fine.

And every day I woke up the next day I

still wasn't fine.

It's like.

Oh.

Mostly better than I was last week.

Better than I was on Friday.

11 p.m..

I guess I'm just getting old.

Sure.

I remember.

I remember, you know, thinking things like indigestion and things

like that.

These are old people problems.

Now I realise that my problems.

Which means I must be old people like you.

Yeah.

I saw this, I saw this beautiful chart on Twitter.

It was basically this.

It was age along the bottom.

And this was the plot of.

My age.

And then it was.

Age defined as old was this fixed gap.

It didn't specify exactly what the gap was, but that

felt very.

It rang true with me this last week.

Are.

And the bit which I always thought about was, you

know.

This is the edge of young.

Right.

So there is quite a lot of your life where

you still consider yourself young.

And then at some point you cross it and you

start calling yourself young.

I'm past that point, but I'm not yet in the

point where there's an old line that will ever intersect.

You, that.

You never converge.

Beautiful.

Beautiful model.

I remember this.

This hit home for me most strikingly when I.

When I left LSD in 2008, I started my job

at Warwick.

So at that time I was still in my 20s.

And thus teaching first year undergrads and, you know, so

I'm 28, 29.

They're 18, 19.

I thought, okay, we're still kind of same ballpark generationally,

same kind of crew.

And then just on a couple of occasions, I said

things that made it clear that one of them was

just a complete slip.

I actually knew the true thing I should have said,

but I said something dumb.

Like I referred to a Nintendo PlayStation or something, at

which point, like The Room and its like all these

big like 400 people in the room kind of lectures.

They started sort of sniggering and laughing, and I was

like, oh, I've just revealed myself to be old.

And then he realised that for them I was in

that window.

I was within that gap of, yeah, he's old anyway.

Oh, okay.

So.

Good plan for today.

Two bits of state dependent pricing still to cover and.

So we'll go on to the Kaplan and Lehigh version

of this SS tight pricing rule.

It's more general.

So the big restriction in the confidence pool model, although

not really a restriction when you think about when it

was written right, it was written at a time when

the prior 20 years had just seen inflation.

Sometimes lots of inflation, sometimes a bit less inflation, but

always inflation.

And so it was really a model about like this

Cop consistently increases in money supply but with inflation always

greater than zero.

Okay.

Now you know, if you if you relax that assumption,

then the sort of the very simple or the most

simple version of the SS pricing rule that we use

in Kaplan School, which is the one sided one, is

going to be awful, if you remember how we talked

about it last time.

We sort of talked about the fact that there's a

there's a gap and that your gap to the optimal

price, when it gets big enough, you hit the lower

s and then you increase it to the upper s.

So you go above the optimal price for a while.

And then as this thing keeps going, keeps going, keeps

going, you'll eventually hit the lower s again and then

you'll reset again.

Now obviously f prices suddenly started.

Optimal prices started moving in the other direction.

They'd be fine for a while while you're in the

thing, but anybody at the bounds would suddenly sort of

not know what to do because they would start going

the opposite direction.

So we have to, in the Kaplan and Lihe model,

adapt things to have a two sided rule.

So it's basically going to be the same rule, except

it's going to be willing to accept that your price

can get the optimal price can go up, the optimal

price can come down.

And there's going to be this sort of zone of

inactivity.

Apart from that, the Kaplan Lihe model is going to

have some other properties that are very like Kaplan.

So what are the what are the Kaplan's Goulburn characteristics?

That we had by assumption was we had this uniform

distribution.

And so as P star would drift up, you'd basically

get that there'd be a couple of firms at the

bottom who would suddenly be far enough away from the

optimal price that they would reset, and they'd go up

to above it, and then everybody else would just drop

down and not do anything.

So you had this world where there's a lot of

firms doing nothing, and then a small select number of

firms doing big adjustments.

But in the in the aggregate, money was neutral because

the the ones who did the adjustment did a really

big adjustment that that made the aggregate price shift in

the same proportion as the money in Kaplan Lihe.

It's going to be a little bit different because of

the two sided thing.

We're going to have a kind of bigger window, and

we're going to have a distribution that's going to move

in that window.

And occasionally we'll get to boundaries.

Boundaries, whether they're the upper boundary or the lower bound

boundary, are going to look very like Kaplan, Spielberg.

So you're going to have some firms that are going

to hit the boundary.

Once they hit the boundary, there's some adjustment.

The others do nothing and the whole distribution shifts.

Sometimes it will hit an upper boundary.

Their prices will be too high, so they'll reduce price.

Sometimes they'll hit a lower boundary.

Their prices will be too low.

The whole distribution will shift up.

But there'll also be some moments by assumption again, but

by the size of the distribution, where the distribution will

move up or down within the boundaries.

So no firm will hit the edges, no firm will

trigger the SS response.

And that will be a moment where money will change.

Prices will not.

So aggregate demand with our simple aggregate demand y is

equal to m minus p or minus p q mindset

coming.

That must be missed.

That's that's we're going to have M changing but P

not changing.

And money will no longer be neutral.

So it's going to be actually again an interesting world

because we're in a world where sometimes money is neutral,

sometimes it's not.

And whether money is neutral or not depends on where

firms are in that total distribution.

Okay.

Then the final.

The final bit of state dependent pricing is a simplified

version of a model like these other models.

Except now we're also going to assume there are idiosyncratic

shocks as well as aggregate shocks.

Now, why would we do that?

Well, there's a couple of facts, one of which is,

at the same time, as we see firms raising prices,

there's often also some firms lowering prices.

Now, in a world of just aggregate shocks, that whole

distribution, that optimal price is moving for everyone.

It may be that you're not triggered, but you are

or you're not triggered and you are.

But the point is, everybody's moving in the same direction

to have a sort of concurrent and even within sector,

some price rises, some price falls.

We're going to have something specific to individual firms.

That means that some of them will actually cut their

prices, and some of them will raise for any given

shock.

Okay.

So that's sort of what the Danziger model gives us.

It also throws out some kind of neat, fun results.

Things like you're going to get something that looks very

like a Calvo adjustment parameter, even though this is a

menu cost model.

So we're going to you know here I've sort of

waved my hands.

These are, these are, these are to derive the SS

model.

You can often start with menu costs.

And that's not where I started.

I told you that's what you could start with.

But we just said let's impose SS pricing here.

We're actually going to solve for a menu cost model.

So a menu cost model is one where in order

to change prices you have to just pay a fixed

cost.

So then what firms do is they say, okay, if

I want to change my price, I pay k.

If I don't change my price, then obviously I deal

with the fact that my price is not the optimal

price.

So you're going to trade off the kind of cost

of being away from optimal price with the cost of

changing price, and there's going to be some profit maximising

choice of whether to change price.

And when you change price, you change to the optimum.

So we're going to do that here.

And we're going to get a world that has a

Calvo like parameter.

Given the assumptions we're going to make on the distribution

of firms and the distribution of their productivity.

But we're still going to get that money's neutral.

Why?

Because again, it's going to be down to this selection

effect.

So a lot of this whole series here and the

stuff we did in lecture six A was all about

figuring out how the C, of course, crazy but seemingly

innocuous Calvo assumption of just independently random draws of who

changes prices.

They contribute to the role the nominal rigidity plays in

the economy.

So here we're going to have something where a fixed

proportion of firms are going to change their price every

period, but money will still be neutral.

And the reason will be it's not just random firms

that do it.

It's a select group of firms that have particular characteristics

about their prices being a long way from optimal.

And that's going to again, you doesn't have to cancel

out, but with our assumptions, it's going to exactly cancel

out.

It's a little bit like what we saw before with

things like Taylor versus Calvo or staggered pricing versus Calvo.

This idea that Calvo can make this sort of effect

more, more persistent because it's inefficiently using price changes, we

might let you change price.

You too can change price three times in three periods.

And there's some people over here who haven't changed and

they don't get to change.

Whereas state dependent type pricing or other assumptions on time

dependence like you change and you change, then you change

means that in three periods it's all washed out.

So that's the sort of thing that we're getting at.

And again, I'm not doing this to say, you know,

never use Calvo.

Calvo is evil.

No, Calvo is a simplification.

You have to understand the implications of it.

That's where we are.

Okay.

So.

So I'm going to start here.

Okay.

So.

As I said, captain Lee, he is Captain Silver plus

two sided world.

And it now gives us that sometimes we get real

effects of monetary policy and other times we don't.

And that will depend on the distribution.

Okay.

So big change money can go up and go down.

So you can have expansion or contraction in Em, which

affects the fact that you don't want any more.

Use a one sided pricing rule.

You now need a two sided one.

And it's also going to be symmetric.

We're still just going to work with that model.

Keep it nice and simple.

We're going to have the complementarity as neutral level.

But on that the same setup as before.

Because of the neutrality the optimal price is just to

log deviation.

So you want to sort of optimal price tracks movements

in the nominal anchor of the economy, the n that

drives things.

Okay.

So in a fully flexible price world, you know, more

money in the economy, you increase your price proportionally and

everything is done.

Okay.

Now can I have the same concept of a firm

level gap.

So how far are you from the optimal price.

And remember then because the optimal price should track the

nominal the nominal money.

So we're in a world where this gap is really

going to try and track these things.

So again, what I just described was a world where

we keep the gap equal to zero, M goes up,

P goes up and goes up because M goes and

P goes down, you trap it perfectly.

That gap to zero okay.

But we're going to apply this two sided symmetric SS

rule.

I brought my own pencil.

It's going to be quite a bit of pen work

today not just on age related graphs, which of course

it was important to bring the pen for.

Start at zero.

Remember this gap can go up and it can it

can go down before it could just go in one

direction.

So now.

So this is the.

Range that the gap is going to be able to

move in.

You're happy with the gaps as long as it's in

this range.

But as soon as the range gets up here, let's

say you bring it back to zero.

If the range were to drift down here, you bring

it back to zero.

Other than that, as an individual firm.

You can operate with your gap being somewhere in there,

and when it's somewhere in there, you take no action

on your adjustment of prices.

Why draw it when you're already going to have this?

Well, because I'm going to move slides on and I

want to sort of have it next to me so

you can see what happens.

Okay.

So the assumption that we're making.

Is that so?

That was what I was talking about.

For an individual firm, the assumption that we're making here

is we again have that the firms are uniformly distributed

in terms of their GAAP makes aggregation very nice.

I've told you that aggregation is the hard thing, but

we're going to assume.

But the distribution of all the firms is on this

range and this total size is S.

It's a little bit different to what we had before,

right.

Because what we had before was a range s, but

it was in a total gap adjustment space.

That was range.

I guess, you know, it was s minus little s.

In fact, we filled the range before, which is why

before you got the neutrality, because when one fell out

at the bottom, they jumped in at the top and

everyone shifted down one.

Also, the moment I realised that you guys didn't know

the nursery rhyme about the bears rolling over in the

bed, which has been a devastating moment in my life.

So now we're making slightly different assumption.

We're assuming that there is a mass of the firms,

but they sort of operate within the distribution of total

changes.

If you get that.

All the rest of this model.

The idea behind it is very simple.

We look at this, who changes prices when this is

the distribution?

Well, does anybody at upper S know.

Is anybody distributed at lower s.

No.

So nobody let's say there's a should I get this

going the right way.

Let's say there is a.

Positive growth in money.

What happens to the gap.

Well everybody's got.

That goes up, everybody's gun falls.

Why?

Because the optimal price has gone up and you haven't

changed, right?

So whatever your price was, if your gap was this

and the optimal price goes up, the gap gets bigger.

Sorry.

Let me say that again.

Very confusing.

If this is the optimal price and this is my

actual price, I'm below the optimal price.

The optimal price has now gone up, so my gap

has grown.

So what happens?

Everybody's car gets a bit bigger.

Now to continue, I'm abusing notation and mathematics a little

bit with my picture here because this is all happening

in continuous time.

But let's do that anyway.

So we go along.

There's been this whole thing shifting up.

Now imagine we had another one, another one, another one.

What's going to happen?

This whole thing.

God.

That's awful.

Did you know there's a competition for people who can

draw freehand circles?

Did you know that actually a competition like people win

medals?

I would not win medals.

So apologies.

This goes up again.

Now what's happening at these three?

What prices are changing.

None.

Nobody has reached the point at which they trigger a

price change.

When are we going to see some action?

When we crossed the boundary.

Equally if we had instead headed south.

So this is very precise.

At the band you were also at.

It's a gap.

If we had instead jumped somewhere here, we hit the

boundary.

Now what happens at the boundary?

Captain Wilbur happens at the boundary.

The ones who first hit the boundary.

They reset their price so the gap is zero.

They basically jump to the top.

Now we're still pretty close to the bone.

So another shock.

We get pushed again.

We get pushed again.

We'll keep getting people jumping.

That's just cap and spoiler.

Or here you're jumping here.

But while we're in the middle part, nothing happens.

The first will hit the boundary, then go the other

way.

So if the.

Rules are those rules.

Players rule.

Whatever going on the.

Stack.

You say the.

Stack stays the same.

So this uniform distribution remains uniform because the beauty of

the uniform.

Let's imagine what happens if we didn't have a uniform

distribution.

Then the the number or the mass of firms.

Jumping from here to here would be different each time.

So you would get sometimes you'd hit the boundary and

a big group would jump and sometimes small group.

Now you could do it.

Complicates the matter massively.

But here it's always the same mass and they're always

reinserting at zero.

So the choice of a distribution that was wide was

not an accident, because it meant that they are coming

in here.

What would happen?

He just as a as a thought experiment, the mass

is not going to be here.

But you can rework out the math.

What would happen if we had that the distribution of

firms was still uniform, but over a larger size then

then s well, what's the limit of the size?

It can't be more than two s, because then some

people would start outside the boundaries and would immediately reset.

And if they started outside the boundaries and immediately reset,

they'd reset to zero, which would have a larger mass

of zero, which would violate the uniform distribution.

But again, in this alternative world, maybe we're okay with

that.

In this world we're not.

So the max it could be is two s.

What if it was a bit bigger than that?

Well, we're going to be in another weird world where

there'll be some firms distributed past zero, and then when

they jump, they jump in at zero, which would create

a non uniform mass at zero, which would again violate

the assumption of a stationary uniform distribution at zero.

But again, if you, you know, I assume that somebody

has solved I've never solved it, but I assume someone

has solved this for sort of whatever distribution of firms

you want.

And then you could have mass at zero, like there's

a bunch of firms that are there and then they

leak out.

But again, that's going to be much easier to handle

with idiosyncratic firm shocks.

If the distribution is greater than s, can't they adjust

the price to the bottom of the distribution below below

zero make keeping the gap below zero.

But why would you go below?

Why would you go to a below zero gap?

Okay, you don't know that the money supply is always.

Yes, yes.

So you sort of want to always go in the

middle.

So when you get a chance, you go to that

middle and you have equal chance.

Now again, if you want to change the assumptions on

if you want to have a skewed distribution of monetary

shocks, like most of the time they grow, but occasionally

they don't.

Yeah.

I mean, if this keeps it nice and simple is

the point.

Okay.

Let me just show you then what happens.

Okay.

So we know that.

He's upset all of this, but we have a change

in em.

At first it just shifts the distribution, but it stays

within the boundaries.

So the change in P is nothing.

So given that the change in Y.

You get expansionary monetary policy.

Non neutrality.

Nominal money has changed.

Prices have not adjusted.

Therefore there's a real effect of that monetary policy.

Now of course it's not true to say nothing has

changed because this distribution has now eked closer and closer

to the point at which it would change.

But until it hits the boundary, nothing changes at the

boundary.

What happens?

Well, again, same logic as before.

There's a there's a mass of this uniform bunch that

crossed the threshold, that entire mass, then jump down to

zero.

Then it continues time.

You see, you take the smallest unit of time so

that that one mass moves.

What happens?

Well, again, a huge, huge majority of the firms, as

I've drawn it, do nothing.

Well, they don't do nothing.

Their gap increases a bit, but they don't change prices.

But the ones that do adjust their prices by a

lot.

So again you get most firms doing nothing, a few

firms doing a lot.

The net effect is that they change prices by exactly

the same.

In aggregate the aggregate price moves by delta m.

Delta m equals delta p.

The real effects are zero.

So that's the same as Kaplan school.

But now we've allowed it to happen in two directions.

And the only addition is this sort of shifting around

distribution.

So you can have neutrality non neutrality.

And it depends on where you are close to some

limits.

Again I think I said this at the very first

lecture.

The famous Milton Friedman quote.

Monetary policy acts with long and variable lags.

Well, here's a world where we get certain variable lags

or variable effects.

Sometimes, depending on the state you did the monetary shock

in, you get no effect on the economy, an entire

effect on prices.

Sometimes you do it and you get no effect on

prices and a big effect on the economy.

A simplified little.

SS type model.

But you see, you see where this sort of chips

into our thinking on monetary policy.

Okay.

So that's that's the currency I want to we're going

to have another chart like this.

It's going to be beautiful for this Danziger type model.

Actually the Danziger type model is a.

Is a way of thinking about proper, fully fledged menu

cost models of the type that I sort of famously

associate with dollar Solve and Lucas.

But we're going to be to do with sort of

assumptions that I think are going to be nicer to,

to work with, at least.

But the same logic applies.

But actually, I'm going to start with some of the

data.

Me?

Or is that the picture?

Well.

That's me.

What do you see?

If you look even within product categories.

There are.

Like quite big price changes that occur.

If you look in particularly food and apparel, sort of

what I could call Sainsbury's type stuff.

You see that?

Also, there's a big frequency of price changes that occur

during sales, but you also see that there's a relatively

large occurrence of big price drops that happen.

And.

And I showed a chart earlier.

I'm going to go back to it.

Is this one.

This is showing that while it's true that over this

period, which is still like 80s to early noughties pre

financial crisis, you had that in aggregate inflation was heavily

associated with the fraction of and size of the regular

price increases.

There is some variation in decreases.

And strikingly there are price decreases among firms throughout a

period of positive inflation.

Okay.

So it's not like we live in this, this world

I just deleted where there would be periods of time

where there's increases in periods of time where there are

decreases, they happen together.

Okay.

So that's sort of where we want to sort of

get to and finish on the dependency of prices.

So.

It's got to be sort of a similar setup, but

now we're going to allow each firm to have a

sort of idiosyncratic draw of productivity.

And that idiosyncratic draw of productivity is going to affect

the way aggregate costs impact there.

So up until now, we've assumed only aggregate shocks.

So M was the thing that we looked at.

Now we're going to assume that there's there's this also

this distribution among you of.

How productive you are and therefore how much you have

to increase or decrease price in a given world.

We're going to simplify it massively, but we are going

to represent a world where there is going to be

this fixed cost of changing prices.

Okay.

Static.

So again, that's a huge simplification.

What you really want to think about is the time

series of this.

But we're just going to look at the choice problem

of the firm in a given period and then aggregate

up from there to sort of get some insights.

Okay.

That is really annoying.

I keep falling for that trick.

Okay, so first of all.

We are going to represent this profit function with a

quadratic difference from optimal price.

This is not quite the full.

This is really not the profit function.

I was reading this earlier.

I was like yes it is.

And no it's not.

What's actually going to be the overall profit function is

going to be this plus any adjustment costs, menu costs

that have to be paid.

So this is really this V function is measuring the

loss from not having the optimal price okay.

So it's a loss minus sign.

If you want to do this in a sort of

deeper way you might think oh when I look at

well let's take two extremes.

When I look at a world where there's a very

low price elasticity of demand, if you're a bit away

from the optimal price, it doesn't cost you that much

because people still buy your stuff.

If you went to a sort of extreme world of

selling a homogeneous good in a perfectly competitive market, what

is the loss from having a price different from optimal?

If others are at optimal infinite, you lose everything or

you gain anything, but you're making losses.

So that's okay.

This is an assumption.

You could put coefficients in front of here and adjusted

if you wanted to.

But all we're saying is, if you're close to the

if you're close to the optimal price.

You're doing well.

If you're far away, you're doing badly.

And as you get further and further away, the costs

of being away build quadratically.

About.

Glass filters are great.

Because they get nice interior solutions.

So where do we optimise this?

Obviously when we set our price equal to the optimal,

it's the best we can do.

Okay.

So that's going to be this.

Plus the menu cost adjustment is going to be the

sort of profit side that the firm is going to

be trading trading off.

What is the optimal price?

Well, before we were basically working with strategic neutrality, with

the optimal price is equal to a p plus a

y term.

Now we're going to add this productivity term higher productivity.

Lower price.

Lower productivity, higher price.

Okay.

So again, if you want to think about this, it's

just thinking how one firm can live in a world

with low prices when other firms have to have high

prices.

This is going to give us a distribution of optimal

prices for for firms.

So.

There are no differences in the efficiency.

Change in the prices?

No.

Equally the same.

Work.

Everybody pays the menu costs.

Kay.

That's right.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I think in this model, every firm has a different

optimal price.

Could you just tell me the mechanism through which all

consumers are not captured by the firm that has the

lowest price?

So the the way to think about this, because remember

we've done away with the whole demand side.

The consumers only care about the aggregate price.

That's what's going to matter for them.

We had that actually in our in our in our

New Keynesian model.

What they really cared about was just consuming a basket.

But remember, firms have idiosyncratic market power that that sees

aggregated.

And we're not doing it formally here.

But in that world, the reason you cared was because,

you know, his price might be way lower than hers.

But if I just his stuff, my marginal utility is

not as great as if I eat some of her

variety as well.

So you have to think that there's some variety going

on.

But we're not modelling that.

We're modelling the demand side in this sort of reduced

form.

Y is equal to m minus p aggregating.

So that's.

But but you know, in the real world, there's many

reasons for this, I think.

I don't know if you ever walk down Fleet Street.

Fleet Street has on it a new, like, newsagent's type

shop that charges obscene amounts of money.

I can only imagine it was built specifically for people

who work for Goldman Sachs.

But if you walk another four minutes, five minutes down

the road on the other side, there's Tesco's.

How do they geographically live?

So close, and yet competition has driven.

Well, there's a convenience yield.

We're not modelling that either here.

But but there are firms that that that.

Have different efficiency levels and I would argue Tesco, by

buying in bulk and having multiple stores and all of

their infrastructure, maybe they're more efficient as well.

But the other one can survive.

Still, for reasons we're not modelling, what we are going

to model is a distribution and again, we're going to

keep it nice and neat.

It's going to be a uniform distribution.

So I'm going to start drawing some more pictures because

I want to keep these with us as we go.

What is that.

We're going to have a distribution from minus side to

side.

And this is the distribution of AI.

So on average, on average this economy looks like the

other economy in that the.

The optimal price.

The aggregate optimal price.

The average optimal price is just a function of these

two.

Because these will net hugs.

But at the individual level will be some firms who

will be leading prices above that and some that will

be needing optimal prices below that.

And remember I'm going to go back one more slide

again.

Why do optimal prices matter?

Because each firm is going to consider whether or not

to change prices by a distance from their optimal.

So you could have two firms with the same prices,

one of whom wants to change prices, at another of

whom does not because of differences in productivity.

Yeah, maybe I'll write it up here.

What's the range of this?

Okay.

Where before we had a world where the optimal price

just tracked M, and therefore the optimal price was optimal

for everybody in that period.

Now the optimal price is firm specific.

It still depends on em, but it depends on em

adjusted for productivity.

So again, same logic.

More productive, lower optimal price.

Good.

We're not modelling exactly where that comes from.

We've done it before, but here we're just working off

that, that, that sort of relationship.

Now again we're going to have these aggregate shocks.

So M is still the aggregate shock even though it's

a tiny, static, time invariant world.

We're going to think about this this.

Random draw of em and look at what the effect

is going to be on the economy.

Okay.

What's the one thing we're missing?

Well, we're missing the distribution of firms.

Initial prices.

Okay, so I sort of already jumped here when I

realised that my first slide was slightly confusing, but I

already posted them and I only did about an hour

ago, so I didn't change them.

And again, the overall profits are dependent on that cost

of lost profits that were approximating with the quadratic, but

also the menu cost.

Okay.

So if you choose to change your price.

You did quite nicely.

Remember that this is difference of price from optimal.

If you don't pay K, you just have to take

whatever that loss is.

There's nothing you change, but if you pay K, you

get a chance to change that loss.

You can see why this becomes an optimisation, because if

you pay k you can change that amount of loss.

So when would you do it.

What do you do.

Obviously when this loss is very big.

Because if you do pay to change price what do

you set price equal to optimal.

So it's ultimately going to be a comparison of how

big a loss you take if you don't change price

versus changing price.

And getting this loss to zero we're paying a cost

K.

Okay.

So now.

This.

This picture doesn't appear in the slides.

I may draw it and send it round to you

because I like it.

Or you can draw yourself.

I like it, but I can't draw it properly.

We're going to start.

Sort of initialise the model with everybody at zero.

All right.

Fine place to start.

M is a random shot that's going to affect the

optimal price, but that's going to be mean zero A

it's also going to be means here.

So we're sort of against a static model.

So ignore my sloppy use of temporal language.

But instead of think of this as you enter the

period with that zero price.

And then the question is when shocks realise what happens

to changes.

ET cetera.

Everything I said in logic about v minus k versus

v is the optimisation that the firm does.

And that's what's on the next slide.

So if they don't make any price change, they don't

pay k good for profits, but they also keep their

initial price.

So what happens one of their profits or what is

their profit function.

Well it's the they suffer any loss that comes from

the fact that the optimal price might not be zero.

So again, the temporal aspect of this can be confusing.

So remember we're starting here.

We're going to end the period.

There's going to be shocks.

So there's going to be an aggregate shock which is

going to affect everyone.

There's going to be a draw of idiosyncratic productivity which

is going to affect individual firms.

That's going to cause their their optimal price to not

be zero potentially.

Now.

What is the effect of that going to be?

Well, if they don't change then this is what they

get.

They get minus the whatever that optimal price realises that.

But remember you're realised optimal price and you realise price

are can be different.

What if there was no aggregate shock.

What would the what would happen to what would we

see is the distribution of optimal prices.

It would be this because this is the distribution of

productivity.

Let me go back.

One slide.

Remember.

What is your optimal price?

Is an aggregate is a sort of combination of an

aggregate and an idiosyncratic shock.

These come from some distribution, but they affect everyone.

These come from this distribution.

And they again each firm will take a draw.

And on average we'll have this uniform distribution.

If you feel I'm labouring the point, I'm doing so

because I'm getting more confused stares than usual.

If it's just that there's sort of week nine fatigue,

tell me that speed up, but I'll keep hammering it.

I'm starting to get lost here.

So when?

Absence of.

Shocks.

When firms have the optimal prices, they earn zero profits.

Do we still assume some monopolistic competition?

This is just a loss function.

Let's just call it a loss function.

Right?

There's no scaling parameter.

You can have it.

You can have a big fixed thing there.

But for now this is all we're doing.

We're just assuming that is their profit objective function.

So it does zero necessarily.

Doesn't have to be zero.

So we're not trying to work out what the dividends

are to pay to shareholders.

Just this is their optimisation object.

If you want the answer is yes.

You can do all this with monopolistic competition and all

the things in there and work out with it's the

same maths, but more so.

So this is just a simplification and that's what we're

working with.

Because I was this I don't know what was the

slide number.

When we say total profit.

So it's in the total profits not just changing profits.

When the shock hits the economy was that.

Was it?

It was about to be function and we said it's

total profit.

It's that's what I'm describing.

Just consider that an approximation to their objective function on

prices.

And then there's going to be a fixed cost component.

That's all.

There's a whole ton of stuff that could be going

on under the bonnet.

But we're not modelling yet.

Thank you.

Sorry.

Yeah okay.

But but so the key thing is if there were

no shocks.

The initial price would be the optimal price.

If there was no monetary policy shock and there was

none of this, the optimal price would be zero.

Now, what if there's no monetary policy shock?

There is still a productivity shock now on average.

The value of productivity is zero.

So we would get a distribution of optimal prices around

zero.

So let's imagine that world no m.

No world.

And I'm making.

That probably doesn't look symmetric to you, but that's because

I'm not good at drawing that is symmetric around zero.

Probably still not quite there.

So that makes it look even worse.

You know what I mean?

Okay, there's a distribution.

So what happens?

We all went into the the period.

We all sort of began life with zero as our

optimal price.

Now, some of you for what I'm going to be

really kind to this part of the room.

You guys all got this big productivity shock.

So you're super productive, which means actually, your optimal price

can be lower.

So you guys are down here.

You guys are.

Awful.

Not as humans, but productivity wise you need a much

higher price.

Again, we're not.

Thinking.

About the world.

Where.

How come these guys don't take all the market share

and you guys go bankrupt?

No, it's just all captured in this V function.

Both of you are actually unhappy.

Who's happy?

Our friends in the middle.

Why are they happy?

Because they're boring.

Nothing really happened.

They got they they happened to be in this bit

of the distribution.

So their optimal price didn't go up.

Didn't go down.

They're actually pretty close to their optimal price.

You're unhappy because you're.

You're not charging enough.

You're unhappy because you're not cutting your price enough.

You need to cover your costs.

You're like, damn it.

I could make way more if I cut my price.

Think about some world where you cut price and demand

goes up.

You're both unhappy.

In this world.

What has to happen if you want to change price?

If you want to change price or you want to

change price, you both have to pay the same cost.

Kay?

Well, these guys want to change price.

No, they're absolutely spot on.

You two in the middle.

You're literally the very middle of the distribution.

You are exactly.

Perfect.

You can think of no better.

In fact, if you did pay Kay.

Or if the cargo fairy came along and said freely,

you can change price, you'd go, no, I'm perfect.

Now, you guys, to the side.

The cargo fairy came along.

You're not quite perfect.

So you move a.

Little bit more to the middle.

But would you pay to do that?

No.

You're basically there.

Who's paying these guys at the end?

You guys are definitely going to pay for different reasons.

You won't want to adjust your prices.

That's the logic of this.

Now that's what.

No.

What would happen if there was also an aggregate that

affected everybody's optimal price?

Well, the whole distribution would move.

So with M.

Maybe.

With a positive end shock, the whole distribution shifts up.

Now.

Does it change things?

Joseph.

Well, it depends what the threshold for changing prices is.

Let's go back to our friends in the middle here.

You were in the middle by productivity drill.

With an M sharp middle is not the place to

be anymore.

The place you would ideally like to be is higher.

I understand it zero.

This is you.

You're starting here.

You were spot on when that was the distribution of

optimal prices.

But now.

Oh, man, you're down here.

It's not enough to change prices.

We don't know yet.

I haven't done that, Matt.

But we know there's some people.

Who?

Because they're.

So you're here now, but you'd like to be here.

You've shifted, but other people have also shifted.

So the question now is what has happened to people's

optimal price versus where they start?

In terms of relative to the menu cost.

It's going back to that question.

Should they change price?

Well.

Sorry, I can't remember if I did this.

If I didn't, I'll do it here.

What if you change your price?

Well, I said this.

If you change the price, you set your price equal

to the optimal.

But you pay the cost K, so you lose K.

If you don't, then you lose.

And the value of the loss because you started at

zero price depends on where your optimal price is.

So what is the actual decision to change?

The change comes if and only if that should be,

or equivalently, if the absolute value of your optimal.

Price.

Is greater than route K.

Remember, it's a two sided thing.

For some, they'll be too high, for some you'll be

too high.

For some you'll be too low.

Question is how far away you are from K?

This is risky.

What I'm doing.

I'm picking this in particular to make a point.

And it's a terribly made point, so don't copy that

just yet.

Finally going to fix the graph.

It's actually going to become symmetric.

And then I'll actually make my line symmetric.

Okay.

No n I'm going to try and make a very

specific point here with no M, so you'll start here.

Your price is here, but your optimal price.

Suddenly you get this draw.

Some of you, your optimal price should be higher.

Some of your optimal price should be lower.

But as I've drawn it.

The K and the Cy are.

The star is just about bigger.

So without an M shock, none of you wanted to

change your price.

It's not quite.

Even though you guys are a long way apart from

each other, it's not quite enough for either of you

to cross the threshold.

What about with the positive shock?

Well, that's changed the optimal price for everybody up.

Relative to these bounds in which you're not willing to

change your price, because the sort of gain you get

of resetting to zero, sorry, the gain you get of

resetting to the optimal price from zero is not big

enough to cover this large cost of the changing price.

That's not the case now for this mass of firms.

So actually, if we think about it, what's happened?

The aggregate demand shock has helped you guys because your

price was too low.

You were just on the cusp of even lowering your

price.

The price is too low.

But the economy has done that for you.

By making the optimal price higher for everyone.

Your optimal price is too low.

It's brought it all higher.

Yes, we're getting closer to where we are.

Because you're still here.

You're still all mastered.

Zero.

You're not that far away now.

Yay for you, but for you.

You were just about to raise your price because of

your lack of productivity.

And now you have to raise your price because of

aggregate demand conditions.

But not just you.

Not just you.

You you you you.

There's a whole mass of you who have shifted across

the line now for you.

You're so far by being at zero, you are so

far from your optimal, which is somewhere in here.

You're so far away that it's worth paying that cost

for you to change prices.

So there's some cut off somewhere in here where all

those people change their price to their optimal.

So what would happen to the distribution of prices?

Bunch of people would stay at zero.

No change.

And this chunk of people would move up here.

Of course.

Money.

The distribution.

What is the optimal price?

Also change this.

Yeah.

Let me let me say it again.

At first we all start with zero.

Everybody is at zero.

Start is really bad language again because it's a static

model.

But that's our initialisation.

There's no dynamic aspect to this.

This is the distribution of optimal prices.

If if there was if there was flexible prices immediately

on the realisation of the idiosyncratic shock, you would all

spread out on this distribution.

You're not you're all starting in a big line at

zero.

So what productivity does is it changes the optimal price.

It doesn't necessarily change your price.

Your price is still zero.

Then the monetary policy aggregate shock shifts everybody's aggregate optimal

price could go up, could go down, could whatever.

That doesn't mean that prices change, just the optimal prices

change.

So what would this economy look like?

All the people are mastered zero.

If it was just this, everybody would still be at

zero.

It would look a bit like Kaplan and Lehigh.

When you're inside the bounds, stuff happens, but no one

does anything.

What would happen though to actual prices?

Most people's prices.

So these are distribution of P star I.

A whole bunch of firms do nothing still.

But everybody who's in this part of the distribution, what

do they do to their prices.

Change them.

Do they change them to the same amount?

No, no they don't.

They're all starting at zero.

They change them to that or that or that or

that.

When you change, you change to optimal.

Everybody's optimal is different.

So these are going to we're going to have a

mass of zero.

And then a mass that are distributed uniformly between root.

Let me maybe show it.

Now I'm not going to do the maths to work

out.

Exactly.

I think it's on the next few slides, but if

I try to do it in my head, I'll definitely

make a fool of myself.

We start with everybody at zero distributed zero.

After all the shocks and after all the optimisation, a

mass of these people, that group from somewhere there on

choose to re optimise.

They pay K and they choose different prices up here.

So we then get a uniform distribution above route K.

The rest of you just stay up there.

Now another interesting thing you could plot would be the

distribution of profits.

These guys, what would their profits be?

They'd all be the same.

Minus K.

What about everybody here?

Well, there'd be a few people.

Whoever was.

I think it's YouTube right at the edge of the

distribution.

The shock has pushed you to the middle, where you're

now at your optimal.

You're the happiest people in here.

Now you're making exactly no minus K for changing prices

and no quadratic loss for being away from your optimal.

Everybody else is losing out a bit.

I should note I'm sorry I'm wrong.

My bad.

You guys suck.

See you guys.

I went the wrong way with the distribution.

The distribution shifted that way.

You guys all wanted to take out a bit happier.

Yeah.

Sorry.

You guys are happy.

Do you see the logic?

You want to be close to the optimal?

It just so happens that after all the shock, you're

at the optimal.

If you're these guys here, you're a bit closer than

you were before the M shock.

You guys are so far away, you've reset your prices

so it doesn't matter what you started at, you're back

to optimal price, but you have to pay for that.

So we get this weird distribution.

Okay, so.

Nasty change in price and.

Two guys is that we end up at the same

place that we had to pay for it.

Yeah, yeah, they were lucky.

Yeah, they had just the right.

They had just the right combination of em.

Shock and idiosyncratic draw from this uniform that the combination

is exactly zero.

And there were people who were, who just got a

little unlucky.

Like it went a little above or a little below.

But given the quadratic, they don't really care.

It's a tiny number squared.

Who cares?

It's you guys at the extremes who at one end

got very unhappy that I brought you closer to optimal,

but your productivity brought you away from it.

Net net, you choose to do nothing.

You do a lot.

Oh.

At the end of the day.

Because.

I can go further.

None of you could be any happier than you are.

You've all optimised.

They're doing the best they can.

You're doing the best you can.

You're the happiest.

But they couldn't do any better.

So everybody is optimal.

But yeah, they're as happy as they can be because

they had a choice.

What was their choice?

Don't do anything save K, but be a huge distance

away from the optimal price and take a huge quadratic

loss.

It was better for them to adjust what's actually funny.

But this is not the right logic I'm going to

give to you anyway.

Who's most comfortable with paying the K?

These guys.

She is.

Why?

Because her loss without changing was going to be horrible.

Like massive.

The person who's kind of most aggrieved is our marginal

person.

There's someone right along there who was right here.

And their loss if they change or don't change, are

basically the same.

So she thought like paying K was good value for

her pay.

Can't get big gain.

They can't get kind of.

Get.

Lucky guy doesn't have to pay K at all.

She's not to peak, but actually less happy than him,

even though you're more productive.

Life's not fair.

But because of the shock.

Because they're not.

Yeah, but they're both shocks.

Yeah.

But remember it could.

It could have been the exact opposite.

What if we'd been here and we had a negative

shock?

Then you would have been the ones paying.

You would have been like, yes, I'm terribly unproductive, but

the world has saved me.

Yeah.

Okay.

Rest of the slides.

Show you this, what I've just done graphically and repeatedly

and hopefully enough times that when you read it back,

it will be clear.

But this is it.

This is what you're doing.

You're defining sort of how much the sort of gift

for a given, how which parts of the productivity distribution

end up being happy, actually.

So the slides do it in the reverse.

They do a positive shock to em first, for instance.

And then they work out the gap, the threshold for

how far you have to move in here, what your

distribution would be for, whether or not you move or

don't move lower upper.

But I won't I won't flog that any longer.

I think I've said all of the stuff that needs

to be said.

Okay.

So.

Now I will have to say it.

I'm sorry.

I'm going to have to say it again.

Not the exact same thing again.

I'm going to have to say the logic again is

useful.

Okay.

So if you get that okay.

So now let's ask the same question.

Take a given shock okay.

So it's the same logic but in reverse.

Now remember these shocks occur at the same time.

So you can go in whichever way you want when

there's been a monetary policy shock.

And given a distribution what we're interested in is which

parts of this distribution.

Will be indifferent between changing prices or not.

So.

The question is.

Want to do this?

No, I'm going to confuse you if I go through

this logic.

Let me pop.

I'm going to park it there.

I'm going to show you two more slides, and then

I'm going to get you to look.

Think about this in the week, and then we can

talk about it at the end of next week to,

to drive home this point, because I just realised going

backwards through the logic, it's the same logic, but I

feel it won't.

I don't think it will help things, but we'll come

back to it.

And I do want to show one thing.

What you basically get is that you have, as we've

sort of already talked about, there's a certain mass in

our case, the example that we gave there was a

sort of mass of people with a particular draw productivity.

At the lower end of the productivity given what we

were discussing.

There's a mass of those who would change their price

and everybody else who would do nothing.

Now what the.

What the other logic shows is just a way to

work out exactly what this mass is.

Again, I'm not so concerned about that now, but what

you can show is that if you repeated this again

and you did a negative shock or a positive shock

or whatever, you can work out that this fraction of

firms changing or this fraction of firms not changing, the

fraction of firms not changing, which we're calling fever for

sticky price Calvo type reasons is actually given.

Is given by this I want striking about this.

Is that this?

It depends on the range of the shocks, the distribution

of the shocks, the size of the cost.

But this is.

A.

Fixed quantity.

A fixed fraction of firms that change prices every period

in this model, which is a bit like Calvo.

What's not like Hal, though, is the fact.

That when you when you work out.

The aggregation.

So again, the aggregation is just who changes prices and

by how much.

If you work through the maths you get that the.

So the reason the reason I'm going to tell you

now why I didn't want to confuse you, but I'm

going to half confuse you by telling you this.

The reason I didn't want to confuse you is because

I actually drew a very specific version of this where

we started with nobody adjusting prices without the aggregate shock.

So we had a particular draw on PSI.

If you draw it more generally and you can have

this going above, we could start from a position where

without the adjust, without the shock, there's two cut offs,

not just one, and that there's two cut-offs.

Then you could have a situation where the people from

the bottom, you could, in theory, have still some people

left below, while people are way above.

It's the same logic.

These people, they're the most productive.

Even though the shop helped you, you still wants to

cut your price.

So I tried to make it simple.

Now I've sort of added to the confusion.

If you work through the same logic, it's the exact

same.

But then you get that there's a set of people

at the most productive, a set of people at the

bottom, and you add those up.

What happens to our distribution now?

Well, these people we actually would get in our here,

we'd have a very small subset, uniform subset of people

who lower prices.

So again, it depends on the assumptions you make about

how large the distribution of productivity is relative to the

menu costs.

But you can see how in this world, at any

given point in time, you can have some people who

look like they're not changing prices at all.

Looks like is in play.

There's a whole bunch of people who are raising prices

with a positive aggregate demand shock, but there's also a

set of people who are simultaneously lowering prices.

That's the sort of key sort of takeaway from this.

The nice thing is that once people just do this,

so there's nothing.

The reason I decided, I felt I had to tell

you that now, having decided mentally not to tell you,

is because actually, if you do this in in my

world, the way I drawn it, you would only have

a one sided part of this distribution.

Whereas this aggregation is you go from the bottom of

it until some cut off, and then you go between

the cut-offs don't change through the integration of zero price

change, and then you go from the upper to the

top of the range.

If you do it this way, it also works.

If you just did it one sided, you would get

that.

Actually, the maths is such that the aggregate price equals

n, and because we have strategic neutrality, that basically tells

us we get money neutrality.

So we're in this weird world.

We've had all of these shocks, all of these people

moving prices.

We have some raising, some lowering.

We have this weird distribution all happening at the same

time.

It looks like Calvo we've got our theta of Calvo

non movers and yet we have money neutrality.

Why do we get money neutrality.

That age old issue.

It matters who changes prices in Calvo.

We're randomly picking who changes prices.

And therefore there's some people in the very middle which

is I guess here after all the shops.

So we give this guy permission to change price.

He doesn't bother.

In this state dependent world, the only people who change

are the ones at the extremes and therefore when they

change, they do big changes.

So if I go back here.

This is the love of Luke.

You can see that when prices change.

Even though inflation at this in their period was about

5%.

When conditional, unchanging price changes tend to be ten, 12,

15, 20%.

That is very much consistent with a menu costs model.

Okay, I fully accept this is.

I've said that this is not a completely trivial model,

even though this is the simplest version of this type

of model.

So don't just assume.

I was a little confused when Michael was talking.

It must be impossible.

If not, you do have to get your head around

this idea of these distributions moving and then think about

what size they are.

Think about where people are distributed, think about who adjust,

etcetera.

It's not easy.

Okay.

Any questions?

Yeah.

So neutrality depends on there always being forms on both

sides of the thresholds in every medium.

Yeah.

So if you well there's only one period here in

this version.

And I mean so I think I mean there are

many ways if you, if you wanted to generalise this

model and do lots of interesting things.

So one is you could of course say there are

distributions or time dependent KS.

Another is you could think about and I think it's,

you know, I think it's a super interesting dimension.

I've never done any research on it.

But when I do that, you know, so if you

if you did research 20, 25, 30, 40 years ago,

you only thought about means in macro.

You're thinking about the aggregate, the average.

Now we think a lot more about higher order moments

distributions.

ET cetera.

So if you thought that what was actually changing.

So I'm about to tell you something in the last

half hour, I'm about to tell you something about real

business cycle models, which again, I'm not going to do

the RBC model, but I'm going to tell you some

things about one thing that we often criticise is we

just think about there being productivity shocks and an aggregate

productivity shock, and that hits.

And we sort of think, well, what does it mean.

Like we all wake up and we're done.

Like we forget how to make stuff.

Yeah, maybe if you could get interesting things happening in

the economy because it's not that average productivity is changed,

maybe the distribution shifts, maybe it becomes a bit skewed.

You can think about lots of ways that this would

vary.

You could think about firm level stuff, how it interacts

then with actual measures of competition.

I mean, but that's all the levels of complexity get

bigger very quickly.

I mean, one simple way could be to assume that

size depends on.

So the bounds depend on.

Yeah.

Yep yep.

You could.

But again we tend to think of like this is

this is the distribution of real productivity.

We we often feel most comfortable assuming that nominal doesn't

drive these real phenomena.

Again there are people who argue that it does and

various channels.

But yeah you can make assumptions.

And the question is are they the reasonable defensible ones?

Other questions.

Okay, let's take five minutes because everyone needs a break

after that.

And then we will start on some macro finance macro

credit models.

ET cetera.

To get us into the final part.

And this.

This is.

You know.

So there's there's no entry and exit in these months.

Like this to like some sort of international tourist scenario

becomes the track.

So there's no China.

And plus you.

Know well, so it's not quite fair.

Once you move to international.

You'd have to start asking questions about the real exchange

rate and whether costs are in domestic currency or or

foreign currency.

Because they're all interesting.

And this is first time I don't know if it's

a side question at this.

So.

Yeah.

So.

But I don't like nothing.

Nothing here.

I think you need to think a bit more about

the model.

Nothing here tells.

Us.

I mean, the M is an aggregate shock if you

want to think about this as the US and Mexico

and M being US monetary policy.

Affects which.

Affects no that's affects overall aggregate demand.

That's fine.

But there's still a real exchange rate to think about.

If we consider that how would the model.

T is it.

But that's what I'm saying.

You have to think about how you price things.

You price in your own currency or the foreign currency

or your costs in home or foreign.

Are you buying your stuff from the US or your

inputs from Mexico?

What's the trade balance?

So so the aggregate demand that's being assumed here, which

is massively.

Supported.

So it's a very horrible connection.

Would you say?

Well, I don't know what it means to apply this.

Do you mean have menu costs in international?

I mean, in theory, it's possible.

I'm sure someone has done it.

But otherwise it.

Adds extra layers of complexity.

And this is not simple to start with.

So there are other ones that could explain it then.

I mean, there's a whole area of international finance that

looks at these things here.

But but they have to but those models have to

take really seriously things like optimal choice of currency for

these things.

Well, the reason I was trying to apply is because

at the end of the day, we reached a money

neutrality.

So that's why I was like, wouldn't that remove China?

And no, no, but don't don't take that as the

takeaway.

The takeaway is just that sticky prices don't necessarily give

you.

You can have a world that looks like sticky prices

but still has money neutrality.

But you can write lots of versions of the demand

side of the economy, where nominal rigidities do give rise

to non neutrality.

The point is, you just have to be much more

careful on it.

I don't I don't think it's anything about like oh

in the US monetary policy has no real effects.

That's an empirical question.

And I would say the answer to that is very

strong.

There are real.

Effects.

Yeah okay.

Yeah.

Thank you.

Just what why do we have to have regions of

distributions outside the bounds on both sides to achieve neutrality,

or is that necessary.

No, no.

I don't.

I don't think I don't know if it's I don't

think you have to have it, but I'm just saying

you can have it and the slides have a world

where you have it.

Yeah.

If the shock is really big, that means we can

always find a way.

And oh yeah.

No no no.

So yeah, yeah.

So you could have a world where this all shifts

in.

Yeah.

And there's a non neutral.

Yes.

I mean the only key thing is that the change

in M which is going to be really big, the

average of the price increases has to exceed.

It.

To exceed.

Equal the M.

That's the only thing we need for neutrality in this

model.

So we're not we're not making any sense.

What we show that is.

But that is a statement about quantities y is equal

to m minus p.

So if m equals p y which is a log

deviation.

So the percentage change in y is equal to zero.

Cool.

Yeah.

Thank you.

Just.

When by the end of the individual.

They're going up this week.

The structured ones.

Are going up this week, and then we have to

recruit them inside the January and whatever.

Yes.

And what you are not doing any individual and you

know.

Up to you.

Individual one.

Is risky.

But not in an intellectual centre.

Let me say this to the whole class.

This is not something.

I said.

I'll talk about that here.

Yes.

You're doing this.

Okay.

And actually, I took away the note.

You took away the note.

So?

So during this week, I've been in touch with the

first election.

The other half.

So during this week, the structured assignment will go up

at least the description of what they are.

And then you can read them and decide you love

them or you hate them or whatever.

And then and then you can.

If you want to start the process of pursuing an

individual one and realise they start the process is because

really all of this kicks off next term.

Final stamps are given, etcetera.

But but start the process is you submit a proposal

and then it gets looked at and there can be

iteration as I understand it.

And so I was just asked a very hard question.

Do I recommend doing the structured or the other.

I mean I.

Let me, let me, let me roll back the years.

So when I was here, there was no choice.

You did the individual one.

And and that is the way it is at many

universities.

Okay.

Now, LSC was always a bit of an outlier because

other universities would make you do the nine month masters

and then do three months just on the dissertation.

LSC always assumed that the students are smart enough.

They can do it within the nine months that.

Even if you're doing.

It.

In three months after, it's the only thing you're working

on afterwards.

You've done your exams.

Now you just do this other place.

They don't tell you the exam results, by the way.

So you've done your exams to wait until you do

your dissertation handed and then you find out.

But during that time you just work on this thing.

Three months dedicated nothing but this.

They are still risky endeavours.

So.

So I used to regularly give advice that you kind

of want to do something.

And this is my advice for anyone pursuing an individual

one.

You want to do something whereby even if you get

nothing, you get something.

And that often means empirical.

Because theory.

Is awesome when it works.

When it works, you could be done in four weeks.

Put your model down.

Bang bang bang.

Solve something nice.

Unique equilibrium.

Bang bang bang.

All done.

Very very little calibration.

No done.

Beautiful.

Or it can be a pain in the butt, right?

It down doesn't solve.

Oh no, no it doesn't.

Oh, God.

I've got problems with a bunch of can conditions.

010 this calibration work.

Oh, no, that's the wrong calibration.

Oh, no.

I want me to go.

Oh.

So.

These are the kind of choices that typically have to

be made in these situations.

For you guys, they're they're more intense, as I said,

because you have to do it while doing all the

other stuff that takes up all of your time.

And but I don't have a strong preference, I don't

think.

I don't think it's it's.

You should view it as in any way a marker

of greatness or non greatness to do one or the

other.

I would, if you have something you particularly want to

pursue and you think you can get it done in

the time, but just be careful.

So, you know, in Oxford we have a two year

program and they spend an entire year.

Doing.

Their dissertation, so they're naturally bigger.

Most of them work on it over the summer.

They're also doing internships as well.

But then it's like while they're doing not the core

courses, they're just doing options.

And this dissertation and still they often dedicate too much

time to it.

And still there's last minute panic.

And still there are people who get to like a

month ago and realise their theory model isn't going to

solve and they're in real trouble.

So I just think these are these are.

Choices for.

You to make, but don't certainly think, oh, I've decided

I want to, you know, I want to be like

Michael.

I know that's what you're all thinking.

You're thinking, I look at that guy.

I think definitely his career must be the best it

is.

I can unequivocally know there's lots of interesting careers.

Might happen to just be the best.

No, no.

If you decide you wanted to do research and you

wanted to go down that path, I still don't think

it's a necessary condition to do an individual essay.

Ultimately, when you're applying, a lot of you will apply

this year for PhDs, in which case like can offer

essentially zero formative assessment on you.

So if you decided, oh, that to be so because

of that, I'm going to work for a couple, I'm

literally going to follow Michael's career.

I'm going to go there to see and do all

my exams, and I'm going to do my dissertation extended

essay thing, and then I'm going to go work for

a while, and then I'll have those results in the

background apply.

Great.

What they're really going to look at is your core

courses.

They're going to say, Did Michael screw up advanced Micro

or something?

Whatever.

And if the answer is no, it'll be like, yeah,

we'll let them in.

And will they care if my structural analysis of the

monetary transmission mechanism in Ireland get got a 66 or

a 74?

Nope.

They don't really care because they took that mark divided

by two of the two, of course, called monetary economics.

No fluctuations for me.

And they gave me a grade.

And overall that's what determined my life.

There you go.

But I'm happy to answer questions.

Do you want to ask a question?

Yep.

How are we going to get to structure research assignment?

So I can't say for Joe's part, but my part

is going to be a model.

It's going to look like a model you've seen before.

Let's call it the New Keynesian model.

But the New Keynesian model.

But it's going to ask questions like.

In this model, communication really doesn't play much of a

role apart from forward guidance.

And you've all seen that forward guidance stuff both here

and in the classes.

Where are the other places that communication might play a

role, and how would that change the predictions of the

model?

And I'll put forward a couple of cases, like different

beliefs about the monitoring rule.

That's it being used and how they affect the dynamics

of the system.

Expectation formation would be another.

So we always assume rational when we write it in

the in the slides.

But what if we assume that people had some kind

of behavioural, you know, expectation process, which you could then

set the parameters on and say, hey, if people are

like really behavioural, the model goes bonkers.

There's going to be plenty of scope there.

Then you could also introduce your own things within that

framework, but it is going to be within the concept

of communication expectations and the behaviour of the model.

So at that point you wanted to do your individual

essay on take the safe option, do the structured one,

and then if your own idea doesn't work out, just,

you know, hack away at a couple of my suggestions

and write up a nice piece and hold on.

That's the kind of the equivalent of a structural var

for brackets.

Insert my own country here, which was my chosen extended

essay.

But yeah.

I sort of thought I was going to tell you

this just reminded me.

I had a wonderful experience, which maybe someday you guys

will get to have.

Not last Friday.

The Friday before that.

I just forgot to tell you last week, obviously, because

I wasn't feeling well.

I had the person who lectured me Monetary Economics Act

as my discussant at a conference.

So someday I could be your discussant.

Hashtag life goals.

There you go.

Anyway, yeah, that's.

That was very exciting for me.

I've seen him lots of times, obviously, since.

But I've never had him as a discussant.

Yeah.

Charles Goodhart, Charles Goodhart, famous for Goodhart law.

Anyway, it was good fun.

Thank you.

Any other questions?

Yeah.

Is there some.

Caffeine in terms of how many of us can go

for part one?

For two, for part two, as there are two of

you?

So I don't know if there's a formal one.

I can try find out.

But my guess is that, you know, never worry about

that because there's, there's, there's a distribution of preferences and

tastes and that usually sorts itself.

I mean, what you might be subtly telling me is

you all want to do a Rosiers part.

That's also fine.

I would be perfectly supportive of that.

We don't have to worry about that.

We have to have a backup option for the other

part.

I don't believe so.

I think, you know, because the way the supervised ones

work is we obviously put in a good bit of

work to define them and give you the structure.

But then there's a there's a couple of classes which

are group.

So I guess it would mean we'd need a bigger

classroom for one and not the other.

So one could take place just in my office with

one person or no people, and then the rest would

be the rest would be in a big lecture hall

with Ambrosio.

So that's fine.

Thank you.

Any other questions?

Yeah.

If we take.

The individual, let's say what the novelty may be.

How much?

Not much, but what is clear.

I mean, even if it's.

Like, you know, writing something down and just exploring the

sensitivity to a parameter and explaining how that fits in

the wider literature, like you have a couple of months

to do this.

Just to put it in context, in the last three

months I've finished three papers, and the cumulative number of

years I've been working on those papers.

Now, again, not full time, but like on and off.

Procrastination is an important part of the research process, he

says, for explaining his own lack of productivity.

But I mean, the total number of years that's gone

in is probably eight into three papers.

And these are these are papers of substance and big

and, you know, whatever they'll be sent off to see,

one of them's at the QG being reviewed at the

moment.

And that will go to the, you know, to that

level.

But that's eight years.

That's eight years.

And I've been doing research for 15 before that.

So you should not have this pressure on you.

I'd be awesome if you did.

If you write a model down quickly.

Bang, bang.

And it's all good.

And we send it off the air and it's published,

well, even better.

But no, don't, don't, don't set that bar for yourself.

It's a chance for you to explore and fit things

in the literature, that's all.

So that's a bit of novelty, but not, you know,

change the way everyone in the world thinks.

Novelty.

I can tell you one thing.

My structural analysis for Ireland did not change the way

anybody thought, possibly including myself, but I was proud of

it at the time.

But life has moved on.

Okay, good.

Let me spend seven minutes on this.

Okay.

So have you guys seen RBC models yet?

People are nodding.

You saw them in the main macro, right?

I know they never really submitted real business models.

Neoclassical.

You see, the next term is you're going to see

okay, what you're going to see.

Is.

A neoclassical model that has at its heart a production

function and assumed representative firm and a consumer.

And the consumer is going to make choices like they

did in the new model.

But prices will be fully flexible.

That's why it's called a real model.

Now, when people wrote these down as optimising so-called micro

foundational models.

They then tried, as I was alluding to earlier.

They tried to match aggregate movements of macro variables.

So if you look at aggregate movements of macro variables,

you find a bunch of things.

One I put is not steady, it moves up and

down.

When I put moves up, consumption tends to move up

and so does investment.

Investment tends to move more volatile in a more volatile

fashion than consumption.

So consumption tends to be smoother, but they both tend

to be prototypical.

Now it turns out if you write down these, these

models, the way you match that data is by having.

Shocks to a this aggregate macro phenomenon in the production

function called productivity total factor productivity the solo residual.

When you measure it empirically, you need to shock that.

But worse than that, what you end up writing down

is some driving process.

Is it usually log deviation?

Log of a t is equal to rho times log

of a t minus one plus epsilon a t.

You get this r one process for productivity and this.

He's up at levels like 0.9.

Now there is some internal propagation in the model.

When you're more productive, you start investing a lot more.

You build up capital and then because you have more

capital, you have more output next period as well.

And that gets you the two big things that we

hope for in a business cycle model.

What I would call the holy grail for business cycle

researchers is amplification and propagation.

What we would really love to have is a model

where we hit it with a little shock.

It amplifies and then stays big or stays in the

economy for many, many periods.

Turns out you can do that.

Once you have this hitting productivity.

But actually that's not really the model because you're imposing

propagation.

And it also turns out that there's not very much

amplification.

So we put big shocks that stay in the system

for a long time.

And we can match the data.

That's a little bit unsatisfying because it's not really the

model doing it.

It's our time series processes that we're imposing on the

model okay.

There's also a bunch of other facts about these.

You know, why do we end up with productivity shocks?

Because demand shocks don't tend to match the movements very

well.

So for instance, if you have a demand shock, like

an impatient shock, like you suddenly wake up and you

say, oh, I want to consume a lot today.

Yeah.

Party time.

In these models, what you end up doing is you

end up consuming more, but at the cost of investment.

So you get high C, but low AI because you

don't produce anymore.

So you have to sort of you have to keep

jumping through hoops to try and get demand shocks to

work in these in these models.

So instead, you know, there's the hard core, what would

often be called the fresh water schools.

Who said, look, we can do it all.

Productivity shocks.

TFP is the king.

Let's go.

Bunch of weaknesses.

And so then the question was, what can we add

to these models that might give them more propagation, more

amplification?

And one of the things that people started working on

was this idea of financial frictions, namely, can we change

the financial operations in the model?

Okay, I'll skip that.

So my plan is I'm given time.

I'm probably going to.

Really just talk about I'll go into this in a

bit of detail.

I'll talk I'll cut back on some of the detail

here.

These are already just adding some some details.

But there's a bunch of models, some called financial accelerator

models.

These often associated with Bernanke, Gertler, Gilchrest type world.

My own personal preference, because it's an LLC tradition, is

to go with key attack and more so key attack

key is no bookie attack who's now a Princeton and

John Moore.

Both of them were here.

So so so they have this sort of set of

it's actually one of the most beautiful.

So Nobu is a is a macro economist.

John is a micro theorist.

And they wrote these very beautiful papers together.

And so we'll talk a little bit about those.

And then I'll talk about the credit channel in some

of my own work.

If I get time at the end, which looking at

the time I will not.

Okay, I'm going to tell you a story and then

we'll come back and do it all next week.

So skip all the mats.

This is what we're going to get.

This is a world where you have no financial constraints.

We're going to have that world.

It's going to have some normal amount of growth.

We're going to occasionally hit the economy with a productivity

shock.

It's going to last for one period and then it

will go away.

And in an unconstrained world, and this is going to

be a constraint on the credit market.

We are going to have that.

The shock when it hits is going to affect growth.

But after that it will have no effect.

And then what we're going to do is we're going

to compare that to the exact same world with a

constrained credit market.

And that is going to be a world where the

growth rate we get normally is lower than it was

in the unconstrained world.

And when we hit it with this one off shock,

it's a one off shock, one period where we're less

productive, everybody is less productive.

It's then going to take many, many periods until we

get back to that lower level of growth.

And the logic I'm going to steal two minutes.

The logic is very simple.

The math isn't too bad either.

I'm going to be favourable to you now.

You are now going to be productive.

Okay.

Imagine an extreme world where the economy, everybody has low

productivity except for her.

Everybody also has a linear production function.

So it doesn't matter if you put in one unit

of effort or inputs or a billion units, your productivity

is the same.

What would be the best thing we could all do?

If her productivity is like five times, the inputs and

hours are 0.5.

What would we all want to do?

We'll go over to her house.

Can you just put all our stuff through your production

function and you say, okay, and then you just give

us back to five times output.

Now, I could put the inputs to my own production

function, and it would eat half of them and I'd

get eight half.

Okay, so in an unconstrained world, we we have a

credit market which gathers all the inputs and puts them

through the most productive agents in the economy, and they

return it to us with a rate of return determined

by their productivity.

What's the constrained world?

She might run off.

That's all Nobu and John did.

They said she might run off.

And so we're going to limit how much in total

she can borrow.

And how much she can borrow will depend on how

much she puts in.

So if she's putting a lot in, she can take

more of ours in.

What's the aggregate level of productivity in the economy?

It's going to be some weighted average of how much

is done through her and how much is done through

the rest of us.

So 0.5 is a bit unfair.

Let's call it 1.1 low productivity five.

So we get some productivity if we put it to

our machine.

But she gets more.

But if we give her too much, her incentive will

be to run away with our stuff.

That's what we're going to do.

Right.

I shall stop it there.

I know some of you have class to go to.

I don't want to eat into that.

I don't want to eat into your enjoyment of monetary.

The survey is live and I will put up this

the whatever it's called QR code next week.

But yeah.

Have a good week and see you then.

Need that.

This.

Need that.

Need this?

Yeah.

It's not really.

Inflation.

The most famous Bank of England interview questions.

Excuse.

There's no right.

You have to find those things.

And you.

I think that's going be.

Pretty.

Cool.

Yeah.

I mean, I was.

I was.

Guess I.

I don't know.

I'm not sure it was something that I.

On Wednesday.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But.

I think it's noticeably better.

That's.

Lecture 10:

Expression.

Something that's autistic, like obviously a lot of people, but

it can be seen as something.

It can also be viewed as like a parody.

They're kicking us out.

So vote.

Who thinks Ikea is an infringement?

Okay, this one even here.

Again.

Okay.

We have to go.

See you at five on zoom.

I will send you an email.

Actually, I.

So you know what?

We have a.

I think it's.

I think.

See.

This.

No.

Good.

You can get.

Six.

Got a little bit concerned.

I came in and no one followed me in.

Just me.

Do do do do do.

Oh.

How's everyone run out of steam?

I'm sorry.

Has everybody run out of steam?

You have hit the proverbial wall.

Even by Monday.

Okay, well, I'm going to start because I have loads

to cover and very little maths, so that should be

good.

And as soon as I say that there's a big

crowd arrives.

This is obviously the the last vestiges of the econometrics

material was being shoved in your brain before Christmas and.

Okay, so I have.

I sort of got I got into this a little

bit at the end of last week, but I'll go

through it again and I'll be very explicit on this.

This is the this is the material which I decided

to add in because otherwise there wasn't that much on

economic fluctuations.

And when we talked at the very first session, a

lot of you were like, this is the sort of

stuff, some of this stuff is stuff that interests you.

So but I will be so explicit as to state

that I'm not going to go through all of these

models in complete detail already, the slides going.

But but it's just to sort of get you an

interest of like what type of things the literature has

done.

So if it is something you're interested in, you can

dig deeper yourself.

And so one thing that I will reiterate, I think

I've already said this before, but I'll say it again

and I will be at LSC like all the time.

I mean, all the time is to extreme, but even

more of the time after Christmas.

So if you do need me, then you can of

course grab me, but also email and email and the

discussion forum remain open for use whenever you wish.

But but yes.

If you if you are seeking me, that's where to

go.

Okay, so why do we think about credit models.

Well we think about credit models because.

So a lot of this literature, a lot of this,

a lot of papers that we're going to talk about

are our papers where if you look up the originals,

they were published in various kinds.

So you just leave it there.

It's fine, it's fine.

I have plenty of space.

It's just weird looking in.

Our papers that were published in the 90s.

I remember the 90s.

Most of you do not.

And so I feel like the 90s wasn't that long

ago.

You probably think, ah, ancient history, because I have the

same view about the papers that they were really replacing.

So if you look at the literature in the 70s

and 80s, we had these real business cycle models and

those real business cycle models, the things you'll see in

quite a bit of detail in macro next term is

these these are models where we have an Euler equation,

we have the capital formation.

And it's about how the business cycle looks from that

point of view.

And what rumours ruin the surprise of the business cycle

literature.

Essentially, they do pretty well at explaining the macro movements

over a business cycle.

When you hit the economy with these persistent TFP shocks.

Okay, so people didn't like that because they were like,

well, there's not much amplification, there's not much propagation.

And you really getting the R one process to do

a lot of the heavy lifting.

So this, this other form of literature, this sort of

credit models, financial frictions.

Models were ones where they said, well, let's take let's

take the idea that there's something that means that finance

doesn't work perfectly.

So if you ever think about RBC models or even

the UK Indian model, we didn't really have in the

UK Indian model that we looked at because we looked

at one without capital.

But if you ever have capital in these models, you

usually have some relationship where the people in the model

take the investment goods, they use them and then they

give them back at the end with the return.

And that market is assumed to work perfectly.

So there's no default.

Nobody ever runs off.

Nobody ever.

You know, in some of them where there is a

big negative shock, you just go back to the person

and go, oh, I was supposed to give you ten,

but here's three, because we had a negative productivity shock

and everyone goes, okay, that's fine.

Okay.

So the idea of a financial friction is to is

to add something that makes the financing in these models

not work perfectly.

And what I'm going to cover in these lectures is

a whole raft of models where, where we do that

and then we see what happens.

Okay.

So I sort of mentioned this, like my bias is

shining through in my selection of which ones I focus

on.

Nobuyuki Taki was here and taught me, so it feels

like an LSK tradition to continue his teaching.

John Moore is still here, at least partly so.

He attacking Moore is one particular way of doing it.

And these sort of financial accelerator models are, you'll often

hear them referred to as Bernanke, Gerber, Gilchrist type models.

I'll talk about where they're different, but there's a lot

of similarities.

They are ways of suddenly bringing financial conditions to be

important drivers of the macro behaviour of the model.

And then I will try and end at the at

the end about this idea of a credit channel, because

this is a monetary course as well.

So I'll try and talk a little bit about this.

I almost certainly won't get into much detail.

I will tell you where this empirical test comes from.

About the bank lending channel.

BLK stands for Bank Lending Channel.

That that'll be clear at the end, but probably not

the start and.

This is one of my favourite papers that I've ever

written.

But.

But I haven't published and.

And I think it's beautiful.

But it beautifully discovers zero.

And it turns out that nobody really likes hearing about

significant zeros.

Is there a bank lending channel?

No, not at all.

No evidence.

And here's why.

It's all there.

It's beautiful.

I think it could have been published, I think a

little unfair on the publication process.

It was in at a perfectly reasonable level of journal,

and I would have been quite happy to publish it.

But a bunch of things happen in my own life,

and I fell away from it, and I really regret

it.

So it stays there as an enduring memory of how

you can write interesting papers and not publish them.

This is not something you should aspire to do.

That's just the way I screw up things.

Okay, but let's start with talking more.

We're going to start with the most basic version.

So this is this is a version of this key

talking more and model which is not the original version.

It's a simplified version which appears in an article which

I've linked on the on the course Moodle site, which

is a Japanese Economic Review article, which was essentially a

lecture he gave for some prize he won back in

Japan.

And it's just a simplified version of what I'm going

to come on to next to explain which is the

original key attacking more credit cycles paper from the GP.

But the basic idea and the friction, if you will,

is everything else is a specific set of assumptions, something

you should know in advance.

About Nobuyuki Taki and John Moore.

They wrote really beautiful papers like mathematically, really, really simple

pen and paper.

There's no we're going to send it off to the

cloud for three days of computer processing.

This is all.

Everything was chosen to make it completely solvable and transparent.

They are very beautiful.

So there's a few assumptions here which don't look like

the standard RBC model, but they're not that different.

And you could easily do an RBC version of this,

which they do.

The really substantial change is essentially to recognise that if

someone lends me money today, I can run away.

I can take the lending and just never pay it

back.

And as a result, and they do this again in

Bernanke at the Gilchrist type models, there is some system

that they assume is in place whereby you can collateralise

up to a limit a certain amount.

Okay.

And this is what they're going to have, this coefficient

theta, which is going to be really key.

And so in the simplified version.

It's like there's a limited ability of me to run

away.

Now there's a whole micro foundation.

In fact one of the reasons John Moore is on

this, he had worked on these sort of micro foundations

of these kind of limits and what the limits would

be.

We don't go into that in this course.

We're just going to say it is imposed on the

system, that I can't run away with everything.

So if someone lends me intermediate goods that I put

into the production process, I can't just run away with

all of the output.

I can run away with some of the output, but

not all of it.

And because I can't run away with all of it

and you know, I could run away with some of

it, you will lend to me up until the point

where if I run away, you get that fraction back.

So we're going to have you'll see this borrowing constraint.

But that's all they add.

They add this borrowing constraint.

Now.

I'll show you the mats and then I'll talk.

The story I talked about last time.

There's a fraction of the economy.

Who are productive.

They have a linear production technology.

They can take these X units of intermediate goods, put

them in their production process, and they will get H

times X out next period.

Okay.

So if I'm the productive agent and key gives me

some inputs and I have some inputs, I put them

in and then I get h times that amount.

So that linearity is really key.

So it doesn't matter if I put one output, one

intermediate good in or 1 billion, my productivity from that

production process is the same.

Everybody else apart from these, we're going to call them

unproductive.

They're not utterly useless, but their technology just produces a

lower amount of output next period.

So each person who is unproductive has a choice.

Do I produce myself or do I lend to the

productive agents?

Okay.

Now so everybody has this linear production technology.

And we assume that though they're unproductive, they're not that

unproductive.

It's just they're less productive.

They're calling them less productive.

Would be better.

Now, the thing about this economy is I'll come back

to this hopefully in a bit about why we have

it.

The people who are productive this period might not be

productive next period.

There is a Markov process where with probability delta, if

you're high productive now, you become low productive and with

probability n delta.

If you're low, you become high.

And those probabilities are selected so that we always have

a stationary distribution of n productive and one unproductive.

It's just which people are in.

Their will vary over time.

I'll mention that very briefly why we need that.

Because what's going to be important in this model.

And you'll see very quickly from just the budget constraints,

basically, what ends up being important in the budget in

the credit constrained model is actually how much net worth.

The high types have.

So if we allowed people to stay high productive forever,

they would gradually accumulate so much net worth that they

would never be subject to borrowing constraints.

Now there's actually an equilibrium of the model where the

productive agents are so rich they're not subject to the

constraints, and that just behaves like the unconstrained model.

So this is the sort of interesting world where the

people who are productive are subject to constraints.

That's what we're in.

Clear something.

How long is the production process?

Is it always just one time?

One period?

Okay.

It's always what I put in as inputs.

This period become output.

Next period.

Yeah.

Okay.

So the basic mechanism for this is going to be

through the financial.

Net worth of productive agents.

Essentially what we're going to see is a world where

if we have a transitory shock.

It hammers the productive peoples network because they are leveraged,

and because their net worth drops, they are no longer

as high net worth and therefore they are more subject

to borrowing constraints, which is going to then mean they

do less of the investment, which means that unproductive agents

do more of the investment.

So we're going to live in a world where suddenly,

after a bad shock, we can't just go back to

the world we were in before.

It takes time for the productive agents to build their

networks.

I'm telling you this narrative, and then I'll show you

the equation.

What this gives is a lot of propagation.

It makes a one period.

Shock lasts a long time.

This version of the model does not give, or at

least doesn't give a substantial amount of amplification.

Amplification is going to come in the next model where

we're going to augment this with a forward looking asset

price.

So why does it matter?

The share of investment done by the two types.

Well, it matters because.

If this is the productive agents.

The more productive agents then if they do all the

investment, then they can pay back at the high rate

of return.

So in an unconstrained world, what would you ideally do?

Just give it to them to invest.

Why?

Because it doesn't matter whether linear production technology, if they

do their own investment or they do everybody's investment, they

generate the high return.

So in an RBC type world where there's no trust

issues, runaway issues, stealing issues, whatever, we give it all

to them, they produce, they give it back to us

at the high rate of return and the economy is

produced the most it can.

In an extreme where there's no credit market at all.

Everybody is forced to do their own investment.

A sort of autarky world.

The high productive would have a higher return while they're

highly productive, and everybody else would be stuck with a

lower rate of return.

What we actually look at is a middle ground where

we're going to allow some of the resources to transfer,

but there will be constraints.

And that constraint is going to be this borrowing constraint,

this theta that just defines the sort of key attack

more world.

Okay.

So here it is.

It's a limited commitment to technology.

And this is essentially the outcome of that limited commitment

technology.

The timing B BT plus one is the borrowing that

is done in T to be paid back in T

plus one.

So the amount that you can borrow today to pay

back tomorrow must be less than or equal to theta

times the amount of output you are going to generate

tomorrow.

So if you.

If you're going to be producing a small amount of

vapour tomorrow, theta, let's call it 0.70.60.5.

Whatever number you want to carry in your head, some

fraction between 0 and 1 of that you can is

all you can commit to repay.

And the reason for that is because you can run

away with some of it.

Now then you can measure.

The degree of the the sort of financial friction by

changing this data.

The higher is theta.

Essentially the the more that is recoverable by the lenders

and therefore the more that you can borrow.

If theta is very low at the extreme of zero.

They can borrow anything because they can run away with

everything.

Okay.

Okay.

So this is this is a sort of this is

the outcome of this limited commitment and the desire not

to have people run away.

I described the unconstrained model.

We just give all the stuff to whoever is productive.

They pay it back because we're in a world of

full trust, and the economy is always at the marginal

rate of return, and the economy is always the high

rate of return.

Now if that if that rate of return is shocked.

Yeah, we'll then be it.

But we'll always be at the highest possible in that

economy.

And what's interesting about that unconstrained world is it wouldn't

matter if I am the only one who's highly productive

and everybody else is low, because you would just channel

everything to me.

I would do all the investment.

Linear technology.

No, no falloff in my rate of return.

I get the high rate of return, I distribute it

back.

Perfect trust, perfect contracts.

Everything's fine.

Coming behaves that way.

So whether there's one of me, ten of me, 50

of me doesn't make any difference.

The wealth distribution doesn't matter.

We behave as if everybody has the high productivity.

As I said with the constrained model.

You can think about different values of theta.

And we're going to think about the interesting world where

the constraint is so tight that the marginal investment in

the economy is done by low productive types.

To low productive tribes, do some investment.

Obviously high productive will do investment, but the rate of

return that you have to pay ends up becoming the

low productivity.

So we're in a world where there's not that many

high productive types, or theta is sufficiently low, or a

combination of those, that marginal investment is done by the

low productivity types.

Okay.

So let's look at that and we'll do it through

looking at the budget constraint okay.

If we have this world, it's actually going to be

in the interests of the high productive types to borrow

as much as they can.

Why?

Because they can pay back our low to al the

low rate of return, but they can stick it in

their production technology and generate the high productivity.

There's a wedge.

So it's definitely better in this world to be high

productivity.

If you're high productivity, you're making extra.

You're making a spread for your productivity.

So you borrow as much as you can, which is

theta times future output.

What's future output.

Well it's eight times the amount that you put in

today.

So what's their budget constraint for these ages?

Well.

They allocate their resources today.

Between what they consume.

There is actually a consumption going on here.

And what they use as intermediate goods.

So you can think about this as like seeds that

you can either eat or turn into future fruit, future

seeds and single type of good.

It's malleable.

You can switch it between sort of intermediate goods and

consumption goods.

You choose okay.

How much resources do they have?

Well, they have what they produced as I put.

Minus BT.

Minus BT is the repayment of borrowing from last period.

So y t minus BT is like your net worth

today.

I produced ten but I had borrowed eight.

So my net worth is two.

And the other resource that you have is BT plus

one divided by T.

That is in today's terms the amount you get.

Of borrowing because remember we're dating this in sort of

next period payback terms.

So you borrow that divided by the rate of return

you have to pay again.

Just a little trick they use just to make the

sort of the budget, the borrowing constraint look much nicer.

But once we have that we can then plug in.

We know that the constraint agents, the high productivity agents,

are going to borrow as much as they can.

You plug that in here, you rewrite this and you

get this expression.

How much?

When going to the limit.

How much do these agents.

Uses intermediate goods.

Well this expression.

Tells you what y minus b.

That's their net worth.

Less what they consume.

So that's like their post consumption period T net worth.

And how much do they lever that up.

Well it depends on these terms.

The theta the RH and the r.

Remember R is going to equal a l.

So it's a term that determines how much the financial

system allows you to lever up.

Can you please explain a little bit more about why

would people load the marginal investment covenants of age?

Am.

So.

So remember, the unproductive are not that unproductive.

Okay.

So they still get a positive rate of return.

It's greater than one.

But it's not as high as the high one.

So just imagine everybody has their optimal consumption.

This is a dynamic problem.

This is like a cake eating.

How much do you build for next period and how

much do you eat this period.

So it's a dynamic problem we're doing.

So we all want to save a certain amount.

Now where is the marginal saving done.

Well it depends on how many high productive agents there

are, how much savings demand there is and how much

these guys can borrow.

At some point, theta is low enough, or there's few

enough of the high types that unproductive agents have to

do some borrowing, and if unproductive agents have to do

some borrowing, that pins down that interest rate, they are

the marginal investor.

Because if Ken is unproductive and he's trying to think

about where to what to do, his choice is he

can try lend to the highly productive types.

Now we can thereafter limits.

So the only thing he can do is invest in

himself.

And that's an al.

And if he went early to one of the high

productive types, they know they're going to be in a

binding world.

So if he says, I'd like to give you money,

but I'd like you to give me a hedge.

There you go.

No, because I can I could bargain and say to

you, actually, I'll give you a minus a bit and

then the A's minus a little bit more and a

bit more and a bit more and a bit more

and all the low productive are willing to take that.

And eventually we get bargained by competition down to the

point where it's a L.

That's the equilibrium.

So what this tells you is that the amount of

activity investment done by the high types is a leveraged

position based on your net worth, post consumption, net worth.

This ends up being key.

This is actually why we need to have that Markov

process.

Because if you stay as the high type for long

enough in this equilibrium, you're going to be making a

spread.

Remember you're earning a H on the investment and you're

paying back al.

So you're leveraging to get that spread.

You're going to get richer and richer and richer, and

eventually you'll be so rich that you could do all

of the investment.

And then what I just said about al being the

marginal rate of return would no longer apply.

The credit constraint doesn't matter.

We move into a different world.

So you can be you can be getting rich for

a while, but you're eventually going to get shoved back

into the unproductive pile and then the other group take

over as productive.

Yeah, I can't exactly see.

Where's the smoothing?

So I.

Was.

Like, that's that.

That's that.

Investor expected productivity and productivity shock.

And if they do expect a negative productivity shock then

don't they smooth their consumption and stuff so bad.

So so we haven't we haven't brought in any shocks

here.

So these guys are just behaving as if that's their

high tide when we bring in shocks.

It's a previous slide.

Like when there's one thing that could be negative.

No no no I'm going to come to it.

But we're going to solve just the basic optimisation in

a world where the there's certainly going to be this

is a model where there's no certainly idiosyncratic shocks when

their shocks they're going to hit everybody.

So productivity of Al and RH are both going to

shift okay.

Yeah okay I understand that when I mean productivity shock

is also when a high.

A high tide becomes a low tide.

And this you say in slides that this basically makes

them to invest much, much less.

And this is why they this is the way.

I see where.

You want to be the high type.

You want to be leveraged.

Okay.

So the optimal thing to do is be leveraged by

being leveraged.

You become more subject to fluctuations.

Just because you're more subject to fluctuations doesn't mean you

don't want to be leveraged.

Remember, you're earning a big spread by being high type

in this equilibrium.

So I think what you're getting I said, why don't

they not become the height or why do they not

behave at the limit because they know they're there for

a limited period of time.

Ideally, what you want to do is just take advantage

of your high productivity period, and then you're going to

become low, but you'll become low with a high net

worth.

It's just weird that.

The monitor.

Probably doesn't show in this formula.

But this is the individual's behaviour in a given period.

Okay, but but they know that in the next period

they have no idea of getting to the high.

High with a low probability.

And so what would that change.

Of how they invest today in terms of what they

might or what they.

Okay.

When we get on to actually, I don't even think

I have it in sight.

It does turn up and it turns up in aggregate.

And so so if you go through it fully with

the credit cycles paper, it gets very complicated, but it

ends up not mattering.

You still want unless you were really super risk averse

I think.

But you still want when you're at the when you

have your moment in the sun as high productivity, you

want to be as leveraged as you can.

And yes, there is a risk that you face that

when you're leveraged, you will suddenly become low productivity.

But you are better off by being high productivity for

a while and then suddenly becoming low productivity.

Then you are not taking advantage of your chance to

be high productivity.

So you always want to sort of it's a really

in this economy, it's really great to be high productivity.

You get that spread and you want to do that

to build your net worth.

Sort of like, yeah, anyway, you will see it.

It matters in aggregate a little bit.

But even there it's really this is the core channel

that bites.

Okay, so I probably tend to answer some of these

questions I put in to look at the Japanese Economic

Review article.

You will see where it turns out.

The key mechanism in this world, though, is that if

we go back here.

So there's one assumption that I snuck through without without

telling you.

But I'll tell you it now.

So there is a consumption smoothing that is going on

here.

It's a very particular assumption.

So we assume that they're optimising.

And the productive and unproductive have the same utility function.

And that is a log utility function.

Now a feature of log utility functions is that you

consume one minus beta.

Times your net worth.

So if you if you're if you have log utility,

it's a particular form of utility function that has this

nice property that you always consume a constant fraction of

your net worth.

Once you put that in, you get rid of the

C and you get this beta term in here.

So there is some element of smoothing going in, but

it's coming in through the seaside.

You still want to take advantage of your being high

productivity because of this spread you can earn.

But the key thing that's in here is that the

amount that that the amount of investment that can be

done by the high types depends on the high types.

Net worth.

Okay.

Now, the fuller equation that I don't have in here

that I think would help you, but I didn't put

it in here is there is an aggregator where there

is a fraction.

Every period of high tides, you suddenly become low tides

and new high types who don't have high net worth.

So you have this permanent like this.

Some new high net worth people, new high productivity people

who are low net worth or relatively low net worth.

And there's some of the low productive people who could

have been very high net worth but suddenly lost it.

And again, they they suddenly wake up and they're like,

oh, I played net worth, but I don't have an

opportunity to invest.

If you think about their position, you could be my

high tide who becomes low.

You suddenly come across here.

She's got a load of resources, but doesn't have an

opportunity to invest them at the high type.

That makes the problem for the system worse, right?

Because we now have this big bunch of work that

we're going to try and transfer over.

And let's say Ken's gone the other way.

He's been poor for a long time, so his net

worth is low.

So his ability to take any of her resources is

lower because he doesn't have a reasonable net worth.

So that all contribute.

So both of those things are going to show you

them in a picture.

I sort of showed this last week, but I'll show

them again, okay.

If we are in.

The world of unconstrained and like I say in the

unconstrained world, it doesn't matter if she's the only high

productive type.

We all give everything to her.

She invests it.

That money grows again and again.

And if there is a shock to productivity, so everybody's

productivity drops high and low drops.

Yet we grow by less because there's less return.

But as soon as we go back, we go back

to investing in her.

Or if it's not her because she switched.

It doesn't matter if key is there and the new

person has no net worth or low net worth, we

can always give them everything and have that person do

the investment.

Okay.

The two things that I was just talking about.

Turn up here one.

You notice that the average growth rate is lower than

the unconstrained world.

Part of the reason for this lower growth, on average,

is this effect that there's some people who are now

highly productive, who have no net worth or lower net

worth than the person they replaced.

Now remember, the Markov process is independent, but but there

will be some high net worth people in there who

have disappeared.

And that what matters is the aggregate amount of net

worth held by those productive types.

So by the fact that that's always churning, I think

the channel you're talking about that reduces the overall growth

in the economy because we reduce the capacity to do

high investment.

And then when we have a shock, the shock is

particularly bad because the levered people get hammered by that.

Why do the levered people get hammered or what do

I mean when I say the levered people get hammered

by that?

You've made your plans on the basis of producing a

H times X, and you've borrowed on the back of

that.

You still have to pay back at a high production

at an a high level, but what you actually generate

is h less whatever the shock was.

So your net worth when your levered gets really hit.

This looks very like the banks who were highly levered

in 2007 2008.

Being levered is wonderful when the profits are coming in

because it magnifies everything, but it magnifies profits and it

magnifies losses.

So in this case they end up getting hit.

Their net worth shrinks the total amount of net worth

in the high productive sector drops the amount.

Therefore, in the next period that that sector can borrow

is now endogenously lower, which means even more investment is

done by the unproductive or less productive group in society.

Okay.

So we not only have that, there's less growth on

average when we get this one off shock, it takes

a long time of profits of that extra spread between

RH and Al.

Remember, after one period, H has gone back and al

has gone back to their original levels.

But it takes us many, many periods for the amount

of net worth of these guys to build back up

to some steady state amount where we're back to lending

to them.

So that's a world where you do get propagation.

Okay.

That was only one of the two challenges that we

were trying to get.

But financial frictions can make a one off shock that

in an unconstrained world have a one off effect.

You certainly have a one off shock, have a many,

many years effect.

So that's the first bit where sort of financial frictions

kick in.

Now.

That was a weird world.

Like I said, that wasn't the original credit cycles world.

That was a weird world in which the collateral was

a claim on future output.

So we were still in a world of sort of

trust where I can't run away with all of tomorrow's

output, but only a fraction of it.

Maybe it's I've limited hand bag capacity to run away

with this stuff that adds persistence.

What's really key to adding amplification is having.

And a fixed asset where the value of that fixed

asset is going to be determined today in a forward

looking sense.

So the classic example and again, for those of you

who didn't ascertain from his name, Nobu is Japanese.

And if you go to Japan's history and in particular,

what happened in the early 90s there, they had this

massive boom in the late 80s into the early 90s

and arguably are still seeing some of the effects of

it today because they had these hugely inflated asset and

land values and banks lending on the back of them.

And then when the asset, the land values fell, you

had all these zombie banks who stopped lending.

And then we got the lost decade, which became their

lower bound for 20 years.

Sorry.

Looking at you did not blame you.

It's not your fault.

But so motivated by that.

This is where no booze.

This is where no booze.

Like if you ever hear him talk about it.

This is what his motivation for this work was.

He's like, I watched it, I watched this happen, and

I saw the effect.

And the big thing here that they get here is

amplification.

So I'll give you.

The idea is that you have this asset land.

We're going to call it land.

Why do we choose land?

Because you can't run away with land.

You can run away, but you have to leave the

land.

And we still going to get the same kind of

in this model.

And again, this is the GPE version of the model.

So we'll go through it fully.

We're going to have the borrowing constraint is related to

the value of that fixed assets of land.

So what is the value of that land.

Well it depends on the amount of land but also

the price of that land.

And if that price which we're going to call Q

that price is going to be the key term for

generating amplification, because that price is itself a reflection of

how valuable the land is going to be in the

future.

So it's going to be a forward looking asset price.

Okay.

I stole their picture and it's really beautiful.

And.

Okay, I want you now.

Have you now have both the X, the input goods,

but also the K, which is the land, but the

only land is recoverable.

And we assume we'd go to that limit again if

you want.

If you want to be really true, to keep attacking

more, you can put a theta in here.

So you could assume they can get away with some

of the land, or they can take some of the

bricks or some of this stuff from the office.

But here's a really strict version of it where all

of the land is recoverable.

But what matters is this depends on the value of

the land.

So what you get here is another thing which we

saw in the financial crisis, which is what the amount

that you can borrow becomes endogenous to how valuable or

how highly priced the asset is.

So as house prices start going up, buying start lending

going, hey, it's fine to lend to Michael.

He's got a house worth a million.

Years time my house is worth half a million.

Oops.

My borrowing capacity will be determined partly by asset prices.

Asset prices are forward looking.

You can start to see where the amplification you can

trace through it.

I wasn't intending to do it.

I don't intend to do it.

It's all in their book.

But this is depict their article.

This is their beautiful picture and you see the whole

story here.

And the reason I start with what was chronologically a

later model is because it is a simpler model.

If you get the idea of why the first effect

comes in, the idea that the fall in the net

worth of productive agents can give you persistence and have

these effects on the aggregate with these financial constraints.

What you get here now we have the temporary decline

in productivity.

That causes the channel we just talked about kicking in.

Leveraged agents suddenly get hit.

Their net worth shrinks badly.

So their net worth falls.

Well, we know what that's going to mean is there's

going to be less investment in total in the economy.

So we sort of wake up and we go, ah,

not only are these guys screwed, but we know the

overall economy is going to struggle for longer.

Well, during that period if there's less investment getting done.

If we're going to be doing a lot less X,

we're also going to want a lot less K.

We're going to have less demand for X and K.

Well, if there's less demand for K.

That has two effects.

One is directly with less demand for K, the price

falls.

But the price today also reflects how much demand we

think there'll be in the future.

But we know this is going to be persistent.

So we also know that not only that, the people

who own the land are going to also have less,

less net worth.

So we know they'll have less network and less demand

for land here, which means that the price tomorrow should

be lower, which means it's worth even less today.

And so on and so forth.

Out all of this, this cut feed back into net

worth today.

So we have a first effect, which is a direct

to what I just talked about in Q2.

You were one effect on net worth of the high

productive types.

And then we have the second, which comes through the

change in the price and the change in the price

then also affects the amount that they can borrow.

The collateral becomes less.

Your net worth becomes less.

The Hittite, who were living it up, having a great

time with their extra return, are suddenly hit in a

major way today.

Their net worth that worth collapses today.

That causes what was just a drop to become an

even bigger drop.

Amplification.

And then the old channel gives us persistence.

So that's the key.

Like, you know, if I, if I just stopped here,

I would be happy that you at least got some

flavour of where financial frictions models went.

That's not all by any stretch, but that is a

sort of a really classic type of thing they're trying

to do.

They're really trying to understand why we can hit an

economy with temporary shocks and get big effects, big effects

that don't occur in models without those.

I felt I couldn't stop with just those two.

There's a third key attacking anymore, and this is my

this is one of my favourite key attacking war papers.

It was actually a paper when he taught it to

us.

He taught me pre financial crisis.

This was a paper that was only available as a

like handwritten pictures with typed notes from the Clarendon Lectures

given in Oxford in like the late 90s.

But it looked like nothing was happening in this model.

But this was a model where he actually went back

to ask some of the fundamental questions about why does

money exist, even though it's a sort of liquid asset

that doesn't pay the return of Google shares or government

bonds or whatever.

So the stuff we sort of started with and what

they did in that was they thought, again, about a

balance sheet.

So a lot of the a lot of the financial

frictions literature takes balance sheets really seriously.

So net worth assets, liabilities, what's happening.

So if you want me to summarise what was going

on before your debt liabilities don't change the value of

your assets drops your leverage.

Your network gets hammered when you're levered.

Now what they do is they talk about the existence

of you have your own capital stock as an entrepreneur.

There's outside equity.

So you can own equity of other companies.

And there's also this thing called money and money doesn't

pay a return.

So in an unconstrained world you don't hold that money

is useless.

What they do is they introduce two constraints.

One is a borrowing constraint, like the stuff we had

before.

But now the act, the equity serves as your collateral.

It's not really that important, but the new one is

resale ability.

In that there is a limit on how much of

the other people's equity you can sell at any one

period.

Now, the whole basis of this particular version of the

model is a very simple story.

Sometimes you have productive opportunities and other times you do

not.

When you have productive, when you have productive opportunities, what

you'd like to do is issue a bunch of capital

here and use it to buy capital stock that you

use in your production process.

But when you're not productive, you don't want to be

totally in your own capital stock, because if your productivity

is low, you get nothing off that.

So sometimes you want to be heavy in your own

capital stock.

Other times you want to be relying on others.

So in an unconstrained world, you would hold both of

these in your assets, sort of cover yourself for when

you drop out of being productive.

Problem.

Is the resale ability constrained?

If you suddenly wake up, so you wake up tomorrow

and you not productive while you're productive.

And again, in this model, I picked you because you

asked a good question earlier.

You know, you're going to be productive for a a

statistically determined marker of amount of time.

And this is your time to make money you want.

Yeah, but.

What you'd like to do is issue some equity.

Sell all your other equity.

Get rid of all your money.

Put it all into capital stock because you've got the

lottery ticket right now.

You've got really high productivity.

You wanted to crank that thing?

Yeah.

Make the money.

Make the money problem.

You can't sell all of your outside equity because you

can't sell all your outside equity.

Actually, it affects the whole market if you try to

issue too much equity.

Your borrowing constraint kicks in.

They're not going to they're not going to beat you.

So you're now in a real problem.

You have to the winning lottery ticket, but you cannot

take as much advantage of it as you would like.

What solves that problem?

Money.

Why does money solve the problem?

Because liquid.

So if you win the lottery and you get the

high productivity world, you can take all your money and

immediately convert it into capital stock.

So what agents in this world hold money?

Yes, even though it.

Returns no.

Extra return.

It just is money.

Yes.

Why?

Because there is a probability that they suddenly become high

types.

And then they can get around these constraints by holding

money.

This one's even cooler.

Why is it even cooler?

Because it tells you that if there is a liquidity

shock.

So imagine we're in some equilibrium.

And then for some reason, theta T drops.

Markets dry up.

Have you ever heard of that happening?

Yeah.

That was 2007.

Suddenly the assets you bought that you used to be

able to trade freely as a bank disappeared.

Those markets, you can't sell them anymore.

What do the banks start doing?

Well, they stop lending out.

They stopped doing anything like illiquid, and they start holding

just reserves wherever they can.

The whole economy sort of grinds down.

Could policy help in this world?

Yeah.

If you assume the central bank can buy as much

of this stuff as it wants, is not subject to

concerns about resale ability constraints.

Then there's actually a government policy that's not monetary policy.

That's called liquidity policy, where they go in and they

buy from private agents outside equity and swap it for

money.

And that helps the economy in these weird liquidity dry

up moments.

That type of policy does not exist in most other

models because even think about it, you have to have

a serious thought about what liquidity is and what the

balance sheet is doing.

So most of the models we looked at would not

have that feature.

So that paper, which in 2004, when Nobu was teaching

me, was just a typed up manuscript, became very relevant.

Three and a half years later.

And then published really well.

So he sat near to.

So you can sell them papers.

Now I think I said all that.

Okay.

Let me do quickly some costly state verification.

Oh, so that's a copy and paste issue.

Unfinished.

You ever try to copy from a PDF?

Sometimes it comes across funny.

So costly.

State verification is a is an underlying mechanism sort of

theory.

Micro theory mechanism.

That makes a lot of sense.

If you think about a lot of our models.

Our financial system is is very fair.

I invest in you.

If you get the high return, you pay me the

high return.

If you get the low return, you pay me the

low return.

Now it's assumed that I can tell, but we all

know it's public knowledge.

Oh, you know the high return this period.

So I get the high rate of return.

Low.

I get the low.

We're all unhappy.

Group, if you think about this in an economy wide,

like why might you get a high return?

Sometimes in a low sometimes.

Well, maybe he puts in no effort.

So there's all these models about efforts and lending and

what you do.

But if it's if it's costly for me to verify

what draw he got, then we can end up in

a world where the financial arrangement has to be different.

What costly state verification built in was this assumption that

there's a monitoring cost?

So if I lend him money and I want to

figure out if he's high or low type, I have

to pay a monitoring cost.

And what they show is that you can derive an

optimal contract that gets him to reveal his true type,

and that is an optimal debt contract.

And so you end up in sort of justifying.

Oh.

You end up in this world where we have a

debt contract.

But if you if you can't pay back.

So there's an amount that you have to pay back.

Anything above that you keep.

But anything below that I pay the monitoring costs.

They take everything you have left.

Looks very like the kind of debt contracts we see

in the world.

So what Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist did is they built

this type of mechanism into a macro model.

So it's going it's going to look a lot like

Turkey.

More it looks a lot like it, particularly in the

sense that net worth matters with the exact mechanism looks

a little bit different, but it has the same kind

of effects.

Okay.

There's some other names on here that.

So BG, Bernanke and Gertler, Gilchrest.

Carlstrom first is another sort of version of these type

of models.

But all of them 19 remember 1990s.

So we didn't just think about this in 2010.

Wake up and go, we should we should have thought

about that.

No, we knew this.

You didn't build it into all of our models, but

we knew it.

What you get in these financial accelerator type models is

what's called an external finance premium.

So it's very much like attacking it more in attacking

more, the more net worth you have, the more skin

in the game you have, and therefore the sort of

more that you can borrow in a financial accelerator model,

the more net worth you have, the lower the external

finance premium that you face.

So if you.

Turn up with no net worth wanting to borrow, the

amount you're going to pay as a as a premium,

as a return premium is higher.

So you get this.

World where the interest rate we all face depends on

our net worth.

And what that does is it.

This is why it's called a financial accelerator.

Just think about what happens when the economy is growing.

Well.

What happens to net worth?

It goes up.

So as the economies get going well, for five years,

six years, seven years, eight years, what's happening to external

finance premiums?

They're dropping because you all have more net worth.

We're all great borrowers.

Lend to us.

We're fine.

This happens.

This happens as happens now.

What happens endogenously to the economy when interest rates are

essentially lower?

We do more investment.

So what happens?

Growth keeps going.

This is awesome.

Was when we suddenly all.

Leveraged all with these high bid balance sheets suddenly get

a negative shock.

Bang!

We get the negative shock.

That's not great.

But what happens suddenly to our net worth?

It drops.

What suddenly happens to the amount it cost for us

to invest?

Shoots up.

So now we're stuck in this world where our net

worth is lower and it's more expensive to invest.

So we invest less, so we build less net worth.

So we suddenly go into this sort of.

Negative world.

Because we're investing less, we grow less, the economy grows

less.

That feeds back.

So the financial accelerator type models, we're all about building

a link between financial and real caretaking, more financial and

real.

To all of these credit, financial friction type models are

all about having this link between the financial sector and

the real and the real and the financial sector.

And now we have entire areas of central banks just

dedicated.

To.

Financial stability.

Okay.

Yeah.

On the last slide, what are the exam?

What are some examples of disturbances originating in the financial

sector in this model?

Enron fraud.

So.

Yeah.

So so we're going along, we think everything's great and

then we suddenly realise all is not what it seems.

Enron has been defrauding.

So suddenly your balance sheet.

My balance sheet.

Her balance sheet.

We all have a bit of Enron stock on it.

We suddenly wake up tomorrow and not because we did

anything or the aggregate did anything like some dodgy management

did something.

But suddenly our balance sheet did have 10 million of

Enron stuff.

It's gone.

Our net worth gone by 10 million.

That shock.

Now what happens because of that shock?

We do less investment.

Because we do less investment.

The economy grows less.

That hits my net worth.

We start getting the feedbacks.

But you can think of loads of this, you know.

Yeah I Enron's a nicer example to pick then like

the financial crisis, because the financial crisis was an all

sorts of interconnected problems that sort of fed off each

other.

But, you know, you could also imagine just traders wake

up not trusting someone each other.

Like that's what happened.

There was a period in 2007 before Lehman Brothers, when

the interbank market was basically drying up because people just

suddenly were like, who holds what?

We don't know anything.

Screw it, we won't lend.

And the market relied on interbank lending and that sort

of hit banks like northern Rock in the UK.

If you ever studied that case, other questions on that.

Okay.

Let's take.

Seven minutes.

We'll start again at 20 past.

I will certainly not get through all of the Credit

channel material, because I'm on slide 25 and I have

about 4 billion.

But I'll get through the basic story.

So we'll start again when that big hand hits four

in this room.

Professor.

Professor.

Sorry.

Sorry.

Do we have some revision lecture next week?

No.

No lectures?

No.

So this is our last lecture.

Just class.

Okay, okay.

Revision.

You've only just finished the material.

For all the other lectures.

I believe we have some revision lectures in week 11.

Yes, some of them have.

I think if you're going to have a.

Revision class, it'll be like in turn three.

Okay, okay.

Not mad.

You have to revise first before a revision lecture.

Makes sense.

At least, I certainly wouldn't be here.

I will be on a flight.

On Monday.

I will go back to Ireland.

No, I was back in Ireland this week.

I'll be back in Ireland the week after.

Two weeks after that.

Again?

No, I'm going to Thailand.

Yeah, there's a.

Thailand, so you get a bit of a warmth and

good and good Asian food for a few days.

And I have some friends from my PhD.

Actually ta ta Thai friends from here.

And one of them is at Chulalongkorn University.

And so she invites me out every year for her.

I mean, I end up meeting her and the guy

who was here as well as her husband.

But yeah, they invite me out and I go for

a few days, give some lectures, a public lecture and

just get to eat good food.

And so, yeah, so, so, you know, keep friends with

people from all over the place.

Your life will be much nicer.

You can get later with this kind of gloomy weather

for a couple of days.

That's right.

Yeah.

Although I'm up, I mean, I am built for temperate

northern European.

I mean, I'm designed for this weather.

And.

But having said that, it is.

I mean, honestly, I love Thai food.

I just.

Had we?

It's just nice.

I think I'm also going to go.

I've got a trip planned now also to Singapore.

I'm going to go there.

I'm still working at the details, probably April.

So a friend of mine who independently knows these other

people is he's a Thai friend of mine who worked

at Warwick, who actually first met at LSC as well.

And he he works at NTU.

And every time he hears, I'm going to give a

public lecture in Singapore.

In Thailand, he's like, how come he never come to

Singapore?

And I said, you never invite me.

So then he invited me.

So he said, done.

Yeah, no, I won't, I won't, I won't try to

fit it in on the same trip.

I've got young kids.

It's me.

Being away for too long is hard.

So I think what I'll do is I'll go with

the whole family to Singapore in Easter.

I will be back.

Do nothing.

The entire thing is over.

Sounds so terminal.

Yeah.

No no, no.

I mean, well, it doesn't matter when whether you.

You go back to Singapore.

It's true.

Same weather, no matter what.

Unless you go rainy season riders.

Monsoon is.

Two weeks.

Yeah.

It's been enough.

So.

But yeah, I have to figure out where I'll stay

if I go to interviews a bit.

Hulu, right.

So did you study it in us?

Let's say.

Oh, you tell me that that's a new.

Yeah.

So you were proper central.

I think it to you.

You have to see.

I mean, I guess you are still going to stay.

I'll probably stay somewhere in centre and get the master's.

It's the outfit that is falling from my house.

You live over by Changi.

Oh, wow.

Yeah.

No, no, I'll.

I'll figure out where.

I mean, I've lived in Singapore.

I know it well, so.

Yeah, it will be fine.

Yeah.

Most.

That's.

These are.

If I just one.

Yeah.

It's like it tastes like.

How long is it like.

Wait times by like.

It's crazy.

And then when you land, you are like taxi back.

You go where you have.

You have.

Like he said, as much time.

It's like the problem.

Six point.

One, three.

It's all.

This is just.

And so, I mean.

We I have something about this line.

So the.

Number.

We have.

And that we have, we have.

These strains with borrowing the one with.

The.

Train.

That's the shape of the delta.

The probability of switching on average.

It's the big thing that depends on delta is the

drop.

In growth from one case to another.

That's the biggest.

That's the that's the effect that I was trying to

explain to him.

So so you know, imagine you were churning through.

What's really useful is if the sector builds up a

lot of networks.

So the faster you churn, like the way you build

up.

Network.

Is by being high productivity.

Because you earn a K al.

So that's good for building network.

But if you're only productive for one period, then you

go back.

You never get a chance to really build it and

leverage it.

So actually that affects it to the level.

It probably affects the curvature I don't know.

But but that's the first order effect that you've worried

about.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So like I wanted to try.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And then like 939.

And that's.

I've.

Never heard of it before.

But we look at the balance sheet.

And.

Then we say if we are highly productive.

It's always like is some sort of symmetry in the

sense that the more we are, harder it is to

sell the equity.

I guess we have some non-productive firms.

Not in the models in the model.

Those that the parameter is, is exogenous.

But you could, you could imagine a world where it.

Is that.

You want to make an announcement.

No, I want to I want to ask the question.

I still don't like the next to me like beta.

And it's like.

I still don't know why they're not letting data like

the security firms still want for I guess they don't

borrow.

They invest in themselves.

Yeah, that's what I find.

Okay.

So they sort of they invest partly like a small

fraction to the hybrid firms.

And then after they reach the limit, they keep everything

else to themselves.

Did the questions where the marginal, the last unit of

investment may made by if you're low productivity by someone

like you in your firm.

And that's what.

Determines in.

Your in your technology.

That's what determines.

The sort of.

Competition.

Because since you're like low producing is one of the

small that I.

Hate but greater than one.

But oh so like there are people like other than

those two types of firms in one space, there's only

two.

Yeah.

But then, like, why would it like, why would any

firm other than technology.

Nobody else invest in a technology?

If you invest in it.

That you have.

Yeah.

If you're al and you can invest in the you.

Invest in age 40.

But actually in equilibrium you're indifferent.

Actually let me answer this publicly okay.

Okay.

I'm going to start again.

I'm not going to answer this question I just asked.

And so let's go back to Kentucky.

More one Hal.

The logic for the equilibrium, in which the rate of

return in the economy is.

Al is the following.

If you are a.

If you're in a high type, you invest as much

as you can because that's good for you.

You're earning that spread.

Now the question is.

How much do you have to pay to borrow?

Up to the limit, right?

You can't go beyond the limit.

That's a hard limit imposed on you.

But you want to borrow up to the limit now.

So we'll start with you again.

You can go.

You say he.

Goes.

I'll lend to you if you can be a hedge.

You go, okay, maybe.

But there's loads of other low productive types and you're

like, well, actually, you'd be perfectly happy if she gave

you a h minus epsilon.

Now you're happier than with Ken because he wanted all

of H.

He's offering you a little bit extra, and he's better

off because he's going to invest in himself.

I've been using the term investing yourself.

I just mean take X rather than consuming it, save

it to next period and get a L that there's

no suggestion that he's thinking about giving money to Ken.

It doesn't matter.

Actually, the model's indifferent to that because he can invest

in himself L or him and get out.

Doesn't matter.

Question is for you.

You've never been offered h minus epsilon.

You've come in and you've said, actually, screw those two

losers.

Let's split the difference.

I'll give you the wedge, but up will take half

of it.

You take half, I take half, and then he comes

in and goes.

I'll do a quarter.

Now he's charged in and he goes, what?

Eight 112 to 1 25th?

Each time your amount is getting bigger and bigger and

they're all happy.

Now, this is where all these type of models get

a little bit fuzzy because they don't pin down who

you actually borrow from.

But what is assumed is that you do the borrowing

and that you just pay back the.

What you might be paying is RL plus epsilon.

Okay.

So everybody would like to give to you, but in

equilibrium you get to keep the return.

That's the key thing.

Now these other people, the low types, we don't know

which of them were the ones that lent.

But because we're getting to the point where the return

is al, it doesn't matter.

Now, actually, in equilibrium, you're indifferent and you're indifferent between

using it in your own technology or lending term, which

is why this little bit of epsilon would probably help,

because we definitely get her to the limit.

And not just her, all of the hypothetical types.

But that's the logic.

Again, that is a good question, but that's what's actually

going on.

And so when I say you invest in yourself, I

just mean that you have C and U of X

and you allocate some of your resources to X which

will generate a put next period.

Any other questions?

Okay.

Good.

I have about 25 minutes.

No 30 minutes to do the credit channel okay.

There are different types of credit channel type literatures, including

this.

I really like this paper.

That's why I called PDC stat, which have links to

them.

But.

If you think about the financial accelerator type world.

One of the channels through which monetary policy could have

an effect on the economy is essentially, if monetary policy

affects the net worth of firms that affects their ability

to borrow the price at which they pay, and therefore

affects the way the economy evolves.

Okay, so when you think about the.

New Keynesian dynamic is curve that told us about the

evolution of the output gap.

None of this was present, right?

But in a world where you have that financial accelerator,

if you can affect the net worth of the firms,

you can then affect the external finance premium they pay

and so on.

Another channel, which is called the Byte Lending Channel, is

a world in which if you.

Shift monetary policy, you change the willingness of banks to

lend not just the price.

So the way to think about the Lending Channel is

you have a bank lending supply curve, which is a

mapping between the amount they lend and the price that's

being paid.

And then as monetary policy changes, this curve could shift

around.

That's an idea.

I'm going to look at that in a minute.

What what this stuff does, which I think is very

neat, is to think about how the financial accelerator applies

to the banks, like they have an external finance premium.

Their willingness to lend depends on their net worth.

And then as their net worth varies, potentially by monetary

policy.

This also affects how much they're willing to lend to

the wider world, which then has this effect from the

financial onto the macro.

The macro feeds back to the financial.

And then you get into this nice world where, thinking

about 2003, 2004, banks start lending a lot.

House prices start going up because they're lending so much.

That means all the collateral looks really good.

And because the collateral looks really good, the banks feel

like they're in a great position.

They're also able to sell all of this stuff off

their balance sheet, give it to someone else that makes

their balance sheet look really healthy.

That's awesome.

They then lend even more drives of house prices even

more when you get into this like beautiful loop until

2007 when suddenly people went, wait a second, this doesn't

look great, and then you just have to watch one

of the many movies written about this where you suddenly,

as they start realising, they start realising bad things are

going to happen.

And like I said, the reason I don't use it

as an example a lot is because as well as

that basic mechanism of leverage in the banking sector, credit

and therefore asset values and collateral, you also had a

bunch of other crazy stuff, like wild levels of investment

in credit default swaps at prices that were way too

low for risk.

And then suddenly it's like, oh, if these things happen,

our bank would have 48 trillion.

Oh, how much do we have on our balance sheet

now in net worth 48 billion.

Oh, that would be bad.

Why didn't someone check this?

And so on.

So there's lots of good movies about that stuff.

But it is complicated and.

And decide how much of this to show you.

Okay.

So I'm going to start with.

So.

If any of you are super interested in this I'm

happy to follow up with more conversations on it.

As I said this, this stuff about the bank lending

channel that I'm going to talk about is really from

this awesome paper I wrote that I never published.

Say, just get a few people each year to read

it by giving a lecture on how it.

Is.

Beautiful and that.

I'll talk about the background to it, but it's like

the idea of a blending channel of this form is

not mine at all.

So I just don't want you to leave here thinking

I'm claiming that I came up with.

So the classic name in the literature is Kashyap, and

Stein and Jeremy Stein served on the Board of governors

for a while, professor at Harvard, and Anil Kashyap, who

was on the bank's financial policy committee for a period

and is at University of Chicago again.

Why is it in this section?

Well, because this is this is really a section about

balance sheets.

And, you know, balance sheets are sort of not that

prevalent in lots of areas of macro.

But this area, they obviously are to the basic idea

of the bank lending channel.

Is again that you have assets and you have liabilities

on the banks balance sheet.

Banking 101 for any of you who want to become

millionaires.

And if this ends, or billionaires, if this ends up

influencing your career and you make loads of money and

you feel like this knowledge was useful and you want

to like, you know, donate to me.

I don't have a Patreon account, but I could set

one up if you're willing to give me, like, I

don't know, 1% of your earnings for two years, maybe

ten years.

I don't know if just if you want.

It's like, yeah, just just if you suddenly in years

to come go.

I didn't realise that what I'm about to tell you

is very obvious.

So I feel like I won't be getting any donations,

but.

Essentially all of banking and every function you can think

of in banks and all.

Even the complicated stuff I just told you is based

off a very simple balance sheet management, profit maximisation, behaviour

of banks.

Your objective?

Wait for it.

This is groundbreaking.

This is the one you want to write down.

Put it at the top of your diary every day.

Say it yourself.

Pay less on your liabilities then you make on your

assets.

If you do that banking 101, you've nailed it.

Now what does it actually involve?

It involves things like who can I borrow from?

Is it stable?

Can I count on it?

Can I get it if I needed?

Do I have credit lines etcetera.

But also if you do I lend to which securities

do I buy?

Do they go up in price?

Do they go, oh no, they're Enron securities.

Oh, bad.

Oh, I lend to a bunch of people who live

in Las Vegas have bought 98 homes, and it turns

out they only earn a dollar a year.

And now the house price has dropped.

They can't pay anymore.

Is that.

No.

That's bad.

But in general, you know, what you're doing is you

are pooling risk, liquidity transformation.

You're borrowing short term deposits, turning them into long term

loans.

And you get paid spreads for these.

And that's what banking 101 is about.

So yeah, maybe just when you get your first 10

million bonus, you just give like 50 K each.

Each of you give me 50 K.

I'll never be given any.

But if I do need it, I'm sure I could

come up with something.

You could put it into revenue.

It's great, by the way.

Okay, so this is really what the banking game is

managing the balance sheet.

Okay.

Now the idea of a traditional bank lending channel, this

is the sort of cash of starting type world.

Is that what monetary policy does?

I'll go back to the balance sheet actually.

And then it basically lives in a world where the

banks are constrained by how much they will lend, by

how many deposits they have as the key determinant of

their liabilities.

So the argument is if the central bank comes along

and changes monetary policy, say it lowers or raises the

interest rate leading to more deposits, you relax that constraint

and that shifts the amount of lending that can be

done.

Now this is not uncontroversial.

So if you go back to think it was like

1995, there was a sort of discussion at Brookings, possibly

on this.

And the Brookings papers, if you ever read them, are

great because they have a paper, then they have a

discussion and then they have a crowd discussion.

So the people in the room get talk about.

So or maybe it was just in a subsequent paper,

I can't remember.

But the Roamers just think it's a nonsense idea because

they're like, well, look, yeah, if you want to make

loans, if someone comes along and goes, hey, I have

this idea for a project, it's going to return 10%

and it's really safe and it's awesome.

The bank goes, okay, sounds good.

We can lend to you.

Now if they don't have deposits now, they can borrow

on the interbank market.

And again, so long as the interbank market is only

charging 5%, you're borrowing for five getting ten.

Awesome.

So they just think there's nothing special about deposits.

It's been further questioned actually.

If any of you are interested this is maybe I'll

send this link around and.

McLay, Radia and Thomas at the Bank of England wrote

a neat paper about how commercial banks create money.

So you probably know this, but it causes great upset

in some quarters for no reason at all.

Most of the money in our society today is not

created by the central bank.

Most of it is created by the commercial banks.

People freak out about this.

What?

No.

Well, we give them power, so we determine the price.

And the argument in Maclay, Roger Thomas, is actually that

the correlation and there is a correlation between deposits and

loans, but is that it runs the other way.

Loans create deposits rather.

Deposits creating loans.

Okay, but so there's plenty of work that can be

done in this area.

The original argument was, you know, if you drive bond

yields down and people take their money out of bonds

and they put it in the bank, the amount of

D goes up that sort of give more liabilities to

the to the commercial banks so they can lend more.

So there's more loans that shifts the lending supply.

Okay.

Let's say Romer and Romer just don't think deposits are

special.

So this is classic and Stein's basic story.

Because you suddenly and in fact, they have their.

They have a world where the central bank actually controls

D directly.

So as the D goes up, securities go up and

loans go up.

Why?

Because you have these deposits.

You're paying an amount out on them.

But you want to make more profit.

So you do banking 101 and you increase how much

you lend as securities and how much you do in

loans.

And even the choice between securities and loans depends on

a desire for liquidity.

So if if loans, let's say, loans to households are

paying 5% and government securities are paying 3%, why would

you ever lend to government securities?

While government securities you can cash in quickly, whereas long

term loans obviously are very hard to cash in.

So again, it has this feeling of external finance and

this idea of of.

These things.

Okay.

Yeah.

Okay.

I'll skip that.

So we.

So I'm going to give you the last 15 minutes.

Let me give you this paper.

This awesome paper.

This is a paper.

It's written by myself and a couple of other co-authors.

The motivation for how we got working on this is

not how we wrote the paper.

Sorry to take the veil or disguise down.

A lot of papers are not written in the order

in which you read them.

You have an idea for something, and then you build

it up in both directions, back and forth.

We actually came into this empirically.

If you think about that basic idea.

Of Cashapp and Stein.

You'd like to see a world where if there was

exogenous variation in deposits, you could check how much lending

went up or down.

Now, the hard part is the exogenous variation, like how

do you get random shocks to deposits in a given

bank?

Turns out in the UK.

Is a.

Beautiful way that you do it, and that is QE.

What QE did in the UK is it found customers

of banks who had long maturity government bonds, and it

bought them from them.

So it swapped gilts of insurance companies for money.

And that money went into the insurance companies bank.

So the bank randomly because of its customer being an

insurance company who partakes in this auction, gets more deposits

then.

And these are big numbers as well.

We're not talking like, oh, a little bit here.

This is big variation.

So then we're like, ah, so if we know which

banks they end up in and how much goes into

each one, we can then trace out whether they do

more lending.

And it turns out we had at the Bank of

England access to weekly data on their balance sheet, the

amount of deposits, and we knew which banks had gotten

this money through the asset lending asset purchase facility.

Like, yes, let's explore.

There was really desire to understand that this type of

channel actually has a role.

But I'm going to lie to you again.

I'm going to tell it in the order we tell

it in the paper, which is we actually write down

a simplified version of their model.

Where you have liquid assets, reserves, government bonds, all these

things, or you have illiquid assets loans, and then you

have deposits or you have borrowings.

There's a really key assumption which Romer and Romer would

hate, which is we're going to assume that there is

a rising cost of borrowing.

Now, we're not very explicit about how steeply it rises,

but if you want to borrow a little from the

interbank market, there's no extra premium for it.

But as you borrow more and more, the market's going

to charge you more and more.

And there is evidence of that.

If you ever watch a bank, at the end of

the day needing to borrow to balance its positions, they

get absolutely killed in the interbank market.

Maybe you were borrowing at 2% all day.

If you're the last person and everybody knows HSBC have

a position, they need to close out by the end

of the hour, you know, they're getting hosed.

It's like, well, again, it's like 2.5.

So you know banking can be fun too.

So so again, the whole purpose of the model is

to talk about asset management.

The key thing about loans is they're illiquid.

It's a three period model T0T1T2.

So this is like Python inspired zero indexed okay.

You make loans at zero but they get paid back

at two.

Every period they pay a return R.

And there's no like dynamic chain linking here.

So you can make it much more complicated model.

But you just you're just doing a one off static

kind of three period optimisation.

The advantage of liquid assets is they can be sold

at any time.

The disadvantage is they pay a lower return as a

result.

Okay.

So it's exactly the type of decisions that that I

was sort of suggesting banks have to do.

Why would like in attack more?

Why would there ever be a bank holding illiquid assets

when illiquid assets pay a higher return.

Because in this middle period in T equals one, your

customers can turn up and like decide to go on

holidays or buy a new car or buy a house

and withdraw their deposits.

Call that a payment shock.

So you have some liquid assets that you can use

to pay that.

If you don't, if you can't cover the reduction in

deposits with liquid assets.

Because you're not able to do anything with illiquid loans,

you then borrow from the market.

But the more you have to borrow, the higher you

have to pay.

Very simple world.

Deposits are completely stochastic, so there's no deep and deep

meaning to what's going on.

We're going to normalise the policy interest rate to zero.

So all the interest rates are spread over the policy

rate.

And these payment shocks are sort of stochastic things that

happen in period T equals one.

Okay.

So the banks can borrow on the interbank market.

But there's this convex cost depending on the size.

So if you borrow a little on the market you

pay a little bit of a premium.

If you borrow a lot you pay a lot okay.

Again that's the bit the shape and nature of that

cost function would be the exactly disputed by by Rome

and Rome.

Or in fact they would say it's not convex at

all or it kicks in at convex, you know, so

far into the tale that we wouldn't even care.

Yep.

Okay.

So since deposits, you sort of start the world with

some normal amount of deposits followed by a shock.

You can think about this as being driven by policy.

If you're cash up and stone or just random whatever

you want.

And then at T equals one, the process that this

is really key because this was key to our understanding

of the bank lending channel.

The deposits you have in period one to sort of

continue financing your operation to the settlement period T.

Two.

There's this row times what you had in the first

period.

So there's persistence.

So we have this process that has some persistence but

otherwise reverts to mean.

And there are some extra shocks.

Okay.

So in other words, when you're sitting there in period

zero deciding how much to lend, you have to take

a guess at how much you're going to have to

borrow on the interbank market in the middle period.

And we know that if you have to borrow a

lot, that's costly, and that's going to feed back into

how much you lend out today.

And so we call this flighty miss.

Like if you imagine you woke up in the first

period and there's a load of deposits.

If they're going to be there with high probability next

period, you're going to lend a lot.

If they're not, you're going to lend a little.

So that became rho becomes the key parameter.

That's not in cash up in sterling or anything.

So here you go.

If you wake up with D not a high amount,

then because of the shock process and the persistence process,

the mean of the distribution goes back.

But then there's a shock.

So there's a chance that you have very high.

It's a tail risk that you've really high D one.

But there's also a chance it goes below average even

though you started with above average.

And then you can think about the different stochastic nature

of these shocks.

So that's high persistence.

That's low persistence.

So if it's low persistence, you're more likely to be

back at the mean, even though you started with a

lot.

And then you can also think about how volatile the

payment shocks are.

So this is high persistence but higher variance.

What ends up mattering.

Is the kind of likelihood that you're in and around

certain values next period.

So you can see that the chance you're around the

nought with some random arbitrary precision is that total area.

That total mass is smaller, they're smaller, they're highest there.

But again, just these are just the sort of key

driving variables here.

I'll skip the formality of this, but you can you

can show them pictorially what this means, the amount that

you need to finance in the market.

How much you expect to have to go to the

market depends on how much you've lent out.

For a given amount of.

I should show you the formality.

Sorry, I have enough time.

The amount that you have to finance or you expect

to finance is your l nought minus what you borrow

for two periods from the interbank market, less this amount

of deposits you expect to have in D one.

So this is a stochastic variable because remember D one

is stochastic.

These will be known but that's stochastic.

So you get a basically a distribution of your funding

needs which mirrors what we said before.

So here's a world where because I didn't lend out

very much, there's a big chance I don't even have

to go to the market in the middle period.

So you don't have to do any interbank borrowing.

But because there's some payment shocks, negative payment.

Shocked.

And I pushed me this way.

These are the shocks that were pulling me this way

in the deposit world.

If I get negative payment shocks, I may have to

borrow.

I have some tail I have to borrow up here.

Now, if instead I lent out a lot, I'm almost

certainly going to have to borrow in the market, because

I've done a lot of lending for a given starting

amount of deposits.

So that becomes key.

And again, I'm not going to show you all the

different pictures, but the size of these depends on the

the payment shocks and where they shift also depends on

that rho parameter which becomes key.

And again, then this is the final bit.

If you have to borrow a lot, the amount you

pay goes up and up.

So from a profit maximisation sense there might be some

optimal amount of borrowing here because you're getting a spread

on loans, but you don't want to go too far

this way because then in expected value you end up

having to borrow a lot.

If you land a little, you can be very safe.

But you take as in with this low L, you

almost certainly balance of probability is you don't have to

borrow anything, but you've done little lending so you get

less of the banking 101 spread earning.

That's the trade off in this model.

The paper itself has all of the maths.

Very simple.

It's on here.

You can do it.

It's real first okay.

Third year undergraduate optimisation.

Thank you for the answer.

Once you think about it for a while is really

easy.

The optimal choice in the first period.

Balances the benefits of balance sheet expansion.

The cost of expanding versus the benefit, which is the

spread.

And similarly the allocation between liquid and illiquid.

So you first of all choose the size.

Then you allocate between liquid and illiquid.

That also depends on the expected shortfall, the cost of

an expected financing need and the lending spread.

The key insight for this, which we use to explain

the results, is that if you have deposits that go

up in period zero, but we know they're going to

mean revert a lot in period one, you should not

see a bank lending channel.

If you have deposits that go up a lot in

period zero and they're going to stay high in period

one, you should see extra lending.

Increasing capital ratios and liquidity cover ratio.

It's so they would but but but okay.

So we're going to we're going to look at it

sort of post those.

So we're not going to do it before versus after.

We're going to look at it in a really sort

of tight time frame.

But yes, there's a whole ton of other things that

would feed into the extent of each of these trade

offs that I have totally ignored.

All models should totally ignore lots of things.

It's a bug, not a feature, a feature, not a

bug.

Okay, with I'm going to take three minutes because we

started a little late.

At the time, there was a view that said there

should be a lot of lending from QE, and then

there was a view that said, no, there wouldn't be,

and we wanted to ask that question, and that model

was sort of feeding into it.

No evidence is the key picture.

So the way QE worked.

It took non-banks insurance companies, it took their gilts and

it gave them deposits.

But they don't hold deposits in safe deposit boxes in

their premises.

They actually hold them with commercial banks.

So for the commercial banks they held their gilts.

For the insurance company.

They were sort of custodians of it, and they also

got their deposits.

So what actually happened was, you know, they.

Have the plus and minus gilts there.

Anyway, the central bank is buying the gilts and doing

so by creating reserves.

The insurance company is just doing an asset swap.

They're doing gilts to deposits.

And the end result for the commercial bank is that

they have more reserves and they have more deposits.

This is determined not by them.

It's not determined by their decision.

They want to lend or not.

So at a given point in time, we can say

randomly the fact that the insurance company that took part

in the allocation, the purchase allocation auction, ends up commercial

bank versus B, and we can track the deposits that

go in.

As a result.

We can see if this extra deposit gave rise to

extra lending for this commercial bank.

Whole rest of the paper is about data cleaning it,

making it look beautiful.

I've.

There's everything.

Certainly true that asset purchase gilt sales to one bank

or through one bank gave rise to higher deposits.

First stage.

Good.

Second stage.

Do higher deposits lead to more lending?

No.

No, not at all.

Again, controls for lending.

Not controls for lending.

Fixed effects.

Loads of stuff.

No.

There's just.

No.

No effect.

Zero.

Now let's look at this.

This is the key.

Last chart.

I'll finish here.

We work out gross net flows of different types of

deposits.

That is we look at before and after QE.

These are NFS deposits, private non-financial corporations.

These are household deposits.

These are reserves.

And these are other financial corporations.

These are the customers, the insurance companies, pension funds who

were on the other side of the transaction.

But they're customers of commercial banks.

What does this tell you?

This is a measure of essentially how much the gross

versus net flows of these sort of deposits were in

the British financial system before and after QE.

Pretty similar drops a little bit pretty similar goes up

a little bit.

Other financial corporations.

What happened?

Basically two things stand out one offs.

Deposits are just much more flowy, flighty in terms of

the language used.

Then they were normally with households, but after QE they

were even more so reflecting these reserves.

What's actually happening?

You give an insurance company 10 billion because you bought

their gilts.

They're not a household.

Households get deposits.

They just leave them there.

Maybe they buy some stuff.

Yeah, there's some flows, but largely they stay there.

Even corporates largely leave them there.

They're stickier.

What happens with insurance companies.

They get 10 billion and they immediately re optimise by

buying some other asset.

And as soon as they buy some other asset that

10 billion disappears from the commercial bank.

That got it initially and goes to some other commercial

bank.

So it flows through the system as everybody tries to

reorganise.

In our model.

That's like a.

Set of deposits you get, but you know, are not

going to be there next period.

So if they're not going to be there next period,

do you lend any more?

No.

Why?

Because you just leave yourself open to having to go

to the market.

Now, here's where I think the market and the Romer

Romer assumption is fun to talk about.

We know that the market around QE was particularly expensive

and risky.

So even if Romer and Romer were right when they

originally said it in the 90s, early noughties, by the

time we're in 2010, yeah, you did not want to

be going into the interbank market for large amounts because

you made a miscalculation.

So even if the money stayed in your.

Lecture 11:

Nasdaq didn't speak out quickly.

Say your name and whether you're faking the one you're

working with.

And I'm taking the comments from.

You.

Okay.

And the people coming out to you and say yes.

Um.

Oh, sorry.

Yeah.

Okay.

Anyone else is thanking me?

Thank you.

Um, did everyone speak to one of us?

I was just asking about names and whether you're taking

the one year career path.

So ask you what?

You're thinking one year in 2020.

All right.

Um, I think I asked everyone, and it's, uh, help

us.

So let's, uh, let's call them.

Uh, my name is Ambrogio Bianchi.

I am, um, a central banker, and I am not

employed by the city.

I work for the Bank of England, and I am

a guest lecturer.

Uh, I see I've done this course last year and

the asking questions again this year.

Uh, I think it is as a positive.

Um, the reason why I'm mentioning where I work is

that all of my presentations are going to start with

a disclaimer.

Um, so everything I'm going to say in this class

is going to be my views and not those of

my employers, the Governor's Office of the Bank of England.

Uh, I think this is kind of important, partly because,

you know, this is recorded and secondly, because in this

course we're gonna touch on quite, uh, policy relevant issues.

And I kind of realised last year that I ended

up saying quite possibly very controversial things.

Um, so, you know, disclaimers can be important.

Don't quote me on, you know, some of these things

and some may be reporting or people in a sense,

um, please still say controversial.

Uh, the other thing I should mention is, you know,

don't ask me for the output.

Next month is going to be very embarrassing.

We're gonna be in one year from now, but maybe

we can touch upon these things.

Or maybe we can discuss it.

Um, you know, at the bottom.

Um.

Right.

So let me just, uh, what I was planning to

do today is to give you a very brief introduction

on the course.

Hello.

Um, so just to give you an idea, idea of

where we're going in the next ten weeks and, um.

And then this is going to be probably 10 or

15 minutes, and then we're going to start jumping straight

into the material, which, uh, is quite, uh, it's quite

a bit.

Um, so the plan for this term is cover four

different topics.

Um, and the first topic is kind of going to

be slightly different from the remaining three.

So as the title I think says is is going

to be almost like a methods of course.

So what I would like to do in this first

topic, which is going to cover roughly the first three

lectures, is to try and start where you left it

to Michael and generalise what you've done to a more

general model and bring these kind of very theoretical, very

stylised model to the data.

I want to be able to bridge between the information

theory that you've seen and some time series empirical methods

that we typically use in, um, certain banks.

But as I'm going to mention, um, it's not just

two central banks.

So to do that I will need to recap the

financial model.

I will need to generalise it a little bit.

I will show you some solution techniques that are a

bit more general than the one that we've seen with,

uh, Michael.

And that actually will allow you to solve more general

and more complicated models.

So the technique you've seen, which I guess you've already

seen the verified, uh, way to solve the equation model.

I believe if I'm saying things that, you know.

Right.

You know, once models start being big by being mean

massively, you know, you've got five, six, seven equations.

Uh, then the guess of verifying that it can be

actually not a very, uh, useful tool to solve the

model.

And if you work in a central bank, you can

have more than 150 boundaries on the paper.

So we'd like to.

Good morning.

Yes.

Uh, I will also recap on some time series basics.

That's a disclaimer.

It's not going to be a time series course.

So I'm going to keep a few things for granted.

But have you taken my take?

So thanks for taking time series.

Oh yes.

So I'll try to kind of give you some basics.

I'm going to I'm going to give you the intuition.

But some things are how you construct confidence intervals, how

you inference properly.

And I think these are given uh, and it's not

going to be needed for the exam of course.

Uh, but I'm going to be I will need to

strike a little bit of balance between being loose in

the way in which I'm going to do the exposition

and give you the intuition for what these tools do.

And finally, we're going to look at how we can

identify or basically tease out from the data some monetary

policy shocks or innovations, which really should map into the

shocks that you plugged into your role in the commodities.

Right.

Um, so I said that this topic is going to

be different from the remaining three ones.

Um, as you can see from the titles of the

remaining topics, these topics are going to be more in

line with other topics should be, you know, the more

theoretical, the more specific on a particular aspects of monetary

economics.

The reason why I want to do this is, um,

because a you have an essay to write and some

of but most of the things I'm going to say

in the next three weeks are going to help you

with the essay that you have to write, whether you

choose the more theoretical one or the more empirical one.

So, Michael, it's going to be more of a DSG

type of essay.

The one I would have that is going to be

more of an empirical, applied, uh, type of essay.

So the tools we're going to cover today are going

to be helpful for both, uh, for both essays.

And I think you need to submit proposals for the

structural ones by the end of the month or on

the time next Friday.

Next Friday.

Okay.

Um, so, you know, these first two classes are going

to be important to kind of get a sense of,

you know, stuff that you can do or you can

think about the proposal based on the material present.

So once we're going to be done with this, we're

going to move on some more specific aspects of market

economics.

And topic number two is going to be about monetary

policy tools and targets.

So quite uh timely topic.

So the topic this topic is going to basically talk

about how a central bank can achieve inflation targets, which,

you know, we have quite a lot to think about

in the last couple of years about how to do

that.

Uh, and what I'm going to try and do, I'm

going to guide you through different ways in which you

can actually achieve the same targets.

You can achieve the same outcomes.

And I'm going to try and classify them in terms

of what's the most robust approach to achieve the inflation

target that you have.

And to do that, I'm going to do a little

bit of an historical course.

I'm going to look at different monetary regimes in times,

you know, you may have heard of the gold standard,

you may have heard of, you know, the monetarist approach

to monetary policy.

So on, we're going to look east and go through

different phases of how central banks or policymakers in the

past controlled inflation.

Topic number three, we're going to look at something that

is, um, quite hot at the moment, at least when

it comes to the academic literature, which is um.

Broadly speaking heterogeneity.

So in class with Michael, you've seen the model where

all agents are the same.

They can be aggregated into single representative consumer forms on.

So we're going to depart from that benchmark, and we're

going to start looking at what happens if we have

some form of it originating in households.

Okay.

We're going to ignore alternative firms and financial intermediaries.

We're going to start by this.

Um, there's no scope to kind of there's an active

literature that actually looks at the originating firms and intermediaries

and many other actors.

We're going to start from this, which is partly the

oldest kind of tradition in their genetic process, a very

interesting one.

And again, there's going to be very clear links with

what's going on in the mind.

So you think about if I'm a house, if I'm

a homeowner and you are a renter and interest rates

go up to 5%, you know, we're going to be

affecting your borrower the same time.

So we're going to kind of depart from this very

simple benchmark model.

And we're going to allow for error.

We're going to allow for a role for financial conditions.

So we're going to use the notion that my balance

sheets may be different than yours.

And because my balance sheet is different from yours and

I'll be responding differently, monetary policy changes okay.

And finally, kind of is a nice segue from this

topic.

We're going to look at something that I call Kaizen

and Macroprudential policy.

So this is a segue in the sense that this

stems directly from the fact that there is a role

for financial conditions.

And talking about the balance sheet of households, there may

be situations in which I do not internalise what's my

what's the optimal level of borrowing that should be doing?

And if I were to borrow too much, I would

be getting closer to a situation in which I can

suffer from a shock in a way that is, I

can overreact to shock and end up being in a

crisis.

Okay, so think about the narrative about the global financial

crisis.

People leveraged up too much.

There was too much debt on household balance sheets and

bad sheets.

And then there is a larger session with very large

output costs for the last six months.

So we're going to talk about how these things can

happen and why.

And secondly, what can policy do about this, which is

what we normally refer was under the name of financial

policy.

For those of you who don't know.

Central banks.

Most central banks around the world have to deal with

both type of, um, policy issues.

So there is not just an an inflation target to

achieve, but a mandate.

For example, the Bank of England is wanting is safe

and sound financial system, which means avoid financial crisis, which

means you're going to design tools to prevent this crisis

to happen in the first place, which is one of

the major points.

Okay.

So that's basically what we're going to try to cover.

As I said, it's going to be, roughly speaking, three

weeks, two weeks, three weeks and weeks.

So ten lectures in total.

There's going to be um.

And let me get to the admin later, actually.

So I kind of covered the a little bit, um,

some things, you know, you have an asset, right?

Um, I want to start with methodology because, you know,

despite this is not a, uh, kind of applied macro

course.

We're going to look at a lot of empirical evidence,

and I want you to be able to understand this

empirical evidence, to be able to criticise it, to understand

what are the weaknesses of what is empirical evidence is

and in principle, to kind of, if anything, you know,

think about your own research ideas or you know, how,

why and where can we push this empirical evidence forward?

Okay.

Um, and as I mentioned, these tools we're going to

look at today, ah, um, I wrote here of practical

use in the real world.

Maybe that's a bit too much.

But, um, what I meant here is that if you're

gonna end up doing, uh, work in a private bank,

if you're going to end up going to central bank

or going to be in academia.

These tools we're going to be talking about are basically

everywhere are really pervasive, okay, because they're really the backbone

of most of our current academic research, which informs and

productivity in some of the, uh, private sector practices.

Lastly, I would want you to be able to do

something like this, which is for a course on monetary

economics.

Uh, and monetary policy, in a sense, can be ultimate

goal.

So what this is, is an impulse response function, which

I believe you've seen before.

That shows how a bunch of observable variables respond to

a non expected increase in the policy rate per the

Federal Reserve.

Okay, so think of this as the closest mapping between

what you've seen, what we've seen with Michael.

You had your Taylor rule in addition to the Taylor

rule.

You shot this Taylor rule.

And you saw how, uh, the endogenous variables in your

model responded to the shock.

That's basically the same thing, but from starting from observable

variables.

Okay.

So it's the data counterpart or that exercise that you've

seen.

It can okay.

And so what you have here is an impulse response

as I mentioned.

So you have different endogenous variables.

The fed funds rate which is the policy rate short

term policy rate of the fed, the measure of output

industrial action and measure of prices is the consumer politics.

The either the PCA or the consumer price inflation.

Sorry, the consumer price index and unemployment.

And on the horizontal axis you have horizons.

These are months if I remember correctly.

This is taken from a very nice paper by that

data.

And that helps and to economist the Federal Reserve Board.

And what this line is showing you is again, how

each horizon after each month, after the monetary policy shocks

it.

How does endogenous variable respond to these innovation?

We're going to be talking a lot about what does

it mean unexpectedly raise interest rates.

But that's kind of the that's what we're going to

discuss.

Right.

And as I mentioned before, I want to be able

to kind of start from Kevin.

So Kevin's was last year Stitcher.

Michaels.

Michaels.

Uh, last slides or, you know, the model that you've

seen with him and preach that material to this end

point here.

So we're going to start from the model and go

to the data okay.

And we're going to see how we can do this.

Um okay.

Enough with things.

Um, so just a couple of, uh, additional small points.

I'm going to hang around for, you know, 15 minutes

or so after the class if you have questions.

So don't feel shy.

Um, very unfortunately, I had to schedule my office hour

after the lecture.

Um, really?

Apologies for that.

I know that talking about derivatives after 7 p.m. should

be illegal, but if I just did, I had to

make it work with my maintenance of the bank.

Uh, and the way in which I was about, I

was thinking about running my office hours was to have

three 20 minute slots.

You have a link to a Google doc in here.

Just put down your name and stick around after the

class, and we'll talk about what we want to talk

about.

If this is not enough, we can always schedule additional

meetings.

Or if you have questions, just email me at my

gmail.

I think it's safer.

I don't like to see accounts, so it's safer.

I mean, I see it at some point.

You want to be more responsive on this event.

And the final thing on problem sets, there's going to

be one problem set, uh, for each topic.

And you're going to have, uh, you're going to have

to use the computer for the first one, and only

for the first one.

And for the remaining three ones, it's going to be

more traffic.

So don't be cancelling people you know often.

Yes, yes.

Very good.

Uh, he's amazing to, uh, he knows the material very

well.

So.

In general.

If you have questions, I'm going to.

So you will see there's quite a lot of material

to go through.

Um, so especially for what concerns algebra derivation questions, in

the first instance you go to one during the class.

And if there is anything that you know you can't

solve, you come back to me.

The last problem set is going to be a mock

exam.

I think you know about those things or remarks.

Uh, and that's about it.

Any questions on the structure of the course, on the

essays?

Um, well, the essays maybe we can cover.

We can cover later.

If not.

Um.

Let's jump into the material then.

Okay, so topic one.

I already mentioned that, um, sorry, there's going to be

two more intro slides.

I already mentioned what we're going to be doing.

To be more clear.

I'm going to start by showing you how to solve

linear rational expectation models.

Well, I'm going to start by showing you how you

can cast the model you've seen with Michael employed in

expectation form.

I'm going to show you how to solve these models

and maybe most importantly, how and why, how and under

which conditions.

These models have a solution.

And the solution is unit which goes by the name

of C, then we're going to reach the equation framework.

We're going to solve it.

We're going to look at it.

And then we're going to move to the kind of

more data oriented parts.

We're going to look at uh vector Autoregression var and

local projections.

How many of you have seen this before?

We have several projections.

Some.

How many?

Okay.

Um.

So these are the most.

As I mentioned before, these are the most commonly used

tools for empirical work and to bridge between data and

models.

We're going to look at some techniques for identifying monetary

policy shocks.

There are many ways of doing this.

There's a literature that started back in the early 80s.

So it's been quite a few years that people have

been doing this.

And I'm going to focus on two particular.

Approaches that are very powerful.

I would say these are state of the art approaches

when it comes to certainly central banks as well as

academia.

So these are the tools we're going to look at.

And of course there is no textbook.

Um, but I'm going to flag a few kind of

key readings as we go along.

If you find it useful, the first chapter of Walsh

is a bit a bit dated, but it's a great

kind of discursive, um, non-technical summary of what we're going

to cover in this, uh, uh, in this, in this

topic.

And maybe the key paper is going to be the

paper by Valerie Ramey in the Handbook of Macro, which

basically includes, you know, the current practices for identification of

many shocks, not just one shocks.

You know what you want if you're interested about productivity,

fiscal policy shocks and so on.

Uh, these are basically the key trends.

And when it comes to empirical methods, there's a lot

of material there.

This this book is easy to follow.

And there is there are copies online.

Anyway, you can find if you're reading this.

All right.

So finally, uh, let's jump into the material.

So I hope I got this right.

Uh, by the way, I'm going to update some annoying,

annoyingly, I guess, for you, I.

I'm going to update the slides whenever I find typos

and so on.

So this version of the slide I uploaded at 2

p.m. today.

So if you if you downloaded this before, you might

see a few times and see that it is unloaded.

For example, I realised that this was an old reference

to Kevin's discourse.

Anyway, um, so the recommendation is just, you know, if

you want to take notes on the slides, just download

them just before the class.

Um, okay.

So this is kind of what you've seen with Michael,

uh, in, uh, during winter term.

So what I have here is the equation equation model,

which is described by, uh, a Phillips curve that relates

current inflation to future inflation into the output gap, which

you've seen is a summary measure for marginal cost for

future and expected marginal cost.

I have an equation that relates current output or consumption.

Given that this is modelled consumption and the same to

future outputs, and to the difference between the real rates

in the natural rate of interest discounted by the elasticity

of intertemporal substitution.

Then you added here you define the Taylor rule that

said, that posits that the nominal interest rate set by

the central bank is going to respond to inflation to

the output gap.

And you added this, you this monetary policy shock here.

Um, so I'm going to start by actually simplifying basically

the basic model you've seen to explain and ensure these

linear models, uh, are and how they work.

And I'm going to do that by assuming that the

national interest rate is equal to zero.

Or in other words, there are no movements in the

natural labour market.

You remember that this is going to be a function

of movements in the natural level.

So I'm assuming a way if technology shocks incentives.

I'm going to assume, as I think you've done with

Michael, that the monetary policy shock follows this autoregressive process.

Where road determines the persistence of the process, and epsilon

I is the truly exogenous shock.

Okay.

And we're going to look at richer model and richer

set of shocks for later stage.

Okay.

So the first thing I want to do is to

rewrite this model in a matrix form.

And to do that what I'm going to I'm going

to define this matrix XT which stocks all the endogenous

variables of the model.

Uh, as in in this matrix here.

And then I'm going to define a uh vector epsilon

where I'm going to stack all the exogenous shocks of

the model.

We only have one exogenous shock which is the monetary

policy shock.

So here we have a bunch of zeros okay.

And then I'm going to rewrite basically the model in

a way where I have all the t plus one

variables on the left hand side of the equation one

and all the weighted t variables to the right side,

the right hand side of the equation.

Okay.

So this is absolutely trivial.

You take your equations your shuffled things.

If you the right coefficient in the right place and

you get this representation.

Okay.

Um.

Just a quick thing we're gonna assume from now on,

and this is a very common assumption that the covariance

matrix of the shocks is going to be a, an

identity matrix.

It's going to be a diagonal matrix, um, which means

that these talks are orthogonal.

And, you know, if I move this guy and these

other guys move, of course, this is kind of irrelevant

at this stage because we don't have any other shock.

But if we had additional shocks here, we would be

assuming that these shorts are orthogonal to each other.

Okay.

All right.

The first thing I want you to notice is the

difference between the first row and the other three lines.

So what you can see clearly from this side of

the equation is that the first row doesn't have an

expectation sign in front of it.

Okay.

And this is going to be a crucial aspect for

how we think about like linear models and how we

solve them.

And in particular and this is going to be a

feature a feature of virtually every model that writes, okay.

There's always going to be some variables with some expectation

in front of them in some variables.

And also the variables that don't could go under different

names depending on the setup.

Uh, they typically typically called for determined or exogenous or

in some cases state variables, while the remaining variables are

typically referred to as the for looking or jump variables.

How many of you have seen this before?

Is it completely new to everyone?

Okay.

The important thing is that the state variables are basically

those that, in the absence of exogenous shocks, are going

to go over completely the dynamics of the model.

Okay, so you just need to know what the state

variables are to form a view about what the model

will imply for an experience.

Okay in the absence of exogenous shocks.

And this leads me to write the model in what

is typically referred to as the canonical form.

And so what I've done here, I simply partitioned the

vector xt in two sub vectors vector x1 that includes

all the predetermined variables, and vector x2 that includes all

the um, jump variables.

Okay.

And you're going to see that this is going to

be a very important feature of the solution to this

model.

Okay.

Um.

Well, of course, these two matrices are 4x4 matrices with

all the coefficients okay.

Right.

So how does the solution of this model looks like?

Okay.

What we want to do is to, you know, once

we wrote the model this way we want to find

the solution to this model.

And what I mean by a solution, I mean a

solution that is a rational expectation solution that basically implies

that I can that once I know yesterday's the state

of the economy yesterday, and once I know the shocks

that hit today that I observe today, I know how

the economy is going to behave.

Okay.

This is what a rational expectation solution implies.

How many of you have seen the notion of the

concept of Russian expeditions?

Can you tell me what are the key features?

You know, this kind of Russian expedition solution looks like.

What are the implications of what actually underpins a solution

like this?

What does rational expectation is not expectation is the same

as in the last one.

The expectation is the same as in time.

Okay.

That's.

Oh, uh, are you referring to the low expectations?

No.

Can you say more?

What you mean then?

Uh, so.

So basically, like what?

How, uh, the way we form expectations about the last

one is, uh, depends only on the on value of

the variable at time t, so we have no other,

uh, variables or.

Maybe states that I think.

And why do you think put yourself in the, you

know, in the shoes of our agents and our models.

What is that these people know about the model, for

example, it's like they only have information up to 90.

So.

But they know everything, right?

So they know all these coefficients.

Right.

They know the state of the economy.

They know the structure of the economy.

They know all these coefficients.

They know the state of the economy yesterday, and they

formed expectations.

What he said was exactly right.

Meaning, when we should reform the form, expectation is unless

you receive any information today.

You know, I'm going to form expectation always in the

same way, which is based on the structure of the

economy.

But you know those coefficients that we've seen before.

Okay.

Which implies that if you ask me to forecast to

build ahead, I'm going to use exactly the same logic

and forecasts, you know, the economy based on the structure

of the economy, assuming that no shock arrives.

Okay.

There is another thing that is crucial to think about

national expectations, which is obviously these people don't know the

shock, but they know where these shocks are coming from.

They know the distribution of these shocks.

Okay.

So just keep it in mind.

You know everything.

Meaning they know all the coefficients for the structure of

the economy.

They know the distribution where the shocks are drawn from.

Okay.

And they form expectation in a consistent way.

Right.

Um, and this implies that if you ask me, was

my expectation at time t about xt plus one, then

you know my expectation.

I defined the expected value of these.

Epsilon is zero, right.

You know, that was our definition.

Here they are normally distributed, they are independent of each

other and they have zero mean.

And so my best guess for tomorrow's value of the

economy is going to be D times 16.

Okay.

Next observed situation.

Now.

In truly what's going to happen.

And you know, this is not going to be you're

not going to be able to see immediately why this

is the case, but just take it for granted that.

All rational expectation orders are going to have a solution

of this form where you can see that basically this

both this the predetermined and the jump variables are only

going to load on the state variables in the shots.

That's what I meant before.

You know, before I told you, the predetermined variables are

those that determine fully the dynamics of the moment.

That's what I meant.

The jump variables are kind of irrelevant for governing the

dynamics of the model.

Right.

And you know, during your exercises you're going to see

that this is actually the case for the basic equation

model, but also for more complicated models.

Um, and you know, even this, you can also see

that I'm going to be able to rewrite x two

as a function uniquely of x one.

Right.

Which is exactly what you've seen with Michael.

If you remember, you wrote all of your policy rules

with the solution to the model as a function of

you.

Right?

So all the variables were cast in terms of, you

know, what's the difference in terms of the U variable,

which is exactly stemming from this equation.

Um.

Okay, so let's go back to the features of, uh.

What is the features that we want?

The solution of our model.

Um, the one from our model.

The first feature that we want.

We want a single solution.

Right?

We don't want multiple solutions.

Uh, this should be relatively obvious, but if there are

multiple solutions, then we are in trouble.

Because either, uh, you may end up in one or

the other one, and you can want to know around

which equilibrium you are talking about, right?

This is kind of repeating what the rational expectation solution,

uh, features are.

We want a solution that depends on the effects of

where we were yesterday.

And so this is the state of the economy yesterday

times this D matrix which covers the transition from yesterday

to today and the shocks that hit today.

We also want to look at stable non explosive solutions.

Anyone who.

Anyone who can explain what what I meant by this.

What is bullet points in relation to what we're doing,

what we're doing here and what we've done with with

Mike.

Think about the data.

Why is that?

We don't want explosive solutions.

I think why is that problematic?

Think about GDP or the CPI.

In this these variables you have plot them on stationery

or stationery.

They go to infinity.

They shoot up or they are stable around some some

level.

Anyone?

Do you mean.

They're stationary.

Or not?

If you were to draw the level of GDP, you

know the GDP is growing at whatever in the last

30 years has been running at 2.5% per year.

It's just keeping going.

So there's a bit of a we have thing around.

We don't want unstable solutions.

But you know, the data is actually if you look

at any almost any data series is not stationary.

It's kind of explosive.

So these are important points.

So what we're doing in this course and what the

nutrition model is designed for is to look at stationary

variations and on non-stationary paths.

So that's what I mean by a potentially finding steady

state.

You should think of it of a of your steady

states as the growth rate of the economy.

So think of an economy that grows like this.

You know, you know log GDP and time equals GDP.

You've got a slope of two.

So GDP is going to percent per year.

Okay.

So these are known stable explosive pathways.

The topics, the tools that I'm going to show you

in this course are all tools that allow you to

think about fluctuations around these things.

Were completely silent about the times, okay.

And what effectively we're doing.

We're kind of shutting down the trans and we call

this a steady sales.

Right.

This makes sense intuitively.

So the reason why we don't like explosive solutions is

that, you know, I'm talking about cycles on the trends.

And if the cycle explodes then I'm basically going back

to the end.

So there is a tension.

Exactly.

We're going to be talking a lot about stability.

Um, but.

So we have nothing to say about trends.

We only have something to say about cycles around the

stands and the mathematical way to express this.

We want the limit for that goes to infinity of

d at the power of n to go to zero.

So this is simply, you know, uh, if you have

mind, an autoregressive of process, more than one, you know,

a simple one process, you want it to be smaller

to one.

Otherwise, if it is, this process is going to explode

to infinity.

Basically this, this, this is the same condition but in

the matrix form.

Okay.

Is that clear?

Um, and this points to the point that I think

humaines, which is.

The last thing I want from my solution is that

there is there is new information today.

My forecast for tomorrow is unchanged.

Okay, so this is what we normally call the low

expectations.

And it simply says that, you know, my expectation in

t minus one for x t plus one.

If I know nothing about the shocks that hits in

D minus one t of the plus one is going

to be fully changed.

Okay.

So.

There is a subtle kind of.

Implication of the low expectations, which is that we want

to rule out the possibility that expectations and sales drive

cycles or drive fluctuations in the economy.

What I mean by that.

I want to I'm trying to rule out basically animal

spirits or bubbles.

Okay.

So I want to avoid that.

If you by any chance think that in ten years

from now, inflation is going to be 10%.

These guys are fulfilled and realised.

Okay, so the low expectations in a way that we're

going to see in a few slides is gonna basically

kill the possibility of bubbles in one place, together with

the other features that we just described.

Okay.

So we're going to be more precise about this.

Um.

Okay.

So we basically said we have a model.

We wrote we cast our model in our canonical representation.

We know what the state variable is.

We know what we are.

We know that the solution we want the solution to

this form.

By the way, um, you know that this is going

to be a solution, a valid solution to this model.

If you plug back the solution itself in the model

here, you should get back the solution itself.

You can do it by yourself.

So the definition of a solution is that if I

take this and I plug it back into my model,

I get back the solution.

So this is trivial.

You're gonna you're gonna say yes.

So we know that we want something that looks like

this.

We know the model.

Now the question is.

When does the solution exist and when does the solution?

Is unique.

And I'm going to refer to a classic paper by

Olivier Blanchard and can which in the 80s kind of

proposed a very, um, simple effectively counting rule to work

out the solutions of our, of our DSG or model.

And this counting rule is extremely simple, especially if you

have a tiny computer and it works the following way.

You need to consider this matrix, which is inverse five

one times five zero.

Remember these are two 4x4 matrices of non coefficients.

Right.

Because the stuff that enters here like the discount factor

uh the autoregressive process to model policy, the stiffness.

So we can compute this.

We can compute this object here.

Then define by m bar the number of uh eigenvalues

of this 4x4 matrix that are inside the units.

And below one.

By counting this number of values that are below one,

we're going to know exactly in which of these two

cases are going to be.

Now three cases for our model.

We have one case in which we're going to have

a unique, stable solution, and all other solutions are going

to be unstable.

Since we wanted, you know, one of our feature is

that we want a single stable solution, then we know

that this is the solution of our mode.

If instead and this happens, if the number of eigenvalues

within the units here is equal to the number of

the state variables, remember x one is the vector that

contains the state variables.

In our case, it's only the variable u, so it's

length one.

With this matrix only has one eigenvalue below one.

Then we have done.

We found our unique solution and.

And we are in the place.

If you set the number of eigenvalues below one is

less than the length of the state variables in our

case.

Now a simple example.

If we are to find no eigenvalue below one, then

there wouldn't be any solution that there is an explosion.

So all the solution will be explosive and we are

in trouble because we don't like that.

Why is the number of eigenvalues below one exceeds the

number of state variables?

Then we're going to have a another tricky situation, which

is we're going to have multiple stable solutions.

And these are what's going, you know, went back to

what I was saying before.

We kind of don't like it because it gives rise

to what economists typically call sunspots, which means that if

you are in x0 in some initial condition and there's

a shock, you may end up going to a different

equilibrium rather than returning back to the previous one.

And, you know, think about any applied, uh, you know,

question that you might have or that the governor comes

to me and says, you know, can you work out

if there's a shock where we're going to go?

And if I don't know that I shocking my variable,

I end up in a different place and.

Okay.

Um, so we said that, you know, in our example,

we want embodied to be equal to one.

So you can look at the paper if you if

you want to know what the mechanics or the algebra

of disease is, a very simple paper, it's like nine

pages.

It's really classic.

So it's highly recommended but definitely not needed.

I'm not going to test you on, uh, on why

and how you get to these conditions, but I want

you to remember that these are three possibilities.

And these three possibilities depend on the number of eigenvalues

within the unit circle of this matrix, and how they

relate to the number of state variables.

All right.

Um.

Okay.

It's been it's been quite dry exposition so far.

Let me try and make it a bit more intuitive,

maybe with the simple examples.

So what I've done here, as I mentioned at the

very beginning, was start by simplifying the model by mixing

with Michael and what I've done here.

I basically killed the monetary policy rule.

I kept the inflation, the Phillips curve, as you've seen

it.

And I simplified a yes curve.

Well, now they ask or simply depends on past values

and on a curve shop we don't know much about

what it is.

Okay.

So imagine that this is the true structure of the

economy for whatever reason that you derived it this way.

Um.

Anyone can tell me what the state if there are

state jump and so on and what they are.

What's the big.

The classic representation is on the.

Remember we said the state variables are those who don't

have an expectation sign in front of them.

How VAT is the state variable?

Because you can determine everything else by in terms of.

There is no expectation of future realisation of it.

So this variable has to be the state variable.

Well this guy, if I put this on the left

hand side of the equation, it's going to be there's

going to be an expectation about pi plus one which

depends on white on t and on the shocks potentially.

Okay.

Now it is actually going to be part of your

exercise.

Um, but the model is so simple that we don't

need a planner.

We don't need a classical representation of the model.

We can just, you know, think through the logic of

how this model is going to work.

Okay.

So what I've done here, I simply plug the definition

of the output gap into the code.

And I started iterating forward this equation.

Right.

This is very simple algebra.

Simply you put this guy in here and then you

define the plus one as beta pi three plus two.

And you just keep on writing.

And that's the expression you get.

Okay.

Now this expression, if I take the limit of k

that goes to infinity, he's going to converge to this

expression okay.

Under one condition, which is this geometric progression.

You should be familiar with.

This number is smaller than one.

Then this thing is going to converge to this guy.

And here I have the limits of this thing here

okay.

So now we can inspect this expression and basically work

out what the conditions are.

Remember we want a solution that is stable.

We want a solution that has no role for future

expectation to affect the solution of our model okay.

So to get stability from this equation we need the

product of these two guys to be smaller than one.

To get stability from this equation we want rho smaller

than one.

And to get the expectation of inflation in 100 years

from now mattering for today's inflation.

We want this beta to be smaller than one.

Because if this is the case, then this limit goes

to zero.

Okay.

So effectively we want beta smaller than one and smaller

than one.

Which also implies that this guy is more than one.

Then we get a stable solution with no role for

future expectation environments.

Okay.

And it should be very, very easy to cast this

model into in the classical representation form.

Work out the conditions.

And you get your two by two matrix.

In this case you work out the eigenvalues.

And you can actually verify that the case in which

you only get a unique stable solution is a case

where beta smaller than one and rho smaller to one.

Okay.

This is very, very one.

Um.

So if this is the case, then under.

Under these two restrictions on the parameters of the model

then this goes away.

This converges to this guy converges to this guy.

And I can write my solution in this way.

And as I said before you can check the this

solution.

Because if I take this definition, which is the solution

of my model, and I plug it back into.

The bracket back into the model itself.

I.e. here and here, you come back, you get back

the solution.

You get back exactly the solution here.

So there is a script f here because this is

a forward solution.

You know we got the solution by iterating forward the

model.

And this is simply saying that inflation is equal to

the future expectation of marginal cost as captured by the

output.

Exactly as you've seen in Kevin's micro speak of the

course.

However, if you rearrange the Phillips curve.

Basically I took this equation.

I liked it by one period, okay, and I flipped.

I divided everything by beta.

You can get a backward looking solution.

Okay, so this is an absolutely valid solution to the

model.

Again you can check this plug this back into the

model.

And you're going to see that.

You're going to find exactly this expression here.

And on top of it you can actually verify that

any convex combination or linear combination for giving psi.

Of the backward looking and forward looking solution is going

to be a solution to the model.

And you can try this.

You know, by quite simply you pick your number for

X, I you write down a solution that is a

linear combination of these two solutions.

You plug it back into the model and you'll see

you're going to find exactly the solution here.

And this is quite disturbing isn't it.

Because you know we're basically just we basically just said

that there are infinite solutions to our this, you know,

in principle.

Okay.

So what is basically what is Blanchard kind of doing

for you is kind of rolling out alternative solution.

Think about what we've done.

We assume that beta is smaller than one.

And in this context, what does beta smaller than one

means or the properties of this solution here, anyone who

can see this.

But if we combine it with rho less than one,

that is why we have the convex.

The convex thing holding.

So again, because beta is less than one and no.

Holds for beta.

Okay, I thought because we had two restrictions that were

less than one and only one state variable, we have

infinite solutions.

This is the.

Property that holds for any linear rational expectation model.

You always have a backward and backward solution and a

forward solution.

Okay.

And any linear combination of these two solutions is going

to be a solution.

Now whether this is going to be the unique stable

solution or this one, it depends on what assuming the

parameter values.

Okay.

Now we just went through some reasoning that to get

the forward looking solution being stable.

And not explosive.

We want beta smaller than one.

If I assume we are smaller than one, what are

these?

Does this imply for this solution?

Look at this.

It is plausible.

This is an auto regressive process.

This number is greater than one.

If I compound this thing, it's going to explode.

And so which basically rule by assuming we are smaller

than one, or by restricting the parameter to be smaller

than one, we basically just ruled out the backward looking

solution, which means that there is zero weight.

This is not a solution anymore.

So yes, this is the backward looking.

So this thing goes away.

So the only stable unique solution is the forward looking

one right.

So I basically run through the logic of construction in

this super simple setup where you can basically work on

things by just inspection.

You can just look at these solutions and work it

out.

Russia is basically doing this for you.

Right?

And so just to give you a bit more intuition

on why you want to roll out the backward looking

solution.

So the backward looking solution from an economic point of

view is, is not what our firms are doing.

Right.

You know, our if you remember the pricing problem of

the firms, they were just, you know, sitting down thinking

about the future expected some of marginal cost.

They were, you know, optimising about future expectations.

And there's nothing backward looking about.

Okay.

So the backward looking is not the solution of the

model.

It's not the economically intuitive solution model.

If you want to think about it from a mathematical

point of view, if you have a forward looking solution

that implies something like of this kind, which is going

to happen for any forward looking solution, we said we

don't want future expectations to be driving current values of

variables.

I want your expectation of inflation in ten years from

now, or the marginal cost to generate a spike in

inflation today.

Okay.

And so mathematically, when this beta to kind of shut

down these expectations okay.

Um.

When we have multiple stable solutions.

It's Reiki, as I mentioned.

You know, you take care.

You need to you know, you need to inspect the

solutions and work out what is the one that you

don't like.

And so that's generally why you don't want to be

in this case.

And I mentioned already that we want to roll out

bubbles.

Um, maybe if Covid bubbles quickly and then, you know,

then I can move on.

So this is another way to think about, you know,

the.

How rational expectations work in a sense.

Okay.

So what I'm going to do I'm going to define

a bubble tea as this.

Okay.

So this is my definition of a bubble.

The bubble is something that depends on my expectation about

the bubble tomorrow discounted by me right.

So is a process that has no fundamental, has no

link with fundamental forces in the economy whatsoever.

Okay.

Just it just depends on my expectation about its own,

its own set.

And so I can, you know, as usual I can

iterate this forward.

I can get this expression which says that the bubble

at time t is simply going to be equal to,

uh, the limit of beta power of S or the

expectation of the bubble.

Okay.

Now it turns out and again, you can check it

if you don't believe me, that this is also a

solution for.

So if I pause it, then my solution is going

to be equal to some linear combination of the backward

looking solution, the forward looking solution plus the bubble.

I stick this back into my model, I do the

algebra and I get back the solution here, which is

kind of violating what we want from our model solution.

We just said we don't want expectations of future stuff

that in this case even have even nothing to do

with real things like marginal costs or productivity to affecting

the model solution.

And so this actually I worked out in this example

how we can get back to the original one, the

original positive solution.

And the cool thing about, you know, again, in our

simple model, by looking at the unique solution is that

it's also not about Y, because we assume that beta

is more than one.

By assuming beta smaller than one, it means that this

limit is going to go to zero.

So even if you were to believe the equation in

100 to now it's 100% the beta smaller than one,

and it's no role for this future.

Expectation comes back to these comments.

Okay.

Um.

Okay.

Let me just do this slide and then we'll break.

So.

Uh, I mentioned already that you've seen you solved this

very model.

Well, the equation diffusion model with a Gaussian refinement approach.

Uh, I mentioned already, this works very well.

And it's a very powerful tool for simple models.

But for more complicated models, you're going to be in

trouble maybe two times a year.

Uh, typically when you go to bigger models, you need

the computer and you need something that's not so much

expensive paper.

You need some computational tools.

Okay.

There are many, um, many algorithms available to do that.

Um.

So back in the day, maybe with my age, but,

you know, back in the day, you actually would have

to cast the model in this article for my action.

So you have to sit down, start thinking about what

is it, John Viterbi what is the state variable?

You have to write down your x1 vector x two

vector.

And um, and I'm going to show you what it's

going to be.

Maybe uh forward.

That is not easy to do this.

You know, when the model becomes very complicated, it's really

not obvious anymore.

What is the state five over five or so on?

Um, but luckily for you guys, this is not a

problem anymore because not more than packages.

Uh, for those of you who are familiar with Dyna,

basically do the job for you, which means you just

write down your model as well, and these softwares automatically

are able to recognise what is jump, what is forward

looking.

Uh, sorry to jump over the state and um and

solving the model.

The downside is usually with discount rules is that you

have no idea what's going on.

Um, and if something, especially if something was wrong, you

have no idea what the science was.

I don't know how many of you have used Linux.

Nobody.

Anybody use the zoom?

Um, so the most likely thing that's going to happen

when you're going to be using that now is that

you write down your model, you press F5 in Matlab,

and you get a big error message and writes a

bunch of transmission line size wise.

So that's why they designed pages to be actually useful.

Um, and if you're interested in how to get there,

or at least having an intuition for what does it

mean because it's going to tell you the condition.

Not satisfied.

There are too many eigenvalues above the example of the

outside the user.

It's you kind of know where you are and you

can start, you know, thinking about what's going wrong.

Yet the black box or you know, you need to

be able to kind of dig into this cause and

work it out.

So what I want to do next is to teach

you a very simple approach.

That has the benefit of doing so once needs to

define what is jump and what states.

But he's way more powerful than doing okay.

And so I think this kind of is useful for

you can play out a little bit with this.

Because if you're ever going to work often with new

models and they're not, it's a tool that you at

least helped me a lot when I was like, struggling

to get unique solutions or stable solutions in my model

to spot errors and to understand basically what was going

on.

And then I would go back to just a little

more efficiently.

Right.

Um, let's bake for five minutes.

We'll be back at, uh.

Uh.

Oh.

Yeah.

Yeah, yeah.

Oh, yeah.

Thank you.

For that.

Yeah.

Okay.

They are very nice.

Very nice.

My brother.

Listen to me.

On.

Wednesday.

It's actually.

It's, uh.

Would you be happy to do it?

Yeah.

So, um.

Once.

I look around, I will send you something else.

Yeah.

Uh.

Yeah.

It's the only thing I can ask.

Definitely.

Yeah.

No, no.

Well.

I mean.

Yeah.

I guess it doesn't count towards extended.

Oh, yeah.

I mean, that's what I.

Yeah, I guess.

Just.

And, um.

But I was with.

You know, everything when we were doing this count as

a project proposal.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So.

She liked it.

Yeah.

Well, she's like, um.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah yeah yeah, yeah.

Yeah.

I mean, I.

I just.

I.

I won't.

Be playing.

One.

Minute.

Because all this in the.

Morning.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But how did I get it?

What are you.

Watching.

What is.

What will be the likely.

What?

Assumptions.

Whatever.

What?

What?

Central limit.

So I don't know, I just, I just I don't

know, I think people are saying I think.

Department.

It's.

Not like 6000 words.

Yeah.

Right.

Right right.

By all means, I.

I will Mark.

My comments.

I mean.

I think I am all right.

He was like, oh.

Oh.

So yeah, I think.

Uh.

Yeah.

Of course.

Uh, yeah.

Yeah, boy.

So I got to.

Ask Marcus.

Wow.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

It's not.

It's definitely not racist.

Because, honestly.

The first two.

Words are the only thing that really matters.

But like.

It just.

Never.

Was.

I don't know.

What it.

Was.

I thought.

It was such a.

That's a fun way of, uh.

It's not as simple as in a second.

It's like seven months before you can get back to

it.

No worries.

All right.

Uh, that's something that.

We're going to.

Delve into matrices.

Uh.

Very exciting.

I hope not too many of you are going to

fall asleep.

Um.

Okay, so I told you, we're going to look at

a way to solve these models.

So we're going to basically get our DS and our

BS.

Okay.

So we did all of this kind of, uh, discussion

about what kind of features this should have, you know,

when is unique and blah, blah, blah.

So now we're going to get those numbers out of

a very simple configuration.

Before proceeding, however, uh, some of you may have noticed

maybe you shy, um, some of you may have noticed

that our phi1 matrix that was needed to compute the

conditions is actually not invertible.

Okay.

Remember, we need to compute pi one inverse pi zero.

But I can't recall this matrix.

And the reason why I can inverted matrix is that

there is a column or zeros, which means that these

other um, columns and rows of this matrix are linear

combination of another matrix, which means that this matrix is

not single.

So.

There is a problem.

So there is a problem obviously that, you know, we

can compute the financial contributions, but there's also a solution

to this problem that requires again you know, when something's

working with things, you know, you have to do a

lot of this stuff.

You know, there is a way in which you can

solve this by simply saying, realising that, you know, the

quality aid is going to be used in this equation

in the differential model.

Right.

And we've seen it because, you know, there are zero

everywhere.

All these zeros imply that our policy rule is kind

of irrelevant.

And if I were to plug the policy rule inside

of the curve, which is what I've done here, so

I just substituted away I for the policy rule.

Now I have a model with three equations rather than

four.

And I got rid of one.

And it turns out that if I do this I

can actually get a phi one that is now invertible.

So back in the day, you have to spend a

lot of time thinking about, oh, how do I write

down the model.

Is it in the right form?

Is this matrix invertible or not.

And so on.

And again nowadays is much easier.

And the method that we're going to see is not

going to require you, but it's going to be much

more robust to singularities as we've seen in this in

this matrix.

So the way in which we're going to do things

now is in a slightly different way.

So we're going to rewrite our model in this form

which now has XT on the left hand side.

So the contemporaneous values of the variables on the left

hand side.

And we're going to say that XT depends on future

and past values of the endogenous variables.

These upsides these are not Phi's.

So these matrices are different from the previous ones okay.

And just for completeness I wrote down what these matrices

are.

Again this is absolutely trivial.

You take your model equations that you plug things in

the right place and you write a model.

Can anyone tell me why the setup is less restrictive

on singularities?

Why do you think the way in which I wrote

these, these models, is going to be more robust to

the problem of inverting a matrix?

Do you want some sports?

Some feature on these matrices and methods that makes it

more robust.

So.

We're going to need to invert this matrix now.

Right.

This is what we have on the left hand side

of the question.

This matrix the matrix on contemporaneous values, contemporaneous values means

that this diagonal here will always be diagonal ones.

Because we're simply saying that, you know, if there is

an intelligence variables, it has it has to be contemporaneous.

And he comes out.

You know, for those of you who are familiar with

algebra, is that if you have a row, if you

have a diagonal of ones, the likelihood of having a

non invertible matrix is much, much, much smaller.

It's very hard to find matrices of this kind that

are not invertible.

So we already kind of if we manage to find

a solution to these these problems we already solved like

a big problem, which was instead in the previous case,

quite frequent and quite pervasive in any model.

So that's kind of the mathematical intuition for why this

setup is more robust to, uh, singularities.

Okay.

So recall that we have our rational expectation solutions x

t equal d x minus one b problem.

So what I'm going to use I'm going to use

the definition of the rational expectation solution.

Well the definition of rational expectations which is my expectation

about x t plus one we already discussed is going

to be today's state of the economy times D.

My expectation about the shock in T plus one is

zero.

So there's nothing else.

And so I can simply substitute for x t plus

one here with d x t right.

And if you look at this equation now you can

see that you can gather terms.

Right.

You know this I have x t on both sides.

So I'm going to bring these on these sides I'm

going to collect terms.

I'm going to invert these.

Collect the terms.

And I have something that resembles my positive solution.

The series.

I mean, it should be.

It should be trailer basically.

But you know, you have Phi zero minus 51D on

this side of the equation.

Multiply everything by the inverse of this guy.

And you get something that says that XT is going

to be equal to this guy multiplied by what I

inverted.

Plus the inverted stuff times the shock.

And this thing looks very much like my positive solution.

So if this is the solution, then it has to

be the case that D is going to be equal

to the inverted stuff times five minus one.

Because this is what multiplies XT minus one.

You can see it.

It's very intuitive algebra.

It's very, very intuitive stuff.

You know, if you if you do what I, what

I said, you know, you bring this thing on the

side, you collect terms in words.

You get an expression that resembles like this.

The only thing I said is that these has to

be equal to the term that multiplies xt minus one.

Okay.

And the same is true for me.

Anyone who's not clear on this.

Now, if you stare at this equation.

Then you can see that this is simply a quadratic

equation.

Indeed.

Right.

So the only thing I don't know is the but

everything is in in terms of de.

So I have a square linear term and a constant.

And so this is simply just a quadratic equation in

matrix form is nothing different from a.

It is just these.

If these were scalar you would solve this in a

second.

These are matrices.

It's not as easy.

But in principle you know we're going to need a

computer, but it's in principle compatible with the computer.

But in principle we know how to solve this.

It's a it's approachable as a program.

And once we find D, then we know that B

is just a function of D and known stuff.

Remember the size we know, right?

These are the parameters of the economy.

Then we also found B.

Is it clear.

Now the question is how do we find how we

solve this equation.

Given that solving a quadratic equation in matrix in the

matrix form is potentially not the easiest thing you could

do with pencil and paper.

But again, if the model becomes bigger then you're wrong.

So the algorithm I'm going to show you is actually

a very powerful and super simple way to solve this

quadratic equation.

Okay.

Or in other words to get the D matrix.

And the way it works is the following.

You're going to basically iterate over.

Guesses on the 2D matrix.

We are going to converge to the two one.

Let me explain what I mean by that.

You're going to start by guessing your initial value for

D, okay.

Which you make up.

And I'm going to suggest for reason that I'm going

to be clear in a second.

You start from zero a matrix of zeros.

That is you update this formula and you say that

DD1 is going to be equal to your guessed value

times this bunch of parameters that we know.

You're going to get a number.

And then you're going to keep on doing this until

the day that you guessed is going to be to

the that comes out of this performance.

So it's absolutely, you know, you can you can write

this down in three lines of code.

Right.

Just keep on computing, nothing more.

As simple as a product of matrices.

And of course you will need to specify some level

of tolerance.

You know there is a computational method right.

So at some point you will need the computer to

stop searching for this guy.

This guy let's say one over -5 or 10 at

once.

And at some point the algorithm is going to converge.

If there are no singularities involved in this inversion here

at any step of the iteration.

So if you need 1000 iterations to converge, you can't

get any singularity in those 1000 matrix products that are

going to do.

But we said already that, you know, because side zero,

size zero is of this form with the diagonal ones,

singularities are much less likely to emerge in this case.

Okay.

Now let's call the solution S2.

Obviously this is a quadratic equation.

So there's going to be two solutions.

Okay.

And so let's call this solution S1.

How do we find the second solution.

We're going to invert the quadratic matrix equation that we

had before.

By multiplying everything by d minus the power of minus

two.

We're going to get a new expression for this.

Uh.

Uh, for this d and we're going to run exactly

the same iteration procedure.

Little confused.

The only thing I've done is to multiply this by

d minus two.

Okay.

And now you get a new formula for D.

Okay is again something that looks very similar, these equal

to a bunch of stuff times you can rerun exactly

the same.

I'm wearing them.

And what they're going to converge to is the inverse

of the second solution.

Okay.

All of this is taken from a very nice paper

by Randall, which we can look at.

You don't need to look at.

I'm not going to ask you any kind of.

Why you can do, you know.

I'm not gonna ask about the derivations about this thing,

but I want to remember how the method works.

Okay.

And why it is an interesting one.

So we now found our solutions.

We.

We found S1 and S2.

So these are two matrices that are a solution or

a transportation solution.

Right.

Because they are in the uh they have the d

bits of our solution.

And let me also denote with the lambda S1 or

lambda S2 the set of eigenvalues corresponding to these two

distributions.

Now, what Pontus shows in his paper is that if

S1 and S2 are non-singular, then it turns out that

this condition holds, which simply means that S2, which is

our first solution, contains the smallest eigenvalues.

Out of the two solutions.

And just take these as, you know, as facts.

If you want to see why you need to go

to the paper.

If not, just ask me.

Okay.

Why is this important?

Because it's basically going to allow us to link back

directly to.

Right.

Because if I then compute the eigenvalues of S1 and

the values of this tool, and I look at the

minimum eigenvalue of one of the two S-matrix matrices, I

can basically, of course there is no need to prove

this stuff.

I can basically go back to the three cases by

simply looking at either the maximum eigenvalue of this tool

or the minimum eigenvalue of S1.

You can see this is going to you know, I'm

not going to go through these three cases, but this

is kind of obvious, you know, and it should be

obvious that there is a 1 to 1 mapping between

the conditions in relaxation and the conditions that are going

to come out of this.

So why is this cool?

Because basically we saw the model.

We got our G.

I remember once you get D you get also be

right.

So we have our expectation solutions all of them.

We didn't need to to specify any predetermined or for

looking variables.

We didn't suffer from singularities.

And we also computed the blusher and conditions at the

same time in one go.

Once you compute this thing, you know you can compute

the eigenvalues of these solutions.

And by just using these three conditions, you can work

out in which of the three cases.

Which is going to help you seeing if your solution,

you know you are in the good case of a

unique, stable solution, or you are in the case of

multiple stable solution or unstable solutions.

Right.

In which case then you go back to your model

and you think about, okay, what caused the financial condition

to fail.

And so you go back to your model and say,

oh, maybe I have a beta bit too high.

Or maybe, you know, this parameter is screwing this model

this way and so on.

Okay.

So it's a it's a fantastic it's a very powerful

tool to kind of do cross checking on what's going

on in your model.

If you ever get problems with AI, which we really

don't need, and the reason to be 100% sure.

This is going to help your models and is super,

super easy.

As I said.

You know, for those of you who own stuff before.

He's literally following the code.

Okay.

But just to give you an idea of how this

works in practice, I, um.

I've taken from the paper this very nice example.

So now instead of doing a skip and matrix work

when a scalar work.

So this is now a quadratic equation in scalar.

So you can solve this paper very easily.

But I want to show you what's the intuition behind

this iteration and why it works.

Okay.

So what I have here is d n plus one.

So this is the sorry let me start with this

one.

What you have here is your guess okay.

Imagine you are at zero and zero.

So you have to start your, you know, your solution.

You wrote down your matrices and blah blah, blah.

You say, well, my solution is going to be a

bunch of zeros.

So you start from your guess of zero matrix.

Then you use the formula I gave you and you

compute the one.

This is the 45 degree line, which means that if

you happen to be on the 45 degree line, the

one is equal to zero, is equal to the one.

And you're done.

You're finished.

Okay.

It means the difference between the two is zero.

Most likely are going to be some somewhere here or

somewhere here okay.

But the model is basically doing is that if you

start with the iteration procedure, if you start from here,

you're slowly going to converge to the stable solution.

If you start too high, you're simply going to explode

to infinity.

And so the model is not going to converge.

So you're going to wait one night in front of

Matlab that tells you eventually that you, your you started

your guess too high.

Which is why I recommend to start from zero, because

if you start from zero you, there is no risk

that you're going to shoot up to infinity if there

is a unique solution in stable solution.

And secondly, if you start from a random number, it

could maybe maybe it is just more of a philosophical

thing.

You know, it's not going to happen.

But if you were to guess exactly the unstable solution.

The stable solution is a solution, meaning that if you

start from here, you're going to stay here, right?

This is the phase diagram okay.

So if by chance I land with my guess exactly

on the unstable solution, I'm not going to move.

Matlab is going to tell me oh you know you're

done.

Okay.

So you want to start from zero and just let

this work.

What is this.

This is the inverse of the unstable solution.

The second solution.

And it works exactly same way.

Okay.

So that's the second loop that you have to write.

And this is simply showing that you know the unstable

solution.

You're going to converge to its inverse which is going

to be stable.

Okay.

Good.

Um.

Now very quickly on.

As I said, this approach is very robust singularities.

But it could be sometimes that you're going to find

a singularity in this process of iteration.

And by inverting matrices.

And again in the paper there is a very neat

solution to this problem.

Again I don't want to understand why this is holding.

You can look at the paper if you want to.

It's just to tell you this purely from practical purposes.

If you're ever going to find a singularity program and

you know you're going to get an error from this

matrix, you can do this, which is you're going to

specify an arbitrarily small mu, okay.

And then you can rewrite your five minus one five

zero and five one.

I've put some hats here because these are different from

the true ones.

Where you introduce this mu, and then you're going to

solve the model with the same equations that I've shown

you before using these hats.

Now you think about what a singularity is.

Think about it in a scalar word.

You're dividing by zero basically.

Okay.

So if you add a little number you're not dividing

by zero anymore.

So you avoid a singularity.

That's intuition okay.

Which means that now the algorithm is going to converge

but it's going to converge not to the true solution

because we are just we tweaked these matrices.

We're converging something different.

But we know what that's something different is.

Is this guy we're going to converge to?

S two plus mu.

So to recover the true solution, you just subtract you

from the solution that you find.

Okay.

And on top of it, if mu is sufficiently small,

you can actually look at the eigenvalues of the wrong

matrices by wrong matrices.

I mean, this guy here is someone's tool to inspect

the you know, where you are in terms of the

calculations.

You have began thinking about what is going on in

your mind.

Okay.

Um.

But.

So that's it.

I mean, you know how we can solve this model.

Now we can move to a more complicated setup for

our inflation mechanism model.

As I mentioned before, we're going to reach the model

with some additional features.

Is everything clear up up to now?

So just to somehow we posited a rational expectation solution

that is fully consistent with what you see with Michael.

We define under which condition the solution is.

A good one is unique and disabled, and is helping

us with that.

And we've also seen how to get the D's and

the B's right.

And by the way, if you were to do.

These whatever these approach using the three equation equation model

that you've done with Michael, you're going to get exactly.

The coefficients you've got in front of you that you

found within the training completions.

Okay, so this is just a numerical, more general approach

to solve the model that is much more robust than

the old way of doing things.

Um, we have tried the model in the county court.

Okay.

So now that we know how to do things.

We can go to more complicated setups, and the way

we are going to do it is.

He's, um, at least going to motivate why?

We need a more complicated setup by comparing the equation

model to, um, the data.

So as you probably I don't have it here.

But if you remember the response that I've shown you

in the very beginning of, of the lecture with, uh,

innovation, uh, employment in laser production.

So in response to the monetary policy shock, you remember

that these these were very smooth and kind of hump

shaped responses to the shock.

Okay.

And this is a typical feature of macro data.

So things you know that really move the underlying jump.

They tend to kind of slowly move up, reach a

peak at some point and then go back to steady

state.

And if you remember the impulse responses that we've seen

with Michael, we would remember that stuff would look completely

different, right?

You know, it'd be something like a jump here and

then you slowly go back to steady state.

So you try to imagine how, you know, what's the

fit of your model with the impulse response that I've

shown you from empirical and empirical model, the fit is

very poor and it's very poor in many, many dimensions.

And so basically the main point I want to make

is that it's very hard for a model that is

purely forward looking, like you can draw a model to

match an empirical evidence.

In addition, you probably kind of probably know this because

you observe what central banks are doing around the world.

You know, you don't see interest rates going from 0%

to 3% from one meeting to the other one, and

then back to zero and then up to 5%.

And, you know, there is some that are kind of

cycles.

People talk about market cycles.

And you can rationalise this in many ways.

Uh, but typically there is some benefit in having some

smoothness in how you implement your policies.

Okay.

And this is completely absent in the model that you've

seen because the interest rate would jump up.

You know, if there is a big, you know, shock

in monetary policy of interest rates by 5%.

And there's nothing that prevents that.

Okay.

This is really not in line with what we see

in the data.

So before we try to kind of, you know, as

I mentioned before, the goal of this lecture is to

kind of bring that model to to the data.

But before doing that, so we need to add a

few more features.

So the spirit of what I'm going to do in

the next few slides is really to show you a

few bells and whistles that we typically add to our

models to make them more realistic.

I'm not expecting you to.

Remember how to get the equations I'm going to show

you.

But I would want I would like you to remember

what are these things doing?

What are these ingredients doing to the basic management model

you've seen?

Okay.

So the first thing I'm going to do I'm going

to add what we call consumption habits.

So what this thing is.

Doing is basically I'm going to add a term to

my utility function that introduces some notion of past consumption.

In my utility function.

In other words, you think of it as if I

see you all consuming a lot yesterday.

I also want to mention a lot.

You know, we are kind of we are having some

creational habits in the sense that we we want to.

Stick to our assumptions.

We really don't like to change.

You know, big changes in our consumption bundle.

No, this is very different from consumption smoothing.

Right.

You know, we're not talking about in response to a

shock.

I want, you know, to be, you know, balance out

how much you consume today and how much in the

future is really about preferences.

And so if yesterday I saw you consuming a lot,

my, my utility goes down, which means my marginal utility

goes up and so on, the consumer and this is

going to generate some persistence in, in the model.

Um, in this particular definition of habits, which is called

external habits because this is the consumption the aggregate consumption

economy.

So I'm, I'm, I'm a household, I'm optimising I see

aggregate consumption yesterday and I say what I want to

do, you know, I'm jealous.

I want to consume a bit more uh, as well.

And so you can basically take this KT minus one

when you optimise as a uh, you're not going to

take derivatives of this variable because it's an aggregate variable

you have no decision on.

Which means that when you write the equation this h

is going to show up exactly this.

So this is the simplest form of of habits because

it doesn't imply it implies a very has very minor

implications for the derivation of the.

On the other question.

So this is the other question that you get once

you specify preferences this way.

And once you have the other equation, you're going to

get a new curve.

Again, you don't need to know how to do this.

You should be able to know how to do this

because this is simply going through the same algebra you've

done for Michael, but adding or changing basically slightly the

utility function.

The newest curve you're going to get is something that

looks like this.

And you can immediately see that there are a few

additional terms.

The first one is this one, which is a term

that is smaller than one.

And so what this is doing is dampening the substitution

effects from changes in policy rates.

So when you change a model, you know if there

is an increase in the rates, let's say because the

monetary policy makers decided to jack up interest rates, you're

going to reduce consumption with an elasticity of sigma which

is greater than elasticity substitution.

Right.

Let's assume this number is whatever 0.3.

You know, for a 1% increase.

I'm going to reduce my consumption by going through this

thing in front of sigma simply implies that you're going

to dampen that effect.

So in other words the impact effect of the shock

is going to be smaller.

Right in the limit in which, you know this number

is close to one.

I don't get to responding at all on top of

it.

Uh, on top of it, I'm going to introduce some

backward looking miss in my equation.

Okay.

So now it depends on what you minus one.

And so this is going to generate.

It's going to help us generate some shape.

So this is the second feature I'm going to add

is what we call price indexation.

Again this is very intuitive.

There's a lot of tedious algebra.

We have to be stage as tedious as the one

that you've done for Michael to derive the optimal pricing

decision of firms.

Here the key ingredient is that I'm going to assume

that if I'm lucky, firm that can access prices, at

least I can adjust my prices consistent with what past

aggregate inflation has been.

There's actually quite a realistic feature, you know, think about

what happened in the last few years.

You know, imagine um, so many for wages haven't seen

wage setup processes but, um, problems.

But you know, I can simply say, well, inflation was

3%.

I'm going to update my prices by 3%.

This parameter omega governs how much of this 3% is

embedded into your prices.

So now there's going to be two types the optimal

price setters that take into account all the shocks and

problems you've seen.

And these guys who have mechanical rule right now, you

do all the tedious algebra that you've done and you

get to these, um, uh, re optimising, uh, objectives of

the quantity of the firm, which you can then log

linearise and get to this, this Phillips curve, which is

very similar to the one that you've seen before with

the difference that now past inflation is going to show

up in, uh, in the field.

So again.

We gave the.

Model some chance to match these kind of slow moving

things and to very simple systems.

Now, these are actually quite a lot of implications for

the new control model.

It's going to change the labour and labour markets to

change the definition of the natural rights definition.

The equilibrium mark-up level is going to change.

Um marginal cost definition.

Marginal cost.

I've put here in a slide what we've done in

the whole of topic three last last term.

But you know, again you just I just want you

to get intuition of what I've done.

I don't expect you to be replicating this kind of

algebra.

If you want to do it.

Of course.

Um, maybe the one thing to stress here is that

this definition of marginal cost, if you remember, you know,

a new set.

Um, so what I want to say is that this

definition of the marginal cost depends on the output gap,

as you've seen with Kevin.

Oh, God.

With Michael.

Uh, and also depends on an additional term that depends

on output gap in, in the previous period.

So now this Phillips curve has two terms that are

kind of depend on past values.

These past output gaps by the marginal costs in past

inflation.

And the final thing I'm going to do is to,

um, you know, based on this kind of notion that

you don't see interest rates to go crazily up and

down.

I'm going to introduce some policy smoothing in the problem.

So the only thing I've done to this Taylor rule

that you've seen already is to say that today's interstate

is set as a weighted average of yesterday's interest rate,

plus.

Yes, class ROI, which is the weights on instead the

output equation I removed.

You know there is no you here because that that

role that was governing the persistence of the monetary policy

shock is now going to come via this term here

does make sense.

It is endogenous persistence okay.

Um.

So we've seen the monetary policy shock which is now

here and not anymore in this new equation that we

had before or the reason I just mentioned, I'm going

to have a natural rate of interest shock, which is

going to show up in the IRS curve, which you

probably have seen already.

And have you seen cost per shocks?

Yes.

You must have for the optimal policy for program and

trade offs.

Right.

So these cost shocks are basically shocks that show up

in the Phillips curve.

Some people don't kind of like them because these are

kind of a bit of an ad hoc shock that

is going to generate a shift in the supply that

is independent in the natural level of outputs.

And so you should think of those as, for example,

changes in design Mark-ups from the point of view firms,

for those of you who are at the papers in

the last couple of years, all these stories about inflation

and firms, you know, exploiting market power to make profits

and so on, that would be, you know, a way

to think about this, this gospel shocks.

But these are shocks basically, that typically are going to

increase inflation and reduce output.

And by doing this I'm going to create a trade

off for the monetary policy maker.

I mean, I'm familiar with this notion of trade offs

and, uh.

Yeah.

You've seen the stock market.

Okay.

Um.

Okay, so now, you know, we made all these complications.

Now we have many more parameters.

We have more complicated expressions for our three equations in

the model, but it's just a bit richer.

And hopefully it'll be closer to what, you know, the

data say about the response of endogenous variables, monetary policy.

Uh, and we know how to solve this model.

Right.

You just see, it's just, you know, taught you a

very general approach to be able to get the solution

to this model.

So we simply need to write the model in this

form.

Again I just plugged in the relevant bits coefficients.

All of this stuff is known okay.

And we're going to posit our solution of this kind.

We're going to use whatever approach you want.

You can use the method one determining coefficients for you

know we need to spend a few hours doing algebra.

You can cut it out within two minutes with this

approach.

Or you can put it in dynamic.

Okay.

Um.

And so we're basically that, you know, once we get

our d matrix we have so and we check that

a bunch of conditions holds.

We solve the model.

We know that there is a unique stable solution.

Whereas before playing around with the model and telling you

what I mean by that, um, let me just spend

a second thinking about even more complicated setups where you

have even larger number of lags in your model.

And here really, you know, if you think the models

that we use the Bank of England, for example, to

be realistic, we need to have these additional features.

You will see how poorly this model performs against the

data.

Right.

And so you typically need quite a few additional lags.

And so of course this kind of complicates the setup.

Uh and there's a question around, you know, how do

you solve this model.

And there is a thing that is called companion matrices.

Uh, anyone who has seen these fields before.

No, no, no.

Uh, which is a very powerful way to kind of

deal with, uh, more complicated setups with many legs.

So the trick here is to say.

Okay, look, look first at the first row of this,

of this massive expression here.

So this is saying is simply this equation, right.

You know, I have side zero multiplying xt psi one,

multiplying x equals one and psi minus one.

Multiplying next minus one.

And this.

Okay.

Well these are all multipliers, all the values like so

I basically recreated this equation is the product matrix on

the first row.

If you look at the second row the second row

is nothing else than an identity.

What is this telling me?

It's telling me that x t minus one is going

to be equal to zero plus x t minus one

plus.

So essentially simply saying I want to find this one.

And by just plugging the right zeros and the right

identity matrix of the right size in the right place,

you can just write down this entity, okay.

The same I can do for the for XD minus

two up to XD minus k plus one.

Okay, why is this helpful?

Because I can now redefine a new massive vector bold

xy.

That is, I treat basically each leg as if it

was a variable.

So these includes are inflationary interest rates.

These include output gap inflation interest rate lags and so

on.

But if you look at this stuff this stuff is

just simple.

So sorry you.

Think I skipped a step.

Basically, if you define this vector as a big x

then you see that.

Now I have a.

One order of Autoregression.

Right.

Because I have this gang xt bolt, and this thing

is going to be XT plus one bolt, and it's

going to be XT minus one.

So I got back to my super simple T plus

one T minus one representation.

I can posit a solution of this kind.

I can solve the model.

And I'm going to find, you know, the solution is

going to be this thing.

And at the end of the day, the only thing

I care about is the first row of the solution.

This makes sense.

At 6:30 p.m. this is a very, very powerful tool.

And it's also useful in the eyes and so on.

It's the way in which you can computationally deal with,

uh, especially if you are going to code things yourself.

Otherwise you're.

Not going.

To stop having to loop over.

Um, so just to say that it's actually very simple

to deal with much larger models when it comes to

coding.

Um.

Okay.

We've got ten minutes left.

Let me.

Quickly just start, um, introducing the notion of passing that

will start next week.

Uh, and from here, I just want to tell you,

you know, why why, why do you need all of

this?

You know, we also talked about, you know, how do

we get a solution?

Is it unique?

Is it save.

$1?

And the reason why all these things are important is

because eventually you want to create something like this, or

you want to at least compare something with this, which

actually comes with the data, with whatever is the implied

impulse responses from the, the model.

Right.

Um.

And so I spent.

Five minutes speaking about weathering sanctions.

So the idea is that we want to shock, like

in this example, monetary policy.

Okay.

So Jay Powell wakes up and decides or you know,

we're going to check out these assets.

So this and for no reason whatsoever nobody expected this.

Right.

In this kind of the thought experiment behind these these

inputs responses, these kind of the unexpected component of policy

is the fact that such an unexpected shock would have

an economy.

Um, so the objective is I shock one, I move

only one of these shocks.

Remember our shocks, we assume they are orthogonal to each

other.

So I move one without moving the other ones.

What happens to the emerging variables which are on a

generic variable y at h at HPE, HP runs after

the shocks hit.

And the way in which this, I think, useful to

think about an impulse response that is a total derivative.

So what you're doing here, you're not just talking one

equation or, you know, you're giving an impulse to a

shock, but you're also working out.

Let's assume that you have an output.

That's assuming that's what you want to look at.

Output is not just a response to the shock, but

it's also going to respond endogenously to all the other

variables in the system.

So.

Inflation is going to move and firms are going to

optimise prices, thinking about what's going to be the new

marginal cost in the future.

So there's going to be an interaction between outputs, interest

rates, the shock and inflation.

And that's why the total derivative right.

You know maybe the way we think about it is

not it's not the expensive outputs.

If it were to shock monetary policy.

And if I want to keep constant inflation and interest

rates right here.

Well, I think the whole system to respond.

And that's why it's a total derivative.

And imagine now that I know the because I used

the method I taught you today, and I know all

the elements in this D matrix, then I could easily

compute the total derivative of this, uh, this expression here,

which would simply be for the shock.

Um.

For the shock that hit you compute.

You know, you take the right element in, in the

matrix and you work out what is what is in

zero.

And then you can either in forward and just redo

the same that you've done here, but with one period

of hand, and you just keep on iterating.

I actually find this confusing and much easier to think

about in matrix terms, so.

What I've just done here was to is to write

down the total derivative of my vector of endogenous variables

with respect to the monetary policy shock.

This is going to be given by the matrix D,

and if I just eat it forward I keep on

multiplying by the matrix D, and so I get the

power of h times the derivative of XD2 and one

third.

Now.

What is these objects in our general solution?

So if I were to take the the derivative of

dxy relative to the monetary policy shock, you see that

these things are contemporaneous.

The derivative of XT with respect to shocks of this

expression.

Here.

This is.

Our solution is simply given by the contemporaneous effects.

The shocks have an indigenous violence.

Yeah.

So once we compute this guy, which is our B

matrix that we solved for, we know the impulse response

that arrives on zero.

Because the power of zero is equal to an identity

matrix.

And if I want to know the impulse response to

that one, I multiply our b matrix by d.

If I want to know it's ten tonight, ten years

ahead, I take my b matrix and I multiplied by

d.

The power of ten is that equation.

Okay.

So in a sense.

Our B matrix is crucial to understand the impact impulse

response condition to the shock.

And from that moment onward, remember what what the rational

expectation solution was.

If there is no other shock happening, which is the

notion of impulse response, you know, interested in a period

variable, then I could form my expectation about the state

of the economy just based on yesterday's value and the

metrics.

And that's exactly what they're going to be doing to

compute.

Okay.

Now in the case of a single shock, which I

which is the example I gave you here, this derivative

is actually going to be the third column of this

B matrix.

Okay.

We're looking at the impact effects on the endogenous variables

of the monetary policy shock which is given by this

guy.

So by I would be the impact response of the

output to a monetary policy shock by I VII.

Okay.

If this was completely obscure to you, here is a,

uh, maybe more intuitive way to think about impulse responses,

and then we'll stop.

So what I've done here, I simply remember, you know,

I have a solution to my model, which is this

thing here.

I know that these are shocks drawn from normal distributions

of known variances and zero mean.

So I can go to Matlab and say can you

please draw a few numbers for these shocks.

They are talking to each other so I can draw

shots for monetary policy, for the mark-up shock, for the

cost of shock, and for technology.

I get these numbers, I plug them in and I

can simulate them.

All right, because I can work out okay.

I start from whatever initial condition and then I say,

well, XT is equal to the shocks like this x

t plus one is equal to whatever comes out of

them.

And that's what what the blue line is showing.

So this is kind of a simulation based on some

random realisation of the shocks of my model economy.

And you can see that, you know, here there must

have been a massive shock because inflation went after North

went down.

Um, and policy rate responded to this higher inflation.

So this is just a random simulation model.

Do you understand what I've done?

Now, the way we should think about impulse responses in

a more general way is to take that sequence of

shocks that drove the blue lines, and think of a

alternative world where at some point in this period, instead

of taking whatever shock was happening here, I do an

additional shock only to the monetary policy question.

So imagine that the monetary policy shock here was 1.2.

We make it 1.2.

So we plug in a 1% shock in the model.

And you can see that, you know the interest rate

goes up.

And this has an effect on obviously the other variables.

Now there is some persistence.

So this shock is going to slowly fade away but

not immediately as we were.

As now we have indexation prices indexation, Wahhabism consumption and

so on.

So the impulse response is nothing else than the difference

between the red and the blue line.

Okay.

And so typically, you know, in when you look at

it in papers you only see this thing, right.

You know, there is a shock.

Things move and then they go back to steady state.

But the more general notion of what an impulse response

is is really coming from this, this idea.

Okay.

And so you can see that the there is.

There is no shock until the period in which I

artificially introduced this additional shock.

Then the policy rate goes up is an enormous 5%

shock to the interest rates in the monetary policy.

And what the shock is doing is.

Inducing a fall in the output gap and inducing F1

inflation in this line are going to, you know, have

now quite interesting dynamics.

If you look already, you see that there is something

that is more in line with the data relative to

what you see in Kevin.

You know, with Kevin, you might have seen something like

in R one going back to steady state.

And the same would be true of inflation.

Here we have much more persistent effects and some form

of shapes that are much more in line with the

empirical evidence.

Okay.

Okay.

We have a question.

What was the initial shock uncertainty.

So imagine underlying these blue lines there are three rows

of numbers.

Uh these are 30 periods.

So it's a three by 30 matrix with random realisation

of measurements.

Okay.

The only thing I've done I've taken those religious realisations,

the shocks and periods.

15 I took whatever was the realisation for the monetary

policy shock and I did I added a five the

number okay which you can see here.

So the difference between the rather than the blue is

a 5% increase in the product.

That's not looking at that.

And then I simulated the model under the new configuration

of three by 30 matrix of shocks.

Doesn't make sense.

Right.

Uh, we're out of time.

So next time we're going to see how we're basically

going to go to the engineering, this kind of, uh,

part of the, of the, the topic.

And we're going to try and be speaking, bringing these

inconsistencies from the model to the data.

Um, so that's why the question did not have the

answer.

Lecture 12:

I think I should have said that.

That.

Was probably like something that, you know, we spoke before

we spoke.

You just need, like to write.

I'll tell you now, but yeah, you know, we spoke,

we talked about it and it was like, okay, I

want to.

Okay.

All right.

I hope that's yeah, like a lot of us.

Okay.

I like I didn't believe so okay.

It's fine.

I can't feel all right.

I talked about this like something different.

Like this.

Is something more than one person.

Yeah.

So, like, uh.

Yeah.

I think the instructions in the quarter were in line

with what?

What?

Yeah, yeah, I agree.

Um.

All right, uh.

Let's start.

Good to see you all.

You're still here.

Which is, I guess, a good sign.

Um, before we talk with, uh, the material, I have

a couple of, um, announcements to make.

Um, you guys have some questions that, uh, I received

by email.

So the first one was on essays.

Uh, and we I spoke with some of you last

week about that.

There's a question.

There was a question about, uh, what they're supposed to

do by by this coming Friday, uh, which is a

proposal.

Um, so my memory was in failing, uh, last year.

We didn't have any proposal.

It was only a document saying, I want to do

this proposal.

I want to do my proposal.

That's it.

So name.

And what do you want to do?

There is no need whatsoever to say I want to

tackle this question with this methodology unification scheme or tackle

this specific, you know, question with this.

Yes.

So you just put down your name, the topic that

you want to pick.

And then we'll allocate this confusion and then we'll talk

about substance in the first supervised session.

Um, after we're going to do the we're gonna, you

know, um, look into those depending on what you want.

Is that clear to anyone.

And as far as I know, somewhere on the portal

there is actions that are in line.

What I'm saying.

So no slash whatsoever.

You don't you don't need to deliver pages and pages

on, uh uh, this coming Friday.

And that second question was around, uh, space.

Uh, some of you asked whether we could get a

bigger room.

So I asked admin people, and apparently there are no

available rooms, bigger available rooms, given the constraints of all

of you.

So I'm afraid we need to stick, uh, to what

we have.

Um, and there was also a question around whether we

could move the class from the Monday, because I guess

some of you or all of you only have the

first Monday.

Again, not very good news on that front, given various

constraints, is actually not suitable to move your class.

Uh, I think actually there is marriage for having the

class on Monday.

What are you doing before this lecture?

Uh, so in terms of sequencing, sequencing is actually is

actually better.

That seat from my side.

Um, is there any question related to any of these

issues that I just mentioned?

I guess the essay is the most important one for

most of you.

If not.

Let's kick off then.

Um, okay, let me try to summarise what was done

last week.

Um, which was we started from a, uh, from the

patient model.

We started from some parameter values and the canonical representation

of this model.

We I told you how to solve this model, which

basically means to find the B and B methods that

would basically map the canonical linear expectation model into something

that looks more like a time series model.

So.

We had.

In particular, we had.

The solution.

So for backward looking solution plus some exciting shocks.

And we said that this representation is a general solution

for any linear system model where we started from something

that either looked like this or in the canonical presentation.

Remember this is a more general representation with some size.

Here we started from the canonical representation, which by the

way, really make much difference.

So we started with something like this.

What are expectations about the future.

And we end up with a solution that looks like

this.

Okay, so what I told you last week is how

to find these two matrices in the computer.

It's not pencil and paper as you've done with my

code.

And I also taught you how to check that the

solution that you found is unique.

That is stable.

We discussed why this is important.

Um, and we discussed how can things go wrong if

these assumptions are satisfied.

Now, what we're going to do in the next few

lectures is to try and bring these things come to

the data, where we're a time bridge between this very

abstract theoretical representation to what we actually can do in

the data.

Um, but before doing that, I also showed you, you

know, why is this representation useful or what are they

kind of cool things you can do once you get

this b and this D okay.

And we at the very end, at the very, very

end of last lecture, we looked at how we can

compute objects like this.

These are impulse response functions.

And the way in which we characterise these impulse response

functions was again.

Basically a function of b and d.

Okay, we said the B matrix would collect the impact

response of A of a given shark.

So in this chart it would be the very first

point of this impulse response function.

So the very first point which we call impact response

is uniquely a function of the B matrix.

And whatever comes after this horizon this impact effect is

is that a function uniquely of the D matrix.

And you can see these I mean this should be

almost here very easily from this, from this expression.

Because if you give an input to any of the

shocks in this vector, this is the only contemporaneous relation

between XD and the shocks comes from B.

And any kind of further evolution of these endogenous variables

for given inputs is going to come through the matrix.

Okay.

And we said, well you know you can formalise this

idea by taking a total derivative, right, of uh, endogenous

variables in shock.

We saw how this implies having some recursion.

And we also saw that you can actually write inputs

responses in a very compact way, which is this expression

here, which is whatever.

Or either you want to look at.

The impulse response is going to be given by the

impact response, which again is given by the matrix P

and the power of the d matrix.

Trivially, if h equals zero, which is the response.

This matrix collapsed in identity matrix and you get the

d matrix again.

Okay, we are on board with this.

And finally I wanted to show you how to visualise

these impulse responses.

So this.

I think there's the last picture which was seen, yes,

last week.

And the way, you know, what do you normally see

in papers or on textbooks?

Is this thing right.

Well, actually what we normally see is this point here

as the first point which corresponds to this, let's say

this point here, I need to see what comes before

and after what you should really think of these responses

as basically the difference between.

Some evolution of the endogenous variables for a given realisation

of the exogenous shocks and the counterfactual world, where instead

of the blue line, which is again driven by three

vectors of realised shocks, I plug in an additional shock.

A 5%, in this case to one of the exogenous

variables in my in my system.

Okay, so now the difference between the right and this

is the only thing that changes.

And you can see now that the red line goes

up because I've shocked the interest rate equation by exactly

the amount that I decided to shock, which was 5%

in this example.

You can see the difference between the red and blue

line converges to zero, which is nothing else.

To say that the impact of our impulse response is

going to go back to steady state after one.

Why is that the case?

We assume so we assume that there is a unique

and stable solution.

Rajan.

Told us that.

He's the matrix kind of explodes, right?

We selected the unique stable equilibrium.

Okay.

So if I take the power of infinity of this

matrix, I'm going to converge to zero.

That's exactly what's going on here okay.

Good.

Just keep in mind this chart because we're going to

go back to it because there is an object which

is called historical decomposition of the data that really relies

on similar intuition for what we've seen in this in

this chart.

Um, yeah.

I think I wanted to start is um.

We are actually going to stop here.

Um.

Good.

Now, as I mentioned, we want to.

So this is basically what you can do with your

model, right?

We started with a bunch of parameters.

We wrote down our model, we solved our model, we

got a, B and D, and now we can compute

impulse responses.

Very easy.

Okay.

And you can see we looked on how to implement

an algorithm which gave you the B and D you

run.

You write down a little loop where you iterate this

expression here and you get your answers.

That's as easy as that.

Okay.

Now.

If you think about our example now in the vector

XT, we have variables that we directly observed in the

data.

We have the interstate.

We have the output gap which you know that's the

same measurable position.

But if you want output growth and web inflation.

And so in a sense you should it should be

possible to find parameters from our initial representation of the

model that matched the data very well.

Okay.

And broadly speaking there are two ways to approach this

general problem.

Which are quite, uh, I would say even divisive in

the literature.

It's almost like two different school of thoughts.

Some people love this approach and hate this approach.

Some people hate this approach and not this approach.

What I would like you to get out of this

class is that you shouldn't hate either.

There are good reasons to do sometimes both, sometimes just

one, sometimes just the other one.

And this really depends on the type of question that

you have at hand and the type of objective from

your specific question.

And I hope that, you know, during the examples we're

going to see in class, they they're going to get

a sense of when it's a good idea to do

this or what is this.

Okay.

So let me just describe quickly what I mean by

these two approaches that divide people.

So one approach is to say, well, my model is

perfect.

Okay.

There are all these ingredients that I need to be

able to describe the behaviour of my endogenous variables, okay,

inflation outputs and interest rates.

You know, the model that we enriched, as we've seen

last week now has all the ingredients to create all

those hum shapes, those persistence things that we think are

important in the data.

Um, and we're not going to do this in this

course.

This is way beyond what we can do in the

weeks.

But there are ways that basically allow you to seek

for parameters that maximise a certain criterion that brings the

model close to the data.

You must have heard about.

Bayesian estimation of the xG models or impulse response matching

function um approaches um or maximum likelihood methods for that

matter.

So it's an enormous literature.

Uh, another covariate.

I just want you to know what this is about.

Okay.

And if you're interested, there is a very nice textbook

by Hertz, which helps is the guy who from the

previous six months.

Uh.

The second approach is really at the opposite side of

the spectrum.

What I mean by that, I mean that I'm going

to use a fully theoretical specification or a theoretical view

of the world to try and summarise what are the

characteristics of the data.

And then I'm going to check whether my theoretical model

that really starts from the data is going to I

is going to be able to match what theory has

to say, okay.

And this is what we're going to focus on mainly

for the rest of this topic and is the technique.

These are the techniques that are typically followed by the

empirical monetary economics literature.

Okay.

These tools are tools that are heavily, heavily used in

central banks.

But as I said, these tools are also heavily used

in central banks.

It really depends on the question.

Okay.

But this is the focus of the last the next

week of of our course.

It's going to be this weekend actually.

So the most typical and most commonly used tool that

we use that falls under this bucket here is called

structural vector autoregression.

Um, you mentioned your Taking Time series as we speak,

right?

Or some of you or anyone who's seen Vals before.

Okay.

Um.

So as I mentioned, I think at the very beginning

of the, um, the course, I'm going to try and

give you a very intuitive but not very formal overview

of what is going on.

I'm not going to cover stuff like inference, but, you

know, most packages that you're going to use to do

these things will have those, you know, embedded features that

will allow to compute confidence intervals and whatnot.

Now what is a var?

A var is an empirical model that has this form.

This is a structural var.

And if you stare at it, this is exactly like

the solution of our GSG.

Okay.

Uh, it's called a B type VR because it has

a V matrix multiplying the vector of exogenous shocks.

So this is the vector that we talked a lot

about.

But if you multiply everything by a and you.

Um sorry.

If you want to apply everything by B minus one

and then you rename stuff, you can rewrite the structural

vector autoregression in this form which now has.

Well, now they basically the contemporaneous relation between the endogenous

variables are collected within this matrix.

It seems a bit obscure at the moment, but in

a in a few slides it will be clear why

this distinction matters, or why can help understanding what's going

on in the data or trying to identification, which is

the next topic of science.

Now let's the product of the B matrix and exogenous

shocks.

B this vector of reduced form residuals et I called

the residuals because now these are a linear combination of

the two exogenous shocks.

Think of a two by two matrix okay.

These will be 311 times the first shock plus B12

times the second shock.

So it's going to be a mixture of the first

two of the two shocks.

In my 2.2 example okay.

Now if you let these are these form residuals appear

in this equation.

Now you have a time series model that can be

estimated with the data.

Is something that you can easily bring to the data.

You know you'll see.

You've seen or less.

There is nothing that violates or less assumptions here.

So you can just, you know, open Stata or Eviews

or Matlab.

Once you have this data, these are observables.

These are observables.

You you do less than you estimated.

Right.

And as a result you also estimate E which is

simply the residuals from anomalous regression okay.

So.

This is what vector autoregression are.

You normally start from this point.

You start from a reduced form estimation of a var.

Of course the object of interest is going to be

come back to this object here.

Okay.

And going from here to here is basically is called

identification is the identification program question.

Sorry I lost inflation.

Uh reduced residuals.

Right now it's a scalar.

Again it's a vector of uh go back to our

previous example.

This is a three by three words.

Okay.

Well it's a three by one vector with inflation outputs

and interest rates.

This is a three by three matrix, three by three

matrix three by one vector.

Right.

So the reduced form is going to be three by

three times the three by one.

So it's a three by one which means that for

each equation that I have let's say the interest rate

equation um you're going to have that the reduced one

residual is going to be a linear combination of the

three structural shocks in.

I hope you guys can see.

Let me call these.

He it.

So this will be the reduced from a residual of

the interest rate in the VII is going to be

equal to 311 time epsilon to the interest rate.

We want to subside.

Or I must be one three and sign like this.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Like is there a meaning behind this expression.

Like, can.

We translate this?

Well, there's not much meaning exactly.

Because the linear combination of shocks, the identification problem, which

we're not talking about a lot is exactly is a

problem because you have this object here, which is, you

know, in fact, if you go to the computer is

going to be a vector.

Imagine you have 100 observations.

This is going to be a 100 by one vector.

You could have 100 for this one receiver.

And how should I think about this one?

I don't know because this is just a linear combination

of a bunch of shocks.

I don't know these shocks as a result of these

these and without knowing what these these are, I can

say anything about, you know, what a shock.

That's my endogenous endogenous virus.

So the DSG gave us this B and we said

well now I can compute an impulse response.

If I were to go the var road, since I

cannot estimate directly this, I can only estimate this, that

I'm in trouble because, you know, how can I compute

my equals response?

Okay.

So identification is always going to be about other identities.

Obviously there is an e p and I need y

where the same applies to simply going to be.

B to one, 3 to 2 three and send me

three one.

If you are going to.

Watch the residual and modern network again.

Why?

Why does it say it's a reduced form residual but

not the reduced from error to the same.

People in this literature call it an error.

You should think of those as being exactly like what

you do.

Yeah, yeah.

I mean, once you estimate this thing.

So I denoted DLS.

You know, it could denoted this d hat.

Once you know this, the hat is going to be

a hat because it's going to be an estimated.

What is it from a regression or whatever.

In fact in the, in the oil I speak is

that it is because you are projecting XT one.

You can explain something some things you're not going to

be able to explain.

And these are going to end up in here.

Okay.

There's nothing different from a very, very simple one as

well.

Is that.

In our words, this one is going to be a

linear combination of the interesting objects that we want to

look at.

Okay, that's a key thing.

And what we're going to try and do is to

move from these guys, from this guy hats to some

epsilons and some B's, because we just see that without

B we're not going to go over any inputs.

As we said, B is going to give me these

number, the impact responses.

And only after I know B I can compute the

rest.

If I don't know B, I go nowhere.

There's no inputs response.

Yeah.

And you can also see and then move on.

Why?

This is not a theoretical specification.

Actually, anyone wants to tell me, you know, what's the

difference between these DS that you just estimated?

And that's only the heart that I just estimated from

my from Matlab.

And D that I started with.

Let's say that this is the D that you sold

for using Quantum Randall's, uh, methodology from the DSG model

in this D, what's the difference between the two?

Imagine you were to take data from inflation output and

an interest rates run this regression.

You get a D like you know is this going

to be equal to the lead that you found in

gas?

If we if we assume, uh, weaken a weak.

Exoplanet, then if the sample is large, they should converge.

Right?

Yes, under one condition.

The data is assumed to be stationary.

That's another condition that is important, but no more than

that.

The model has to be a true representation of the

world.

If my new cancer model and we added the elements

to it but misses something like non-linearities, oil shocks, uh,

you name it, you know, features that actually died, the

data, then whatever you get from here, even if you

have infinite amount of data, even under all the kind

of perfect conditions that are never realised in practice, you

wouldn't get the same data.

So this is our theoretical because this D is fully

informed by the data.

Okay.

It's going to capture all this information that is present

in the data.

If there are oil shocks well this D is going

to be affected by our shocks.

This d.

And again I'm being a bit loose here.

Imagine that this is the solution to the industry model.

There's no oil equation.

There's nothing like that okay.

We didn't parameterise the noisy sector in our model.

And so this D is going to be certainly different

from this thing okay.

That's what I meant here by I hope you can

see where we're going here.

You know on the one hand we get that actually

the B from the model.

But the model has to be the right one.

If the model is not the right one, we are

in trouble.

Well, if we go theoretical, we get potentially the ID.

If we have enough data, let's say.

But then we need to pay a price, which is

we're not going to get our be.

We need to find a way to map back from

this is that we don't like to these p times

upside.

Yes, we're all on board.

Okay.

So identification.

Um.

We kind of designed in a sense, you know, we

already said that.

Of course, the applying are different from the East, which

is very recent.

Um, and we actually we already discussed how we actually

don't know what this is.

You know, it's it's somewhat useful.

It's got reduced form because the combination of stuff that

makes its interpretation very difficult.

Uh, going back to the terminology, some people think of

this as a forecast error.

At the end of the day, you know, yes, it's

an error.

Yes.

Specifically, it's a forecast error, because my best guess for

at least we already saw is the XT minus one.

You remember, in a rational, linear, rational expectation world, we

said our past forecast of tomorrow's state of the economy

is the times, today's state of the economy.

Unless you give me the shocks, right.

And the shocks have zero expected values of these holes.

So you can think of this as the forecast error.

Now, is it possible to recover epsilons from our ease

and pliant.

And the B from our E generally is actually not

possible.

And that's why there is a trade off between the

theoretical specifications and what's coming now.

Why is not possible to go back from E to

these two objects.

The easiest algebraic way to see this is to compute

the covariance matrix of E.

Remember this is a matrix of T observations over three

variables time t observations.

Let's take a covariance of this guy and get a

three by three matrix, which collects the variance of these

reduced residuals and the covariances.

And these are estimates from the data.

Right.

You know I estimate these guys from from the data

I can access the medical variance.

Now if you work out what is covariance.

So this guy we can observe but we can map

it into the unobserved objects that drive our structure by.

Because we know that E is equal to b epsilon.

And with simple, uh, linear algebra, you know, the covariance

of this guy is going to be equal to B

omega, which is the covariance matrix now of the structure

of shocks times b.

And the problem that we face.

And that we're going to face in in the essay

if you do the essay on my part, of course,

is that the matrix is a three by three matrix.

Okay.

We saw it already.

But a covariance matrix is a symmetric matrix.

Okay.

So think of the two by two case.

The non-diagonal elements of sigma are the same number.

Thanks.

You're thinking of squaring a sentence here.

And so we're going to have a bunch of unobserved

coefficients here in our three equation.

Equation model is what nine coefficients.

But we only going to have we're only going to

have six independent equations to pin down these nine unknown

variables.

Is it right.

Because for the lower diagonal element of sigma is going

to be equal to the upper diagonal element of signals.

Okay.

Think of these observables as equations.

You know I can equate some unobserved to some some

unobserved to observed.

I have nine entries here and nine entries here.

But three of the entries here exactly identical to the

other three.

So I only have six equations and nine unknowns.

Yeah.

So that's why in general we can't go back from

E to be an upside.

And to do that, we need to come up with

math ideas.

And, uh.

I guess I'm not crazy.

This is exactly the number of free parameters.

Three variables will be in the.

You know, once you start increasing the number of variables,

you can solve this.

How many do I have now as more nodes in

principle, there is an additional set of parameters which is

the variances of this omega matrix.

So remember we assume that the structure of i.i.d. and

so are independent over time also among each other.

So this omega which is the covariance matrix of silence

is a diagonal matrix.

But it means that on the diagonals there are the

variances of these structural shocks.

And we assume that the very start that these these

variances were one.

But there's no reason for why these variances should be

one.

So in principle there are additional parameters that we need

to identify.

But it turns out that these parameters are not very

important.

So we can kind of fix them in a way

that we think is reasonable.

For example, we can say, well, let me fix the

monetary policy shocks such that it generates a 25 basis

points increase in the federal funds rate.

So all we're going to identify you imagine we find

a b.

This B is still identified after a scaling factor I

can multiply everything by, you know whatever size of the

shock.

But I don't know the true size of the shock

okay.

But this is not going to affect our problem is

just an aside.

If you didn't understand this part market and you know,

the important thing is this one, you can come back

to these hours or whatever.

Okay.

So this is the algebraic way to see why identification

is a problem.

These are more brute force computer.

Way to see why this is a problem.

So imagine that I have a two equation model the

SG model.

And the solution to the model is this one okay.

This means that I can compute sigma which is BVP

okay.

And uh.

Well, forget about this, the trubee.

And imagine that you estimate, um.

Doesn't matter whether it's just you.

Yeah.

Sorry.

Forget that again.

This is the truth.

Be given.

Be.

I can compute sigma because we normalised omega to be

the identity matrix.

And this is kind of, you know, we can do

that without many words.

Now imagine I give you a matrix Q that has

this form.

If you go to the computer and define v tilde

as b times q, and now you compute between the

times bt the prime.

You go back to the same covariance matrix of values

from residuals, right?

So from the point of view of our reduced form

var where I only can estimate sigma, these structural model

and the structural model are exactly the same.

Because they give me the same covariance matrix of values

from residuals.

Is that clear.

So this B.

Tilde is going to be certainly different from the true

pi because I multiply this tilde times this q matrix.

And God knows what comes out of this.

You know, it's going to be certainly something different.

These two models through the lens of the vision are

perfectly valid solution to the to the true model.

Right.

So what's going on here?

I basically define Q as an orthogonal or orthonormal matrix

matrix, which has a property which is the following 1A2

times q prime is equal to the matrix.

Then it should be obvious that you know, if you

compute the.

His computer beat him that beat the time here.

And you do a very obvious algebra.

You have two times Q prime in the middle of

these two expressions, which means that you get back to

be times the time in this rotation.

These are known as orthonormal matrices or rotation matrices, if

you like.

You know, geometry, you can think of, you know, taking

two orthogonal vectors and kind of keep on rotating them.

And that's exactly what we're doing with this matrix here

okay.

It preserves the orthogonality.

But that's not dated and there are infinite.

On such matrices in which you keep on rotating what

angle, I draw an angle and you know, I get

a new BT times v prime, which is the prime

that gives me exactly the same sigma I start to

do.

So this is a problem, but we're going to actually

exploit this in a way that's going to turn into

a lot of our favourite sort of unification questions.

So yeah, basically like Omega.

Correct.

But the key here is that we said, you know,

um, we said the sigma is equal to v omega

v prime, right.

Um, we said that this is equal to the identity

matrix, which is going to be equal to b b

prime.

And now we define the q times q.

The prime is also equal.

Uh, yes.

I don't have any relatives.

Right.

I can go into any of these queues because I'm

just taking a random angle from zero and 60.

I have infinite vs file size.

Between us that are fully consistent with the sigma that

are estimated from from the area.

We are in trouble.

There are others, and they're all equally valid from the

point of view of the area.

Okay.

Um, okay.

So let's try to solve this problem then.

So the easiest and seamless place to solve this information

problem is almost obvious.

You know, we have nine.

Going back to our three question equation model.

We have nine.

Unknown parameters.

In the matrix we have six equations effectively, which are

the six known elements.

Unique elements of the sigma covariance matrix as equals.

One should assume the three of these nine keys that

we don't know.

I'm not.

So you kind of recover the three missing equations by

assuming some values for those things.

Okay.

Um, and these are effectively what uh, shorthand or zero

or impact uh, zero restriction approach does.

Is a very old is the simplest case.

It's very old.

It was developed in the in the 80s.

It's definitely not state of the art, but it's a

I think it's the easiest way to see how you

can actually solve this problem.

Right.

So the idea is that we're going to restrict enough

parameters in V, which I don't know the boundaries and

B but you know, we need some equations.

I'm going to just write down these equations.

We're going to assume some values for some of these

V's such that.

Then I can identify I can use sigma to identify

the remaining V's that I didn't assume.

Okay.

Now a simple example.

We already know these are the formulas to work out.

You know n the number of variables is very large.

But in our simple three by three, uh, and you

change your model, we're going to decide we just need

three restrictions to be able to identify B, because if

I assume my way three B's then I have six

equations and six unknown parameters.

It's a simple system of equations.

I can solve it and I recover the piece.

There is a small caveat to this, which is you

need these number of restrictions to be able to identify

B on sigma, but this is not a sufficient condition.

This is called the order condition.

Um.

So the order condition is necessary but is not sufficient

to be able to identify the B's.

You also need a rank condition, which I'm going to

talk very quickly in the next slide.

So this is not particularly important because now as I

said we moved away from this type of identification schemes.

I just want for completeness, I just want to mention

that there is an additional restriction that, uh, that needs

to be satisfied to be over 25 degrees.

For the moment, let's assume that this rank condition is

satisfied.

Okay.

Um, I'm going to skip this bit because that's basically

what already discussed.

So the parameter, the values, the diagonal elements of omega,

which we said in principle could be different from one

question.

One, this is the reason why if you I mean,

it's it's clear.

And if you write down the if not.

Okay.

So, um.

We said, let's fix three of these numbers to numbers

that we know, that we assume we know.

And the most kind of classic, uh, identification about Shorttum

section is called recursive identification.

Uh, it was developed, uh, well, actually in the, in

the 80s by Chris Simms, but it was very much

popularised in this very influential paper by Christiana, um and

Evans.

And Idahoans to assuming these.

So what I've done here, I said, well, there are

some elements, three to the precise elements of the matrix

that are going to be equal to zero.

And you can see that it is a zero short

run restriction and is recursive.

I'm just going through these bits of information.

Zero for obvious reasons, we assume the zero here is

short run over impact because we are stated the impact

response that shocks can have on the endogenous variables within

the dynamic part of it, which we estimated from the

reduced from the I and is recursive in a sense.

You see it because you know there is one shock

that can affect all variables.

There is a second shock that can affect only two

variables, and there is a shock that can not affect

any variables.

There is some formal kind of recursion here, but in

the recursive you run it in the next slide, because

the way in which you can implement this identification scheme

implies that coercion.

Okay, you proceed in three recursive steps.

Um.

So I kind of mentioned this already.

You can see that the first shock, which is the

shock to the curve, is going to be a bit

loose here.

So just let me just do this.

Um.

In the DSG, there was a very obvious interpretation for

the shots.

Okay, we started from this equation.

We added a shock to this equation and you can

think of these as the natural rates.

Okay.

Some very kind of structural shock that you can attach

a meeting to.

We thought we talked about Markov shocks in the Phillips

curve.

And we talked about monetary policy in the uh.

Um interest in the interest rates, the Taylor rule.

Um, the VAR becomes this kind of very tight connection

becomes a bit more tenuous.

Ideally, you would want to go there, but it's not

always true.

Let me just put it this way.

It's not always true that the shock that you recover

from the output equation is your is curve shock.

There is no strict link between these two theories.

And this is going to become you.

Just keep this in mind because we're going to go

back to these, uh, when we're going to see substitutions,

which is another identification.

So um, let's just look at the monetary policy shock

here.

Okay.

So what I'm assuming here is that the monetary policy

shock.

Has no effect on any variable in the system or

imports apart from the policy.

It is obvious to everyone.

Right.

These captures the impact effect of why the total monetary

policy shock.

This captures the impact effect of the monetary policy shock.

Inflation is zero.

The only thing that moves in is the policy rate.

Does this mean that monetary policy has zero functional variables

at all times?

Obviously not, because then the D matrix has playing a

role.

So if you want to compute the inverse of sparsity

plus one or h equals one, you're going to have

zero zero b1 b3 three.

Right.

And I'm going to just work out through the matrix

what you want.

Okay.

So why do people.

Came up with this set of restrictions.

They said well monetary policy.

You know if you move interstate today and you work

at monthly frequency, for example, you don't see a recession

today.

You think about what happened during the latest inflationary episodes.

The fed Bank started tightening policy, and you guys didn't

see a collapse in economic activity, nor for inflation.

You know, it just kept going for for a long

while actually.

Okay.

That's exactly what kind of justifies that be, you know,

justified or suggested to people that this could be a

way to kind of recover the metrics and therefore work

out what the monetary policy.

Um.

Interest.

Okay.

Okay.

I mean, let me just do this.

I think it is kind of self-important.

And it goes back to, um.

How to interpret data from receivers.

So.

Professor.

Yes.

I just have a question on the previous slide.

Of course.

Uh, the assumption that we make on the B matrix,

we don't have to worry about whether it matches the

true, true DGP.

Could you give me an intuition for that?

So again, sorry.

You got a question.

The assumptions.

Why?

Why don't we have to worry about our model matching

the data when we are making these assumptions?

Because the data, whatever is driving variations in these three

variables.

Is going to be.

You're basically going to capture this viral as well as

is informing this this disease, right.

Okay.

So imagine that there is, you know, in oil shock

that, you know, is affecting inflation.

Or imagine that there is some form of non-linearity when

when things go bad, they go bad very strongly.

Okay.

Well the nonlinearity is an example is a bad one

because the var is a linear model.

So let me go back to the to the oil

oil example.

So the oil example is going to be captured by

this matrix because the data you know where we are

basically doing more or less.

So we're just capturing those relations in the data.

In your DSG.

There was no way in which those these could be

capturing word shocks because you are calibrating, you know, the

elements these these in the DSG model would be a

nonlinear function of the frequency of price adjustment of the

discount factor and all the other parameters, the risk aversion

coefficient and all the other parameters that you discussed during

the derivation of the model.

There was nothing about oil.

Okay.

So in a sense this is a safer approach to

get the deal, you know, because you know here I

don't need to worry.

While on the DSG side, I had to worry that

I wrote down from equation one that I specification on

the word of the word works.

Okay.

Does it clarify what you have in mind?

Yeah, but why doesn't this logic apply to the B

matrix.

Well the B matrix I just try to explain that

you can't get the the B matrix okay.

I just have to make a stock assumption here.

And actually let me, let me then uh.

Very, very true to the question that I wanted to

ask.

You know, do you think this makes sense?

It's a question for everyone.

You know, what you what you've seen so far.

This is assumption.

We have this assumption where we couldn't say anything.

We couldn't compute this response because the only thing we

have is AI in AI is meaningless.

It's a mix of a bunch of shocks.

So if I move this, I don't know whether it's

due to water policy, to market shocks, to shocks, so

it's simply useless.

I told you, well, I can move from E to

B, but I need to pay a price.

The price that you need to pay to get back

to the B's is to say, well, I need to

assume that these three coefficients are zeros.

Given what is seen so far, anyone that can tell

me whether this is a good approach or not.

We would change the rows in the matrix.

We have different results, so that's one way to think

about.

It's another way to think about it.

Think about what you've seen.

You know think about you started from a model because

you believe that the world behave that way.

He would use one of them to zero.

Then you just throw the weight of the relationship between

the.

White and the error into the other equivalent.

Yes, that that would happen, but I'm after a more

kind of intuitive explanation for why this could be, or

could be not a good way to proceed.

I'm trying to isolate the shocks, which might not be

the case because they affect each other.

No, I didn't get it.

Sorry.

Can you repeat?

I'm saying, are we trying to isolate the shocks by

having that assumption, which is not the case because the

reason I.

Think you're going that direction.

Um.

It was one back, which intuitively kind of makes sense

because, um, you would imagine that a shock to output

would happen.

Nearly impossible.

Uh, you know, more shocks with a larger lag than

interest rate shocks would have a compounding because they have

all these markets.

And that would kind of make sense that, uh, the

bottom.

So that's a good point.

Yeah.

That's why actually people justify this in the first place.

Yeah.

We estimate indeed as in our model as having the

reality.

Right.

But by erasing these, uh, these errors, it's like we

underestimate the reality, right?

Because it happens.

I'm talking about the D or the B by raising

the zombies.

Mhm.

And putting them after results like in the stroke.

No I see where we're going.

So this you can, you can think of B and

D as being independent.

So any choice I do on B is not going

to affect D because I first estimate the model.

Remember in practice when you when you're going to go

to the computer you're going to estimate D as a

reduced from OLS regression.

Okay I go to a computer, I press run on

this whatever.

And I get this matrix and I get these linear

combination of shocks and parameters which I produce.

Now I can play around with the covariance matrix that

I get from these and try to make assumptions that

give me what the bizarre and the signs are.

I guess what I was after by asking you whether

this assumption makes sense or not for this case of

monetary policy shocks, is that, you know, you built a

model where monetary policy shocks hits and output inflation will

impact, right?

So if you trust the model and if if you

trust what you've done is assumptions make no sense whatsoever.

You know, you're forcing monetary policy shock to zero effect

on output and zero factor inflation.

Go back to you know, your solution your solution.

You goes up.

Why was that.

Why was that right.

One could say well your model is wrong.

And these is basically what I was trying to convey

with my with my very first item, which is if

you toss this, then this assumption that we just made

makes no sense whatsoever.

You should do something else if you think this is,

you know, garbage because you know the model is not

rich enough to capture all these delays that you are

talking about.

Then you might say what is actually not the right

situation.

And so you keep on going with that.

Okay.

Um.

That's what I.

That's going to be.

The discussion.

We just said very quickly, you know, how do you

implement this?

You know, in practice, what do you do?

Okay.

And.

So if you look at if you stare at this

equation, this tells you basically if you open up this

product, this tells you that e1 e y e t

y.

E t y is equal to B11 epsilon t one.

What is that?

Is that.

Obviously.

Right.

Okay.

So we basically have identified.

Up to a constant.

The first attraction right there in this one.

Zero.

Then we know we estimate it is going to be

equal to be one.

One, which I can normalise to something because, you know,

as I said, I can speak up things up and

down.

And so I know what the first structural shock is,

if I know what the first structural shock is.

And I also know that e t t is equal

to mu one to assign y plus b.

Sorry.

This should be A2131.

Apologies.

There are typos here.

Fix it.

So this should be a b to one and AV2

to.

Signed on by.

This guy I know how to write, I know that

why is equal to write over b1.

I could run a regression of the reduced form residuals

of inflation on the reduced residual of output, and I

would identify up to a scaling parameter.

These coefficients, and the residual of that oil as a

regression would be the second structural.

Why?

Because, you know, we assume that epsilon y is orthogonal

to epsilon phi.

So whereas we just, you know, consider this as a

zero, it's impossible that epsilon y can explain.

Epstein-Barr variable diffusion.

That's that's the recursion aspect of this.

Okay.

If you have plenty of variables, keep on doing this.

You know, now I know it's an online I'm sorry

why I go to that.

These are the residual of the interest rate equation.

And I get it on this guy and this guy

okay.

Now luckily for you, uh, some people realise that you

can basically obtain exactly this by doing what is known

as a more precise Cholesky decomposition of the.

Variance covariance matrix.

Uh, sigma in that presentation is going to give you

exactly those b's, because what the classical composition does is

to split this matrix into the product of a lower

triangular matrix and lower triangular matrix prime.

And if you do the antibody, you're going to see

that that lower triangular matrix is going to be equal

exactly to the matrix that you are seeing in the

first place.

Okay.

So this is going to ensure these are going to

be.

Okay.

And if you want, you can check that you know,

these and these.

If you say we want one B to one.

So.

Um.

I'll do the.

Okay, let me just do these two slides, and then

I wanna show transactions.

So there's no reason to be pursuing this kind of

recursive approach.

Back in the day, people were assuming that, well, outputs

cannot respond to something or whatever.

You assume, whatever relation you want.

You know, we said you just need three distinctions to

be assumed this was the order condition.

So just place the zero somewhere else.

And that's a perfectly valid, valid approach.

You can do any more.

You need to work out, you know, the work of

this six equations system of equations and solve it is

fine.

You have six equations, six unknowns and you do it.

But you need to be careful that there is a

second condition that I mentioned, which is a rank condition

which has to be satisfied.

It is satisfied.

In this example, it is not satisfied in this example.

Trivially you can see that these two rows here.

Don't give enough information to separate identifying these coefficients here.

Right?

They are one linear combination of each other in a

sense.

And so in this case the order condition is satisfied

assuming of zeros but the rank condition is not satisfied.

I said don't tell us too much about these is

something that I want you to know for completeness, but

it's something that these days we don't do anymore.

But if you, for whatever reason, you want to go

this, this route because you think it's a good approach,

you need to be aware that there is this optimisation

that is satisfied.

Most packages do it for you.

Basically, this matrix vector is certain because it's structured this

way because and we don't know the bees or because

it's not necessary that.

They can be different nonlinear coverage.

They have to be not a linear combination.

But we are afraid that the structure might imply that

they are.

Well, you know, basically the way which works, you might

think about let me think about the oil market.

You know, oil is affected by this guy and this

guy and the other guys.

And then you go to the next variable and think,

oh, equity prices, equity price are affected by this guy

and this guy.

Okay, fine.

I got the right number of zeros.

And you go and you estimate your vehicle.

But obviously I mean if you start this thing, these

two assumptions are not enough to separate identifying these four

numbers here.

Yeah.

So, professor.

So on methodology.

First we use the New Keynesian model to reach x.

T is a function of d times x t minus

one plus b epsilon.

Then we abandon theory so that we can identify me.

So is we.

How is this allowed.

What I'm saying.

I hope I hope I didn't confuse too much.

I'm saying there are two different approaches for philosophies.

Either you start from your DSG and you get your

beta ray or you get your B this way.

I'm not advocating for you to do the whole lecture

slides from, you know, one to whatever for either you

start from industry model.

You are done from first principles.

You know.

You know you get your discount factor, your preset, um,

frequency of price adjustment.

You put together the number those num you solve for

the DSG.

Those numbers will imply A, D and B, which is

going to be a linear combination, actually nonlinear, a highly

nonlinear function of these structural parameters.

And you're done.

And you're done.

Okay.

Complete response.

You know that.

What I'm saying I'm trying to say, how can I

compare this fully theoretical approach with an empirical approach?

This is the empirical approach.

You start from the data.

You estimate your D from the data where there is

a theoretical and has some pros, but there are some

cons, which is I only estimate these E's and I

don't know what the visa.

So if I want to compute the impulse response function,

the only thing I can do is to start making

crazy or non crazy assumptions, depending on what you think.

And only after I've done these assumptions that I'm going

to criticise you for, because I believe that actually facial

response and in fact one of their policy shocks, that's

only the only way in which we compute the impulse

response function.

And I can then compare it to the SG and

check whether other different thing they give you the same

answer.

So, uh, vars are never based on micro foundations.

They are the opposite to my foundations.

They are fully theoretical.

Okay.

Okay.

So as I said, these these that you get from

a VA, there's no reason whatsoever why should be equal

to the data you get from the DSG model.

Okay.

Nobody told whether this one should be a function of

the discount factor of the theta parameter right in the

DSG.

They are only an exclusively function of the discount factor.

The price adjustment parameter is also okay.

Okay, let's do this one.

Then we move to some some examples.

I want to go back to the A versus B

structure models.

So we need everything in the B representation of structural

values which is much very nicely to the solution of

DSG.

But in a sense you can just move to the

R presentation of the model and impose restrictions on that.

So and the logic is exactly same.

Now you need three restrictions A to be able to

identify the model okay.

But there is a nice.

Kind of a conceptual difference between between the two, which

is we placed a restriction on B, which basically meant

impose a restriction on how certain variables respond to certain

shots.

You just said output inflation will not move.

If JP wakes up and jacks up interest rates by

500 basis points.

Okay.

That's that's our assumption in the matrix.

If you were to reset the matrix you would now

restrict not the relation between the variables and shock, but

rather the relation between the endogenous variables.

Okay.

The sections in the matrix would would imply saying well

interest when when inflation goes up by one.

Or does the interest rates to and inflation could be

moved back, moved up by one because of any of

the shock that we drive the the bar.

Okay.

So in in practice, if you wanted to say I,

my assumption is that the Taylor rule is such that

the response to a movement in 1% to the outcome

is four and inflation is eight, then you should use

the representation of the two protestations, because they are stating

how an endogenous variable responds to a movement to another

endogenous variable contemporaneously.

Yeah that's okay.

But the whole logic and the whole implementation goes through

this exactly same way.

So this will break for five minutes and then we're

going to be done.

If you have questions please.

Yeah.

Please.

Yes.

Yes yes yes.

Okay.

Uh.

In the registration.

So.

Yes.

It's like a I don't.

Know why nobody.

Took.

This.

So one thing in my mind is that it is

the credit matrix that we estimated for the upper diagonal.

It can be underestimated due to the spot.

The reason.

We don't see the.

Benefit to do this because like let's say these are

real, right.

Like these are other than zero maybe.

Right.

Okay.

So let me let me try to imagine that, um,

um, the group is uh, there is no zero.

Okay.

And so then you also see that there's not a

variable in the world that matters.

Okay.

And if one is not capturing variation, okay.

So if that's and I have infinite data points, so

I estimate my use from the I which is only

estimate d hat.

And the combination of the stock which is the hat

is estimated to be okay.

There's no error whatsoever.

Okay I got it right.

All these these are the true these okay.

So.

Now I've got some E's and this is there's nothing

wrong with these two.

Is that just sitting on the right shocks weighted.

Now because I'm stupid and I don't have enough.

You know, I don't think that I have a distinction.

Well, because of the logic of the I, let's assume

that I do this assumption which is wrong.

Right.

Because we just said that the true or presentation of

the world as a full.

Size means like mass comes to a sharp like your.

Assumption with.

Respect to whatsoever or anything else.

So it affects the average and therefore in fact you

kind of get B1.

So if someone gave me this for whatever reason, I'm

going to response that.

I want to compute the response from the number that

you gave me.

Enjoy the social.

Divide.

And I use my estimate to get a response.

And we have data on this.

We don't.

Oh okay.

As we get any.

Equipment, how do we get this?

In order to better understand the without actually given the

confusion.

So.

Yeah I think I.

Think I understand but.

Yeah because we have we have the distribution for you

right.

For epsilon.

So but this this question.

Right.

Yeah.

That's that's yeah that, that's that was my my ignorance.

Yeah I understand like no no no I.

For the past 20.

Five years.

And.

So these.

Assumptions.

And.

So having this with the.

Same.

Name number.

We just.

It's just, you know, I must say that I.

Am more than happy to call a police report on

that.

Aspect.

And.

I'd like to get.

As much as I like my answer.

I'm sorry it was long and.

But.

Alex.

Alex.

And you think I have the answer?

Yes, I know, I know clearly.

It's really too long.

I guess what I'm asking.

Is there's no.

Way would be any more than that.

You have that.

You couldn't get.

Anyone to give us.

Time.

To vote here.

Two votes here.

Would you rather there is a recount?

Every so often would I rather go to.

Is I try to.

I try to answer.

That's not how you could use it.

There's no reason why this should be.

No, you don't.

Listen to Leonard.

Cohen in that club, and he's one of the best.

I think they are the same.

And you should pass in history.

I mean, yeah, we had two big ones in the

rest of your life.

Between the two is now on the table, you know,

no chance.

You know, it's 100 or something.

Yeah.

Just ask me something.

Okay, guys, sorry for the short breaks, but we have,

uh, um.

And, you know, you're asking the right questions, which makes

it, uh, much more fun.

So, um.

Yes.

Okay.

Okay, so that's let's try to implement this thing in,

uh, in the data, um, and this kind of something

that is similar to what they're going to be doing

in class next week.

Okay.

So in particular, what I want to do now is

to see how our short conversations in a flash River

is going to perform against what we know from the

model, what we know from what we've seen so far

in class.

I'm going to take data from 1962 until just before

the global financial crisis.

I already said, we know these variables we can get

them from, in fact, or whatever you want to get

them from.

We'll use the fed funds rate, the leap growth and

the quarterly growth in the core PCE theta, which for

those of you who follow that is the preferred measure

of inflation for the fed.

Um, I'm going to include a bunch of uh, predetermined

deterministic variables in this case is a constant only because

all these variables are stationary.

Um, we're going to call that maybe at some points

to be is probably be more for those of you

who do the same.

Do I want to include the R values for lags?

Um, but this is not it's not particularly important for

inflation.

It matters more for getting the right specification.

Right.

You know, the right estimation of the demand.

And as I said, the interesting bit here is all

about to be okay.

In a sense, identification is about finding out what this

metric is and the metrics we don't.

All right.

So this is what we get from doing exactly what

we just see.

So sorry.

We estimate that it is from VR.

We get our D matrix.

We then implement our recursive identification scheme using the rank

decomposition.

So we impose those zeros.

We get the the resulting BS.

And what I'm drawing here is the impulse response to

a monetary policy shock.

So.

As you hopefully are going to expect, the impact response

of inflation and outputs to the monetary policy shock is

bang on zero on inputs.

Why?

Because we assumed so, right?

We just said, I believe that monetary policy shock decreases

the interest rate by 1%, has no effect whatsoever on

output and no effect whatsoever on inflation on employment.

So these three numbers are B33, D31 and B is

the right the third column into whatever is the third

column matrix.

Okay.

I can then use the d matrix that I estimated

with us to iterate those numbers forward and get these

inputs points.

Okay.

So let's look at this.

What do we see.

We see that the interest rate goes up.

I mean unsurprisingly that's what I shocked.

We see that output.

Is there an impact as we assumed.

And then it falls and has the shape that we

kind of discussed in the previous lecture.

And then we see that inflation doesn't move on impact

and then goes off and then kind of goes down

a little bit.

And then slowly we go back to steady state.

So anything we have from this chart.

I after an interest rate hike.

Why is the inflation rising in after a pause?

That's the question.

Um, why do you think it's so?

Any reason?

That's a concern.

Second shock.

I think that's kind of our definition of an impulse

response is a total derivative to a single shot.

If we get odd impulse responses, that means a zero

are in the wrong elements.

It's quite possible that we just that our assumptions were

completely rubbish.

And if that's the case, you might get completely crazy

things out of your.

Yeah.

Choose the estimate.

This is a combination of the BS that we assume

that we recover from the estimated sigma in the dynamics

from the DS.

So is it related to the fact that in empirical

data that if interest interest rate rises associated with inflation

rises and captures that well, there would be a problem,

because if that's the case, did you did you do

you hear what was said?

The idea is that, you know, if you go and

look what happens in the data that you get in

the last four years, two years, you guys saw inflation

going up and interest rates going up and inflation going

down and interest rates not going down.

Here's when the disclaimer becomes important.

I say in my own views.

Um, but you know, if you take a role correlation

in the data between interest rate changes and inflation, this

correlation is positive.

And the reason is that the central bank response to

what happened in the economy.

So you might expect that when inflation was up interstate

is also well.

But remember here we identified, you know, the whole name

of the game was to say I want to identify

a monetary policy.

What is a monetary policy shock is an innovation to

the Taylor rule.

It's anything that goes above and beyond what you expect

the fed to do in response to things that move

inflation out.

So what you said is right, then it means we

really screwed our identification thing, which is a possibility, okay.

Because our zeros are not exactly what the equation model

implies.

Okay.

I mean, the zoo.

Is not anything close to what the model implies because

we wouldn't get a negative relation using the likes.

The only negative relation would begin was by the monetary

policy side, and then the likes would reply in any

negative places.

So we wouldn't have any negative correlation on the impulse

responses.

And that's a good point.

I mean like we would have a negative relation if

instead of a zero we have a negative number, right.

So like one you could say the education model, you

know, is uh getting there.

But there are more kind of frictions and, you know,

attrition in the economy so that an impact is actually

zero.

Let me put it differently.

If this line would have been zero impact and then

it would fall persistently.

This wouldn't be would have not been too bad compared

to what the education model says.

Right.

The equation model says that output falls, inflation falls, and

the interest rate goes up.

If this response would have been something like this, then

I would have been happy with it.

But now we have something that goes exactly the opposite

direction, and there are a number of reasons for that.

One of them could be those zeros make so much

noise nonsense that eventually they screw up completely in response.

Um.

Now we just conjecture what the new model would have

said.

But you haven't seen what the new contract model with

the additional features that we plugged in last week is

going to say.

And so what I've done here, I did some numbers

on our PSI matrices in the DSG.

So I started from the DSG.

Again I took some factors that are reasonable.

I look at the literature and I say okay precision

3% price adjustment is every 3 or 4 quarters.

We have a number for that.

And then what I've done, I played around a little

bit and this was done very manually, you know, but

because the literature gives you estimates of these numbers and

I said, well, let me move within a reasonable range

for this number or for the discount factor.

There is conversion completion so that I can minimise the

distance between what I observed from the data and what

the model is going to produce.

Basically, what I've done is a very rudimentary impulse response

matching approach that are very formal ways to do that,

where you actually search through all the possible parameter values.

That allows you to minimise a certain criterion.

Here.

I've done it in a very brute force kind of

way.

And this is what I've got.

So you can see that relative today.

You put responses you've got with Michael.

We now have some very nice hum shapes, very persistent

effects and outputs, which, you know, doesn't move much in

impact and then picks after few quarters and then goes

back to steady state.

Same is true for inflation.

And there is a nice persistent in the persistence in

interest rates.

But we already discussed that.

You know, these features bring us back to some of

the nice features that we observe in the data, such

as hum shapes, but very different what we obtain in

the data where inflation is now going up, when there

is no way in which inflation is going to go

up in the standard model.

So what I'm just showing you is not in the

literature as the price puzzle.

And it's been preserved for many years.

Um.

And again, I want you to think about two alternative

ways to think about this price puzzle, which go back

to my initial slide about two sides of this word,

you know, starting from the G and beginning your model

or starting from the data and finding the right identification

technique.

So no.

And nobody brought this up, but it could well be

that one monetary policy determines inflation goes up.

You know, you guys have seen one model which is

the new payment model.

But I can write down another model where I actually

match exactly what the empirical story.

One example is.

If there were a cost channel of monetary policy okay,

imagine that I'm a firm, you know, I'm an entrepreneur.

I have a lot of employees.

I need to, you know, have a lot of production

and to pay my bills at the end of the

month, I need to borrow money.

Okay.

Then I get my profits three quarters ahead, which is

a very realistic, you know, realistic thing.

Now, if interest rates go up and I need to

pay higher, I need to borrow at higher cost to

pay for my workers salaries and so on.

That basically feeds into my marginal cost.

So it could well be that a monetary policy tightening

leads to an increase in my marginal cost.

That leads to increasing prices.

So it could well be that this impulse response is

perfectly fine.

It's just that your model was completely wrong.

You know your benchmark was wrong.

An alternative way to think about it goes down your

direction, which is well, I'm actually identifying the systematic response

of monetary policy to some additional shock that was pushing

up inflation and the fed was responding to it.

Okay.

And he's actually very hard to, you know.

Say, which of these two things is the right one?

And that's the whole that's why, you know, this, this

divide I mentioned at the beginning is quite important.

One is quite a philosophical approach.

And that's why you should always think about these two

sides of the same coin, in the sense you have

a question.

With regards to the right.

Do you think the issue is, um, mostly coming from

like it's accompanied by great intuition, which is why that

is a shame, but actually conformable model.

I'm not sure I got the question again.

During the same period, we also had great inflation.

Which period?

The initial conditions from 1962 2007.

Oh I see, sorry.

No I understand yes.

Because of inflation.

Do you think there is a more hum in DC

and.

You would get hum shape almost in any subsample.

You're on your own.

So it's a very robust feature of the data.

Even if you were to estimate the year over the

election period and whatnot.

So it's something that is very, very robust feature of

macro data.

It's good.

It's good intuition.

It's a good question.

But the answer is not it doesn't depend on the

big spike of inflation in the 80s.

Okay.

So just to give you a sense of, uh, whether

this is completely crazy or not, these people.

The same I mentioned before for the short term restrictions

actually said, well, why maybe is is the model is

the model that is wrong is our benchmark.

And they wrote down the model.

We discussed general monetary policy.

And then they did in a formal way what I've

done, you know, almost dying by chance with the parameter

values.

So they matched.

The impulse response is from the var which are the

solid lines with the impulse responses you would get from

the var, but the price puzzle is present.

Right.

And you can see that this the is the sign

is flipped.

This is an expansionary monetary policy shock that raises outputs

and generates a falling inflation impact.

Right.

And you can see that the model is perfectly able

to replicate what our national short.

So is this a true representation of reality, or is

the VR assumption completely nuts?

It really depends on which sample period they look at.

Which economy are looking at.

Imagine an economy where there is financial repression.

There is no borrowing for anything.

Then this model makes no sense.

Then we can rule this out.

Okay, so that's why I was saying all this week

about the question all this week about the application.

You're doing all this think about setup in which you're

kind of operating, because that's going to inform whether you

want to start from the DSG or start from the

model, which has an assumption to make.

Okay.

Um.

Which is I mean, we touched already with some of

these, uh.

With some of these things.

Um.

So maybe let me just mention a couple of additional

things.

So.

In a sense that we just keep on criticising a

little bit more.

Uh.

So last week we basically looked at we started from

this super simple equation model and we said, well, these

have this model has a lot of features that are

not do not reflect and cannot not affect while and

what happens in the real world.

And so we we added habits and consumption.

We have indexation and etc..

Um, but we also wanted stuff that we kind of

don't really understand.

What what is it?

You know, we have this cost per shock, which is

a weird shock that describes the economy without affecting the

potential of the economy.

We also added some ingredients that could be observationally equivalent

to other ingredients.

But what do I mean by that?

We said.

You know, there are some, uh, price indexation.

But I could basically get exactly the same dynamics if

I were to remove completely price indexation and add stick

expectation for a backward looking element in my expectation.

So I'm just going to posit that, you know, when

people form expectations about.

Future inflation, they say what is a weighted average between

yesterday's inflation and what I expect tomorrow.

And you can see already that, you know, these would

be completely different models with maybe the same D matrix.

Because eventually you get something that generates persistent persistence.

Apologies.

But then the way the beauty of the SG is,

is that you actually know the deep structural parameters.

You know, the deep structural relations between variables.

And it could well be that our price indexation story

is completely wrong.

Okay.

And by chance we end up concluding, oh, that's what

allows us to match the data.

And then you go to the governor and say, well,

you know, I advocate for reducing price indexation and had

nothing, absolutely nothing to do with the type of dynamics

or persistence that you observe.

So there are big risks in going down this approach.

But there are also amazing benefits if you get it

right.

And again, it goes down to tailor your approach to

the type of question that you have.

One final, uh, very grim notes on.

Actually, none of these approaches.

Even if you were to do it.

Well, I think it's sufficient to actually discard the data.

Well, and the reason is that these are linear models

where uncertainty plays no role whatsoever.

You know, your unionised, your DSG on the steady state,

which means that if the shock is, you know, a

shock of a 2% or 2000%, agents don't care.

You know, they just behave exactly the same way.

Well, you guys, if I tell you, well, tomorrow there

is a risk of a 5% fall in your salary

or a risk of becoming unemployed, you would behave differently.

Okay.

And so in a sense, you know, the simple tools

that we've seen are going to struggle to actually describe

some episodes in the data.

Think about COVID's and the latest inflationary episodes.

You kind of want something that goes a little beyond

the linear approach we've just seen.

Covid is the best example.

I think.

You know, we have this just gigantic shock of a

very particular form.

If you were to ask VAR or DSG like the

one you've seen, to kind of explain the data, you

would be asking a lot from this linear single model

question.

But what happens when you keep, uh, integrating more and

more, you know, mechanisms like a huge DSG model?

Well, then the problem is wondering what kind of benefits.

Um, these days, almost, uh, no problem whatsoever.

From a computational point of view, you can have.

Two, 200 250 equations and thousands of parameters.

And these algorithms that are being developed then are which

some of you may have used already.

I'm actually going to allow you to solve the model.

Compute the pressure and conditions, find a steady state and

all these kind of things in a fraction of a

second.

Um, the main the main complication arises if you were

to estimate, try and estimate these models.

Right.

Which is what I said we wouldn't do in this

course because then you would have a similar, intuitively similar

identification problem as the one that you have in in

the eyes, even though the nature is very different.

The identification problem is largely is that.

You can move up a little bit in the accession

parameter and down the conversion parameter or the other way

around, and you get exactly the same impulse response.

Because you have so many combination of parameters, you have

thousand parameters, and you can move up and down a

few things, and you always get the same likelihoods of

the model.

That's a problem because again, you know, you want to

use these models to inform some policy decision.

You want to go to the governor and say, oh,

you know, if if we for some reason, if we

increase the aggressiveness of the Taylor rule and inflation, we

achieve better outcomes.

Or maybe a completely wrong because you just mis assessed

what the requirements are.

So the a theoretical approach is liable to the Lucas

critique that a change in policy is not reflected in

change in behaviour.

The the beauty of the theoretical approach which should be.

Uh, should be obvious.

You just maybe quickly go back to it.

Is that, um.

It's actually an important point.

So.

Immediately you start from some size and you get a

D and a B matrix.

Right?

And then you do whatever you want with it in

the VR.

You start from the data.

And you get a D and you also with some

problems you get the matrix and do some assumptions.

You don't get it directly.

We said we need identification.

We said this D is probably better than this D

because there is no model that is a perfect representation

of reality.

Why not expand the AI and embed as much information

as they want?

Almost.

But then to be I need to pay the price

of this assumption.

The thing that I cannot do in the bar.

Is that this d and this b?

Not actually a function of the size, and the size

are the key structural parameters of the economy.

The price that we was, the frequency of price adjustment.

It tells me how aggressive the central bank is of

inflation.

And if the government asked me what would have happened

in 2021 if I raised interest rates consistently from a

table, if in my table rule, the coefficient of inflation

would have been 2.5 instead of 1.5.

The only way in which I can answer this question

is by changing the size, right?

Change the size of D and up, and work out

what that implies for the behaviour of the economy in

the area.

There is no way I can do this.

I will never be able to go back.

To the box twice.

And that's kind of related to your question.

You know, there's a notion of fatigue, which is, you

know, it's harder to do counterfactuals in a, in a

VR setup.

And.

This is a key point.

And so.

And so you can see obviously now the trade off

between the two approaches.

So there are many paths and many points to both.

Okay.

But this is a key one.

All right.

Let me speed up a little bit.

Yeah okay.

So um, enough on pros and cons of SGS.

Let us kind of go back to, um, what we

can do once we have the D and the B

matrix.

Okay, now for a second.

Let's assume that we know these things and we want

them.

Well, and then we did our actually perfectly and etc..

So there are two things that I want to show

you.

Uh, forecast provenance compositions and historic compositions.

So to motivate these, I just took a quote from

a very famous, uh, i.t economist that said at some

point that none of the post-war expansions in the US

is to the US that old age.

The fed keynote killed all of that.

So basically, this quote implies that monetary policy is a

very important driver of business cycle valuations.

Right.

You can, you know, engineer the end of an expansion

in business cycles.

It means that monetary policy is a powerful force in

the economy.

And but the question is how can we assess this

thing?

Well, in other words, how important is a particular shock

in driving the time series behavioural environment?

Um, sorry, one way to try and assess the statement

given our identification is to say, well, let me take

my monetary policy shock.

Let me see how important the shock is in values

and psychological issues.

However, and this goes back to exactly this point.

This tells you very little about how important the systematic

component of monetary policy, how important that is by systematic

components of monetary policy.

I mean, the Taylor okay.

Think of two data rules, one with a coefficient of

inflation of 1.1 and one with a coefficient of inflation

of one hundreds.

Okay.

This specific way of addressing this question tells you nothing

about these different, these two different rules, right?

Let me show you the algebra, which I think is

going to clarify what it means to you.

So let's start from a forecast error at horizon H

and forecast error.

We already take horizon zero which is the simplest horizon

zero we've seen many times is XT minus expectation of

xt which is d times x t minus one.

Okay.

What is um.

Um, which is that it is from a single time.

You know, everything puts H to zero and you will

see that it's just a reduced from residual.

Okay.

If you enter it forwards, the forecast error h ahead

is going to be simply an iteration of the D

matrix, or due to the power of h minus k

of the sum of this forecast.

Okay.

Now you can take the variance of this thing, which

is a very simple object.

We know that the variance of E.

Remember this.

The reduced form residual is sigma.

We multiply by the time we sum of this thing.

So this would be very trivially this is.

But now we can ask how much of this variation

of this variance is due to a particular shock.

And to do that I'm going to take, let's say

the jth column of the B matrix.

Let's assume that monetary policy shock.

Uh, I also want to say that sigma J is

the jth element on the diagonal of, uh, the omega,

which is the covariance matrix of the actual shocks.

And then I can rewrite this guy as this sum.

Okay.

Well now I have BJ BJ this is a vector

corresponding to the j th shock.

And this is the variance of the element of the

j, the diagonal element of omega on the jth position.

So if I were to know this object, I take

this over the total sum of the variances.

And this ratio is going to tell me exactly how

much of the forecast error variance is due to this

shock.

But now we have the Bayesian.

We solve for them.

And I compute this for every shot.

Okay.

It's quite easy.

And that's exactly what I plotted here.

And you can do this for each horizon.

You can do it on impact and you can do

it over different reasons.

And you can see that on impacts as we should

expect.

This is for the monetary policy shock.

The monetary policy shock explains zero variance of without inflation.

Wonder why we assume that these are zero.

So all of these disappears.

But then over time you know, this variance of let's

say output can be explained to a certain extent where

the monetary policy showed.

Now what you see here is that monetary policy according

to our model and our last 25 million explains roughly

after, let's say, one year, 2% of the variance of

inflation.

That's a stunningly low number.

If you think about, you know, the central bank is

going to control inflation.

And we find that, you know, monetary policy shocks only

explained for 2% of the variables, which means that 98%

of the variance is out of control of the central

bank.

Right.

That's exactly what I meant by.

These words.

Okay.

Maybe you had in mind something different.

Okay, so what I what I mean here is that

this number, you should think of this number as being

the monetary policy shock.

So what is the monetary policy shock?

If you ask my boss, you would tell.

He would tell.

There are no monetary policy shocks.

His job is to minimise the shocks.

You know, he wants to respond to shocks that happen

out there in the economy, but it certainly doesn't want

to surprise you guys by raising interest rates by 100

basis points and, you know, engineered recession for no reason

whatsoever.

So in a sense, you can take this as, you

know, the importance of control errors or mistakes or unexpected

moves in policy rates.

Okay, this tells you nothing about whether we have a

Taylor rule with a 1.1%, 1.1 coefficient of inflation or

a 100% coefficient of inflation.

And we could only work out how important it is

to have these two different regimes with the DSG, because

that's we should we should change the price.

Okay.

Um.

That's basically.

That's what I just said.

So remember, policy shocks you should think of as being

either control or control errors or deviation from a policy.

If there is a change in the way in which

you policy, we shouldn't expect these things to drive most

of the business cycle fluctuations.

However, we need to identify these objects to know what's

the causal effect of monetary policy on the economy.

So I mean, if there were no controls to be

lost, we won't be able to plot the impulse response

because we wouldn't know how monetary policy works or transmits.

The other object I want to show you is, uh,

um, historical decompositions.

So everything we know so far is something that looks

at, um.

It kind of ignores the realisation of the shock.

Okay, so remember, our view of the world is that

there is an indigenous variable that is buffeted around by

different kinds of shocks, but that appears in which you

may have a very large shock and no other shocks.

Okay.

What were all these three shocks that we're looking at

all work at the same time and all big.

And so we want to kind of understand at any

given point in time, what's the relative importance of shocks

in driving what we observe in the data every day?

Put in differently, think about the last two years.

You have this massive up and down inflation.

What do you think caused inflation to move around in

this in these last three years?

Is it mark-up shocks.

Is it a yes curve shocks or is it one

of their positions.

That's what historical decomposition is kind of want to do.

They want to tell you, you know, what's the contribution

of each shock or given observed path in the endogenous

values.

Okay.

Now a question how much you think one of the

policy shocks accounts for the last three years of inflation?

In a sense.

And what you think happened over the past two years.

So probably not much past year.

Jobs would have been driven by the war in Ukraine

and related oil price issues.

Yes.

But professor, the the the shock to the interest rate

was a response to the shock in inflation.

So we as a shock.

If you are responding to something.

Is the systematic response of policy.

So there's no shock, which goes back to your point.

I think I would agree with you.

You know, if we were to try and estimate the

VAR in this specific areas, there would be some monetary

policy shock because people expect the central banks to do

something that they didn't do, which means there were some

control errors.

But, you know, my prior would be that you would

get numbers like around, you know, roughly around these, uh,

these other one, which is I would expect more than

10% of variation inflation to be driven by monetary policy

shocks, rather by other shocks like oil price or repay

demand shocks, maybe fiscal policy shocks and so on.

So these are I could be completely wrong.

The VAR would, you know, would give you exactly this

answer.

Okay.

In psychological positions is the tool that allows you to

zoom in into a specific period and say, well, over

this period, let me see what is the relative role

of which shocks.

And the way you're going to do it is exactly

like the impulse responses that we see.

So, um.

Let me just.

Let me just do it with with charts.

I mean, the math is, is the same as with

the one we've seen before.

So now flip the order in a sense.

Okay.

Imagine that.

Um, the blue line.

The red line is the.

Is the, um.

True?

Data generating process.

And there is a massive monetary policy shock here at

this point in time.

The difference between the blue and the red line would

be the historical contribution of the monetary policy shock to

the specific realisation of this interest rate.

Okay.

What is the difference between these and any process bonds?

I use this chart to explain what an impulse response

is.

The only difference is that at any given point in

time, which is for each one, for each period here

there are three shocks happening.

And so this would be the contribution of monetary policy.

But at the same time there there might have been

a shock that maybe when the opposite direction and a

mark-up shock, they push in same direction to interest rates.

These things are going to evolve over time and eventually

fade down to zero.

And so in every period, you're going to have the

effect of the current shock, the other two shocks, and

all the previous shocks that are still alive before they

fade away.

This intuition?

Yes, we are confused if we interchange.

If you could go back.

If you interchange the Red line and Blue line, then

does anything happen to the y axis?

Maybe that wasn't that was not the best example.

But you know, think about it.

Um.

Forget about this.

You know, this was to explain the impulse response is

just to show you, you know, that I'm taking exactly

the same example as before.

So ignore the base.

But just think about so this historical decomposition, what I

mean is an impulse response at any given point in

time.

Okay.

Um, that keeps on accumulating.

So imagine that if there were another monetary policy shock

just after this one of opposite sign, then the contribution

of monetary policy in this period would be whatever is

the shock today minus the previous, the fact of the

previous shock that is fading away.

And it's more and more complicated because there are not

just monetary policy shocks, but there are also other shocks

that hit every period.

And there are all the past shocks that have been

hit in previous periods.

Um.

And so this is basically the formula to compute the

historical contribution of a given shock, to move the realised

path of the individual variables with nothing else.

Again, is then the shock at any given point in

time times times its impact effects multiplied by decay.

Now we are summing rather than, you know, this kind

of the impulse response, but you're summing over impulse responses

recursively because you want to keep into account the past

shocks that are fading away.

I'm going to do like a projection.

I'm going to stop.

And actually, I think this in a sense, is my

preferred way to think about historical decompositions.

You can go through the previous slides math.

Uh, but intuitively, I think that's the best way to

think about historical computations.

So what I want to do now is to think

about another way to express our data, which is this

we're in this thing where we started from.

You can start substituting recursively XT minus one into the

var.

And you get this expression.

And then you keep on doing it and doing it

over and over again.

And you get to something that looks like this.

Okay.

So what this expression is telling you is that imagine

you let big K to go to infinity.

What this expression is telling you is that I can

rewrite any endogenous variable.

Remember these are observables I downloaded from Fred okay.

I can rewrite the entire path and each observation of

the policy right as an infinite sum of shocks to

monetary policy, to possible shocks and shocks.

That's what this is telling me.

If I take k that is large enough.

These shocks, the very old shots up here, you know,

they go back to zero, but old shocks that are

still alive and are still contributing to some extent to

keep moving.

Our endogenous variables will be captured by the some okay,

the historical decomposition.

Nothing is nothing else than at any given point in

time.

What's the contribution of one shock?

The shock today, plus all the shocks that hit in

the past and they've not faded away or disappeared because

they're still in a, in a within a horizon where

the the power of K is not zero.

Yeah.

Um.

I'm sorry.

That's what it is.

And this is a matrix.

The matrix for what I just said.

Now the other reason why I like the word representation

is that if you stare at this expression, then you

understand immediately what an impulse response is, right?

You know, the or in other words, our definition of

an impulse response really drops out immediately from the word

representation.

Because I can take a shot that happened here as

ago.

If I take its derivative at t minus k, I

get b.

If I take it at t minus k plus one,

I get the d times b, and so on and

so forth.

So it's kind of, you know, I find it very

intuitive, at least one to work.

The other thing that comes out of this word representation

is the following.

Imagine that.

You know, I'm the planner or, you know, I'm God

or whatever, and I give you that shock.

Okay, so you're in this room and I give you

time series for Epsilon J for the monetary policy shock.

Okay.

If you were to observe this shot, then you could

run the regression of each of our endogenous variables on

a constant.

The shock a bunch of controls.

And given that the shock is orthogonal to all other

shocks and is orthogonal to leads and lags of this

shock, this coefficient here is going to be exactly my

impulse response, right?

Think about this word representation again.

If I observe the shock at any given, you know,

shock at whatever lead or lag in the regression, the

coefficient I get is going to be exactly this product

here.

Okay.

And you can do it by leading your endogenous variables.

You are on you know, you take, you know, information,

you download it and you are gonna sit on my

shop that I just gave you.

And then you take inflation tomorrow and you're on my

shop today and inflation in two days and so on.

And you can build the full path of impulse responses.

Okay.

So this is known as lockup reactions.

In principle.

Or at least under certain conditions, where wearing amounts of

data and the are specified correctly.

And some things are these beta that you get from

this regression is going to be exactly identical to the

impulse response that you've got by getting your V with

the right assumption, and then iterating over the D to

get your input search box.

Okay.

That's basically what the projections are.

And this is a very powerful tool that is used

I would say, as much as we are in the

world of practitioners like central banks.

Now let me spend the last five minutes describing.

What are the pros and cons of obviously welcome projection?

Because in a sense, you know, they're doing the same

thing, right?

So one big problem with the projections is that typically

you kind of need a measure of the shock itself.

And we just spent almost two hours thinking about how

we can recover these shocks.

Right.

However, there are other ways in which we can, uh,

we can actually measure the shocks instead of doing identification

studies.

And, you know, imagine how you could observe an instrument

in an event that is correlated with the shock of

interest, is uncorrelated with all the other shocks.

Then you could plug these into a local projection.

But just for the sake of argument, let's assume we

can measure this shock relatively one.

Then this local projection approach is actually quite nice because

it's going to be more robust to misspecification.

And it can be easy to apply to nonlinear setups.

You know, I made the case for me as being

a linear tool and maybe not being, uh, good enough

to capture dynamics such as the Covid period.

Um, local projections are much easier to tweak to get

these nonlinearities going.

Anyone who knows.

Who can kind of guess why local projections are more

robust with specifications than than VA, but more robust misspecification

I.

Roughly speaking, I mean, the likelihood of getting the wrong

impulse response from the VAR or something that doesn't really

make much sense is much higher for VR than those

of projections.

Anyone who has an intuition for why that might be

the case.

Um, so we.

Decide which variables.

Things can be relaxed.

Um.

In a sense.

In a sense, you're right.

But there is a is a second order.

There is the most important thing that is more important.

So the key the key difference here is that.

In the longer projection.

Actually, let me start from the innovation.

You mentioned that you got me wrong because I was.

Your assumptions were crazy.

Okay, then what you're doing?

You keep on basically compounding an error at the power

of H.

Right.

You know, even if this was kind of tiny, like

a tiny bit different from the true V, I start

kind of multiplying by D at the power of H.

By the time I get to the power of 20,

that very tiny mistake I made, maybe God knows where

it is.

When we look at projections, I'm estimating every time this

be there is no compounding.

There is no single data, data powers or at any

point in time I get indirect estimates of my d

times d a the power of h and z.

That's why it's called.

You might find it in uh, in textbooks.

That's called direct methods.

So this is a direct method to get into spots

because they're getting these objects straight away from you.

In this sense, yields are much trickier when it comes

to misspecification if there is a mistake or you're screwed

basically.

However, the price to pay is not.

Lecture 13:

You know, he would love this place and.

Yeah.

We can.

So you'd better estimate the restaurant.

Thank.

You.

All right.

It's how fast.

So let me, uh, get going.

Um, so we are going to do the last lecture

on topic one.

We have got a lot of slides to go through.

So exciting.

This one we loved this last time.

So we looked at local projections.

Um, I just wanted to clarify one thing.

So we ended last week.

We ended on comparing the local projections.

Um.

So someone at the end of last, uh, the lecture

last time asked me why you think all the time

it was a typo.

If you spot things that are not right or don't

seem right, don't be shy.

There are probably 95% of that in the slides.

So I'm going to find them as they, uh, as

we go along.

I actually put on Moodle a, um, PDF with a

list of corrections on the stuff that we had already

gone through, as I mentioned already.

Don't be too far looking because I'm changing the slides

at the margin a little bit while I do these

classes.

So the stuff that comes after the slide, for example,

I change a little bit later.

Slide.

So this was a typo.

It was uh t subscript t.

It should have been one.

The idea is that of course, you know, if you

observe a shock, that shock would affect staff at time

t if you can start at time t here, you

would have some endogeneity problem.

Even if you had the time shock that someone gave

to you.

Okay.

Someone else also asked me whether you need these controls

in the instance in which you actually observed the two

shocks.

And the answer to this question is no, you don't

need those controls.

Because if this is a true shock, then this beta

is going to be estimated consistently irrespective of whatever you

put on the question.

However, you want to have these controls to narrow down

the standard error of this residual, because the smaller is

the standard error of this residual, the better your confidence

intervals.

Okay.

So there is a case.

There's a statistical case that you can make for having

those controls.

So that you can factor estimating these responses.

With that.

Um, we kind of as I said, we left it

here last time we were discussing the pros and the

cons of local projections versus the ideas.

Now, before moving to the last part of the lecture,

we're going to cover two methodologies for identification of monetary

policy shocks monetary policy instruments and restrictions.

Before doing that, I'm going to quickly go through, um,

kind of two interesting features of local projections, um, or

at least where local projections kind of lend, lend themselves

better to some of the things I've discussed in the

next five minutes.

The first one is the idea of state dependent importance

policies.

What I mean by that is that a shock epsilon

or whatever kind, let's say monetary policy can have different

effects depending on where you are.

Let's say in the business cycle, in the monetary policy

cycle or whatever kind of different state you may have.

So think about it.

You know, think about the monetary policy cycle.

Now interest rates are very high.

If you have a mortgage you may respond to a

25 basis points high.

Differently award winning rates are zero.

Okay.

If you believe that that's the case, then you can

try and tease out the different effect that monetary policy

shocks have.

If you are in a world of high interest rates

or low interest rates.

So how do you do that?

Local projections are very you know, this idea of state

dependent impulse responses are very easy to implement in local

projections.

And the way in which you can do it is

by having a variable x which define the states.

In my example it would be low interest rate, high

interest rate environment.

And you can simply have some function of it.

You know, by this can be a very general thing.

It could be either a.

010 for low interest rates.

One for high interest rates.

What can be a more sophisticated kind of continuous function?

You can transform these in the probability of being a

high state and probability of being in low states.

It can be whatever you like.

Once I define what f of x t minus one

is, then I can simply run these regression where I

have my.

Average impulse response effect, the one that we've seen in

the previous slide.

And then you have a new term where the shock

is interacted effectively multiplied by the state variable.

Okay, so let's assume for sake of argument that this

function of the state is a function that has zero

mean.

Okay.

So something that fluctuates around the mean zero, then p1

h is going to capture the marginal effect if the

shock happens to be in that state.

So these would be the average effects.

And if I'm in a boom that would be the

you know imagine this example was boom recession or high

or low interest rate.

This would be the marginal effect of being in that

state okay.

Similarly, you can think that positive or negative interest rate

shocks have different effects for whatever reason.

Imagine you have a model in mind where there is

this asymmetry embedded in you.

Kind of in your theoretical model, you can test whether

this is the case by defining your state variable as

a dummy that takes value one.

If the monetary policy shock that you're plugging in the

local projection is actually smaller than zero.

So this would be a dummy specification.

And again now v one is going to capture the

difference in the response between positive and negative shocks.

So again is the marginal effect.

And you can do it with whatever you like.

You know it could it could be high credit high

leverage of you know the economy versus low leverage could

be boom versus recession.

You know you can you can guide your thinking from

the framework that you have in mind.

And you can just go to the data and test

this very, very easily.

Effectively, you're multiplying your shock by whatever state variable you

want okay.

And this could be useful for your essay if you

wanted to go down this road.

So something that is is an easy extension in a

VR setup would be a little bit more complicated to

implement, even though conceptually.

The second extension I want you to consider is the

idea of having a panel, or in this case, it's

going to be country.

But you can have, you know, firms, individuals, whatever you

want.

And again, the local projection approach lends itself very, very

kind of naturally to having a panel of uh, uh,

oracle cross-sectional element to your regression.

So now our X variable, then the outcome variable is

not going to vary.

We're not gonna just consider leads of this variable, but

we can have a C sub subscript that denote accounting.

Okay.

So I'm going to have let's say GDP in county

C at different horizons.

And the only thing I can, you know, I need

to do here, if you were to implement this regression

in whatever statistical package like Stata and whatnot, you see

that, you know, we still have our beta coefficients.

The shock can be the same shock across countries.

In this case the shock that varies across countries.

Imagine I gave you monetary policy shock for the euro

area, monetary policy shock for the US, for the UK

and so on.

You can just stack those.

This is going to change across countries, or you can

have something like a truly global shock, let's say an

oil shock, in which case the C subscript wouldn't be

wouldn't be here.

Okay.

And the only thing you need to do is to

have a what is called a country fixed effect.

So this is just an average that changes country by

country.

And the reason is that GDP growth, for example, can

have different averages across countries.

And these exactly take into account this difference.

So is there any kind of let's say uh non

time varying difference across countries.

Say one country has an inflation targeting regime, the other

one doesn't and so on.

You're going to capture these effects by account of fixed

effect.

But you can see that, um, you know, the structure

is exactly the same.

The approach is exactly the same.

It's going to be a bunch of regressions.

And the way in which you're going to interpret this

P0H coefficient is going to be the impulse response to

the shock epsilon j.

In the average column, there's going to be an average

effect across counties.

Okay.

By average economy, I mean you're putting together all this

information.

You have to think about some form of average response

that uses these effects, these that exploit this cross-sectional element

to get a better estimate of the speed.

Again, if you care about non-linearities you can embed the

same state dependency we talked about a second ago.

But at the you know with with with this panel

dimension.

So now in the boom versus recession example.

Of course, not all countries are in recession.

At the same time.

You can have a state that varies not just over

time but also across countries.

Okay.

I just want to mention this because, you know, you're

going to some of you are going to write an

essay on, um, using maybe some of these methodologies.

And I just wanted to show you that if you

want to go down this road, you know, it can

be done.

And it's very easy to implement.

Um.

Just for you.

I put here an example.

Um, I'm not going to test you on this stuff.

It's mainly for you to see.

You know what we mean by this.

And this example is an example about how fiscal policy

shocks can have different effects, whether you are in a

boom or in a recession.

Again, the details are not very important.

You know, the way in which these guys construct, um,

their measure of fiscal shocks, you know, they do it

in a smart way.

They take outcomes of fiscal spending versus whatever the OECD

were forecasting for each of these countries.

Uh, they then have a fancy kind of non-linear transformation

of, um, basically of output growth to get a measure

of, you know, of intuitively speaking, they want to capture

the probability of being in a recession.

And that's what this kind of complicated function look in

function at least.

And that's for you based on GDP growth.

And then they simply are on the these local projection

specification.

You have many countries.

So there's a final specification.

You have an interaction term that tells you whether you

are in a boom or in a bust.

And you can work out whether fiscal policy shocks change

depending on whether you are in a recession or in

an expansion.

Just spending a second on this chart.

The shaded areas are the average impulse responses that you

would get if you were to ignore this asymmetry.

While the solid and dashed lines show you what the

effects are.

If you are going to take care of this dependency

state dependence, okay, in this case is very important.

There are models that tell you that these fiscal multipliers

can change depending whether you're on a boomer in a

bust, and that's actually supported by the data.

And if you are to ignore this stuff, you would

get the average between these two states, which is exactly

the shaded area.

Okay.

Another question.

Um, is the fiscal policy expansionary in both recession.

Yes yes, yes.

So it's um, you know.

Otherwise we would just be afraid of each other.

So.

Yeah.

You see what I mean?

Just has to be the case.

Otherwise you wouldn't get an average of the shit about

it.

Okay.

Yeah.

So the main point I want to do this again

is just an example to show you that there are

some cases where you might think that there is some

state dependent effects.

And if you were to ignore these independent facts and

you were to run the simple specification, you just get

the average between the two states.

And this is a very easy way to account for

the states.

And.

Um.

Good.

Okay, so let's jump into the next bit of, uh,

um, this last lecture.

Topic one, which is instruments for monetary policy.

So basically what we're doing here, we're going back to

the discussion program we discussed at length in uh, uh

in the last couple of weeks.

In particular we're going to the goal here is going

to be from now until the end of the lecture,

to try and identify monetary policy shocks.

Okay.

So.

We are going to cover two particular approaches.

There are many others, but these two, I would say,

are the most state of the art and definitely the

ones that have been at least most successful in the

last few years.

And as a result, these are the ones that are

most used by people in the literature, both in academic

literature, but also in places like the bank or other

institutions or university.

So one is going to be instruments for monetary policy

shocks.

What I mean by that is some.

External information that we're going to bring in that has

nothing to do with our local production, that is going

to help us.

And we do an indication anyway that I'm going to

show you this in a second.

There are two ways of doing these instruments.

There is a narrative approach and there is a high

frequency approach.

Now before the break.

Hopefully.

Maybe not.

Um, and then we're going to do some stations.

Okay.

So um, I'm going to slightly depart from uh, kind

of our what we've seen so far by assuming that

the policymaker is now following a forward looking rule.

What I mean by that, I mean that I'm going

to set interest rates based on my expectation for future

outputs and my expectation for future inflation.

So I'm going to use this notation here.

I'm going to use hats to denote a forecast made

by in this case by the central bank right.

For the variable of interest outputs inflation.

And just to make sure you get what I mean

by these.

So there should be if we want to be precise

there should be a subscript T conditional.

So this forecast is conditional on the information.

Thank you.

Okay.

So I mean t I'm trying to forecast output tomorrow

with the information sets that I have today.

Okay.

So it could be a T plus one condition or

D if you wanted to be a bit more precise.

But just just for you to know what I mean

by these words.

So imagine that I'm sitting today on the monetary policy

Committee.

I need to change interest rates or, you know, keep

them where they are.

And I'm going to do it based on my forecast

for output inflation.

And then we have the usual monetary policy shock, which

is what we want to.

Basically identify.

So what's the problem here?

That's if you guys sit here and you observe what

the Bank of England does every, every month or every

meeting, the only thing you see is a change in

interest rates.

You know, it's going to be a monetary policy decision

soon.

What you're going to see is that, you know, interest

rates are going to be 25 basis points higher, lower.

They're going to be the same.

That's what you observed.

And if you compute what this implies you know I'm

just taking the first differential operator of this equation.

You get that there's going to be potentially the change

in interest rates is either justified by a change in

my forecast for output next period, a change in my

forecast for inflation experience, some random shock that has nothing

to do with my role today.

And there is also there are no shocks that happened

in the previous periods.

So this is why identification is difficult, you know?

You guys see something, but you have no idea whether

this is coming from my changing my forecast or the

past effects of auditions for today's show.

Just to make it very clear.

Why would I change my forecast?

Because maybe I observed a demand shock dissipating or a

supply shock hitting the economy.

And so that hit today.

And that will lead me to change my forecast.

Okay.

So what is the idea here?

The idea of the instruments for monetary policy shocks is

very much in line with what you would, uh, for

those of you who've done instrumental variable regressions, or at

least intuitively imagine that there is a series out there,

some data where I can argue that this data is

correlated with my policy shock.

We want to the shock I care about, and it's

kind of uncorrelated with anything else.

So it's uncorrelated with the supply shock or the demand

shock that has driven the change in my expectation for

inflation and is uncorrelated to the past information over the

past wrongs, then that would be great.

You know, I could use this kind of logic to

try and tease out what this guy or to separate

these epsilon t from everything else.

Okay.

And basically we're going to spend a half an hour

or 40 minutes or maybe more thinking about how we

can construct objects from the data that satisfy this property.

Now, it's often helpful, or at least I find it

helpful to think of this.

Am I this instrument as a linear function of the

shocks, something that is related to the shock, of course,

which is fine plus some noise.

So the idea is that I'm not going to be

able ever to measure exactly this epsilon t.

Okay.

But, you know, I can get close.

Uh, and whatever I don't catch is kind of captured

by this noise down here.

So it's kind of an imprecise but still correlated measure

of the shock.

Okay.

So we're going to do a little bit of historical

courses here.

I'll go back in time and see how people did

this in the past.

Um, and actually, we're going quite a lot back in

time into to 1989.

And so these two guys, what is a is a

husband and wife team, um, who've been very influential in

the military economics, literature, the empirical literature.

And they had this idea of saying, well, let me

just go through all the historical records of defence.

Let me read what they've done and why they've done

it.

And let me try to find situations where the change

in the policy rate.

Was.

Either unrelated to policy.

So, you know, they move policy, the policy rate or

some deviation from a perceived rule, which is exactly what

they want.

The policy shock is the way we defined it or

was different from what kind of yeah, this was the

deviation from the rule or was this kind of would

be better, but they're kind of unrelated to policy, was

altogether the famous kind of I wake up and I

raise interest rates because I'm in a bad mood, really

related to the economy.

Of course, this would be fantastic from a statistical point

of view, but this doesn't happen very often.

Luckily for us.

Um, and so, you know, they they read all these

documents, they read all these transcripts and so on.

And then they came up with a list of dates

where you can say, well, this date satisfies these conditions

here.

And if it's a contractionary shock, they put a plus

one dummy.

If it's an expansionary shock they put a minus one

there.

So they even gave up on the quantification of these.

Just A011 minus one plus one classification.

And so they're almost basically this old paper, which is,

you know, rudimentary, if you will.

And we'll see exactly why.

So they said, okay, you know, let me try to

do this.

And they looked at occasions where the fed tightening the

policy rate in response to past conditions rather than today's

conditions, because they say this kind of it was the

unexpected means, you know, there was inflation a few years

ago and you're still tightening policy.

People will expect you to tighten policy if something happens

today.

And so it is kind of a surprise in a

sense.

I know this is, you know, not the best you

can do.

And that's exactly, exactly why we created this paper as

we criticised.

But, you know, these were the early days, and this

is actually the first paper that the long literature that

we've seen starting today.

So it's worth kind of going through it.

And they basically identified a bunch one six, not many

occasions where the fed behave this way.

And they said, well, these are exogenous monetary policy shocks.

This map into our epsilon, I okay.

And if you're interested in kind of monetary history, there

is an older paper that kind of did the same

for the pre-war periods, um, which, you know, again, if

you're interested in that kind of stuff, I recommend having

you now, as you as you might already, you know,

you're probably thinking this.

You're saying, well, this is very subjective reading stuff.

You have to convince me that you're doing the right

thing.

And even more worrisome, in a more worrisome sense, is

these dates, kind of by their very nature, can be

predicted by past information.

You know, I just told you, you're you're tightening policy

because of some past inflation.

It means that if I run a regression of the

shock dummies on past inflation, I should be able to

predict them.

And we just talked about these monetary policy shocks as

being unpredictable, being not related to the standard way of

operating by the policymaker.

Um.

And so kind of the deeper question is what motivated

the desire to eliminate inflation in other sense, if you

were if you are someone observing the Fed's in those

in those in those days and you would see high

inflation in the past, that wouldn't go away, that you

could predict these things.

And so this, this recession at age 75.

And so this would be a little bit problematic.

So then ten years after northern, this 15 years after

the Romans said, okay, I'm going, we're going to refine

this approach.

And this tells you how long some of these debates

are going.

Um, and they actually realised.

That's like a crucial thing, which is that defence actually

releases the forecasts that are given to a defence, which

is the committee that decides on interest rates every three

times a year.

They're given this forecast by staff and they're given this

forecast just before the policy meeting.

So, you know, we're chatting with before the lecture starts.

This is kind of common in, uh, in most central

banks.

The staff produces a forecast.

It goes to the Monetary Policy Committee or the FOMC

presents the forecast.

And based on these forecasts and their own judgement and

their own view of the world, this policy committee is

decide what to do with interest rates.

So as long as the staff forecast reflects the FOMC

forecast, the forecast by the policymaker itself.

Then we observe y hat and pi hat.

All right.

We'll observe the terms in our specification of the table.

Which means that if I run this regression where I

take the observed policy change on the now observed forecast

by the central bank for output inflation.

Um, and you can you can saturate this regression.

That's I don't know if familiar with this term, but

you can say, well, maybe what matters is not really

the forecast for output, but it's the change in the

forecast for output.

You can put in more and more stuff just to

be more conservative.

Then you can basically try and capture the systematic component

component of monetary policy.

Okay.

You're trying to understand why the bank, the central bank,

has changed interest rates the way it did, because maybe.

Growth was picking up, or maybe because you were expecting

some inflationary pressure in the future, or the change in

inflationary pressure was becoming kind of steep.

And you can also filter out the effect of past

shocks by just controlling for past interest rates, because this

guy is going to include the previous one.

So whatever you're left with is the famous monetary policy

shock is the deviation from the rule is the unexpected

component of the monetary policy.

And so these guide this epsilon tilde because now is

an estimated and estimated object satisfies all our requirements for

monetary policy.

Okay.

The conditions that we set out to the bank in

question one, we're not taking into account if that.

Forecast is inaccurate.

Right.

Because then we might have a correct, um, the monetary

policy might be correct, but we have an error term

because the forecast.

That's my point.

Well, can I ask you who's forecast and why?

When does it matter?

Does it matter whether the forecast.

You know here we have a forecast by the fact

we have a perceived forecast by agents.

You guys.

Let me just postpone this.

You know your rights, but.

Whose forecast is going to be quite crucial.

So here I am assuming that the forecast is the

same as the FOMC forecast and is the same as,

let's say, our forecast.

There is what is typically known as there is no

information symmetry.

Across these ages.

And so maybe let me just postpone this discussion later

because we're going to relax this assumption and we're going

to see what happens if you were to relax this

forecast.

Okay.

But what is a very good question.

And it's important.

Just in case you wonder how this epsilon tilde thing

looks like.

This is it.

This is from the Roman and Roman 2004 beta.

Um, and you can see that, you know, it behaves

like you would expect.

The shock should behave.

It's kind of scarily uncorrelated or almost.

Um, there are some big shocks at the end of

the 70s.

Were familiar with that period.

There was, you know, quite a lot of action because

inflation was very high.

And, uh, there was the now famous Walker disinflation with

quite aggressive monetary policy tightening with a lot of volatility.

And that's reflected here, which, you know, you should think

of these as large deviations from the perceived rule.

So this kind of makes sense if you know what

happened in those years.

And now you know I'm not going to tell you

I'm going to talk about other ways to get these

instruments.

But in the second week of this, uh, this lecture,

I'm going to show you how you can use this

thing into our local projections in the arts.

Now, we look at projections is going to be super

easy because we said, look, our projections are great because

if someone gives you the shock, you just plug them

into the local projection.

And roughly speaking, what you're going to do is you're

going to take this thing, put it on the right

hand side, away of the equal sign, and run your

local projection almost, almost like this.

There's very little we think that we're going to change,

but that's the intuition that we are on.

Do we think that.

Okay.

So in principle.

Gordon.

But of course, the literature evolved.

And so some people started thinking about, okay, what can

be wrong from from this approach.

The first thing that can go wrong is whether these

coefficients beta one to beta five, which are from this

aggression, are stable over time.

Okay.

And of course is if the central bank starts responding

to different parts of these, perceived quality will change over

time.

Say in the 80s we care that all about inflation

and now we don't care about inflation.

Then this beta would change over time and these would

affect how we're going to estimate, you know, the stimulus.

So we're going to get some means misidentifying this.

But we and this was kind of one of the

main concerns by the time.

But to be fully honest with you this applies to

our current model.

Right.

So if you run a guy over, you know, 30

years of data, you kind of need to assume that

over those 30 years things haven't structurally changed or if

they've changed, whether or not a capture is going to

be an average over something else.

So you just need to be aware that, you know,

this this concern is, is a bit of a destructive

kind of comment on any empirical approach, because there's nothing

you can do.

Okay.

Unless you can argue that these coefficients were stable over

time.

Um.

The other concern is, you know, how good is our

way back to this regression?

How good is this regression, this specification of what the

central bank has in mind when setting interest rate?

How good is it capturing everything that goes in my

mind?

Okay, maybe you know, Jay Powell, things that actually respond

to and equity prices or movements in the leverage of

the financial sector.

And of course, these things are not here.

And to the extent that are not perfectly correlated to

one of these identified objects, then that thing would not

be captured by the perceived value.

And if that's the case, then I would be again

misidentifying this data here.

Um, another example is uncertainty.

You know, if you live in a very uncertain world,

policymakers are likely to think, to react, to react to

this and to act in a different way and to

work where there is no uncertainty.

It's kind of goes back to the independence thing they

were discussing before.

It's not just the shocks, and we can have different

effects in different states, but policymakers may be reacting to

different things in different states.

Right.

Um, and so that's kind of a I would say

the biggest concern about the.

It's kind of mad at the opportunity.

You know, how sure are we that we're capturing things

correctly when it comes to the monetary policy response by

the central bank?

And, uh, here's where we're going to the high frequency

to high frequency instruments.

And these kind of the very latest, I would say

this is one of the latest developments in the monetary,

uh, economics literature, at least empirical one, which, um, exploited

financial market measures that are traded at very high frequency

and for which we have prices that can change very

quickly over time.

So to describe how this approach works, uh, let me

just introduce the notion of fed funds, future contracts.

So the idea here is that there's a lot of

people out there who try to make money out of,

you know, predicting what central banks you, you know, whenever

you read newspapers, there is an ECB watcher, a Bank

of England watcher, fed watcher that whose only job is

to sit in an office and try to see to,

to, to forecast effectively what the fed is going to

do, what the Bank of England want to do, actually,

um.

And these future contacts in this particular case are futures

contracts on the fed fund, which is the policy's, uh,

primary policy option.

Uh, the fact.

These contracts basically allow market participants to trade.

Based on their own views of what defines next now.

Okay.

So in a sense is it is it is.

They're very liquid contracts and they are traded by many

people and they are traded very, very often.

It's you can think of these contracts as aggregating all

the available information that is out there.

Since there are people who are making or losing quite

a lot of money.

It's kind of reasonable to assume that, you know, they're

trying to embed as much information as they can.

Possibly more than our five covariates regression that we have

here.

Okay.

Um.

So what these contracts are capturing effectively is, is a

future.

I'm assuming you know what the future is.

And so what this is what these contracts allow you

to do is to bet on what the future fed

funds rate is going to be after, let's say, the

next policy meeting.

There are many different contracts that expire, different maturity.

Let's just focus on the shorter term one, which is

exactly in a month's time.

So after the next policy decision has been taken, what

is the new level for the first one rate?

They're quoted in a certain way.

You know, typically they're sold at 100 minus the policy

rate that you expect to be holding after the, uh,

the fed decision.

Uh, I've already mentioned that there are many, um, many

different contracts.

So you can basically trade very short term future contracts

up to one year, I think is the longest maturity.

So that would be a form of, you know, gauging

what people think the fed funds rate is going to

be in 12 months time.

Um.

And in a sense, you know, you can use these

prices to back out.

What's the implied probability that the market has signed for

a 25 basis point increase in the policy rate?

And I'm sure you guys have seen charts like this

one, which is basically, you know, you can as I

just said, you can back up, make out the probability

of a eight increase in the next week.

You know, there are many of these things, right?

If you open the Ft, refines these charts all over

the place because you do and you say, oh, no,

is the bank even going to raise rates in the

next week or not?

What's the probability is market prices allow you to take

out what market participants think about the policy in the

next week.

Okay.

So now the question is can we exploit these market

prices effectively to back out our multiple shocks.

Okay.

And to do this I'm going to introduce a new

objects which is going to be e t minus uh

your top.

And this is going to be the market expectation of

the policy rates.

And therefore you see in a very tiny interval of

time before before the FOMC announcement.

Okay.

Let's say ten minutes before.

So if I'm say this Saturday at 12 800 years,

you put yourself at 1150, you check what the market

price for this contract is and you can work out

what's the expected rates from now to the next ten

minutes.

Okay.

And I'm going to have to do some assumptions.

We go back to your question, which is I'm going

to assume that these market participants know the decision rule

of the bank.

Right.

They know how much I respond to inflation and outputs

or expected inflation or expected outputs.

I know expected inflation and expected output.

So is exactly your question.

Okay.

What is the forecast is wrong.

And here we're going to see how whether the forecasted

market participants have may be different from the forecast that

the fed has or the bank has, but they do

not know the shock.

All right.

So now under these assumptions and this definition, if I

compute this object which is.

They realised policy rates minus the expectation as market participants,

that I'm going to get a measurement on the position.

Okay.

So you know, you put yourself now ten minutes after

the meeting.

Gave rise by 25 basis points in the expectation.

The minutes before was that he would have raised by

25 basis points.

That is no shock also.

One if these people were expecting no change in policy

and ten minutes after the policy.

25 basis points higher.

That means that there's been a monetary policy change.

Um.

Just to show you how powerful this approach is.

This is a link to the plots of market prices

for these futures contracts.

So these objects are traded very, very frequently.

There are many trades permits.

So you can really talk at the intraday level how

these prices evolved over time.

This is an example taken from June meeting in a

meeting in June 2003.

And you can see that you know the day starts.

There is a is this quoted in you know, this

is what I was referring to before.

These prices are quoted as 100 minus the interest rates.

Um.

We are here.

I need to check what is.

What is units.

Ah.

Uh, but the bottom line is that there was an

expectation by market participants that was very stable.

Then the policy decision happens at 2:15 p.m..

Nowadays.

It's important I can check, uh, but you can see

that there is a discrete and sudden jump in the

market price of these, uh, these objects, which means that

market participants were very comfortable that they were getting their

expectation rights.

They were trading with the the price was consistent with

the level of the policy rates implied by whatever this

axis means.

And then they were surprised what the what the fed

did and immediately, you know, not to lose money.

They adjusted the, you know, they started trading such that

the new level of the fed funds is now consistent

with the new price of these futures.

Expression.

What is the logic for confidence breaking only ten minutes

before the meeting announcement?

It's not ten minutes.

It's just Adam.

So, you know, you can see that these market price

changes only when there is an announcement, not a means

before.

If you're asking why you pick ten minutes, the idea

is.

To believe that this is not a shock.

And this is a an endogenous response of the central

bank to some news that is going on in the

economy.

You need to have a very tight interval to measure

the difference between this point and this point.

But let me put it differently.

Imagine that if I were to take some arguing, that

if you take the difference between these market price and

these market price, you have your instrument for monetary policy.

Okay.

That's what I'm saying.

Now, I mentioned that he started doing ten minutes before,

ten minutes after you do, ten minutes after and five

hours before.

And imagine that there is an oil shock heating here

because Opec+ something and you know, the price of oil

spikes.

The shock is going to be observed by anyone, including

market participants.

And they're going to say, oh, it has been an

oil shock.

This is going to affect the decision making power here.

I'm going to start trading this contract such that this

oil shock is going to be reflected into these prices,

right.

And so imagine that, you know, it jumps up here.

Then if I were to take the difference between this

point and this point.

I would assign I would call a monetary policy shock

would effectively has been the endogenous reaction of the central

bank.

So you're shrinking as much as you can.

The window over which you take this difference.

So that nobody could claim over this jump, was actually

due to something that happened in the economy that Jay

Powell is responding to.

You really would need to convince me that over those

20 minutes while Jay Powell is, you know, tying the

knot of his tie and the announcement there has been

an oil shock or a demand shock or something happens

so that systematically, if you do this for 150 announcements,

you get something that doesn't make any sense.

That's why it's so powerful.

So that's why it's important to get a tight window

of time.

So basically we do not want, uh, the risk to

be priced into the contract.

Well, you only want you want all the available information

to be priced in.

And under the assumption that if I have all the

available information and I know how the central bank is

going to respond to this available information, then whatever is

left.

That explains the change from here to here has to

be the famous monetary policy shock.

I think that you didn't expect because I woke up

and I was in a bad mood.

I raised interest rates.

Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

If I were to take two weeks time to compute

this difference, then there would be a lot of stuff

that, you know, the bank is responding to.

And in which case, you know, you would be capturing

these effects rather than shock.

And we are all on board.

Um, okay.

So the standard for this approach, or at least what

this approach exists.

Uh, so it's taken from this older paper by Kanak

and, uh, co-authors of the world's, uh, second one, some

very influential paper.

And they looked at these, you know, in a more

in, in a more financial economics sense.

So it was an event study paper.

It was, uh, they were looking at the response of

asset prices, a daily frequency and so on.

These guys, Mark and Peter Grady, uh, popularised this approach

to kind of more the macro setup.

So they embedded these instruments into a VAR, right, in

which they actually show showed how these monetary policy surprises.

So this you know, where they constructed these surprises starting

from these changes, aggregated them into a monthly measure.

And then stack them, stick them into a VAR where

they looked at how CPI, inflation, industrial production and other

macro variables responded to these shocks.

They use a window of ten minutes before and 20

minutes after the fancy meeting.

Exactly for the reason we just discussed.

We then aggregated these, uh, surprises at the monthly frequency.

Sometimes you have more than one meeting in a given

month.

There are some unscheduled FOMC meetings, and that's why they've

done this thing.

And.

You can actually download this series from the macro, uh,

website.

The macro is where they ended up publishing this paper.

If you look in their application packages, you can find

this, uh, series of shocks.

Now, there are many, many people built on this paper,

and there are many evolutions of their measure.

And we're actually going to see some of that.

But, you know, this kind of where this literature started

in a macro sense.

Okay.

So get this data and play with its projections.

So we are also looking for behavioural doses.

So the question for those of you who haven't heard

is, you know, if there are information asymmetries, I think

you were asking or behavioural biases, you know, is this

going to work?

We're kind of going to get to this.

The answer is no.

But not always.

And so we're going to see exactly when these biases

when and why these biases may arise.

Yeah.

Which is the reason why people literature evolved from this

paper.

And people are still working on this stuff.

Okay.

Um.

Which is my next slides.

Um.

So let me just let me just summarise.

There are, you know, from the start of I think

these contracts started trading in 1990 for something that is

1991.

From 1991 to today, you can check whenever it was

every FOMC meeting, you know, the time of the decision,

you know the day you can go and check these

prices.

You take your interval of time around this event and

you compute these surprises.

And under these assumptions then we can think of a

time series of these surprises.

This would be an unexpected, frightening and unexpected gathering.

There are many cases in which you don't have any

movement because the market was I know we were expecting,

let's say 25 basis points increased, which was the lever.

And so you will observe absolutely a flatline here.

Then these objects for that time series is going to

satisfy the conditions that we set out at the very

beginning.

Why?

Because it's obviously correlated with the monetary policy shock, and

it is uncorrelated with any other shock.

It might have led the central bank to change interest

rates.

That's a discussion we just had because the window is

so small.

Then this.

Am I?

Our instrument has to be uncorrelated with whatever epsilon Pie,

epsilon y or whatever caused the central bank to change

its forecast for volatility today because there's more high frequency

trading and quicker response in the market or something, I

don't know.

It's a good question.

Um.

I would expect if you ask me, I would expect

a lower volatility because there is more people and more

information and better understanding of what central banks do.

So I would expect people getting it more wrong on

average, and maybe it'll be more dispersed.

And, uh, you know, the previous day is going to

be affected by this data.

But, you know, there were changes of um, of basically

75% increases in some statements.

And so it's a it's a it's just, I don't

know, uh, it's something that will be interesting to check.

Um, maybe just, you know, before we move on to

the information symmetric problem.

And we also mentioned that since this so this this

kind of approach started with monetary policy, but it has

been used in many other contexts, you know, completely as

an aside from, you know, your essay and your exam.

Is a very powerful way to have causal effects.

The same setup has been applied to oil shocks have

been applied, uh, to talking about, um, climate change and

carbon pricing shock.

There are papers that have used futures contracts on the

carbon pricing of ex uh, to back out carbon pricing

shocks is a very powerful way to get a reasonably

exogenous variation in what the specific demand is.

Okay.

So.

Let's, um.

Let's see how, how and when things can go wrong

in support, so it's great.

Um, as I said, you know, it's a very powerful

way.

However, we need some very strong information on assumptions.

And in particular, I assume that, you know, you guys

have the market and the central banks.

I assume that you guys know what's my forecast for

output and inflation.

And you also know that given this forecast, you know

how I respond to these forecasts.

Okay.

So the key and if I remember all the coefficients

in front of this forecast.

And this is obviously, you know, a strong assumption, you

know.

Um, central bank, the Bank of England doesn't publish the

forecasts until the policy decision is made.

And there is no nowhere out there.

There is a Taylor rule saying that my tie is,

you know, 1.7.

Okay.

So either you guys are out there making plans to

make money out of, you know, my policy moves and

you spend the whole, you know, the whole day doing

that.

So in principle is not a bad it's not a

bad assumption to start with.

But, you know, we can think about what happens if

things go wrong and that's actually not satisfied.

Um, so remember that.

E t minus iota is my expectation just before the

meeting.

And let's try to relax these assumptions.

And in particular, let me ah, add some, uh, kind

of errors or shocks to the assumptions made before.

What do I mean by that?

I know you guys know my decision rule with Roe.

So you have an.

Expectation about my chi chi chi chi, but I may

deviate from it.

So you expect me to respond and say 1 to

1 1% increase or a policy rate for 1% increase

in growth.

But sometimes and this may be thrown average, but sometimes

I deviate from it.

Okay.

And this time I reacted by 1.1, in which case

there's going to be a shock to the chi chi,

right?

And similarly, you know, we all look at high frequency

indicators.

We all have our now casting model.

And you guys do your own and do my own.

And we just, you know, we see each other only

after the decisions taken.

But similarly you have an expectation about what my forecast

is going to be for tomorrow's output growth.

But this may differ from what my forecast actually was.

So there's going to be an error on the y

hat on the forecast.

And of course, you know, for simplicity, I just considered

why.

But you could think of these applying to buy as

well.

Okay, perfect.

So you will continue to assume that the agents know

the form of the decision rule.

That is, there are no other unobservable variables that the

central bank is.

You have to.

Um.

I guess you know, what I have in mind is

that I'm simplifying the world for you guys.

But these prices may.

When you guys trade among yourselves and this price comes

out as an equilibrium outcome, you may well think that

I do respond to asset prices or do respond to

uncertainty.

So the beauty of this approach is that you don't

need to specify an in econometric model of why my

reaction function is you guys can say, oh, you know,

in this case, power is going to care a lot

about asset prices.

You form your expectation about how much power is going

to respond to asset prices.

You're going to form an expectation about what US prices

are going to do in the next month or so.

And you embed these in your trading.

Okay.

So think of this as you can generalise it and

add as many terms as you want.

You have these these for output you can have for

inflation.

You can have it for equity prices, you can have

it for uncertainty and so on.

And these arrows are exactly meant to capture whether, you

know, you're getting my, um, my actual function in a

different way relative to what my actual function effectively is.

Yeah.

For a similar question.

So rather we say that it's a deviation or is

it really like a forecaster.

So what we're going to see in a second what

this implies.

Okay.

For the moment I'm just relaxing assumptions and just saying,

you know imagine that you think I am going to

you don't think I'm responding to asset prices okay.

To the S&P 500.

Which means that effectively your expectation of K S&P 500

is zero.

Well I do okay.

And then this is going to show up.

Right.

Because you're just getting you have the wrong guy on

a term that you don't even think I have but

actually do that.

But all this means is that we're going to see

in the next slide what this implies for the difference

between this point and these points.

Right.

So so far we said the difference between these and

these under our assumption has to be equal to the

monetary policy.

Now is going to be one of three policy shock,

plus something else, which is going to be a combination

of these companies.

Some of them are problematic.

Some of them are not.

We're going to see it in the next slide right.

Question.

So here are both central bank and agents aware that

there might be some errors.

And does it even matter.

They are aware of it both.

What kind of errors we have in mind.

These errors are central banks aware that the agents, uh,

do not know the decision rule?

Precisely, fully, precisely.

Um, it does matter.

Because.

Because if there are errors that are monetary policy shocks.

And therefore, if you have in mind the fully up

central bank that is thinking about responding optimally to a

shock, why do you guys don't get my reaction function?

You can obtain something different to what I wanted to.

Okay, major shock hits.

I'm responding to this shock and I'm assuming you guys

understand what I'm doing, but he actually didn't.

That means there's going to be a monetary policy shock,

which means that effectively, in what follows to the policy

decision, the economy is going to behave in a way

that I didn't expect or I didn't want.

So that's why there is such an important, such a

big effort from central banks to try and explain what

they're doing.

Because in principle, I think if you ask any governor

of any central bank, they would want these guys to

be there all the time.

There's no reason for monetary policy shocks to exist in

the first place.

You know, we discussed before, I think, and the belief

I asked him, you know, I don't I don't want

to junior anyone if they're going to shock and just

responding to the economy in the best possible way.

I want you guys to understand what I'm doing.

But, you know, whatever shocks can think of them as

control arrows.

It's it's great from, from our point of view because

we kind of need to know these monetary policy shocks

to understand how monetary policy works.

Okay, from the point of view of a policymaker, you

don't actually want to see these things.

Okay.

Um, okay.

So I also assume that all these errors are mean

zero.

Okay.

So you know, my expectation about these errors zero and

same.

And I'm going to assume that these arrows, this shocks

or arrows are uncorrelated among each other.

So what is our.

Realise the interest rate minus expected interest rate in this

tiny window.

What it's going to capture now.

And I've done the math for you.

You can, you know, do the same and work out

exactly what comes out.

It's super simple.

You just take expectations and you work out what these

differences.

It's going to be three times here.

Okay.

So let me go one by one.

And what this means are that we finance.

So the first thing, luckily our monetary policy shock is

still there.

So, you know, it's going to be somewhere in this

difference between realised and expected prices.

But there are two additional objects.

The first one.

Depends on whether the central bank has behaved differently to

what I expected.

So I knew the forecast and my forecast was exactly

the bank's forecast.

Okay, but my chi, my your expected chi was different

from the guy that I used in my policy.

Okay.

So we'll go back to the same example.

There was a 1% increase in output growth.

You expected me to raise by 1% and I raised

by 1.5%.

Okay.

So effectively this is still a monetary policy shock.

So effectively this is not really a problem.

Okay.

Well it is a problem in your sense you ask.

You know the central bank wouldn't want this thing to

happen.

But we're still talking about a monetary policy shock.

It's kind of an unexpected increase in the policy rate,

which was unjustified from your point of view.

So it's still going to behave like a monetary policy

shock.

The only problem is that it's going to introduce heteroscedasticity.

Right?

Because there is an error, you know, that is normally

not there, which means that this monetary policy shock is

on average, on these occasions going to be bigger than

one normally is.

And so it's going to make your inference more complicated,

but it's not going to introduce any bias in the

estimates of whatever endogenous outcome on the monetary policy shock.

So you can still think of this policy shock.

But then there is this guy here and this guy

happens.

If your forecast was different from my forecast okay.

So you are forecasting zero growth and I was forecasting

a 1% positive growth okay.

So for a given time you are expected no change

in interest rates because you know whatever the car you

want to buy.

Time zero.

No change in policy rate while I actually raise interest

rates because I see this growth coming.

So it is my interest.

And now this is a problem.

Why is this problem?

Because when you raise interest rates and you guys realise,

oh God, you know, the bank is seeing a boom

like a big boom in the economy that I didn't

realise was there.

They are responding to this boom by raising interest rates.

But basically you are in a better world now.

You know, you thought there was zero growth.

Okay.

And now we realise you actually are in the womb.

And the central bank is just trying to contain everything.

And so you say, well, you know, things are much

better than I expected.

So think about how equity prices are going to respond

to this situation.

Or likely the prices will well go up in this

world.

If you think about what we're doing here, we're just

saying, oh, there is a monetary policy surprise that tighten.

Right.

You know, where in this case here we've been surprised

by a spike in interest rates.

And now equity prices are going to move.

That's exactly the opposite of what we have in mind

when you think about a monetary policy shock.

Because monetary policy shock is a contraction.

Everything actually prices should fall.

Okay.

So if we are in this case then we are

in trouble because this happens frequently enough.

And you run a regression of equity prices on these

monetary policy instruments.

We are failing, you know, our initial conditions that we

set in the very first slide, because now this instrument

is correlated to the very shock that has moved out

for growth and has moved the monetary policy reaction function

and so on.

And you get a completely wrong side, you know, regression.

Okay.

Uh, I think it's worth kind of going through this

slide and then, uh.

Just sum up.

So basically under the information asymmetry we describe these high

frequency surprises are going to capture I'm going to capture

a combination of two shocks.

I'm going to bundle this first two because we said

you know they both behave as monetary policy shock.

And I'm going to separate this third one.

So it's either a monetary policy shock or it's going

to be an update on how I think the, the,

the state of the economy is.

So the central bank tightens and you guys learn, oh

well we are in an in a boom.

So we're doing much better than we thought.

And this is going to be a source of bias.

And there is this kind of very, very nice paper

by Campbell and others which basically shown that this problem

can be actually a substantial problem in empirical setups.

So they took this high frequency monetary policy surprises, and

they did a very simple regression.

They took how blue chip forecasts, which are like these

people are paid a lot of money to make forecasts

about the economy.

And they said, okay, how does my forecast change for

unemployment in this case when there is a monetary policy

shock?

And they show that, you know, psychically that the monetary

policy tightening is going to reduce unemployment.

It's going to be it's going to lead to a

boom in the economy.

Okay.

Which is perfectly consistent with this view.

You know, there is a monetary policy tightening instead of

in engineering a recession.

People are saying, oh God, we are doing so much

better than we thought.

So I'm going to revise my forecast with a lower

unemployment.

So a better state of the economy.

How do you deal with this?

Well hope is not lost.

You can still use our high frequency monetary policy instruments.

You need to adjust them in a way that, you

know there are many ways of doing it.

Actually, in the original there was a section that proposed

how to do it.

But in an intuitive sense, what you want to do,

you want to purify our high frequency surprises with measures

of this asymmetry of information.

Okay.

So one way would be to say, well, let me

regress this, this high frequency surprises on the difference between

the Green Book and the private sector forecasts.

So I'm trying to get a sense of, you know,

how different is my information set as a central banker.

Your information sets.

Similarly, you can regress this frequency this me on the

group forecasts and macro factors.

So you clean up for some.

And there is this very nice paper.

Which instead has a slightly different kind of approach.

And the way in which they tackle this problem was

by saying.

If you look at all of these, uh, surprises in

scatter plots of these surprises and the change in equity

prices.

So if all of these MEA realisations were true monetary

policy shocks, we should see that an increase in Em

would lead to a fall in prices as we just

discussed.

All right.

So the monetary policy shock should be a contraction.

Anything that should lead equity prices to fall.

Now think of this scatterplot.

That means that.

The scatter between Em and equity prices should be on,

you know, on a negative line, right.

With a positive M negative E negative M positive.

But you actually show that there are cases in which

M and equity prices go in the same direction.

And so they call these cases cases in which the

information the second channel here was dominant.

Okay.

So if you observe whenever is the policy announcement by

the bank next week that's going to raise interest rates

by 25 basis points.

And that was unexpected.

So you you measure something like this and you see

equity prices going up.

And he would say, well, in these specific episodes it

is quite likely that this channel was played and it

was important.

And that's what they do.

And, you know, they they classify each of these events

and then they say, let me take only the monetary

policy ones, and we only take those where I preserve

the negative movement between the supplies and equity prices.

Right.

All right.

Let's stop for literally five minutes.

So we'll be back at 43.

And then we do a final push to to finish

this off.

And if you have questions on.

The market.

So it's a good point.

Um, something from.

Um.

I think that's very.

Nice.

Where you can get.

More guidance.

For guidance.

For next meeting.

You should look at.

It in one direction.

But you're very supportive of.

Those.

Changes.

I think I don't think it matters is that whatever

variation of.

The in whatever.

Aspects is actually called in a causal sense.

So I think it's just a moment in time to

consider its introduction.

Yeah, yeah.

So it really depends on what you're what kind of

application reminds.

Us of the future and whether.

You can discharge meeting by meeting.

You know there is information in the market conditions that

inform.

And then the day of the meeting this plant is

very interesting because then, I mean, it's it's impressive, you

know, whether there's a reason for the crisis meeting or

standing off the table.

And how do.

You kind of answer the question about.

Something.

Um, importance of the position within the sector is important.

So.

So.

Was it the shop where it is?

The shop.

Is the shop who is.

Responding to the call?

So.

And many responded people, to the.

Extent that you have a mortgage.

You are welcome.

Whether there is no there is a chance also because

if there is no shock and you are doing.

Your mortgage taking.

Care of.

Your mortgage rates decision only when the central bank generation.

Also said.

Yeah, it's a business.

It's just the way it is.

That's that's very.

Unfair to say that this is the moment because then

we need to split it up as it is in

business, the way the finance channel is going to be.

There.

And that is the shock.

So if you were to rapidly capture, that will be

the best estimate.

That's.

Not fully back to your question.

So.

My best way to think about this is that if

you believe that you are going to have an effective

one.

You almost can flip the sign of, you know, the

information.

Shock is like the opposite sign, and still a monetary

policy shock that is coming from the central bank.

But as the opposite sign, I don't know if that

means, but I think I think it has been clear

it's still coming from action to the central bank.

So maybe it's just a bit of.

You know, these are wonderful, but it has exactly the

opposite effect on what you would expect from a monetary

policy.

Innovations like the one you've seen in the trailer with

Michael or with his parents.

You're on your own.

Yeah.

Yeah.

You can, we can.

Let me just, you know, I need to press on

to get to the end of this, and then we

can talk about the remaining remaining open questions later on.

Um, okay.

We're gonna spend some time thinking about.

Um.

So as I mentioned.

This is very active, um, and very exciting, to be

honest.

Kind of evolution of the literature, since this paper by

um, is really sparked a lot of work in trying

to understand how we can use this high frequency information.

And so then, you know, this paper came and all

these other people came on and said, well, you know,

there's this kind of information, in fact, that is biasing

effective responses.

Because if you believe that your monetary policy surprises with

no correction or a combination of these two, then what

you would get in a very narrow projection is a

downward bias in the effects of monetary policy.

Right?

Can you see that?

Anyone can was confused by the last statements.

Let me just say this.

This is key.

Okay, so if I were to compare the responses I

get from the instruments.

They're all instruments which I constructed by simply taking the

difference between these high frequency financial market prices and the

raw instruments.

But now controlling for the information effects, I would need

to find if this story is true.

And once I purify the instruments, I'm going to get

larger effects of monetary positions.

This paper on why that happens.

So don't be shy to ask.

The idea is that, you know, they say there is

a force that is pushing the opposite direction and it's

creating a downward biasing estimates.

So that's why this is important.

You may well underestimate how important the currency is.

If you don't do these steps here.

Now however, you know that the beauty of, uh, of

trading and research, some people said, well, you know, it's

not obvious that this information story is the correct one.

And is this, uh, very recent, very nice paper by,

uh, Michael Bauer and Alex Swanson.

Swanson, by the way, is one of the authors of

the very original paper I mentioned, which doesn't fit bigger

and more kind of asset pricing for finance.

The paper which kind of challenge this information on symmetry.

The quotation in this story is the following.

So let me go back to I mentioned this paper

here, which is taken as the you know, the ultimate

was taken as the ultimate evidence for this information effect.

Remember again, what we have here is a very simple

regression of how the forecast of these very informed and

good forecasters change when there is a monetary policy tightening.

When these people show is that there is a monetary

policy surprise.

And these people were forecasting, you know, unemployment to be

4%.

And just after monetary policy tightening, we forecast unemployment to

be 3%, which is completely inconsistent with what is right.

So they said, okay, let me take these gargantuan let

me think will be more careful about it.

So effectively what they're doing they're taking the change in

the survey.

Okay.

So 3% 4% in my example.

Just that I just gave you in the regress this

change over the surprise on the FOMC announcement.

That's a regression.

The argument of our answer is the following.

Imagine that there is some economic news that happens between

when the survey is taken, which is typically at the

beginning of the month.

And the FOMC announcements.

Okay.

Now obviously these people when they have served again they

will change their view of the world based on this

economic news that happens.

In principle.

The central bank will also take into account this information.

So the bank is also going to embed this information

in my y t y hat, you know, forecasts about

unemployment or however it may be that people don't understand

well how this economic news affect my policy decision.

So we're going back to what we thought was an

interesting, which is the error on the key.

So they they miss estimates on responding to the economic

news.

It turns out that these economic news is correlated with

the monetary policy surprise.

So it's correlated with the, you know, the error remake

of my kind.

Then there is an omitted variable.

Bias in this Campbell regression.

And so the logic of what these people did was

to say, well, now let me run again these same

regressions.

So I'm trying to explain the change in the blue

chip survey, which in our example was an improvement in

the economy.

You know, it was a minus one, 3%, 4%.

You regret it.

On the FOMC announcement alone.

This was the Campbell et al regression and you get

a negative coefficient.

Uh yeah.

Tightening in policy leads to a fall in unemployment or

a change in the slope.

Now I ran the same regression, but on top of

it adds any news that comes out before the FOMC

announcement.

Okay if I miss the announcement, I don't know.

Is on the 17th of August, you take, you know,

any economic release that is done between the first of

the month and just before the formal announcement.

And what they show is that you flip the sign

of discretion.

And so because of that, they say, well, it's not

really an information story.

It's not that you guys are learning from my policy

decision how the state of the economy is.

They are simply misjudging how my reaction function is.

Okay.

And this and this is correlated with the economic news

that was previously kind of ignored, or at least in

these societies was.

So.

Effectively.

What this means is that you need to have control

for stuff.

You need to purify these high frequencies of prices with

the information.

External information, in this case, macro and function variables that

predate the announcement.

So the approach is very similar experience to these approaches

one to this one and this one.

But the interpretation is very different.

So there's no thing of information symmetry between the state

of the economy, between you guys and me.

But it's completely different is that you guys don't understand

well, my reaction function, my guys.

And for some reason, these guys are correlated with the

kind of economic news that happens between the Bluechip survey

and the surprise.

Okay.

So this is really kind of.

This is what the literature is.

And there's been a big debate in the past few

years.

I think I would argue that they actually are active,

um, between kind of this view of the world and

this view of the world, um, how to say who's

right?

Um, I would say I've quite a lot of sympathy

for this approach.

Um, the information theory is, uh, it's plausible.

Um, but I think is is a bit too powerful

when you look at the numbers that there is such

a massive gap in how we understand the economy and

you guys understand economies, I think it's hard to sustain

that information.

So.

Again, you know, I don't want to influence too much

your views and you should read these papers.

And, you know, for my own view on on what

the right interpretation is for me.

Um.

All right.

So, uh, we see we've seen basically a bunch of

different monetary policy instruments.

Right.

So seeing the Roman and Roman narrative, we see the

high frequency, let's call it, let's call them raw surprises.

We clean the surprises to get rid of information effects.

We clean the surprises to get rid of a response

to news effects.

This leads to kind of conceptually the same objects, but

very potentially very different theories and potentially very different effects.

In the next ten minutes or so, we're going to

look how we're going to look at how to use

these things in our tools.

What we've seen so far, uh, local production and proxies.

What's what practice.

What do you have.

You have no idea what they are.

Proxies vars, uh, structural vector regressions, where you use an

external proxy that's going to turn out to be our

external series externally, that is external to the, the a

series of uh, uh, multiple times.

So.

We have D minus one here I corrected next time.

So this one we see so far this was the

uh, simple non parallel version of our local projection.

If you remember I told you imagine that someone gave

you the shock.

But now we kind of have the shock, right?

If you remember, I told you think of these instruments

as a linear function of the true shock plus a

noise.

Um, so it would be tempting to just plug our

monetary policy instrument here.

We cannot quite do this, or at least as long

as the the Omega term, um, I defined.

Empty equal to phi epsilon it plus omega t.

So in a function of the shock plus some noise.

If this noise was zero, then I could use my

instrument straight into the rocker projection.

But as long as there is some noise, then I

would need to kind of address this noise, because this

noise as an instrumental variable could lead to some downward

bias in the coefficients.

But there is a solution to that, which is you

can do a local projection ID and instrumental variable local

projection, where you basically do a super simple two stage

least square that I think you've seen in the past.

But if you haven't, it simply simply means that this

is the local projection you're going to run where now

you can see that there is the policy right here

instead of the shock, and you're going to instrument the

policy rates with your, uh, monetary policy variables.

Um, you are with your monetary policy instruments, whatever instrument

you prefer.

But Romer, the high frequency road information and the one

dimensional factor, the one factor, um, uh, the fact that

it's constant.

Um, it's very trivial to implement.

You know, you can call it yourself in a second

in Matlab, or you can use Stata packages that has

these kind of, you know, these are no aggression, right?

So you just need to say in Stata you would

just do the OLS, the instrumental variable or less, uh,

command saying that this is the whatever you want to

instrument.

And you would say that the high frequency is the

instrument.

Yeah.

Um.

Again, if you wanted to do local projections or introduce

nonlinearities, you could do it very, very trivially by adding

an interaction term here and just instrumenting the policy.

Right, interacting with the state variable you want to go

about.

Okay.

All right.

Now, what if you said you want to run a

bar?

So if you remember in our VR, you know, we

can estimate the VR with the last, we'll get the

reduced form residuals e which are the meaningless objects on

the sector box.

And our goal now is to obtain the column of

the B matrix that is associated with a monetary policy.

Remember each column of V is associated to a specific

shock.

Now we want to get the column of B associated

to the monetary policy.

So the way in which you're going to estimate or

you're going to bring these kind of monetary policy instruments

into VR is actually obviously kind of related to this

notion of two stage squares, but the one we implemented

is the following thing.

So imagine that in your VR you put the interstate

first in your bank account because you now have interest

rates, inflation after that product.

It doesn't need to be.

But you know it's going to be safe.

So I estimate my reduced from VR.

And I get an estimate of the reduced from residuals

from the policy rate equation.

That's my first equation.

If I recast is a reduced form residuals on my

instrument, I'm going to get an estimate of the impact

response up to a scaling factor of the monetary policy

shock on the interest rate.

And then what I'm going to do, I'm going to

take the fitted value of this regression.

And I'm going to regress the remaining reduced form residuals

from the second, the third and the first fourth equation

on this beta value and the coefficients on this variable

here, this fitted value are going to give me those

elements of the B matrix.

Why is that the case?

Because by regressing this guy on this guy.

Remember?

Remember the conditions we set out at the beginning.

We said we want something with the covariance between m

and epsilon I.

Different from zero.

So our instrument is correlated with the monetary policy shock.

And my students.

Is uncorrelated with any other shop J.

Okay.

And we argued that that's the case for all instruments.

So we say our instrument, it is uncorrelated to any

other economy.

Okay.

E1 which is the reduced form residuals of the var.

If you remember our.

Discussions in the last couple of weeks.

We said, well, this is a linear combination of all

the shocks in the economy.

You know, the linear combination of the monetary policy shock,

the mark-up shock and the curve shock.

But if I regress it on something, that only depends

on the monetary policy shock by means of orthogonality, who

is going to push to the residual or the variation

in this guy that is due to mark-up shops shocks.

So the defeated value is only due to the monetary

policy shock.

And now, if this guy is only delivering my monetary

policy shock, if I regress the other ideas from residuals

on this guy, you can do exactly the same thing.

Push to the residual.

Anything that is due to mark-up shocks and excursions, and

I'm going to only retain the variation in each of

these formulas.

That is due to the monetary policy issue.

Okay, so you do this recursively.

You know, for each equation you get a coefficient.

That coefficient is going to give you a B matrix.

And once we have the B matrix we're done.

Remember, the matrix only matters only for the on impact

effects.

And then we can go back to our matrix and

construct inputs responses the normal way.

But just keep on iterating for what the, uh.

The impact effects.

You know this one.

We'll just get the column associated with the interest rates.

The superscript I not not the other.

Because you only get this one because you would only

have, you know, to get the other columns.

We need information for the other structural shocks.

Yeah.

But you know, I'm working under the assumption that we

only care about the monetary policy shock.

And that would be enough to compete in Brazil.

Of course, if you want to know what the impact

of oil shocks and how they affect the economy, we

need to get a name for the oil.

So it would be that's why I actually have the

notes.

Mhm.

I think uh yes you could buy construct and oil

which is now an instrument.

And there are ways to use more than one instrument

for more shots.

And.

Yeah, but the logic of what I said just goes

through.

Proxies was because you use an external proxy to move

from a VA to the structural VA, because now we're

going to identify where we have identified effective methods for

the shot that we care about.

Okay.

Um, so I highly recommend having a look at this

paper by Valerie Irani.

Um, she, she wrote a handbook chapter for, uh, the

Handbook of Macro, which basically looks at and we will

be talking about.

And so she played around with different shocks with different

approaches.

She takes a turn for the shocks.

And if you look at projections, you compare them to

the Roman Roman shocks.

Um, and here I just put in some, uh, some

charts that show that unfortunately, some of these approaches don't

exactly give always the same answers.

And you're going to see the, you know, how these

information effects may be playing out and how these things

can differ whether you use Roman shocks or, um, shocks

and so on.

So I'll let you kind of, uh, look at these

charts, uh, and have a look at the paper.

Um, so another testimonial, this is just to show you

how things can look like in a local projection IV

or, um, in proxies.

Okay.

Let's spend the last time now, uh, thinking about sine

and diversity change.

So as I mentioned, this is kind of a, an

alternative is a very different approach.

Uh, and I would say complementary approach to identifying the

effect of monetary policy shocks.

As for monetary policy instruments, you can use this to

identify other kind of shocks.

In the East Lawrence example, you will just go somewhere

else and gather some data on some additional, you know,

oil price movements and so on.

The transition we're going to see how to think about

additional shocks.

Right.

Um, so this approach has been it's been quite powerful

and quite heavily used in central banks, uh, and in

the private sector.

So.

I mean, we've seen this uh IV or instrumental variable

approaches, which are great.

I use them.

You know, I use them a lot in my daily

in my daily job.

You know, when it comes to when the question comes

of, you know, what's the impact of monetary policy on

real outcomes in different states of the economy?

We often run this kind of say depending on the

projections we ask.

However, there are a few drawbacks.

A is not obvious that you can construct them for

all the shocks that you want.

Uh, sometimes, you know, you're constrained by the sample periods

where you can find these high frequency data.

We discuss that with assumptions and informational structure of the

economy.

There are things that can go wrong.

Um.

And sometimes, which is, uh, I kind of mentioned before,

you know, approaches that should kind of give you the

same results, don't often give you the same results.

So you wonder, you know, what's going on.

Is there anything that we don't understand that is kind

of causing these differences?

And there's one final point which I didn't mention.

Um.

Effectively both for the LV IP as Lpv, but as

well as for the proxies.

While you are effectively running a random variable regression as

and as any instrumental variable regression.

The instrument that you're using has to be relevant, which

is what we as we exogenous, which is what we

discussed for like more than half an hour.

We kind of argued we spent a lot of time

arguing that this is equal to zero.

No other shocks, but it has to be out of

bounds.

So this covariance between the monetary policy shock and the

instrument has to be large enough so that these first

stage regression is powerful.

And it turns out that, you know, in many cases,

these, uh, instruments are quite weak.

If they're weak, then you need to go to.

You know, it's more complicated to do inference and oftentimes

it gets very wide confidence interval, etc..

So now let's take a completely different approach and think,

okay, you know, we kind of if you remember, we

started the second lecture by saying we want to bring

this equation model to the data.

And we said let's start from something completely theoretical where

we let the data bring down the D.

Then we did all this thing about identification to work

out what the B is and so on.

But, you know, we kind of were ignoring completely what

our theory that arguably we should believe in, at least

to some extent has to say about identification.

So the question here is can we use the the

implications of our independent model to help identify the B

matrix is that.

And so let's go back to the model and let's

look at the impulse responses to our shocks.

Then we looked at the very beginning of uh class

one.

And so this is what is implied from a classical

shock is the if you remember, is the shock to

the Phillips curve, that is.

Reducing inflation, increasing outputs and reducing the interest rate.

So this is an expansionary, uh, possible shock.

We can look at an s demand curve shock, which

is gonna stand differently from the previous shock where output

and inflation were moving in opposite direction.

This is generating Co movement between output and inflation.

And the central bank is responding to this boom by

raising interest rates.

And then we can look at our monetary policy shock

which we discussed at length so far, which again leads

to co movement between output and prices as the S

curve shock.

But now there is negative movement between the interest rates

and these variables.

Right.

And so if you stare at these things come long

enough, you realise that there are unique predictions about the

movements among these three variables that are unique to a

shock.

This is the only shock where output and inflation move

negatively.

This is the only shock.

This is not the only shock where output and inflation

move positively, but it's the only shock where output, inflation

and interest rates move positively.

And this is the only shock where output inflation could

move positively.

But they insist the movement in interest interest rates and

either output or inflation is negative.

So can we explore this.

Information is unique features of the model principle.

So the idea of restrictions is that you bring these

kind of unique components to the matrix.

And what I just put down here is exactly what

I just told you.

The monetary policy shock, which is the third column of

the matrix, is the only one that leads to movement

between output and prices.

They both fall.

But the interest rate now moves negatively with these two

guys.

The Is curve shock, which is the first column of

the B matrix, the only shock that leads to positive

movement among the three variables in the Mark-up shock is

the only one that leads to negative movement in prices.

So you can see that you know, if you believe

that these are the only thing shocks in the world,

then these restrictions here uniquely pin down.

The cost of shocks that are consistent with our model.

Now they're going to be different from what the model

says, because here there are all the restrictions coming from

your five, your size.

You know, there are all your risk aversion parameter, a

frequency of price adjustment that uniquely pin down this on.

There is only one impulse response that is consistent with

our parameter values.

Well, here I'm being a bit more loose.

I'm saying, ah, you don't care.

You know what kind of combination of parameter values gives

me the signs?

But as long as it delivers these signs, I can

call these.

I'm quite confident that I can call this shock, monetary

policy shock, this shock a mark-up shock and this shock.

Can I ask a shock?

Can you see that?

So this is the intuition is a very powerful intuition

because you're kind of halfway through.

If you remember guys we discussed, you know, you can

either go straight to the data from your model and

do Bayesian estimation.

But that's very restrictive.

If you are taking all the equations of guess of

your DSG, you're believing in them and all those kind

of cross equation restriction or, you know, the restrictions that

come from your parameter values and the, uh, the condition

from your model have to be satisfied by the data.

So there's these on one on one, one part of

the spectrum.

On the other part of the spectrum, we have the

bar where we said, forget about your cross equation restriction,

forget about your parameter values.

The data is going to inform my D matrix.

And then, you know, with some assumption, we get the

matrix, this kind of somewhere in between saying, well, you

know, I cannot believe the model when it comes to.

The fact that in monetary policy, shock should increase interest

rates and decrease output and inflation.

But I don't really care whether, you know, you have

a frequency price adjustment of 0.7 or 0.5 or a

risk aversion coefficient of.

And so you allow the data to fit the signs

rather than to fit specific parameters.

Okay.

So we are in a bit a little bit in

between the completely updated approach or the straight jacket if

you want, of the estimation of the OSI model.

The implication is that this implies.

That we are not going to search for a unique

way, but there's going to be many bees consistent with

designs.

And so we're not going to identify a single model,

but a set of many models that satisfy this.

So our identification is going to be a bit looser

than before.

Question.

Uh, before we had infinite bees.

Right.

So the problem was that we had to find this

one.

But now we still find the infinite bees at this

point.

But before we have.

Bees that went all over the place here, we're going

to limit because the infinite bees.

The subset of steel leaflet bees that satisfy the science.

See what I mean?

Question.

That's the difference.

And so that's why you call it a set of

BS.

Because I'm not going to be able to tell you

whether one B is better than the other b.

Okay, so you're kind of giving up a little bit

on, uh, precision if you want, because now I have

a set.

This is called set identification because there is a set

of models.

There is a set of solutions that are all valid.

Okay.

I'm going to give that up.

But you know, I'm going to have a less crazy

assumption that let's say if you remember, you know, Trotsky

was like, okay, I'm going to set some zeros which

are like, oh God.

You know, I'm not sure that actually deserves hold.

You get a unique solution.

But that solution, maybe Cop one is saying, well, I'm

going to give up on, you know, this the assumption

is going to be a bit more general and less

straitjacket.

But the price I have to pay in this kind

of trade off is that now, instead of having a

unique model, I have a set of models.

Which of these ones is the right one?

I don't know.

Okay.

And so.

Yes, I said we were going to implement these is

exactly going back to that example last week where we

said there are infinite bees.

If you remember, we constructed this Q matrix that has

this property that q q prime is equal to, then

the identity matrix.

And we could construct infinite amount of B's that satisfy

our this our identification problem.

So that we're going to exploit exactly these.

And basically think of this as a loop.

You know I draw one of these Q matrices.

I construct a candidate B matrix that is the Cholesky

decomposition of my matrix times Q.

Once I have a candidate B I can work out

impulse responses.

I can compute all the impulse responses.

I'm going to look at them.

I'm going to see do the impulse responses satisfying the

signs that I imposed.

If they did, you retain your candidates?

If they don't.

You just throw away this drone?

You shake it again and you start from scratch.

And after a while you collect 500, 1000, five thousands

of these different candidates and you can plot, let's say,

the median across these 5000 models.

That's all satisfying my distinctions.

And that's exactly what I've done here.

So I'm done here.

I'm done for the monetary policy shock.

I impose the science that come from our model.

And you can see now that inflation output and interest

rates are moving the way I want them to do.

And there is no zero impact response as in the

critical position, if you remember inflation and output didn't move

on impacts.

Well we design inflation approach again impact effects on zero.

Now around this medium there are 5000 models that create

some kind of error bands.

But these are not statistically error bands.

These are identification uncertainty right.

I wouldn't be able to say that this is the

unique model.

Is the most frequent model that satisfies these restrictions, but

it's certainly not the only one.

Yeah.

Um.

Of course, you know, you can you can do.

Once you get in the logic of this, you can

do a lot of things.

You can say, well, I don't, I don't I don't

want to restrict only the science.

I can restrict only the size.

You know, I can say I believe the monetary policy

on impact has twice as much the impact on output

and inflation.

You're going to search through this infinite amount of matrices,

only those that satisfy this criterion.

Or you can say that the impact of monetary policy

shocks should be positive for periods after the shock.

It's.

You can play around with the restrictions of any kind,

really.

And as long as you have theoretical justification for it,

you know, you can you can just try and implement.

You can also impose restrictions on the a structural matrix

if you remember what this was.

It was the contemporaneous relation among variables, which was the

one that we said, you know what, the Taylor rule

kind of comes out, or you can even restate the

forecast, advanced decomposition or the historical decomposition of the shock.

Right?

So every time I draw this candidate, B I have

a solution to the identification scheme.

You agree on that.

You know I have a B matrix that satisfies all

our properties.

You can have orthogonal shocks.

I can compute impulse responses if I if I can

compute impulse responses, I can also compute the historical decomposition.

And I can see how my candidate B matrix affected

GDP in 87 Q4.

And if for some reason you guys have a strong,

very strong prior, then 1874 monetary policy had a massive

effect because you had the record of the fed and

you know that Volcker did something, then you could impose

that restriction.

You couldn't just go to that court and say, let

me just look for the B candidate that in 87,

Q4 has had such a strong effect on inflation or

asset prices or, you know, there is an oil shock

and you know that in 72 there was no crisis.

Then you want to have your oil shock affecting in

that quarter oil prices a lot.

Okay.

That's a kind of an idea and it's a very

general idea.

And you can use it in many different ways.

I'm going to spend the last 15 minutes or 10

minutes showing you a couple of examples of what you

can do on top of the restrictions that we just

discussed.

Right.

Um, to do so, I'm going to quickly describe this,

uh, very famous paper by an elderly, um.

Who was kind of, uh, who said, okay, I want

to know what's the effect of monetary policy.

Now, you know, there is a classical dichotomy whereby, you

know, if you believe in a classical model, monetary policy

should have no effect whatsoever on output.

Then he said, well, let me just identify a monetary

policy shock that is going to leave unrestricted responsive output.

So it's not going to impose any sign on how

output responds to the marketplace shock.

But it's put impose restrictions on all the variables that

are uniquely associated with a monetary policy shock.

You understand these are reserves.

You know, don't worry too much about why there is

a minus sign here.

We can spend the next two lectures in exactly about

this.

Just taking for take it for given a moment.

So you implement restrictions, you assume the price passes away

because we're just assuming that inflation is going to fall

when the shock is in, the reserves fall and the

policy rate is, then you do what I just said

many, many times and this is what you get.

So these bands now have all your mainframe models okay.

Because a combination of statistical uncertainty.

But also certifications.

So this is the set of models that satisfy our

restrictions.

We assume this going up fine, where something's going down

fine.

And we look at outputs and, you know, there is

a big kind of zero.

So typically there is no effect on output.

If anything is going up, which is very weird.

So this guy concluded, well, you know, the effect of

monetary policy on output.

Is not there.

According to the.

But then you know.

What I want you.

Do you know what I want you to understand is

that you can refine this approach.

By adding additional restrictions.

And it could well be that the restrictions we impose

here are not stringent enough to get the right effect

of monetary policy shocks.

You know, as I try to argue, it's a relatively

weak restrictions because they're just imposing design.

And so what these guys did, um, this nice paper

by Aristotle, they added some restrictions on the a matrix

or the, a representation of the data on top of

designs on the point of view of the shock.

They said, well, I don't just want the shocks that

engineered these movements between output inflation and interest rates.

I also want that if I were to look at

the A matrix that comes out of this, I want

a reasonable tailor rule.

I want a tailor rule where when output goes up

or inflation goes up, interest rates go up because it

could well be that, you know, in one of these,

you know, draws one of these D v candidates that

we looked at, there are some BS where it turns

out that interest rates fall when there is a massive

output boom, which makes sense.

So you can impose additional restrictions by imposing things on

this a matrix.

And so it turns out that if you do this.

This is going to be the same.

This is going to be the same.

But now we restricted the response of the policy to

output and inflation.

You can see that the distribution of feasible models failed

quite a lot.

And if anything now the impact of monetary policy on

outputs.

Exactly as you maybe were expected.

From then you can go on and you can go

even further.

And say, well, you know, still, I'm being quite rude

because I'm not just imposing very tight restrictions.

And the area that I tried to kind of give

you a sense of a second ago is that you

can try to think about.

In a negative sense.

You can think about how certain shocks have been particularly

important in certain areas.

But they mentioned already that each kind of draw each

B candidates is going to have a well-defined historical decomposition.

I can compute it.

I can look at it if I have a strong

prior for a certain period with a particular report.

And I could try to say, well, I want all

the BS that satisfies the particular section, the highest restriction.

And on top of it that if I look at

the specific order, the monetary policy has to be large

enough to a certain threshold, but larger than the other

shocks that hit the period.

And this is exactly the logic or the idea behind

narrative satisfactions.

Um, and there is this very, very nice paper and

Linda Ramirez, which basically took this idea of, uh, some

events from what shocks were particularly important and brought it

to this, to this approach.

So the only thing that they do is to say.

The you know, they think they look modern and they

are tourist attractions, you know, easily when you just need

a couple of them and you've got a, you know,

amazing job of shrinking the feasible set of models.

They said a in October 79th were you know, there

was kind of large, uh, shock for the Volcker inflation.

That was completely unexpected, even according to the Romans.

This has to be a positive monetary policy shock.

And secondly, they also say, well, not just the Body

Shop, but it has to be a very large shop.

It has to be a shop that is larger or

contributes more than other shops to, uh, the movement in

the days.

Okay.

And then they proceed with investigation.

They do not enforce the system.

So it's just these two things.

And this is what comes out so ugly is the

grey shaded area.

And red is the narrative centre stage.

So what happened here.

You basically have restricted massively the set of possible responses.

And it turns out that a you're shrinking massively the

set of feasible models.

And secondly, you're also kind of in a sense selecting

out of the many, many models in the holding restriction,

those that actually led to a fall in in output.

So these guys actually reached completely opposite conclusion of where

monetary policy can have quite strong and statistically significant effects

on outputs.

So this turns out to be a very powerful approach.

Of course, it also has its own shortcomings, meaning that

you need to have.

You need to be able to have a view on

on what happened in certain periods or, uh, what happened

in certain whether some shocks have been more important than

others historically, or things like this.

Um.

So I think.

It's quite important to understand how this procedure works.

So this is.

Think of this as a time period in your VR.

This would be a data point in your VR.

Okay.

Now when we when we do identification with the composition,

for example, for this specific time period, which is October

79th, you would get one realisation of the shock.

We agree on this because there is only one B

matrix.

You invert the reduced form residuals and you get your

series of structural shocks and there would be a contractionary

shock.

Imagine that would be a number here would be plus

one.

Well the restriction approach is doing is giving you for

each time period many different shocks that are consistent with

the many different ways that you that you are looking

for.

So these are my, my 5000, um, draws of the

B matrix that are consistent with the science.

Grey is only in reds is is 100 years.

So what these statisticians are doing are basically affecting the

distribution of shocks in that specific period.

Because we assume this, you know, we said in this

specific period, I want only the shocks that are large

enough to affect the federal funds rate.

So you can you can see how these curve distribution

has shifted to the to the right.

And this only restriction was enough to change the impulse

responses from the grey to the right.

So you can see how powerful it is.

It's just you know a restriction on one data points.

Okay.

Okay.

We're almost out of time and luckily we are at

the end of it.

So I just wanted to kind of quickly finish on

practical tools so you can write an essay.

There are many, uh, tools available.

Um, the ones that I think are most useful if

you want, especially to kind of keep working on this

stuff, are those that require you to get your hands

dirty with the codes.

Uh, and so it's up to you what you want

to do, but, you know.

He may be worth the investment of looking into Matlab

based stuff, because those are where you can see more

clearly what's going on, and you're going to be able

to recognise many of the matrices and things that we

looked in class, or if we were to go on,

you know, things like eviews of Stata, totally fine would

obviously give you the same results, but you're not going

to be able to kind of open up a function

and see how this restriction approach works.

In my experience, looking how the sausage is made is

is actually a good way to understand some of the

mechanics and understand better how these tools work.

So up to you what you want to do.

But you know, there are a bunch of, uh, toolboxes,

including one that I kind of wrote when I was

looking for jobs.

Lecture 14:

Those amazing skills.

And languages or computers and just those spaces.

Here are just illusions.

Using the Spanish.

Language.

Everyone.

Said that.

Because it wasn't.

Any.

Excuse me.

Yes.

All right.

Um, we'll be late.

Um, we are going to start topic two today.

Uh, which is going to be, uh, quite different from

what we've seen, uh, last week, in the last three

weeks, actually.

Um, so we're moving away from methodology and going a

bit more deep into a proper monetary economics topic.

So we're going to talk about inflation, um, which is

obviously quite a hot topic these days.

So the disclaimer down here actually particularly applies in the

next lectures.

Um, as we're going to touch and fuel topics that

are actually quite, uh, quite relevant, um, for what happened

in the last, the last couple of years.

Um, before I leave the material, uh, I just want

to check whether you've seen who you've been assigned as

a as a supervisor for the extended essays as them.

No.

Not yet.

Okay, so there should be on Moodle soon.

Like a spreadsheet where, you know, basically your preferences with

either Michael or myself.

Um, I've seen I've seen some of your proposals in

the preferences expressed.

So it's, it's quite a few of you on my

part of the course, which um, which basically I was

thinking about what does that mean for supervision.

So I think what I would like to do is

to have a joint session for everyone who might not

be around for this soon, so that you guys can

start kind of thinking about what you want to do.

Uh, I'll give you what is expected of you in

terms of the outputs.

And then according to the rules, I think we have

other two.

Um, you are kind of entitled to other tools, but,

um, supervision and but it's too many of you.

So I think I would need to split you into

either 2 or 3 groups and have, uh, smaller group

sessions on, uh, supervision for this part.

So I see I still need to work out exactly

what is the best way to do that.

Uh, but as I said, I'm going to try and

ask someone find a job that works for everyone that

picked my topic.

So maybe even next week or the week after.

When is there any week?

Not this next week for the one after.

So either.

Well, most likely it's going to be the one after

reading week.

We're going to have the first supervision session.

Uh, unless you have strong preferences for next week, in

which case you send me an email or, you know,

you coordinate with others and you let me know.

Um, if not, probably the first one is going to

be the the week after in a week.

And then, um, based on previous experiences in the second

and the third session is useful to have towards the

end of the term that allows you to do some

work and come back with, uh, a bit more kind

of, um, sorry questions.

Of course.

Our office hours.

So in the meanwhile, you know, you can you can

come to me, uh, if there's anything, especially on the

I mean, I don't think I'm allowed to kind of,

uh, give one on one sessions on the SC in

the office hour because I will be in first one,

you know, but if there is anything on the admin

side of anything else.

Uh, either by email or in office, our questions.

So like the group session is like an extra slot

of.

Now, Rhoda, Grace is going to be.

Remember exactly.

You need to check.

It's either 1 or 2 hours.

You know, we sit down all together, I tell you,

you know.

What kind of structure is expected of you in terms

of the essay?

You guys have a question you have in your mind.

The first one is going to be quite general, obviously,

because you didn't have the time to think about properly,

about what you want to do or what challenges are

facing.

While the second one, the third one will be, like

I said, smaller groups.

You.

What makes any sense to have like 20 people in

the room and listen to each other's challenges when it

comes to estimating.

But depending on numbers, which I haven't checked carefully.

Now I have 2 or 3 games and there will

be two additional sessions, or either 1 or 2 hours.

Does it make sense?

Okay.

Um that's it on admin.

Which means we can jump in.

Topic two.

So topic two is going to be about controlling inflation.

So in a sense you know you kind of you

went through the part of the course that means that

you can your model you wrote down your stable rule

worked out why the Taylor rule is important for deterministic.

We looked at Blanchard.

Can we look at what more can you do to

get variables in this model?

But we didn't talk too much about how effectively what

are the mechanisms through which you actually control inflation.

What does that means.

Down.

The price level.

And if you have targets, the target for the price

that is consistent with is consistent with inflation target.

So probably two is going to be about how we

do this.

We're going to see how you know we're going to

see we're going to look at it in a in

a more specific way.

Why the tailor over the euro down in the in

the model works in bringing down the price level targets

and inflation targets.

But we will also see that there are other tools

that can achieve the same goal.

And the whole name of the game for this topic

is to kind of consider, okay, we're going to have

all these different tools that basically allow us to achieve

the same objective.

Can we rank them somehow?

Can we say these is better than the other one?

Uh, this is less prone to errors.

And another one, what are the pros and cons of

doing?

Um, so that's objective number one, what we're going to

do in the next weeks.

And objective number two.

I would like you to get a sense of how

all these tools are going to be intelligence.

And the idea is that, you know, if you choose

one tool, you will need to give up on the

other tools.

Okay.

So just keep this in mind.

We're going to see that this is kind of based

on the link between the different ways in which you

can control inflation.

And surprisingly, maybe some of you some of these tools

may be physical tools.

So there's going to be a very strong interaction between

monetary and fiscal policies.

That's when I emerged from these two weeks of the

topic, to which maybe was not that obvious when you're

done remotely saw this.

Okay, so these are kind of broadly speaking, these are

the things I would like to take away from the

next several weeks now.

Um, kind of to do that, I need to review,

in a sense, what is the notion of the central

bank and what do central banks do?

Um, so just briefly, you know, I thought it would

be useful to then go through what, central banks in

the past.

And, you know, the first notion of a central bank,

uh, was as a clearing house for the deposit notes

of commercial banks.

Okay.

Um, so what that means for those of you who

are not familiar with, you know, how a clearinghouse, um,

mechanism work.

You know, if you go back in time enough and

you think about this class taking place, you know, you

would pay money to see bank accounts, then the other

bank would transfer the money to me for this lecture.

And, you know, back in the day, there were people,

you know, with accounts in the gold coins from one

bank to the other bank, deposit the money, then the

money would be deposited to me.

And this was very inefficient, right.

You know, it's efficient because it's dangerous.

You know, it was costly.

You had to move all this money from one bank

to the other one.

And what central banks, what we basically started doing was,

well, he started like moving all this money.

Why didn't you deposit your coins at the central bank?

So your commercial bank and my commercial bank deposits in

the bank.

Then whenever, you know, the payments would have, would have

been made.

You just need to move the money within the vaults

of the central bank.

Or even better, you must move the money in a

book, whether it's, you know, plus for my account and

minus on your account to make a payment.

Okay.

So that was really, uh, the first, uh, the first

notion of, of central banks and we've seen we touched

on reserves in topic one, if you remember, when we

looked at the time restricted by, um, with, uh, we

wanted to identify monetary policy shocks and suddenly, you know,

in one of my examples, there was this paper, famous

paper, like we had the standard variable inflation output and

interest rates in the reserves there.

So.

And I told you, you know, we were gonna talk

about this quite a lot.

And actually, today we're going to talk about resources.

So what are reserves?

Reserves are basically commercial banks deposits in the central bank.

Okay.

My example, you know, your commercial bank deposit money, the

central bank and the bank, in exchange, uh, gives reserves

to to the bank.

Okay.

And the way you should think about these reserves is

really as cash.

Okay, so the central bank is the monopoly issuer of

reserves, and nobody can issue reserves other than the central

bank.

And the central bank is committed to exchange reserves and

currency 1 to 1.

At any given point in time.

You take your banknotes, one probably don't have one, but

if you happen to have a £10 note, there is

a promise to exchange these notes.

Basically with reserves.

Okay.

Um, so the central bank was an easy monopoly issuer

of reserves and is also a monopoly issuer of currency.

Given that there is this commitment to exchange, reserve and

currency.

Want one?

Um.

And now this kind of a little bit out of

fashion.

Um, the essential one one's the central bank for the

old way of operating central banks was to get some

requirements of the amount of reserves that that commercial banks

would deposit in the central bank zone.

Okay.

So for those of you who have done any module

in banking in undergrad, basically the idea is that the

central bank would force some function of reserve.

So you are you are a commercial bank.

You want to lend money, but you can lend money

up to a multiple of the reserves that you deposited

in my account.

Okay.

So that's kind of an old fashioned way of uh,

uh, of a banking view.

And we'll see exactly why this is not, uh, this

is not relevant.

So central bank is the monopoly of reserves.

Reserves were used this way.

But beyond this role for reserves, there is an important

notion of reserves, which is that these reserves exactly as

currency provide some liquidity services.

Okay.

What do you mean by that?

Um, so think again.

This is kind of a bit of an outdated view,

given that we now all go along with that because

of money on top of cars.

But, you know, back in the day when you needed

to have cash to pay for transactions.

Right.

And so you would be very happy to keep £50

in your pockets because you have to pay for things

for transporting food and so on.

But by doing that, you would forego some interest because

you could have deposited the £50 in the bank and

get you or whatever deposit right in your account.

So this, you know, you may think this is completely

irrational, but it's not because cash as reserves provide some

liquidity services, which is exactly, you know, if you're hungry

you need food, you're going to pay for cash.

Okay.

So there is something special about reserves.

There is, uh, the same speciality of having banknotes.

And in a, in a more modern sense, you can

think of exactly kind of the same logic between Ammon's

accounts and a savings account where the country access your

money.

Uh, immediately.

Right.

Because you're locked in some whatever savings in those states.

Uh, it's still liquid, but it's not as liquid as,

uh, as it would be on your on your deposit

account.

So what I want to say is that you should

think of reserves as a particular and special durable goods.

On which we have these liquidity services that generate some

foregone interest.

People do not enjoy, which we're going to see is

going to generate some revenues to the fiscal authority.

Okay.

And this is called senior age.

For those of you who have seen it, you know

what I'm talking about.

If not, you just wait until next week.

And finally, you know, you know, given all of this

and given these properties.

Of reserves and given the fact that central banks are

not really sure of reserves, central banks now can do

several things with these reserves.

You know, they can buy assets.

Imagine your commercial banks out there.

I can buy bonds from you and your reserves in

exchange.

That's what you can do.

You can use reserves to fix a particular price.

You can say that $1 is equal to one kilo

and use reserves to kind of fix that price.

You can control the supply of currency.

Or you could you could provide fiscal revenue, which is

exactly what I mentioned here.

And I kind of mentioned in my the very beginning

of this class that, you know, if you do one

of these things, you have to give up on the

remaining on the other things.

So there is no way in which you can fix

the price of the dollar to a kilo of potato,

and at the same time, buying assets to target whatever

level of long range or control to control the supply

points, for example.

Okay.

So what we're going to do, we're going to see

how doing each of these things may help us in

pinning down the price level target of the inflation targets.

I'm going to use price level targets in a in

a way that I want to I don't want to

confuse you, but.

So when I say price level target I really mean

an inflation target.

Because if I know the price today and I think

the price level target for tomorrow, there is an increase

in inflation.

Inflation targets, this has nothing to do with um, average

inflation targeting.

If you came across this notion of something that if

as a reserve that, you know, done in the past

few years on price level targeting for that matter, which

is that means you're targeting some some price level.

Okay.

So we're all going to talk we're going to talk

about inflation here.

But I'm going to use a price level target.

Because again if I know T0P the price today and

tomorrow spec out the inflation target price level.

Um we're going to say um, yes.

So basically we're going to try and check how I'm

doing these things one at a time is going to

help us be in down inflation, and we're going to

try and rank them based on how.

Less how little we're going to try and minimise the

errors in achieving these targets.

I'm going to be more precise about exactly how we're

going to assess the goodness of these policies.

Um, to make it a bit more concrete.

Um, so what I thought it would be useful is

to put up the organic equivalent so you can see

the, you know, as big institution.

And there are many different functions.

What we've basically seen so far in topic one as

well as in, um, uh, the part of the course

with the course, Michael, you've seen what the monetary policy

directory does.

Okay.

So thinking about monetary policy strategy, thinking about how monetary

policy affects the real economy, how to manage trade offs,

all these kind of issues are dealt with within the

monetary Policy Directorate.

What we're going to do in the next two weeks

is to look at this bit of the bank, which

is the deputy, the directorates or the governorship or the

deputy governor for Markets and Banking.

And so these this is where monetary policy is implemented.

Okay.

So what you see in the price is, oh, the

Bank of England announced interest rates going up or down

whatever.

These guys are those who actually implemented decision.

And using one of these tools that we're going to

talk about are going to achieve.

That's, uh, policy announcements.

Okay.

And you can see that there is actually quite a

big chunk of the bank that we haven't covered yet.

Um, we're going to go back to, especially this bit,

the governorship of financial stability reform.

When we're going to see how monetary policy and financial

stability have a strong link, and what the monetary policy

actually do something to preserve.

So the main objective of this part of the bank

is to preserve a safe and sound financial system.

And we're going to see how monetary policy actually can

help in this respect.

Okay.

So this is just to make make it a bit

more concrete.

I'm not talking about you know, we're going to talk.

It's going to be quite a theoretical, um, topic.

And so I just wanted to keep it grounded in

what actually happens in reality.

Okay.

Um.

Again, trying to motivate what we're going to be doing

in the next two weeks.

I've got a quote from Chris Simms.

Um, you know, the low rates in his presidential address

in 2013, which I'm not going to read.

But the main point of this, of this quote is

that, you know, the simple Islam approach that you probably

have seen in your undergrad is kind of a very

outdated way to think about how monetary policy works and

how we can pin down.

Rising inflation.

However, there are a bunch of relatively simple but much

more gross reality models that we can use to get

a better sense of how monetary policy works.

And that's exactly what we're going.

Basically, the whole of this lecture is based on a

single paper, uh, by Laura martinez at rice.

Um, Laura was a student of Ricardo Ricardo.

He, of course, was a brown.

And this paper, um, which probably is being published now.

Um, so this is this is a working paper version.

Um, they told the material we're going to cover, however,

you know, in much more detail than is needed for

this course.

So what I tried to do in this part two

was to extract the most important information and in some

cases simplify some of the bits of analysis.

But this should be your reference for this topic okay.

If you're interested in getting more details on, uh, some

of the things working for.

Um.

So before jumping into the models, I wanted to again,

there's going to be a long intro, but I think

it's important to get a sense of why we're doing

this.

So why does it matter to control inflation?

And maybe this question was maybe more, uh, more interesting

in 2019 when, you know, inflation has been low for

30 years.

It is quite obvious that inflation is important as of

now.

You know, it was after this kind of big inflationary

spike.

We already feel the effects of inflation on our incomes.

You could see that for businesses, it was complicated to

plan investment because of it eventually.

What you care about is the real return on your

investment.

If you have no idea what inflation for the next

year, in the next three years, you can start to

make plans.

And so what I want to say is that inflation

does happen in a non-negligible, because maybe not as easy

to see before 2020.

This should be relatively obvious now.

Um, and in case you know, you're not aware of

it.

We talked about central banks, and we talk about what

the banks did in the past.

The main goal of central banks these days, and this

is true across nowadays, almost all central banks in the

advanced emerging world is to control inflation.

That's a primary objective of central banks.

It's the mandate for most of them.

There are some central banks that have a dual mandate

in the sense that they care about both inflation and

output or employment.

But inflation is by far the most the most important,

uh, um, goal from monetary policy by mandate.

And as I mentioned, you know, we have many years

of low inflation.

But at the moment we experience a very large and

persistent overshooting of the 2% target.

Um, and so I think it's quite exciting to be

talking about these things and to understand exactly how we

can, uh, how can control inflation.

Um, so I kind of hinted to this already in

the sense that, you know, when I put up the

quote by Chris Simms, why it is important to to

learn about this, this topic.

Well, partly because many of the stories that you hear

about or you read in newspapers are really not backed

by some theory.

And I want you to take away, you know, to

be up to date with the various theories that have

controlling inflation and how they work.

And what's the intuition for, uh, for them.

At this point, I mentioned already.

Uh, which is basically which is, I think, the most

important thing of the topic, which is you have many

different ways of doing things, and we're going to try

and see the pros and cons.

I also already mentioned that.

Controlling inflation requires policy coordination.

So there is no way in which you're going to

be able to think about the fiscal authority and the

monetary authority falling behind.

You probably haven't covered in your undergrad or previous courses

the importance of having an independent central bank.

And it is crucial to have independence.

However, some degree of policy coordination is always required, and

this is going to become very clear in the equations

that we're going to look at.

And finally, you know, it's uh, it's important anyway to

think about inflation because as a macro variable and as

any in any macro system that are general effects and

want to understand, you can't just think about a variable,

thinking about the other ones, just need to have the

full overview.

Okay, going closer.

And, you know, just to give you a sense of

what the approach that we're going to follow.

I mentioned already that we want to achieve a target.

I'm going to talk about P star as the price

level target that is consistent with our inflation targets.

And we are going to allow our central bank in

our model to assess macro conditions wherever.

If you remember when we talked about high frequency identification,

we wrote down a table rule where the central bank

was responding to inflation outputs in a forward looking way,

but also was making mistakes.

There was some hats denoting the expectation of central bank

or something that would happen that could not realise.

And so we're going to keep a similar kind of

logic here, and we're going to let the central bank

make mistakes, which we know we do all the time,

because we don't observe the true state of the economy

and then we're going to ask the following questions.

First, can monetary policy even deliver a pistol?

Right.

Is it possible at all and under which conditions?

It is possible.

If it is possible, we're going to see that every

approach will never, always be on target.

So every approach is going to deliver some form of

mistake or control error, which is going to map quite

neatly in, you know, the notification of monetary policy shocks.

You can think of these control errors, roughly speaking, as

the shocks that we identified in the first part of

the of the course.

Ideally, you want them to be small, and we're going

to look for the approach that gives the smallest possible

error control errors, um, to achieve our inflation targets.

And as I mentioned, we're going to try and check,

you know, the metric we're going to use is to

see if I were to compute how the realised price

level differs from my targets is going to give me

the control arrow, and we're going to be able to

work out analytical expressions for this, for this object here,

minus pretty stuff.

As I said, it's going to be really practical, but

we're going to have some some applications.

Sorry.

I have a silly question.

Is this what we are looking in terms of data?

Is this.

Consumer price index indices what we are looking at?

Yes, you should think of these as the CPI because

of the UK or the PCE, the personal consumption expenditure

or uh for the US.

Okay.

And in principle you could target any price, right?

No.

Tomorrow we wake up and go to targets.

Would you surprise indices.

You know the same theory would apply.

Okay.

So it's a general theory, but you should think of

it when we go to practice as something for, uh,

for CPI.

Um.

Right.

So as I said that the, the focus is slightly

different now, we've looked so far at how the economy

responds to money.

Now we're going to we're going to have a slightly

different approach.

We're basically going to treat the real side of the

economy as fully exogenous.

Okay.

We're going to move away from what you've seen so

far.

We have the monetary policy shock because the price rigidities

could affect the real effects.

Now we're going to assume this way.

And the reason for that is that it's going to

make things much, much simpler, not from an analytical point

of view, but it's not going to we're we're not

going to lose anything from doing that.

And as I mentioned already, we're going to study different

monetary policy regimes.

Uh, and we're going to have a key assumption, which

is that, uh, fiscal policy is Ricardian.

So those of you who have seen these things, it

basically means that the mix between that and tax finance

is irrelevant for that.

Um, you know, basically agents realise that if a tax

today or if they get a, uh, fiscal transfer today,

they're going to be taxed in the future.

So basically, the fiscal policy is going to play a

the least possible role in our, uh, in our models.

It's going to be passive in the sense it's going

to be in the background.

Uh, the reason for that is that if we assume

that, uh, fiscal policy doesn't play a role in determining

price level.

Uh, it's not going to play.

Yes.

The answer is yes.

So you will see that this distinction between fiscal and

monetary becomes very blurred, because we're going to think about

the consolidated balance sheet of the central bank.

And it's going to be one tool that is going

to be a fiscal tool effectively, which is senior age.

And seniors will allow us to control inflation.

It simply means that taxes and transfers are not going

to have an effect on the behaviour of consumers in

a way that is non-standard in a sense, but we

are going to relax this assumption anyway.

Basically, if you wait until topic three, you will see

what does it mean to deviate from this one?

For the moment, just take it as as a simplifying

assumption that is not too little mental in terms of

understanding what the logical mechanisms are.

Okay.

All right.

So last few chance before getting into the material I

find this task actually quite amazing.

So this is um, the price level I think this

is the PCE.

Uh, what the targets in the US, um, from the

2000 until, uh, just before the pandemic.

And this red line is the 2% inflation target.

So basically what I've done and normalised the price level

to 100 in 2010.

This is the 2%, uh, targets.

And you can see that it is actually amazing how

one single doing, which is the boundary you can control

basically millions and millions of prices that are out there.

Think about how the economy works and the amount sheer

amounts of, uh, different prices and interactions between manufactures.

It is actually really amazing how you can achieve this.

You know, the deviations of the PCE level from targets

are actually quite minor.

If you take an average over a long enough period,

you know, you could conclude that the fed has done

an amazing job, uh, in controlling inflation.

Obviously, things weren't as smooth in the last periods.

And so we had this kind of big spike in

inflation, um, which led the price level to be to

a permanently, uh, unless we have strong inflationary periods.

So.

If you question.

All right, um, can you claim that maybe something else

is driving that and the interest rate just happens to

be just okay and not interfere?

Um, you have one tool and you don't have another.

You could claim that, you know.

But as you will see now, um.

You will see how well it could be.

It could be.

You know, pinning down the causality is hard, but you

will see.

We see how the price level could deviate in crazy

ways from the targets.

If you went use a rule that pins down the

price level.

So in a sense, you know, without.

Let me, let me let me get back to you

in the next five minutes.

Okay.

Uh, I just want to show you the same chart

for the UK.

Again, quite a decent job.

And again, quite a big spike in prices in the

last few years.

This period here, for those of you who are familiar

with, uh, uh.

See kind of what happened in the economy.

In the UK economy after the crisis was kind of

the period after the global financial crisis, where the UK

depreciated very strongly.

Depreciation basically meant higher imported inflation.

You still had to buy things from from abroad.

And there was this kind of relatively persistent deviation from

targets in the period just after the crisis.

One for the euro area.

Again, for those of you who are familiar with euro

issues, the issue was actually relatively low inflation in the

period that followed the euro area sovereign debt crisis.

Inflation was kind of persistently undershooting the target.

And again, you had a big spike in inflation.

Now, is it always like this?

Well not really.

Look, if you look at Japan, you see that basically

the price level is almost at the same level as

it was in the year 2000.

Or even, you know, there was a relatively long period

of deflation.

The price level is falling very slow, right.

Um, so again, just to try and keep it not

too dry as an exposition, you know, we're going to

try and think about that.

You think we achieved this?

And how can we rationalise this?

You know what's going on.

Can we make sense with this data that's comfortable okay.

And which tools can we use to achieve anything stable.

Uh, and, uh, you know, precise control of an organisation.

Okay.

Enough with, uh, with introduction.

This is the plan for the topic.

Um, we have some time to answer your question, basically,

which is what happens if you don't do anything.

Okay?

Just don't use any tool to try and control inflation.

We're going to show that.

We know it's an active role for policy.

The price level is going to be indeterminate.

But what do you mean by that?

That there's going to be an infinite set of policies

that are consistent with real outcomes?

Or in other words, if the more we, you know,

you think that the new price level is one reason,

you know, that the £1 is worth actually £1 million,

prices should adjust and they wouldn't change.

Okay.

So I think these when I try and answer your

question, um, then we're going to look at four different

ways in which we can control inflation.

Okay.

We're going to kind of almost go throughout time.

Uh, and we're going to start with the Fisher approach,

which consists in choosing interest rates, which is basically what

we've been doing until the global function in the most

recent period of monetary history, until the global financial crisis

and the whole point.

And we're going to see actually why Taylor rules, why

you wrote down the Taylor rule in the model with

Michael.

Where the where does the data comes from?

And it's all going to be about arbitrage.

So the economic mechanism that's going to pin down inflation

is going to be up.

And then we're going to look at the monetarist approach

which is that is going to has is going to

have a different mechanism.

Rather than relying on arbitrage and forgetting about quantities.

Here we're going to choose quantities.

We're going to choose the amount of money in the

system.

And that's going to help us bring down, um, the

price level and inflation.

And we're also going to look at seniority rules going

back to the fiscal monetary, um, question.

We're going to look at the gold standard approach, which

instead is going to be rather than choosing quantities or

relying on arbitrage, we're going to fix the price level

to a specific commodity, gold.

And finally, we're going to use the budget approach, which

is we're going to use government borrowing as a tool

for.

Okay.

So again this goes back to the question about the

motor vehicle interaction.

And finally we're going to talk a little bit about

what I mentioned already.

The fact that it is useful to have independent central

banks.

But um, there is a need for policy coordination.

I think this should kind of come natural as an

implication.

What are we doing in the next couple of weeks?

Okay.

So let's start with the price.

I'm in terminal C program.

So the way in which I'm going to structure this,

uh, slide deck is that we're going to start from

a simple equation that is going to be key for

each of the subtopics that we have here.

Okay.

And then we're going to so it's going to be

a little bit more kind of reduced form in a

sense than what we've done previously.

We're not going to start from micro Foundation and just

clean up our model the way you did it with

micron.

Um, we're going to kind of reverse engineer a little

bit of those.

So the question that I want to start with talk

about terminus is the other question, which you should all

be familiar with.

So what is the return on a real asset?

Think of it as capital or real bonds in the

bond that pays you back upwards rather than bonds.

And lambda two plus one is the stochastic discount part.

Okay.

Have you.

I'm assuming you've seen the discussing discount factor with Michael.

Talked about it.

Um, just to recap, you know, what's intuition for this

other equation, which again, you know, you must have seen,

uh, many times there's kind of an economic intuition and

a more finance intuition.

Economic intuition is about being indifferent between consumption today and

consumption.

So the other equation is kind of the optimality condition

that underpins intertemporal choice of the household for consuming today's

consuming tomorrow.

And all this is saying is that if I save

one unit of consumption today, and I get one plus

R units of consumption tomorrow.

Because I invested in a real laundering capital.

I should be indifferent between these two choices.

So what?

That implies that the stochastic discount factor is basically what

is worth a good today in terms of tomorrow.

Okay.

So it allows you to exchange one one good today

and valuable today and what not.

The more investment intuition which I think you're going to

see with uh, in, uh, in uh, in class or

maybe you've seen already, it's kind of, it's kind of

similar in the sense it tells you that.

There should be no arbitrage.

Okay.

So in other words, there is there is can time

adjust the return on investment should be here.

If I invest one Apple and I get one plus

apples.

If I discount properly for risk and for time these

investments should be zero.

Otherwise we'll have everyone will go wrong.

You know that investment or short investment, depending on which

what what's the time in the day?

So in a sense you should think of the stochastic

discount factor if you want to look it from a,

uh, more finance kind of intuition as the object that

allows you to price any investment or any say in

future.

Same, uh, of, of profits in the future.

Okay, so I mentioned already that we're going to assume

that the stochastic discount factor is going to be fully

exogenous with respect to money in the past.

And this again, is completely different to what you've seen

so far.

The whole point of the mechanical model is that a

monetary policy shock can affect this.

And typically this assumption is known as the classical dichotomy,

which states simply that real outcomes do not depend on

the.

Right now, as I said, this kind of a, you

know, just fix this.

Now, let's try to understand where this is coming from.

That's actually a little bit of micro foundations.

And the way which I want to do this is

by um.

Think about a representative representative agent that is going to

choose the sequence of consumption and real bonds.

So Katie here is going to be a real one.

If you don't like the idea of a real bond,

you know, as I said, think of capital.

If you want something that pays off in real terms

and this representative agent is going to enjoy this utility

is going to discount things with discount factor beta.

And this is the very standard budget constraint that you've

seen.

Now many times.

It simply says that I can enjoy some consumption if

it is a nominal value constraint.

Okay.

So I'm writing everything in dollars.

I can buy some consumption goods and enjoy them and

get some utility from them.

I can save in some real bonds or some capital,

which is going to pay you off in the next

period.

And this has to be less than or equal than

whatever are fixed endowment, I guess.

Well, in this case I think is a um, there

is some uncertainty around your income, but this is an

endowment.

So you're just given ten outputs plus, plus minus one

with some uncertainty.

Okay.

And you're going to receive the return from your investment

in the previous period, which is the real rate.

No one minus one for whatever you chose.

You chose to save into minus one times.

Again the price level to make it to make everything.

Um.

The assumptions I'm making here is that there is.

I know the initial level of k zero, as you've

seen in in the standard equation model.

As I said, I'm going to use a different assumption

here.

I have an endowment endowment of uh, of one unit

of goods with some uncertainty.

And I'm going to assume another that limits as a

transversal condition, because in this notion of the natural limits.

Yeah.

So it's just simply that, you know, we can't borrow

more than the discounted value of your future income schemes.

Right?

So here is the usual thing.

You're rolling out schemes and equal condition.

So given these assumptions you should be able to kind

of.

So we're assuming.

That the consumption goods have the same prices.

The bonds in this case.

Yes because.

So that's why I think a real bond is more

precise.

So it's better to think of this as a real

bond that pays in consumption units.

But if you you know, if you don't like this

idea because you kind of struggle to see it, think

of this as capital.

But then you need to think of this capital good

as having the same price as the consumption.

Good.

So you're actually saying consumption goods is a bit sloppy

to think about in terms of capital is much better

to think in terms of a bond.

Okay.

So basically I say one apple and I get one.

Right.

So this is the problem.

Uh, you should be able to, you know, in five

minutes work out what are the what is the optimality

condition?

The only optimality condition is problem.

Um.

You know, just substitutes consumption and utility function.

You take derivatives with respect to your choice, which is

k, and what you get once you assume that the

budget constraints would be the quality and the initial condition,

plus the terms of condition, what you get in the

equation here.

Okay.

Is this clear to anyone.

Yes.

Okay.

So this is the parity condition.

Then we can close the model by assuming market clearing

conditions which are very simple.

In this case we're going to assume that ones are

in zero net supply okay.

Or that these asset K is an inside asset if

you want for those chemicals this term.

This simply means that in equilibrium, for every dollar that

is borrowed, there is someone who lends the dollar.

Okay.

And given that all our consumers are the same, eventually

nobody borrows anyone anything or borrows anything, right?

Is is just an, which implies that k in equilibrium

is equal to zero.

Because when we define, for example, you know, a foreign

economy, you can borrow from somewhere else, then you could

have a market condition for your k zero.

Um, but these are based on assumption.

And given this assumption, if it also follows that consumption

has to be as the vehicle doing so, everything that

is kind of perceived as an endowment has to be

consumed even inside.

Okay, so now that we have the market conditions and

the optimality conditions, we can define the equilibrium, which is

simply going to be a sequence of variables city real

bonds, the real rates and the price level.

With an initial condition and an exogenous process to Y

such that we have our household behaving optimally in the

markets.

Clear what the asset market and the goods markets.

So if you plug everything together, what you get is

our Euler equation where by lambda t plus one I

simply defined I substituted from the previous optimality condition the

market condition for goods.

So y is equal to c.

And I took my discount factor B and I called

v times y t over one lambda plus one okay.

So this is basically where our order equation comes from.

And you can see then you know why you are

talking about this economic intuition of being indifferent between today

and tomorrow.

Because this comes straight from the intertemporal choice of a

consumer that faces a consumption saving decision.

Okay.

Um.

We made a lot of simplifying assumptions here.

Um.

Oh, actually, something to, um.

Something to mention.

You know, we assume that this guy is lambda T

plus one is fully exogenous.

And you can see or you should be able to

see that in this indeed is fully exogenous.

We said that y t is an endowment with an

external process.

So it is given and it's not affected by any

endogenous variable in the model.

So there is no way that changes in P are

going to affect this guy.

Right?

Well, you know, I think of it as, you know,

ten plus minus one with some uncertainty, probability, p plus

one probability p one minus one.

That's the process for y.

And so this lambda t plus one doesn't depend on

anything else than the assumed exogenous process or y.

Okay.

So in this sense we're going to treat these guys

a as exogenous um stage analysis.

So um, I told you that, you know, we we

made some very stark assumptions, but actually these are not,

um, most of what we're going to be saying in

this class and this topic is going to hold.

You can assume, you know, you can move from an

infinite risin to a finite horizon where people live and

and die at certain age, and they take that into

account for optimising.

You can allow for eternity and have households with different

degrees of, uh, income or financial constraints.

You can allow for capital accumulation.

You can have assets with different maturities.

Um.

Basically, this Euler equation is.

All I want to say with this line is that

this Euler question is a very general relation that relies

on arbitrage, and is going to be there in most

of the models that we're going to think if we

can see this, at least in this course.

Right.

So what does it mean that the what is this

price level indeterminacy that we talked about.

So I'm going to define a reduced form equilibrium.

So I'm going to use the notion of reduced from

equilibrium because I'm assuming that um.

There is an exogenous process for lambda plus one as

we just mentioned.

Okay.

So if this is exogenous then the only kind of

endogenous variable or the reduced from equilibrium is going to

be the sequence of real interest rates and prices that

for given lambda t plus one allow for the other

equation to hold.

And you can see trivially that if we know this

guy because this guy is exogenous, we solve we can

solve for the reality equation.

Okay.

So the rate is fully pinned down by the stochastic

discount factor under our assumptions.

But you can see that there is nothing that brings

down the price level here.

There's not a question that tells me what the price

level should be.

It could be one 1 million and that wouldn't make

any difference for real allocations and for my consumption saving

the series.

That's what we mean by price level indeterminacy.

There is any sequence of prices that is consistent with

the Euler equation and with the equilibrium model.

Okay.

So how reasonable is this.

You think?

I mean, we all attach value to the money that

we have in our pockets.

And we all know that, you know, £50 are different

from £500 and £5 million.

And there is this kind of famous economist that, you

know, quite a long time ago said, well, agents do

not suffer from an illusion.

You know, we know we are not indifferent to any

sequence of prices, and we wouldn't be allocating resources in

the same way.

And so this result here is basically a failure of

theory.

It's not a failure of reality.

So there is something missing here that we need to

complete our model with.

Okay.

And so what is the what is going on here.

The issue is that what this is showing you is

that there is a role for policy, basically.

There is a role for policy to pin down a

specific and unique price level, which is going to be

the unit of account.

What do I mean by the unit of account?

You know, we all agree that it's you know, it

doesn't make any difference if you know, one pint is

£6 or £6 million, as long as that unit of

account is kept constant over time and allows us to

allows us to allocate resources over time, what price is

going to do?

It's going to take this unit of account.

It's going to say buy the £6, that's it.

And then everything else is consistent with that.

And that's that's what we mean by fixing the price,

determining the price level.

And without policy, there wouldn't be any possibility of bringing

down the price.

Okay.

Question is how do you mean competitive equilibrium?

So that we have to specify prices.

That is, uh, simply a just one in the sense

that.

I assume that these guys are gorgeous, while normally you

wouldn't have that.

So I would call it.

It's just the fact that, you know, we we assumed.

Assume these exogenous knew what an equation model would be.

Maybe it's maybe it's just a confusing thing, but, um,

it's just to make, you know, make it or show

that there is a difference between what you've done with

my code and what we're doing here.

Okay.

Um.

Uh, okay.

So I have shown that.

In this simple model that is still very general.

There's no way which can be down.

The price level or any price level would be consistent

with our oil holding.

And that's obviously a problem.

Now how can we fix this?

The first thing that comes to mind at least my

mind would be well, let's introduce nominal models in these

environments.

I mean, I if I let people say now nominal

bonds.

So bonds that deliver dollars other than apples, then by

arbitrage I should be able to pay down the price

level because prices become incredibly.

And so let's let's give it.

Let's give it a go.

We just create or consider a new asset which is

now in dollars.

And the diversity was one one plus it.

Okay.

So there is a nominal return asset if you work

through exactly the same example we just went through.

And you optimise, we take for certain conditions relative to

B, you're going to find the new Euler equation that

is associated with our nominal bond in this new Euler

equation, as before is simply saying, you know, I think

of the finance perspective you want, I'm going to receive,

I'm going to invest $1.

And then I see one plus $5.

I'm going to convert them into real payments or real

simple payments and experience.

And I'm going to discount this or uh, with with

my stochastic compact.

Okay.

So that's, that's why this Euler equation takes this form.

Again you can do the math and see that this

is going to hold.

So now I reduced from equilibrium is going to be

a solution for r p and the nominal interest rates

such that for given stochastic discount factor both Euler equations

are.

And you can immediately see that we didn't do we

didn't solve our problem.

You know, we just added an equation.

Yes, we have a new Euler equation, but we have

the one variable.

There is nothing that helps us pinning down the price

level.

Now, if you try and solve for the nominal interest

rate here, you can see that it depends on the

price level.

And we don't know the price level.

So we're not going to solve any problem here.

You know we know the stochastic discount factor but we

don't know this guy.

Yeah.

Um.

So.

Let me just conclude this bit on the price tag.

We're just trying to recap what we've seen so far.

So the first notion I want you to take away

is the notion of a unit of account.

So it doesn't matter what it is.

Okay.

Because once we coordinate on what we do in terms

of units of account, whether it's 110 or 100 is

really doesn't make any difference.

It's like, you know, think about measurements.

Whether there is a metre or is really doesn't make

any difference.

That's what I mean by account.

And this implies that without policy pinning down that unit

of account the price level is indeterminate.

You know, there are infinite defined prices that are consistent

with our reallocation and optimising the consumption saving decision.

And just bear in mind that, you know, we assumed

an exogenous stochastic discount factor.

So we have the economy holding.

And as I mentioned already, it's not really important for

many of the things we're going to learn in this

in this topic, but it's going to make our lives

much easier.

Just the key, um, is going to be only one

case in which this is going to be the way

we need to kind of work on somehow, or this

the assumptions are going to hold basically.

And maybe, yeah, maybe I'll wait for you to tell

me when you know I'm not in my position.

Just bear in mind at some point we need to.

We would need to relax this assumption in one of

the applications.

Just go ahead and let's see if we spot it.

Um, let's break for um.

Ten minutes and seven minutes.

537.

Otherwise, I'm never going to meet you again.

Thank you.

And of course, if you have questions in.

This application.

Whether.

It's already in the application.

Is the model.

Okay.

Good good, good.

Um.

And.

Oh, yeah.

That's a tough one.

Many people are.

I was out of curiosity.

I think it's 28.

29.

I think.

It's.

Fine.

I mean, it's just it's tough.

Okay.

Uh, I it's fine.

Groups of 14 we had last year.

It's pretty busy.

Yeah.

2020.

Yeah.

We can split into two.

The first one is going to be all together, and

then I can go ahead.

Okay, so.

It's kind of a think of the economy as a

closed system, which is very important is that you cannot

have an equilibrium is the state of my thoughts is

well stated.

So imagine we are kind of rolling out the spirit.

World, which is.

Um, to be useful.

And given that all houses are very you still price

the question, you know, you still price these bonds because

there's still a lot of small things in equilibrium.

Um, nobody will actually borrow that spirit because.

You can.

Honestly, because you have more transactions with like the relaxing

stuff and for example, virtual life discount factors like that.

You are more efficient than that.

Naturally you want to borrow from an equilibrium.

We have a steady state.

I will be the lender and you will be the

topic.

Exactly.

Now relax this assumption and start thinking about what if

people are different in the.

Same series?

I just don't.

Yes.

I do understand the idea behind I guess.

Okay.

Well, because it is in that notion of economics.

On the domestic.

So.

Imagine since you are hearing about this.

Uh, I think probably 500.

Metres to the economy and then the economy.

Yeah, right.

I think this is kind of what's going on.

But on top of it, this is where all I

can think of is that nobody would actually want to

sell and buy.

You see what I mean?

So in principle you would allow that to happen later.

Okay.

You know, remember this case or just coming up with

the additional cost.

Yeah.

But it turns out that under this condition, nobody would

ever want to be in that land.

Okay.

So once you aggregate, everything up is somewhat zero.

But in principle, you should still have an inside asset

with the model that you have to make.

So argues that what we're going.

To do now I think I have the keys to

zero.

But now we're going to allow for people to be

borrowing land, obviously.

Okay.

That makes.

Sense.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

So that's what.

Looks.

Like it's just interesting.

Isn't that actually two points when you answer that?

Question.

We have to use distance.

Oh.

You mean.

All right.

And proceed.

Just like the subsequent questions are built upon.

I'm sorry, but if you do it badly.

You don't have to apologise.

Which is that?

It's fine.

You don't need to get back to me.

So do you really think I should discuss a bit

more whether I should?

Yes.

Major.

Spanish.

Perfect.

Perfect job.

The descendant.

Yeah, right.

Question.

Which is which?

Is that supposed to be logical?

Uh, I was thinking about it while I was presenting.

I forgot what I've done.

Um, I don't know.

It seems to me that it's kind of a bit

of an expansion.

It may be that everything is in levels, but I'll

check the codes.

And, um, I think this is only levels because this

doesn't look like a straight line to me.

You know what I mean?

Like, if it was something like this should be a,

you know, a slope 2.002, then it seems that is

an exponential.

So I think I'm just passing the levels and plotting

the exponential level, the price level consistent with the 2%

growth in a period.

Um, I checked my, my code and I see what

I've done.

Um, okay.

So let's press ahead.

Um, so within this, you know, without additional tools and

without policy action, we have no hope in bringing down

the price level.

So now we're going to pin down the first level,

and we're going to start by doing what central banks

arguably did until the global financial crisis, which was choosing

interest rates.

So the key equation we're going to use is going

to be the Fisher equation.

Anyone who knows where the Fisher question is seated before.

Yeah.

What is the intuition for this relation.

You know.

Anyone wants to venture in telling me.

That's kind of the intuition behind this.

This thing, remember?

It's a neural condition.

And remember, the stochastic discount factor allows you to price

future retail sales revenues.

So one of these things revenues is a nominal bonus.

So this is the return from a real bond.

These are returns from a nominal bond.

All we're saying is that if I take these returns

and I discount them, I should be indifferent.

Otherwise there should be another opportunity or go wrong on

a real bond and try to buy some bad things

for that.

And, you know, just for you to see where this

is coming from.

We had an Euler equation on nominal bonds.

We have our well our equation on real bonds.

They're both equal to one.

You equalised one to the other one you bring one

as one part of the left hand side of the

zero sign and zero sign.

And these special question questions.

Like let's see, what does it do?

Well, in this case, obviously you could live without the

discount, the stochastic discount factor which is not the same

person discounting these two these two investment opportunities.

So it doesn't really matter.

Uh.

But this is simply equalising the equation from the real

bond and the equation from the nominal bonds.

Um, and, you know, given that this is positive, then

this thing has to be zero.

So there should be the same return from a real

bond, nominal.

But, um.

So.

What I'm going to do now I'm going to log

linearise this equation.

Well this sorry equation is an algebra condition.

And I'm going to I mean you've you've seen organisations

I think to death uh and other parts of previous

courses.

Previous courses.

I'm going to basically peak an approximation point for the

stochastic discount factor, which is beta.

I'm going to assume that there is a steady state

inflation rate of capital Pi.

And then you can work it out.

I think you're going to do it in class of

one.

Um, and what you're going to have to get to

is this expression here, which should be very, very intuitive,

is kind of very statement of what it is.

I think it's even simpler.

So if you have a nominal safe interest rates minus

expected inflation, you know, the log difference between the price

tomorrow and the price today, this should be equal to

the return on real bonds.

Okay.

And you know the usual convention that lower letters, the

deviation from uh log deviations from uh we want to

work it we to which you approximate.

The important thing, you know, since we're doing a first

order approximation, there's not going to be a role for

risk premium.

Um, what does that mean?

There is an expectation here.

So we don't know what the price level is going

to be tomorrow.

And a risk averse investor would care about that.

So in a word with risk there should be an

additional term here.

Because investing in a nominal bond exposes me to an

additional source of risk.

Right.

And I want to be compensated for that risk.

Think about the, you know, average arbitrage condition.

You know, if I'm given at the end of the

day, you you guys care about apples, right?

You know, that's what it was.

You know, your utility function.

This investment gives me our apples tomorrow.

These will give me the same amount of apples in

expectation that the price level is going to be something,

but it's going to be a risk on this future

price level.

So there's going to be an inflation risk premium if

I were to deviate from the first order approximation.

But we are ignoring that.

I think it's important to resolve this notion.

Okay.

Okay.

So let's introduce fiscal policy.

We're going to assume that there is a fiscal authority

that collects taxes or gives transfers to households, spends on

government purchases G and receives dividends from the central bank.

Okay.

I wrote it, you know, um, in real terms.

But of course, you can multiply everything by p.

All all of these are apples, so you can just

write right in nominal terms.

Uh, because of the equivalence, you know, we can assume

a way government borrowing is becoming irrelevant.

We're going to assume we're going to make it as

boring as possible.

We're going to assume that these guy g spending is

exogenous.

We're going to assume that dividends are set by the

central bank as a rule.

And the t transfer and taxes on the choice variable

of this fiscal.

Which means that basically the behaviour of the fiscal authority

is fully pinned down by other agents in the economy.

Right.

It's going to be a completely boring thing.

These exogenous these decided by the central bank.

So whatever the the fiscal authority wants to do is

pinned down by these various guys here.

Okay.

Um, okay.

So let's let's introduce reserves.

Um.

So this is a liability is a liability from the

point of view of the central bank.

And it has two interesting properties.

First of all, it's denominated in dollars.

So VAT is going to be dollars outstanding.

Be $1,000.

This is a nominal object but it's going to pay

a real return.

Okay.

So I'm going to do something that is actually quite

unusual.

You know central banks don't do this, but you're going

to see this is the easiest way to kind of

pin down the price level.

It turns out to be without spoiling too much of

what's going to come.

One of the best ways to do it okay.

So what does it mean that it promises a real

return?

It means that, you know, you give me $1 and

I give you one chicken tomorrow.

No, $1.1.

I give you real stuff, which basically means that if

I promise you a 2% real return, the price level

tomorrow is 1.6106.

I'm going to give you back this 1000 times what

I promised times the new price level.

It's all good here.

So the budget constraint of the central bank is going

to be super simple.

I'm going to have newly issued reserves today.

I'm going to pay back whatever reserves I issued yesterday

at the promised real rate times.

The price level, which is exactly what I've done here.

And then I'm going to make some profits or losses,

basically because I don't know what the price level is

going to be.

And if this is different from this, then you know,

this is going to be either positive or negative.

And that's the rule.

I'm going to transfer everything to the fiscal authority.

Okay.

Um.

The other kind of slightly weird thing I'm doing here

is that I'm allowing households to hold reserves.

In reality, only only commercial banks can hold the reserves

at the central bank.

But you know, this is a simplification that is definitely

going on in the banking sector that ensures deposits to

the households.

And then they have exactly this.

Now what's the whole point of having this?

We have a new asset.

And now consumers can have the option of using an

asset, which means they're going to have a new Euler

equation.

Right.

So again we do exactly the same steps before we

work out the condition with respect to V.

And this is what we're going to get.

The equilibrium is going to be given by our real

Euler equation with respect to the real bond.

So that's not different from the nominal.

The Euler equation with respect to be the nominal bond

is still going to be the same as the one

we've seen before.

And you see that this didn't help us remember.

You know, we had ise a function of p but

P we we don't know.

But now we have this Euler equation from our reserve.

And again you know, think about how we think about

the order equation.

You're discounting the future revenues.

The future revenues are simply going to be by given

by my best $1 today I get one plus x

t times p t plus one.

That's exactly what the reserve the real reserve is offering.

You brought back in real terms with tomorrow's price level,

which is what we're doing here.

Then discounted with the stochastic discount factor.

Okay, if you do the math, you're going to see

you know this is kind of trivial to.

To to derive.

But you can already see hopefully that because DT plus

one is both at the top and the bottom of

this fraction, we're going to be left with something that

is known, something that is the decision rule of the

central bank and the price.

So you can see from here that basically I can

work out a solution from Pete.

And once I know Pete, I can plug it here

and get a solution for the nominal denominator.

So since we solve our problem.

The other very interesting thing is that quantities are completely

irrelevant here.

You can see that v r t, which is the

quantity of reserves that the central bank has decided to

issue and the consumers want to hold is completely irrelevant.

Disappeared from our equations.

That's why I was mentioning this approach works by arbitrage.

Quantities are completely irrelevant.

There's no notion of quantity of money, money supply and

demand.

It's just forces of arbitrage that help us pinning down

the price level, because the consumer has to be indifferent

between holding a real reserve that offers a real return

and holding on.

Okay, so what I've done here, I simply reshuffled this

equation.

Okay.

To show you that we now pin down the concept.

So PD is going to be equal to one plus

r which we know it is exogenous is this is

given by the stochastic discount factor divided by one plus

XD.

And XD is something that the central banks decide.

So I can move XD in a way that is

consistent with my targets.

If I have a target for DT or 100, you

know I just work out for xds.

And that's exactly what I'm going to do next.

I want to write down a policy rule.

Okay, so put yourself in the shoes of the central

bank, or the central bank wants to do was to

say, well, I have a price level target P star

and I want to achieve chain.

Then I can choose one plus XT, which is the

grocery store.

And this reserve, you know, 1.2%, 1.2%, for example, 1.02002.

In my previous example, I can estimate with error what

the real rate is.

Okay, remember that hats in our previous kind of um

notation denotes the central bank forecast or assessment of where

R is, because you don't observe R perfectly in real

life.

And so this is giving you a policy just saying,

you know, you want this p star set x t

such that it's consistent with this equation.

Given your assessment for our for R which automatically leads

to determining the price level T equal to this expression

here.

So just plug the role into the definition of the

price that.

Okay.

And if you compute the log difference between p and

p star, you're going to see that there is.

The central bank is going to achieve the target.

But with some errors.

This error is going to be epsilon which is simply

given by the log difference between the realised real rates

and the central bank forecast or assessment over the 80s.

So I'm here sitting down and trying to assess what

the real rate is.

I make a tiny mistake, and that the difference between

my assessment and the realisation rate is going to be

my error relative to the p star that I wanted

to achieve that day 21.

So we're kind of done.

We have a quality rule.

You know, I'm sitting in this in the Bank of

England.

I can say, well, you give me $1, I give

you a chicken, and I'll give you well as many

chickens as are consistent with my p t I no

p today.

Okay.

And you beat yesterday and I can beat down inflation.

Gordon.

Yeah.

Remember, the whole point of this logic is arbitrage is

the difference between holding a real and holding a real

one and the nominal one.

Um.

I think I said that already.

Now, just quickly, I want to say why you you

know, this is quite, quite a straightforward or straightforward approach

to being on the price level.

But I told you that nobody actually no central banks

in the world behave this way.

Okay?

And.

There's no reason, actually, why we don't do it.

You know, in a sense, real bonds exist in government

issued real bonds.

For those of you who are familiar with these things,

you know, these there are tips in the US which

are exactly they are bonds issued by the government.

You know, we give the government $1 and they give

you one afterwards back in 1 or 2% assign or

whatever.

And so it's kind of interesting that no, no central

bank does it.

Maybe they should, but maybe there are good reasons for

why actually this not is not happening.

You know, we made some simplifying assumptions.

We assume that our households are holding the reserves, which

is obviously not doing the data or in the real

world, you know, you guys don't have an account at

the Bank of England, only your commercial bank does.

And there is also kind of, you know, you can

see that there is a the interaction between one time

fiscal policy I was talking about.

It's kind of implicit in this, you know, I told

you the central bank is going to make mistakes.

You know, if you do mistakes, you know you're going

to make profits or losses.

Inflation is higher than you expected.

You're going to lose them or gain money, and you're

transferring this money to the Treasury if you're making it

or otherwise.

You need to be funded by the Treasury if you

lose it.

So in this sense, you know, it does require some

coordination.

Fiscal policy is just the first example of how fiscal

and monetary policy are intertwined.

Okay.

Um.

Okay, so let me just recap on notation because things

are going to be a bit more a bit a

bit cumbersome notation wise from this moment onward.

So um, P is going to be the log of

the price level.

P star is the target of the price level that

the central bank wants to achieve.

I'm going to denote with this expectation sign the public

rational expectation of variables.

So that's standard.

Um and as in the rational expectation paradigm, the expectation

of at time t of t is not equal to

p.

So you know, the usual thing of no new shocks

there is no epsilon expectation.

Things is exactly, uh, the same thing.

Um, I'm going to use when I use hats to

denote the central bank's expectation.

Of the variable.

So in this case this is the central bank separation

at time t of the price level in T plus

one.

And the last kind of maybe more confusing thing is

going to, you know, I'm going to allow for an

expectation from the point of view of the public or

what is the target of the central bank interest.

One and I'm going to allow even the central bank

to be unsure about its own target in the sense.

In the future.

Of course, you know, today there is make no sense.

But, you know, I can be unsure about the future

target I want to achieve.

Because, um, depending on the economy, I may want to

sell a different style t plus one.

Okay.

So we need to assess what this number is.

If I start iterating over, you know, in the future.

So we had plus one and we had star T

plus one different.

Because if the central bank has an expectation for the

price level, they will, uh, expected to be the target.

Um.

Right.

There's going to be a difference between.

What you want to achieve and what you can achieve

with that.

So this basically is going to include the arrow because

there is an expectation about the arrow you're going to

make, right.

You know rationally, you know you're going to make some

errors.

And these people will include that.

Right.

But in a sense you can think of the deviation

between this guy and this guy as a plus one.

Yeah.

Okay.

So quickly I want to see what happens if I

now add nominal results.

And the reason why I want to do this is

because that's what the central banks actually do.

You know, since the banks issue nominal results, they can

say they actually offer an interest rate on these reserves.

Okay.

And so let's try to do it again following exactly

the same steps as the one we've seen with their

reserves adjustment.

They note.

Now I've t as their return on this nominal reserve.

Right.

And V is going to be the quantity of reserves

issued by the central bank.

So everything is the same.

I've got a plus one.

So the reserves that issue have to be equal to

the reserves I issued yesterday, plus the interest I paid

in the reserves.

If I make profits or losses send them to the

Treasury.

And that brings down the fiscal role, the key constraint.

And you can see basically already that v t is

essentially the same as the nominal bond.

You know, as safe as nominal bond is nominal interest

rate is one period bond is the nominal bond.

So there's absolutely no difference between these two objects.

So what it follows is that the interest rate on

the nominal money has to be equal to the interstate

on the reserve just skipped.

You know, basically if you work out the first order

condition relative to BT, you get exactly the same expression,

but with IB instead of IE.

So it has to follow, given that these two other

questions on the same that I is equal to IV.

So.

This really doesn't.

Quite help us because, you know, we know that these

two assets have to have the same return, same nominal

return.

But, you know, the price level is still undetermined.

Indeterminate is right.

Because there's nothing here that brings down the price level.

Um.

However, we can choose this IP.

Right.

And the first thing I want to do is to

say, well, if I were to choose this interest rate

reserves in central bank, I can choose to set I've

equal to, you know, 8%, 2%, 100%.

Do I have any chance of, of, uh, bringing down

the price level?

Okay.

And the way I'm going to try and do this

is starting by the Fisher question.

Okay.

The Fisher question now has to hold with the interest

rate on reserves.

And I can use the the Fisher equation as a

policy.

You know, let me just take the central bank that

says I've consistent with the Fisher equation okay.

And not just with the Fisher equation, but a Fisher

equation where, you know, I have a target for either

p t and p t plus one.

You see the logic of what I'm doing and saying,

let me take this Fisher condition.

The Fisher condition is expressed in terms of prices.

I have a target for these prices both today and

tomorrow.

I can fix I've equal to this guy and I

can see what comes out.

Let me see if I can if I manage to

bring down the price level.

So this is my role.

Okay.

For for setting I've and what I do I plug

this rule back into the Fisher equation.

And this is what comes out.

What this is telling me is that p t is

equal to p t star, which is my target.

The expected value of p plus one minus p t

plus one star you might target tomorrow, minus the difference

between the true rates and my assessment of the.

So if you study this equation, this kind of remind

you of topic one plus one where we're looking at

the simple kind of simplified equation model.

And we're we're thinking about ramshackle conditions.

You know, the first thing that should come to your

mind is that there's nothing in front of this expectation

of plus one.

There's a difference equation that disciplines this equation.

But in other words, if I iterate this condition forward,

there is nothing that bounds the price level today.

It's those kind of things.

This means that, you know, if tomorrow's expectation of the

price level is 1 million, Pete is going to adjust

immediately to 1 million.

Right.

We're violating all the convention conditions, or the logic of

our unique stable equilibrium that we looked in the first

class.

And this basically known as, you know, the failure of

nominal pegs.

So you kind of just fix the interest rates consistent

with the Fisher equation to a certain level and be

able to pin down the price level.

But I'm a bit puzzled.

Central bank can reset their targets in every time period,

but not necessarily the desire to keep it constant for

five teams or to change it every year.

The inflation targets?

Yes.

Why do you?

Why would that be relevant to what we're seeing here

is a general question.

It's a question because I'm not able to follow.

Like is it even or is this irrelevant.

It's kind of relevant to this discussion.

You mentioned that you have a inflation target of 2%

right on target of 2% for given prices today.

You can work out what your star and the star

plus one is consistent with the inflation target.

And you can in principle say I'm going to have

to fix I because I can fix it.

You know, I know that this equation has to hold

so I can pick the interest rate or reserves.

The interest rate reserve is going to pin down the

interest rate bonds, which means the Fisher equation has to

hold with my interest rate on reserves, which means I

can pick the interest rate or reserves consistent with the

price level targets that I have.

But if I do this, I end up with something

that violates all our uniqueness and stability condition.

So.

That's a large order.

All right.

So this is still kind of normal which.

Is still an arbitrary approach.

It equals I assume that the demand for both normal

bonds and very similar in a way that one way

and the other way is in the real world.

The reason this is because it reserves enough and there's

a world where they don't equal.

Right.

You're jumping a bit ahead and I'll cover exactly what

you have in mind.

But in principle, I kind of I cannot disagree with

the, the, the principle which is think about a household

or as two assets, okay.

You can save into assets.

These two assets are identical by arbitrage.

If these two assets are identical, they have to offer

the same return.

Now if you violate arbitrage, if you violate with something

badly on because nobody would want to hold this one.

And everyone works for this one or the other.

Well.

So you need to put yourself in the shoes of

a consumer and choose to save into assets which have

the same payoff structure, the same risk properties, and so

on.

There's no reason whatsoever why these things should be different.

I'm going to get to the Association of Reserves in

a second.

This is kind of more of an implement.

What you have in mind is more of an implementation

point that has to do with the central banks that

interest rates.

There are many different interest rates, but in these words,

there's no reason why reserves and bonds should be different.

Okay, I'll get back to you in ten minutes.

All right.

So basically all I wanted to tell you is that

if I pick and I can pick now because I'm

issuing nominal reserves, any interest rates that I want on

these reserves, I'm going to move nominal bonds to equalise

those returns.

I'm going to write down my rule conditional with a

consistent with the Fisher equation.

And so I need I need something more.

Okay.

What does that something more mean.

It means committing having an interest rate that is more

aggressive if you want in a sense.

What do I mean by more aggressive.

So this is the interest rate rule that we looked

at a second ago.

And now I'm going to add a term that penalises

any deviation of the price level targets.

So any deviation of the realised price level relative to

the target okay.

So I'm just saying okay, if there is a discrepancy

between the target and the price level, I'm going to

be more aggressive.

I'm going to raise interest rates by one okay.

And let's allow this phi coefficient to be greater than

zero.

This is known as a salient rule.

You know if you look at it it looks like

a little bit like a terror rule.

The only difference is that you are targeting a price

level rather than inflation.

Okay.

Now, if you were to do again the calculations that

we just done, which is this is your rule.

You put it back in the Fisher equation, you iterate

things forward.

This is what you're going to get.

What you're going to get is that DT is going

to be equal to your target, plus a bunch of

terms that are deviations of the real rates to my

expected expectation of the rate of the target tomorrow relative

to what I expect the target tomorrow is going.

B plus a term that depends on p t plus

t, the deviation of velocity plus the target that is

multiplied by this object here, which you can see for

t that is large enough, is going to go to

zero.

This is greater than.

Greater than one.

There is a minus d.

And so we basically get back to a word where

this term is going to disappear.

If this large enough okay.

And so we basically are going to get a unique

bounded solution for the rate of the problem that we

had in this part here where we were expectation could

move the price level today by simply having a much

more aggressive tailor rule that penalises deviation of the price

level from the central bank today.

And with that, we now have an equation that brings

down the price level and we can work out what

they mean in this.

Uh, as we done before.

What do you see when staying in this equation?

You can immediately see that the errors you're going to

make are much bigger.

If you remember before when we were issuing error reserves,

the only mistake we would make was the difference between

our assessment of the two years to the realisation of

the real interest rate today.

Here we're not just have the difference between the realised

rates and expected rates, we have all the differences.

We also have the difference between the targets and what

I expect the target to be in the future.

On top of it is cumulated over the horizon that

I'm looking at.

This is a sum of errors.

Now until, you know, at some point in the future.

So intuitively you see that this approach leads to bigger

errors relative to the real interest rate reserves issued by

the central bank.

Let's move to tenor roles.

So what Taylor is, is simply exactly the same role

as before.

But now we're going to penalise deviation of inflation from

the inflation targets.

Okay.

You do the math again and again.

You get something that pins down.

Now inflation delta P with some boundary condition that depends

on phi Phi is greater than one.

This guy goes to zero.

And so we pin down the price level and inflation

as a result of its.

Yeah.

So in this Taylor rule and the Mixolydian rule is

still assume that.

Um, the expectation of people's for the price level would

not go to infinity, right?

Is this some kind of implicit assumption that, uh, that

the phi can be big enough?

Basically, you pointed to I think we you know, what

people consider a weakness on these.

This approach, which is agents need to believe the central

bank.

When you guys read about credibility of central banks.

It's all about this.

Fine.

Right.

And so agents need to understand they're going to be

aggressive enough so that you bring back, you know, you

kind of call this a correction mechanism.

You're going to come back any deviation from whatever expectation

such that the boundary condition holds.

And there's a unique solution.

But it's implicit in this logic of tailor rules.

And it's crucial for these things to work.

And I think it's a weakness of the whole approach

because um, again, think about the area right on reserves.

You didn't need that.

It was no expectation about future expectation about prices from

the point of view of households.

Suggest the central bank's prediction about the rate.

Okay.

Um.

All right.

So.

So basically what we've seen so far is the kind

of theoretical underpinning for why the Taylor rule that you've

written in your model is such an important device to

a pin down the unit of accounts, right?

And b, allow your model to be unique and stable

in the sense that the solution, equivalently might be unique.

Now, obviously, um, there has been an enormous literature on,

on the Road and uh, which actually started, uh, or,

you know, back in the day, it was also like

in an empirical kind of there was an empirical side

to this nature.

And there is this famous, uh, rule written by John

Taylor in the 90s, which basically stated that the interest

rate would respond, um, to deviation of inflation from a

2% targets.

So he assumed these numbers kind of assumed the 2%

inflation target and 2% real rate.

You can see that, you know, the response to inflation

is some these two things are it's 1.5.

So it's larger than one as you would need.

Here to get rid of this boundary condition, to get

this thing not to explode.

Um, and as I, as I was mentioning, there's been

a lot, a lot of research on the Taylor rule.

Um, you know, back in the 80s, when inflation was

under control, people were asking whether this Taylor principle is

coefficient of 1.5 is something.

These two things was actually satisfied in a lot of

work on that.

Um, there was a lot of work in trying to

understand whether this rule kind of could approximate the optimal

monetary policy response, you know, Max, trying to maximise minimising

losses.

Um.

Whether it's possible to generalise it, to include other, other

kind of variables in these and in particular, there was

a big literature on whether the, the low interest rates

in the run up to the global financial crisis were

actually instrumental in causing the global financial crisis.

So what I have in this chart is the actual

federal funds rate set by the fed, together with the

implied federal funds rate that you should have set according

to the zero role written by John Taylor.

And you can see that, you know, in the 80s

and in the early 90s, did a relatively decent job.

Uh, if anything, it was policy was tighter than what

the Taylor would have implied.

But after the.com bubble.

The fed funds rate was very much lower than were

implied by the ten year rule.

For a very persistent, very persistently so very large period

of time.

And some people argued that this difference, you know, the

integral of these lines was kind of important in generating

the financial excesses and financial imbalances that led to the

global financial crisis that came in 2009.

And in a sense, this is what we're going to

is really the top the kind of topics we're going

to cover in topic four, we're going to look at

the notion of financial crisis and the role that one

side policy can play in either causing or limiting effects.

So we're going to go back to this to this

chart.

Also, and this chart is just to show you that

this is just for the Covid periods.

There's this kind of cool tool from the um.

So what if it's one of the things that's going

to allow you to change the ingredients of the table

roll and see how the predicted policy rate would change.

And you can see that there is a lot of

uncertainty.

So these things are very much kind of active area

of research.

Um, and it's been subject to a lot of, you

know, debates.

I just wanted to give you a sense of how

different the policy implications would be if you followed different

data rules.

Uh, this is the Covid period.

So by how much you would have needed to tolerate,

um.

So there are some issues, however, that I mentioned already.

The arrows.

So while this kind of obvious, there is the second

issue which is a bit more subtle, which is that

we kind of imposed a terminal condition on RT.

So we basically assume that DT cannot explode.

That's what we've done with our files.

However.

There's no reason why prices could not explode, right?

You know.

It does make sense to impose terms and conditions on

output, because output is made of finite resources.

And it cannot be that, you know, you have output

choosing.

But for prices, there's there's no reason why they shouldn't

do it right now.

As a unit of account.

If tomorrow we wake up and you say, well, it's

not £1, it's £1 million, who cares?

You know, as long as they want to buy everything.

So in principle, you could have.

This terminal condition that we impose is a bit loose,

is a bit theoretically incoherent.

Right.

It doesn't stack up with the idea that prices are

unit of account and who cares?

So there is a slight kind of, uh.

Uncomfortable notion of imposing this terminal condition on prices.

And if you're interested about this in the paper by

Cardano and Laura, it's quite a long discussion about this,

but I just wanted to mention, because I think it's

interesting.

And finally, um, there is one important aspect which is,

you know, we started by linearising our model around a

fixed point.

You know, we decided that there was a point on

which we want to log in as well.

And so in a sense, as you start this, if

you log linearise around a point and you take your

first order approximation, you're kind of you need to leave

around that point.

You can't go too far away from it because God

knows what's the truth.

If you are too far away from the points, uh,

around which approximate.

And so.

Um.

And so what I want to do here is just

a very simple example to give you a sense of

how badly things can go.

If you ignore this, normally it is an approximation of

the steady state.

And the way I'm going to do this is by

simplifying even more of our model.

So I'm going to assume a way uncertainty.

So now it is a constant.

You get ten apples over periods.

So the stochastic discount factor just becomes beta.

That would be white plus one over white.

So that's gone.

So there's no uncertainty whatsoever.

And there is a constant inflation target pi star that

is greater than beta.

Again just for simplicity then you know you take your

nonlinear Fisher equation.

The first equation we looked at in this in this

section where pi t plus one is the cross inflation

rate.

And now we're going to just do a small tweak,

which is we're going to assume that the nominal interest

rate is bounded by the zero over bonds.

Or in other words, the nominal interest rate is going

to be either something that, you know, the interest rate

that comes out of this expression here, okay, we know

the target.

Well, if you think about a rule to achieve your

Pi star, you can write down a rule for it,

which is exactly what I have here.

Um, consistent with the, well, the Taylor rule.

But the main, the most important thing is that, you

know, the interstate is either going to be by given

by this expression or by one.

So basically the nominal interstate cannot go below zero.

Okay.

And this is the only kind of deviation we're going

to do to what this is about.

And let's try to see.

What happens.

Um.

This is the standard.

This is the rule consistent with differential equation.

This is the Fisher condition.

Okay.

And basically what I'm what I've done here, I just

combining these two functions here, I just plugged in their

all into the equation and this is what I get.

So basically this is the equilibrium this super simple model

okay.

And you can see that if you try to look

at steady states okay.

So I'm going to remove time subscripts and equalise things.

There's going to be two steady states here.

It's going to be one where pi t is going

to be equal to pi star.

You can do it super simple.

And the algebra is trivial.

But there is another steady state where pi is going

to be equal to beta.

Remember beta is the discount factor is smaller than one,

which means that there is a good steady state and

a bad steady state where we are in inflationary state.

Okay.

And so what I want to show you is basically

this line which is the phase diagram of this model.

So this model is so simple that you can just

plot it in a phase diagram.

We have pi t here infinity plus one.

Here you have the usual 45 degree line is usually

around the 45 degree line.

You are in equilibrium.

And the blue line is simply this expression here okay.

Which is, you know, flat one under certain threshold.

And then this is this curve.

And you can see that there are these two equilibria

here, the equilibrium where inflation is positive and equal to

the rates, and the equilibrium where inflation is steady.

But to be done here in equations they state.

So think about Japan when we started our charts.

You could think of Japan as being in this point

here okay.

And if you were to ignore this, you know, if

you are to kind of take your organisation and say,

well, you know, that's the only you know, I'm going

to just look around this kind of approximation point.

You're going to completely ignore this steady state, and you

wouldn't be able to make any sense of the first

chart.

I've shown you of the difference between the US and

Japan, for example.

Um.

Okay.

I have ten minutes.

I want to cover, um, very quickly some, you know,

something related to your question.

So let me just conclude on this, on this section

by as I said, you know, the most important thing

here is to know that inflation in these, according to

this approach, is being done by arbitrage.

That's what I think is the most solid interest rate

is real payments on reserves.

Nobody does that.

We will use state law rules.

That's what we want all the banks to.

Um, and the way in which Taylor rules or wicks

and rules work is for states to respond more aggressively

than were implied by the Fisher equation to deviations of

prices for inflation to target.

Okay.

Um, okay.

I want to close eight minutes.

I want to give you a little bit of an

idea of like how things actually work in practice.

Given all this, you know, that I, uh, just let's

think a little bit about what happens in real life.

Okay, so the truth is that if you look at

what central banks do, they set many interest rates.

Okay.

And.

In particular, there are three key interest.

Rates that are set these days by central banks.

The one that you read on newspapers is decide which

is the target is typically equal to the target rate,

is the fed, is the fed funds for the US,

is bank rate for the UK, or the only rate

for uh, for for the euro area and this interstate,

you can sit in between two other interest rates and

interest rates on reserves, which is basically the safest overnight

return in the economy.

And this is going to act as a lower bound

because of arbitrage.

Again, if I allow you to borrow money at this

rate, there is nobody, nobody else is going to offer

a lower rates because then it will always come to

the central bank.

There's going to be a discount rate, um, at which

the central bank is going to lend to commercial banks

if they are in trouble.

Imagine that.

You know, you guys are all commercial banks.

You get to the end of the day, it turns

out that you cannot borrow from others to, you know,

clear your balances.

You come to me and you know that you're going

to be able to borrow from me at a discounted

rate.

So these interest rates can act as an upper bound.

Now the target rate is somewhere in between.

And you should think of these really as the interbank

markets.

So imagine again if you guys are national banks.

You know at the end of the day you need

some money because you need to clear your balance.

You borrow.

If you don't have enough cash you are in the

interbank markets.

And that is a big market.

We need to be bounded by these two interest rates,

okay.

And the way in which the central bank implements these

interest rates is basically by conducting typically open market operations,

which really is moving around the amount of reserves in

the system.

Okay.

So you guys have reserves in my account.

I can either buy bonds and give you more reserves

or I can sell your bonds and you guys give

me reserves in exchange.

By doing that, you know, there are people at the

bank, in the markets Directorate.

Actually, the very beginning kind of fine tuning is purchases

and sales to target.

The interest rate is going to hold, uh, in the

bank markets.

Just to be able to visualise this.

This is what, um, kind of is a way to

see how things worked, at least until the global financial

crisis.

So think of these.

Forget about these solid line.

Think of the downward sloping, dashed and blue line and

solid blue line as banks demand for results.

Okay.

So.

Basically what you have is that you're going to have

the upper bound for the interstates, for the, um, for

the discount rates discount window and the lower bound given

by the interest rate or reserves.

And then there is this discontinuity here, okay.

Which is basically.

Is going to allow the central banks by moving reserves

to target a specific interest rate.

I stated that you want to achieve.

So imagine that we are in this situation and we

say, well, now we want the interest rate to be

lower, then I start.

Then you would just, you know, shift the quantity of

reserves in the system, which is which you control.

And by moving it to the right, you're going to

be able to lower the policy rate that you want

to target.

Okay.

And you could also shift the discount rates and the

cycle reserve such that this corridor is going to be

symmetric.

Right.

So you just increase the amount of reserves.

You shift these interest rates down and you're still going

to have your symmetric corridor.

Um it depends down there.

Just to show you how this works in practice.

You know this grey area is the corridor.

And you can see that the discount rate and the

interest rate reserves can change over time consistently what the

target should be.

And the blue line here is the kind of realised

rates, the realised interbank rate which is the target.

And you can see that there are very, very small

deviations from the target.

So these kind of it's quite, quite precise.

Here's an example from the Bank of England central bank.

The ECB does the same and they expand on the

same.

This kind of a very well established approach.

Again what happens in Japan.

In Japan you are in a different situation.

We are in a situation where the target aids is

stuck at the floor of the corridor.

Okay.

And the reason for why this happens is because because

of the QE operations of Bank of Japan over the

last many, many years, the system is basically inundated with

the reserves.

Okay.

Such that think of this line moving all the way

to the right.

You know, you you black you down so many reserves

in the system, the now this this vertical line is

kind of all the way down here.

Okay.

And so what matters really is the lower bound or

the interstate reserve.

That's the only thing that pins down the interstate target

Interstate.

And in a sense, this is what I tried and

I just tried.

This diagram represents exactly what I just said.

And in a sense, this is how it works.

So what QE has done was to kind of purchase

bonds from you guys in exchange of reserves.

Okay.

So we created basically reserves financed this purchase of bonds,

which means that quantity of reserves increases massively, which means

that you get this.

We all get in a situation where we get to

the bottom of the call, and this is called the

reserve system.

And that's how monetary policy is conducted these days.

And now you're going to move into the states by

basically changing the interest rate of reserves, the sense you

can kind of decouple the purchase of one of the

there is a decoupling between the tool of purchasing bonds

and moving the reserves.

Um.

Okay.

We're kind of out of time.

Available for guidance.

If you have seen for guidance with the code.

Yes.

So I mean this is not not particularly important.

I wanted to leave it with the discussion you guys

have with Michael.

But you know, the important thing to.

Lecture 15:

Um.

And she.

Has brought me to see her.

I think I.

Can see, like, I was just.

Yeah.

And so.

I think.

It's really good.

For you.

It seems like, you know, one day, you know.

Yeah.

I mean, I understand, like.

Oh, I'll.

Be the one talking about it.

I think that that's.

Okay.

Yeah.

I had no idea, and I stopped.

Reading it.

Yeah.

I don't think it was an angel.

So I think.

It's just.

It's.

So.

Oh, yeah.

Oh my God.

Yeah.

It was like whenever.

You're talking to her, I think.

Is that.

Okay.

Yeah.

I.

Think I think what's it?

Gonna.

Take.

Yeah.

Wait, wait.

I'm sorry for being slightly late.

So, one quick admin thing.

Uh, I think you received an email, uh, saying, uh,

when the first provision for those of you for doing

the asset with me, it's going to be before class

the Tuesday after next.

Um, it's going to be a one hour and a

half, uh, session.

As I mentioned already, the way I'm planning through the

sessions is by, um, I mean, the first one is

going to be slightly different.

It's going to be mainly, I guess, me talking, uh,

telling you, I guess, what is expected of you and

what I kind of expect for the essays, how to

structure the work and so on.

Of course.

Plenty of time for Q&A.

Uh, if you have questions, but I don't expect you

to come with like, very well-defined ideas on topics and

so on for technical questions that in my face, um,

while the second and the third session would be more

on, uh, the actual work that you're going to do.

So if you are facing them with your estimation questions,

they may have.

Um, and those sessions, I was thinking about speaking you

in two groups.

So I don't have enough, uh, enough interaction.

Otherwise it's all of you in single sessions.

We're going to be running out soon.

Um.

So that's really it in terms of admin.

So unless are any questions on that.

Um let me just before we jump into the second

part of this, uh, of the second background.

So when I finished talking to today, um, and then

reached something that is quite different.

So before jumping into the new material, let me just

recap, uh, what we have done last week.

So we started by kind of formally showing what we

mean by that.

So it is an important concept.

And if you remember we wrote down a model in

nominal terms.

We let our big assumption in terms of uh the

income process.

So there's going to be an endowment economy with some

uncertainty around the income that you're getting.

Um, and then we had the conditions imposed, some market

conditions in our economy.

And we got to this Euler equation where the main

point that we, uh, the main point we kind of

made from, from this derivation was that we can solve

for the real interest rate as a function of the

stochastic discount factor, which is fully exogenous under our assumption.

But we have no information whatsoever on crisis.

So the solution and the unique equilibrium of this model

was completely independent of what the price level is.

Okay.

So think of this as being you know, given the

discount factor, we know that, you know, if you give

me one apple today, I can give you two apples.

Tomorrow there will be a real interest rate of 100%.

But the price of the apple is completely undetermined, whether

it's $1 or $100 or $1 million, it really doesn't

make a difference to the equilibrium allocation.

Um, but obviously there is something wrong because, you know,

we all know that we do care about the unit

of account, and we don't care whether we have £100

or £1 million in our pockets.

Okay.

And we showed that, uh, if we were to add

nominal bonds to the model, we actually wouldn't.

So at all the problem would still have this price

level in determining.

And we concluded that we, you know, because of this

indeterminacy, there is a role for government in bringing down

the price level.

Okay.

So we just this this part was really to show

why there is a need for the government to actually

pin down the and work out.

Okay.

And then we considered a bunch of, uh, um, different

approaches within what we call the Fisher approach, which means

choosing interest rates.

Um, and remember, the key thing I want you to

remember about, about this part of the, uh, of topic

two, is that the whole point of choosing interstates is

to exploit arbitrage relations.

So if you remember what we had done last week,

you know, there was absolutely nothing about quantity.

We actually we have shown that quantities are completely irrelevant.

The quantity of research issued by the central bank, we

used the notion of reserves.

This quantity of reserves is completely irrelevant to the equilibrium

and bringing down the price level.

And we just relied on these arbitrage relations.

Um.

We also introduced this notion of um, a real reserve,

which is something that we don't observe in reality and

is, you know, in a sense, this is a bit

of a weird notion in the sense that you give

me $1 and I promise back to us right now.

I think sometimes you get lost in the algebra and,

you know, we did all these derivations, but I wanted

to make sure that the intuition for these arbitrage, you

know, why arbitrage works in the price level.

And I think this came up with, uh, some of

you on the, uh, in the Q&A after class last

week.

So think about these reserves and the arbitrage relation as

follows.

So we know that the real equilibrium is given by

our equation.

Okay.

So for a given estimates of this discount factor we

know whether your interest rate is assumed.

The real interest rate is 100%.

So you give me an apple today I give you

two hours tomorrow right.

That's the real the real economy.

Now the central bank steps in and says, you give

me a dollar today and I give you two hours

tomorrow.

Now, by arbitrage, it has to be the device monopoly.

Today is $1.

Can you see that?

Because if any different price today for that Apple would

imply arbitrage opportunities.

And you would see people growing into either the real

bond or the real investment for the real reserve.

And so there is no other price apart from $1

for one apple that is consistent with an equilibrium.

And we just rely on this powerful notion of arbitrage.

I mean, it doesn't matter how many reserves I want

to issue and so on.

Okay.

And so the whole idea of choosing interest rates is

to rely on notions that are similar in spirit to

this real reserve.

And this idea of arbitrage example, which I think is

the easiest one to get.

You know, I just gave you this string here.

We saw that if you wanted to do it with

nominal reserves, we need to go a little bit kind

of way to be a little bit further.

And you know, it's not enough to promise a nominal

return on a nominal reserve to bring down the price

level.

Why?

Because we saw that if we were to do that,

we would still get basically would pin down the interest

rate on nominal bonds, but there would still be a

disconnect between the real side of the economy.

Well, it would be these two equations here.

And then the stochastic discount factor behind area rates.

So we wouldn't be able to do that.

And then we discussed table rules and how we need

basically to aggressively respond of deviations from either the price

level from its targets on inflation rates to estimators to

be able to be done.

In other words, one end up in situations where, um,

conditions basically satisfied.

Okay, that's kind of a quick summary of, uh, what

we have done last week.

And then we discussed, um, in the columns, we discussed

something that I maybe want to be quickly assigned was,

uh, issues with Linearisation.

Just a key thing to remember here is that.

To get our world, we have to realise the model

and the steady states.

And so we're just working on in one equilibrium.

And those rules work within.

In, in, in a space that is not too far

away from that equilibrium.

But as soon as you allow for a kind of

nonlinear solution of the model.

And so you solve for the, you go for the

global solution.

So you can see that you have different steady states,

um, which means that you can either be the good

steady state, the positive inflation rate or in a liquidity

trap.

And we saw how this liquidity trap could kind of

rationalise maybe, uh, the experience of Japan that we saw

at the very beginning of the lecture with a very

low inflation and interest rates.

Uh, and then we discussed going back.

These things are done again very quickly here, just remember

that before the global financial crisis, the, uh, typical way

in which these are also implemented with the critical system

where reserves were scarce, the central bank would move around

the amount of reserves okay, to targets in interest rates.

And for a given downward sloping demand curve is likely

increasing would reduce the target interest rates, which would come

out from your table, for example.

But then we also said that, you know, for very

large shifts in the demand curve, for whatever reason, the

interest rate wouldn't be wouldn't be able to move too

much because there were two bounds for the interbank interest

rates, interest rates on reserves and the discount rates, uh,

which come to the bank and borrow money from.

Okay.

So this is how most central banks or central banks

were operating before the global financial crisis.

The exception being Japan, and as a result also all

major central banks.

In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, QE was

implemented.

What was QE?

She was basically a massive expansion in the amount of

reserves.

So basically the central bank creating reserves to buy to

buy government bonds, which shifted this vertical line all the

way to the right.

And you ended up in a floor system where now

the interest rate is pinned down by the interest rate

on reserves.

So it is the lower bound on this on the

part of the US, and this is in the framework

we operate in.

Okay.

So going on the ECB, the fed still operating the

floor system.

And there is a big policy discussion around whether you

want to stay in a floor system or whether you

want to go back to a corridor system.

And again, I mentioned some of you who say is

after the class time, uh, a quite interesting episode of

a podcast by David Beckworth, which is called Macro Musings.

So for those of you who are interested in knowing

more about these things, there is a an episode exactly

on the virtual floor and control systems.

Um, just as an aside, okay, enough.

I already lost 15 minutes, and we're quite a lot

of, uh.

Thank you all for guidance.

Just have a look.

Uh, you've seen it with Michael.

Um.

All right, so what we're going to do next is

to go through three additional ways of bringing down the

price level, which relying completely different forces.

Okay.

There's no there's not going to be arbitrage in more.

We're going to just, uh, look at, um, various approaches

and we're going to kind of go back in time.

Um, we're going to go to the monetarist approach, which

basically by choosing money, somehow quantities are going to matter.

And this is an approach that was, uh, particularly prevalent,

prevalent in the late 70s, early 80s.

And then we're going to go to the, uh, gold

standard approach, which is choosing banks, which again, was going

further back in time, uh, in from in the 80s.

And then we're going to touch on the fiscal theory

of the price level, which is as and.

So this is just to give you a sense, remember

the way in which you kind of approach this, this

whole topic was to start from some important key equation.

We were looking at it, trying to gauge the intuition

of what this equation is about.

Then we kind of micro found the little bits where

this equation would come from, and then we'll try to

start to write down a rule that was consistent with

with this equation and see what this rule.

Hopefully it will pin down the price level.

And we will also try to rank these different rules

according to the errors that each rule would imply in

targeting the price level.

Okay, something actually I forgot to mention last time.

So if you remember, we said that the one of

the conclusions of the interest rate rules is that the

payment or reserves seems to be the most solid in

the sense that it's the least error prone rule, um,

between the real payments or reserves, the bookselling rule or

the Taylor rule.

And I kind of give you a little bit intuition

by looking at these, um, by looking at these awards

just for.

Yeah.

So that'll be all this this term here basically.

And we said here you have an infinite sum of

stuff that goes from zero to infinity.

Uh, there are many terms that is really positive in

target and so on.

While on the on the real written resource, you would

only have the contemporaneous error that you make in assessing

what are your actions, if you remember.

If you find it more intuitive, one way to think

about this is to compute the imagine.

You are to compute the variance of the error.

Remember that the error is defined as the price level

minus what we want the price level to be.

If you want to compute the variance of these objects,

you will have some variances okay.

And so obviously you know you kind of if you

have in mind one that would minimise the variance of

your errors.

Okay.

So on top of that you know intuitively I think

the more objects you have the more the more more

prone error prone you'll be.

But you can see it mathematically by just taking advantage

of this.

Um.

Okay.

Um, so let's go back to our one case approach.

And the first equation in the key equation we're going

to look at is this equation here, which is uh

known as a model demand operation.

So what you have here is on the left hand

side of this equation, you have money, uh, as a

fraction of total expenditure and consumption.

Good as usual.

This would be the price of the consumption goods.

Uh, and we already kind of talked a little bit

about money.

Uh, money is a very particular good that provides people

with some services.

And we may we may already the example of, uh,

which may be nowadays less, um, less evident why now

is so special.

But, you know, if you're just only a few years

ago, if you wanted to buy lunch, you had to

have some cash in your in your pockets, having cash,

you know, pockets implies that you're forgoing some interest because

you could have had that cash in a deposit account.

And so you're very happy to forego that interest because

money is facilitating some transactions.

Okay.

It's maybe nowadays a bit peculiar.

But again, we said at the end of the day,

you know, now you can think of your Apple Pay

or your phone as, as mine.

So we do have these cash banknotes in your pockets.

You can do it with your phone, but there is

still some foregone, foregone interest from having the money on

my Monzo account or to a savings account to give

me some interest.

So there is still this notion of a special wire.

Um, so then quite intuitive intuitively, what is a question

is telling you is that the amount of money that

you demand for a given amount of, uh, consumption that

I, you know, my consumption basket is going to depend

somehow on the nominal interest rate.

Why?

Because the nominal interest rate is exactly the foregone interest

that you give out when you are holding on.

Okay.

Um, and so the higher the interest rate, the less

I want to hold money in my pockets, because the

higher is going to be the foregone interest that I

have.

And if you notice here, there are um, so there

is there's the interest rate, but there is also a

shock.

And this shock is going to be quite crucial in

what we're going to do.

So the shock if you think of we're going to

have microphone is one microphone shocks.

But we're going to see what the shock is going

to show up in the optimisation problem.

And you should think of these as being some exogenous

thing that makes me willing to call more money policy,

irrespective of what the interest rate is or irrespective of

what my consumption expenditures are.

Right?

Um.

So one important thing I want you to remember is

that money is actually a inherently complicated, uh, concept.

And there are many, many there's a huge literature about

why we need money and what is the role of

money.

Right.

So this is just one example, but there are many,

many other kind of ways in which you can think

of money as an important feature of the economy.

But at the end of the day, for what we

need to do, we don't need to know about what's

the deeper reason for why we need money in an

economy.

We just need you guys to care about money and

in particular way.

Um, we're going to have one in the utility function,

which I think you've seen with Michael.

And I really don't need to understand why I attached

some utility money.

Right?

And we're going to get to the end of the

class.

We're going to go back to this point.

You know, there is a I think there is a

false myth about, you know, you need to understand money

to understand inflation.

That's absolutely not true.

I mean, it was not true in the previous, uh,

with the Fisher approach.

Right?

Money never appears about existed and we're still able to

pin down inflation.

But again, there is a another layer which is I

don't really need to understand what's the theory behind money,

I just need money to drop in some condition.

And you guys is optimising engines to, to care about

money.

Um, so I think, by the way, I think you've

seen probably this equation in various different forms in your

previous studies, um, that are.

You know, there is an enormous literature on this money

demand equation.

And there are actually quite, quite a lot of names

attached to it.

Um, some of you may have heard of velocity, which

is the inverse of this object here.

So if there is less money than the expenditure of

consumption, you need money to circulate very quickly, you know,

to allow for these purchases to happen in the economy.

So that's why the inverse of this thing is typically

called velocity.

Um, and somehow this whole kind of topic we're going

to cover sometimes is referred to as the quantity theory

of money.

So if you, you know, if you've heard about this

names in the past doesn't get confused.

We're talking about exactly the same thing, just different ways

in which, um, we can refer to this equation.

Um.

Okay, so there are four important properties of money we

can have covered already.

Uh, one, the fact that, you know, it pays zero

interest.

And so there is some foregone cost in holding money.

But the other important thing is that, you know, the

private sector, the private sector cannot short money.

So, you know, I can have negative one balances in

a sense.

I kind of issue my bank notes and give them

to you.

It's legal.

Uh, and maybe you wouldn't want them anyway.

And what this implies is that there's going to be

a zero bound on interest rates on bonds.

Right?

So if bonds were to offer a negative interest rates.

Then why would you have all those bonds?

Since you can hold an asset that pays zero interest.

So that's why the presence of money really generates bond

interest rates that we looked at last last week.

Um.

The second thing I wanted to stress is that, you

know, this is a question you can potentially bring to

the data.

You know, we take the logs of these things and

you get some, you know, you can measure money, you

can measure consumption.

We have data on interest rates.

There's going to be annoyance coefficients, you know, and then

you can estimate and there's going to be some residual

shock.

Right.

Um, however all attempts that try to estimate this equation

work very, very I would say unsuccessful.

Um, first of all, you would find that there is

not a good relation between the right hand side of

the regression and the left hand side.

So interest rates and assumption expenditures would not explain a

lot of money balances.

Second is residual error would be very, very volatile.

And this is kind of a sign that there is

some weakness in this relation.

There is, you know, something that is missing that we're

not capturing with this notion.

Um, equally, again, if we take logs and you bring

this, this guy on the right hand side, you should

see that it should be I mean, the theory would

imply a coefficient to one of money balances on consumption

expenditures or an income.

While we actually do find that the OLS estimate of

this coefficient inefficient on this object here is much, much

lower than, um, the one which again points to the

weakness of this relation.

Um.

And the final thing is that these elasticity, which is

the elasticity on the interest rates, which should, you know,

change my incentive to hold money or not seems to

be buying over time at all.

So it's not really stable.

All these things are like, um, but, you know, maybe

this is not the best approach.

And partly this is why eventually this approach is abandoned.

Yet it is very informative, kind of go through it

and try to understand.

Why and whether and how the presence of one is

going to help us be on the right side.

So that's what we're doing next.

This is just a chance to show you in a

picture these bullet points.

Uh, second and fourth.

The left hand side is velocity and the right hand

side.

So it's the left hand side of the equation inverse.

And the right hand side is the cost of money.

So this would be the interest rate.

Uh, this sorry this bit here.

And you can see that there is a very weak

interaction between the two.

Sometimes it correlates positively, sometimes it doesn't.

You can already figure out doing some eyeballing econometrics that

we have term is going to be massively.

Uh.

Um.

Yeah.

It's just going.

To show.

Us that.

Okay.

So let's try to Michael found this might be another

question.

We're going to start from our standards.

Um, utility function with a slight addiction.

We're going to add money in the utility function as

we just, you know, just mentioned before.

And we're going to assume that we get increasing utility

from money at a decreasing age.

And we're going to also assume that if I increase

my consumption, I will also increase one thing in my

mind in line with the idea that I need money

for transactions.

So, you know, if I start spending a lot of

money because, you know, consumption is higher, I will need

more money for this action.

Um.

I already mentioned that, you know, we can short money,

so you're going to hold it as an asset, which

implies the following modified budget constraints.

Now, I can spend money for consumption expenditures.

I can save in nominal bonds.

I can save the real bonds.

I'm using nominal terms and I can get some on

my pockets.

And on the other side of the budget constraint, I'm

gonna get some income minus taxes.

So this is a disposable income in nominal terms.

I'm going to get a nominal return for my bonds,

a real return from my real bonds.

I'm the price level and I'm going to have my

T minus one money basis.

Okay.

Can anyone tell me if there is anything we have

in this, uh, um, optimisation problem?

The way I wrote it down, in particular relation with

the assumptions we made so far.

The assumption we made for the topic was the, uh,

exaggerated this capacity discount factor.

Is this satisfied, you think or not?

And the answer, unfortunately, is no.

And the reason for why we're kind of violating one

of our assumptions for the topic is this assumption here.

So with this assumption means.

It means that there is some form of complementarity between

money balances and consumption.

Okay.

Which means that when I'm going to take a derivative

relative to money balances, consumption is going to be affected.

But if you remember our, uh, assumption of the stochastic

discount factor being, uh, relaxed, i.e. the classical recording would

hold, we said that monetary policy or money would have

no effect whatsoever on real outcomes.

And this assumption leads to a violation of that.

Do you see the do you see it?

It does, doesn't it also.

Is it isn't it also true that because because of

this budget constraint and usually the budget constraint.

So it's also the fact that money holding in fact.

It would come out right, you know.

It wouldn't have any.

If you were to solve it without this assumption, you

would get the usual Euler equation where the really just

depends on the discount factor.

What I'm saying is that now I'm going to take

the values of m, you know, you're going to do

the optimisation and you'll take it for the first order

conditional consumption, which means that now you have stochastic discount

factor is going to be affected by.

Yeah.

Right well before we have the city of our city.

And 3000 really wasn't affected by the policies or pricing.

So it's important to mention this because I'm going to

actually ignore that we're violating our assumption.

I'm going to kind of act as if the stochastic

discount factor is still fully exogenous.

But just bear in mind because if you were to

do the math, you know, when when holding, you weren't

holding on.

Yeah, it's the intuition, you know, it would just complicate

the math, but the intuition is still the same.

So that's why I'm using this kind of cheeky, uh,

or sloppy if you want.

Approach here.

Okay, so now you know, we have our budget constraint.

We have our, uh, utility function.

We can just follow the usual steps.

And the first order condition, uh, for the money demand

equation is going to be kind of of a usual

form.

We're going to have a marginal rate of substitution on

the left hand side, and some relative prices on the

right hand side.

Um, it's kind of, you know, you're going to see

it if you want to do it in paper.

It's very it's very easy.

And let me just get a bit more into what

I meant by complementarity.

Okay.

So I'm going to have a particular form for the

utility function which is a cost function.

And this eta tilde uh parameter here is exactly going

to uh parameterise how much complementarity there is between money

balances and consumption.

Okay.

Also note that there is a shock here.

And this is the shock that I mentioned before.

So if you stay, if you stare at this thing

here, you will see that.

This is effectively a shock to the marginal utility of

mine.

Well I think of it as a preference shock for

some reason.

Now I want to call more money balances than before,

irrespective of what happens to interest rates and my consumption

expenditure.

What happens due to fiscal, um, whatever sort of fiscal

authority.

We're still having a relatively boring fiscal authority.

As we did for the previous approach, we're going to

assume a fully exogenous expenditure process.

And this is the, um, there's going to be some

dividends that the government is going to receive from the

central bank.

And and the government is going to set taxes such

that this budget constraint holds.

So it's still fully Ricardian, very uninteresting, very boring.

But there's going to be an important, um, an important

deviation from what we've done before is that to think

about the central bank.

So what is the central bank going to do in

this, uh, in this setup is to issue money.

So it would be as permanent supply.

However, we're going to make an assumption here, which is

the central bank is not going to be able to

control fully the amount of money that is out there

for us consumers to spend and do our expenditures.

And in particular, this kind of is a way to

capture the idea that there are some close substitutes to

currency that are created by the financial sector.

But in other words, for any unit of money that

I issue as a central bank, the financial sector is

able to kind of multiply this unit of money that

are issued and decide, okay, and transform it into something

that can be used by anyone.

To pay for the consumption.

And this is again, something that I'm sure you've heard

about.

We refer to this object here as the money multiplier.

It's the money player in the sense that again, you

know, it multiplies whatever each unit of the central bank.

And it turns out to be that if you look

at this thing in the data, this object is very

volatile and has even threatened.

So if you want to look at the evolution of

money supply over time, something like this, the actual money

in circulation in the economy would be trending, would have

a different trend.

Okay.

So and this could you could think of these as

being technology in the financial sector that is able to,

you know, create money.

There's an enormous literature on this.

As for the money man's equation.

Again, we don't need to understand exactly what are the

mechanisms that leads to this money multiplier.

But just bear in mind that this object is very

volatile and can can be tiny over time.

Um, and finally, the balance sheet of the central bank,

we're going to assume that currency is the only liability.

And so basically what the central bank can do is

to issue some new money and, uh, you know, payback

basically all on money balances and transfer some dividends to

the fiscal authority.

What are these dividends?

You know, we think about what money is as we

celebrate this.

A very special object is something that I can issue

a unit of money at virtually zero cost.

But you guys attach a real value to it and

you're happy to forgo an interest for it.

Which means that effectively, I can extract resources from you.

Okay.

I can make a profit out of this.

I can produce a zero cost, and I can get

something that, you know, is basically a real value.

And this is exactly the nature of the dividends that

are transferring to the government.

But if you want every time you issue money in

principle you could extract some real resources from household.

And these are resources you can then transfer back to

the government.

Now, as I said, the government is going to treat

this deal as pinned down by a by a central

bank role.

These exogenous and fiscal authorities cannot just adjust taxes such

that this budget.

It's beautiful though, but I've been struck.

So given that the amazing money supply.

What what could be an example of such an exhausting,

exogenous shock that causes consumers to change their preferences for

money?

Imagine that for some.

Reason you become less um.

Me for love, eh?

Uh, the risk is going to go up.

Some form of risk transaction is going to go up.

We want to fully make sure that you have enough

money to pay for your transactions because you're concerned about

inflation risk, for example, then would be outside of the

determinants of demand that we described here.

It wouldn't be attached to interest rates would be attached

to your consumption expenditures.

It would just be a kind of sudden taste.

For having my older, you know, your your mother's, for

example.

You know, it can be something that is completely irrational.

But in a sense, you know, the only reason why

we have this object here is to show that this

equation is not working very well in the data.

Okay.

So if the theory was kind of fully able to

characterise what happens to money demand, these objects should be

basically zero.

Um, having this object here is basically limit of theory.

Um, I can try and come up with better examples

if I if I manage.

I believe a pandemic and war for both reasons for

people to give more cash at least, which was the

case in my country.

So that's the chance.

That definitely I want to get.

Uh, so that would be one, uh, it's still a

latent risk to some extent.

You know, you need to have some kind of precautionary

motive in mind.

So I.

Think if someone has to move something like that.

Uh, that's that's a very good example.

But so in principle, it could be anything from irrational

things to more kind of, uh, reasonable and rational, uh,

models.

But I think we think of these as being the

limitation of theory rather than something that is necessary to

be able to capture, like a meaning or a specific.

Okay.

So okay.

So that's a that's basically the setup.

Um, now we can uh, or something I forgot to

mention is that the policy variable, from the point of

view of the central bank is going to be how

much money to issue.

Okay.

So there's going to be the choice variable of the

central bank.

So we can now solve for the equilibrium in uh

in this economy we have in the background, um, the

usual uh, optimality conditions we've seen before, um, relative to

these are the sort of condition relative to nominal real

bonds in combination.

Um.

And then we have our model demand equation.

Okay.

So in, in, in nonlinear form, um, where I.

Yes.

And this comes straight, straight from the optimisation.

The first order condition with respect to M.

And given the assumption we made and this specific form

for the utility function.

Um.

So when you look at these two equations you see

that you know there are remember the area rate has

always been down by the discount factor.

That's our classical dichotomy that remember actually because of our

complementarity assumption really doesn't hold here.

But we just assume that it does.

Um, so we're left with a nominal equilibrium, which basically

means pinning down prices and interest rates.

And if you look at these two equations, we have

two equations where price interest rates obviously show up.

But we also have the stochastic discount factor which is

known for exogenous.

We have consumption which again is known and exogenous because

of the classical dichotomy assumption.

And we have a policy variable and a bunch of

shocks.

So in a sense we have two equations two unknowns.

So there's kind of hope that we're going to be

able to uh, solve for the nominal equilibrium and pin

down the equations.

So what I've done here is to, uh, log linearise

these two equations.

So the first equation we've seen is the Fisher question

that comes from the arbitrage between nominal real bonds, which

is this equation here.

Uh, and the second equation is going to be the

log linearised um money demand equation where, you know, here

there are some, you know, here the points over which

I've done the normalisation.

Uh, these are the is the equilibrium under which I've

done the linearisation.

I think you're going to cover this in class, but

I'm sure it's very simple steps.

Uh, as the ones we've done for the, um, for

the Fisher equation.

So what you can see from here is that if

I, for example, take the interest rate from the Fisher

equation and I plug it into the money demand equation,

I now can write down a role for the money

supply.

I already substituted the fact that, you know, money supply

and demand will be the same.

So this, you know, becomes the choice variable of the

of the central bank.

And you can see already that by setting money supply

and substituting this equation in this equation, I have some

hope in determining the price level, because it was just

said consumption is determined.

And um, it's going to be some p t plus

one, some expectation of what the price level is going

to be.

The real rate is known from the stochastic discount factor.

And um, and then there's going to be a couple

of shocks.

Yeah.

So if I were to kind of write the policy

rule for the money supply, I'm going to get these

equations.

And what I've done here is simply to plug the

Fisher equation into the money supply or my equilibrium, the

money in the money market.

And as usual, I've added some stars or hats, depending

on whether there are some targets or expectations about things.

And so it turns out that I can write a

minus pi role that depends on my targets.

My forecast of the of consumption in period T, which

is a parameter times my forecast of the year rate,

my forecast of what the price target is going to

be tomorrow, the price target itself in my forecast of

the shocks to my demand supply.

Okay.

And now as we've done last week, you know, you

can just take your rule, plug it back in the

equilibrium conditions, okay.

And try to solve for the equilibrium.

And it turns out that if you combine equations you

hit it forward and you impose a terminal condition.

Now from the you basically don't want this, um, budget

constraint to explode.

So you're going to this is what the terms are

coming from.

You get this expression for our policy error.

Remember the policy error is defined as uh p minus

p star okay.

And so what you see from here, you see a

you see that the policy arrow is going to be

this infinite sum of a bunch of objects from period

zero until period infinity.

You're going to have to forecast consumption.

You're going to have to forecast the rate.

You're going to have to forecast the shocks themselves, and

you're going to have to forecast your targets.

Okay.

So this had something similar in uh, the.

Room.

But here is the key problem with this, with this

approach is that, you know, we basically compete down the

price level, but we have all these arrows, including the

arrows on this using these, which we argued are very,

very large and very, very volatile.

So arguably it's going to be a very hard job

for us to be able to forecast, well, shocks to

the demand equations and structure the money multiplier.

Okay.

So.

You know, in in the spirit of trying to rank

different rules, this rule is not out there.

Well, relative to uh, interest rates.

So again, those of you who've done some who've seen

some of these material before, you may recognise that, you

know, this equation here is also called or is typically

called the current equation.

Um, back.

Uh, back in the day.

And by the way, once you pin down the price

level then you can work out inflation and then you

can work out the equilibrium in, you know, the nominal

bond equilibrium.

You can back out the interest rate time from the

Fisher equation.

Okay.

Yes.

Your experience.

The difference between you and me.

Yeah.

So this is again our notation.

So if you remember, um, let me just go back

quickly to notation.

We introduced some notation on.

What we what we we made some assumptions about the

information set of agents.

Okay.

And we said the central bank may have a different

expectation relative to consumers or the agents in the economy,

but also the central bank is going to make mistakes.

And so we denoted by hat the central bank's reputation,

given the information set that the central bank has in

T for stuff, that is going to happen in the

future.

And I think maybe for discussed, the discount factor is

a bit easier to understand because you are basically asking

what's going to be outputs tomorrow, which is something that

central banks do quite a lot, and that's what was

required of, you know, if you remember, this was the

error for the area, um, reserves rule.

So the only the error here would only come from

the fact that I need to forecast output growth in

the model and compare it with the whatever was out

effectively in my experience, in the same period.

Okay.

So that's why intuitive if you were to instead use

a money supply rule to try and pin down the

price level, you wouldn't only be required to estimate, you

know, what's your forecast of output growth model, but you

also need to forecast all current and future shocks of

your money demand.

You know there is a war.

Money demand changes.

Suddenly I would need to be able to forecast that

stuff and all the money multiplier.

So there is a massive, you know, big consignment of

money and suddenly the money supply, you know, jumps, quadruples.

I we need to be able to estimate all those

shocks from now until you feel.

And that that's why, you know, think about the variance

of this error.

It certainly, you know, there are more objects.

So you're summing more things.

But also the balance of these two guys I argued,

is very, very large.

So that's why playing it on the price level with

the money supply question is not so great.

Um.

This is kind of another way to to see why

using this rule is not a great idea.

So what I'm plotting here is, um, the one stocking

rule in the consumer price index in, in red.

And there's something very weird about this picture, which is,

you know, you should be changing or, you know, tweaking

the blue line to stabilise the red line.

While the volatility of the blue line is so much

larger than the variable that you're trying to stabilise.

So you can already see that intuitively there is something

that is not working very well here.

Okay.

So just just an intuitive way to think about think

about these errors.

Another problem is that, you know, just just to show

how little we understand money maybe, is that if you

look at just focus on the first column here, these

are cash holdings per capita in US dollars in 1990

for a bunch of economies.

And you can see that the numbers are all over

the place.

Right.

So even for countries that are arguably similar in terms

of the fundamentals, you know, take, uh, Spain and Portugal,

for example, they were, you know, in 1990, they had

some similar economies, similar GDP levels and so on.

And the money balances in Spain were like three times

larger than money balances in Portugal, something that, you know,

really gets to the point of, you know, this demand

and supply shocks, money demand shocks will be very, very

large.

And not only that, it is a very weird kind

of cross-section, no patterns in the cross-section, but also if

you look at the diff, if you look at the

kind of evolution over time.

These numbers go all over the place again.

So for some countries, money balances increase massively, while for

others they fall.

Despite this was a period where interest rates were very,

very rapidly falling.

Nominal rates, which should be according to a money demand

equation, a very important determinant of our money balances.

You would have expected money balances to kind of, um,

increase because of falling interest rates over, you know, over

time.

What are examples of these numbers, you know, increase by

massively again.

Uh, but so the main point I want you to

take away is that, you know, no pattern, cross section,

no pattern in the, in the time series.

If you see, if you see what I mean, there

are for some countries there is an increase.

For some countries there is a fall is really hard

to find, you know, a, um, a solid pattern in

the data.

These are another way to show how the supply, the

the shocks, the one multiplier can be, you know, enormous.

What I'm plotting here is the monetary base in green.

So the monetary base is the money supplied by the

central central bank.

This is our miss.

And in blue and red I have two other measures

of, uh, uh, the money stock and 1 or 2.

We don't need to understand what they are because we

know what these things are, just different notions of money,

one broader than the other one.

But you can see that when central banks expanded their

balance sheets massively, or at least for the US, I

think if I remember correctly.

Um, I think this is for the, uh, for the

fed.

So money supply increased massively.

But.

And according to our money multiplier, if the money multiplier

would have been fixed, you should have expected a jump

in these lines of exactly the same size or proportional

to the increase in the money supply.

And if you look at these lines, that is absolutely

nothing here.

But, you know, it's really not reflected in this measure

of money, which means that there would be like enormous

shocks to the money multiplier here.

So are we here.

And again, a central bank setting hoping to to pin

down the price level correctly.

We need to kind of forecast that once you once

you had this massive increase in the green line, the

blue line didn't move at all.

Okay.

Um.

So I think I covered.

All right.

So this is just a summary of what we just

discussed.

Um.

Okay, let me just try.

And before the break, we will close this topic while

this subtopic.

And let me introduce the notion of senior age.

So we kind of already mentioned that the notion of

money implies that.

And the properties of money imply that I, as a

central bank can I, I can extract the resources from

you.

Okay.

And, you know, if you simply take the budget constraint

of the central bank and you write it in terms

of what is the dividend, the nominal dividend coming out,

coming out of this, sorry, the real dividend coming out

of this budget constraint is simply given by the amount

of money that I issued today, minus the amount of

monetary issued yesterday over the price level.

And this kind of very intuitive, you know, if I,

you know, issued more money, I'm basically reducing the price

of money so you can buy less stuff with the

monetary circulation.

I can I can extract the resource.

Okay.

And this is typically called senior age.

So I'm just defining SD as uh the real dividend

equals to the.

Um.

So.

You know, given our optimality conditions for m where to

take the equilibrium in the money market that we had

in the previous lines.

And we were to substitute MTS in the diffusion of

series, we would get this expression.

And what you can see from this expression and you

can see maybe you can see it from the steady

state version of this, this equation here is that generating

unit inflation.

I just explain what I mean.

So take the steady state version.

So these are just the time subscript I sold for

the city state of this equation.

You can see that if inflation is uh one this

gross inflation then these two terms this term goes to

zero.

Which means that synergies here right.

And it's kind of very intuitive that you need inflation

to get these, uh, extraction of resources from you guys

because.

You kind of, um.

You know this the strongest increase in the price level.

The more are these resources I can actually extract from

you, because the more is going to be what you're

going to miss out from holding your pockets and not

using them to, you know, to get the normal return.

But the other interesting thing about this equation, it shows

that it is actually bounded.

By a certain number.

That depends on the future of our economy.

So even if you are, if you were to let

inflation go to infinity, you would see that, you know,

this object would vanish to zero.

This also would go to zero.

And so we would end up with, uh, a constant,

uh, positive but finite number of resources that you can

extract from, uh, from households.

So basically we've got these, um.

We've got these bounds, you know, you would have zero

resources extracted for, for zero inflation and a maximum amount

of energy could extract or resource you could extract from

the housing sector.

Now, um.

Maybe a little bit.

But, you know, imagine you were the government.

It would be quite tempting to get some, you know,

free money effectively by a senior age, by engineering, you

know, just engineer some inflation, you got some resources and

you maybe use them to pay for some of your

bills.

Okay.

And we're going to go exactly there next.

But before doing that, let me show you how it

looks like in the data.

So here is the dotted line in this chart.

You can see that it amounts to an average of

say something like 0.3 percent of GDP, which you know,

is not a massive number, but it's definitely not a

small number either.

You know, I think it's kind of equivalent to a

tax on tobacco, tobacco in the US.

So it's not you know, it's something that is chunky,

uh, for from the point of view of a.

Um.

The solid line is the payments that the central bank

made to the Treasury.

Now, in our equations here, we kind of assume that

all the seniority goes to as real dividends to the

Treasury.

So in principle, this line should be on top of

each other.

Effectively.

What happens is that central banks tend to, you know,

retain some of the senior edge and be in some

kind of equity buffers in a sense, to pay for

some operational expenses they might have.

Or if you make losses on some of the assets

that they have, I'm sure you've, you know, you heard

about, you know, losses on the stock of bonds that

central banks made during the latest inflationary cycle.

And so that's why these lines coincide.

Uh, but on average, you can see that, you know,

these lines are roughly, you know, if you accumulate these,

you basically you're constantly moving into the territory.

Um, and.

So now, you know, given this expression here.

And if you look at, you know, what's you know,

exactly in the same way as it was done before

with the prior role, you can actually think, well, actually,

I can maybe write down a senior rule and try

to pin down the price level with senior age rather

than choosing money supply.

I'm just going to choose as I'm going to choose

the, you know, real resource that I'm extracting from the

household sector in that way.

So what I've done here, and, you know, I'm never

going to ask you to do this in the exam.

Um.

Because especially, you know, you've got a very nasty expression.

But basically I took a log linear approximation of this

equation here, which leads something that looks like this, where

I had to add a z term here because I

currently basically what all the arguments of that in the

slides.

So very, very long list of variables that enter this

expression here.

Um, and similarly exactly the same way as we've done

with the money supply rule.

You know, you've got your log in approximation of an

equilibrium condition.

You can then iterate forwards and um, impose the conditions.

And you're going to get our usual error, which now

depends on present and future ZT and all the errors

on DT.

So basically this is a massive and very complicated expression

which basically tells you it is a very bad idea

to try and pin down the price level with the

rules.

Not just based on our kind of, uh.

Um.

Formal criterion to assess whether a rule is feasible or

not, but also because there is a risk or a

temptation, at least from the point of view of the

government to say, well, you know what?

You know, I've got some fiscal bills to pay.

Maybe I can just, you know, generate some inflation and

get a bit more senior age and pay some bills.

Uh, with this, this way, rather than, uh, by either

raising taxes or reducing, um, expenses.

Um.

So for the sake of argument, assume that now tao

t, which is our choice variable from the government, which

has already it's not set anymore to clear the, um,

the budget constraint of the of the government, of the

fiscal authority.

But I said full expression.

Okay.

Then.

Um, this means that basically the central bank would lose

control of its policy tool because dividends would be fully

pinned down by the behaviour of the fiscal authority.

All right.

So G we said it's exogenous.

Now I'm going to start setting T as an exogenous

variable, which means that PT is fully pinned down by

the fiscal authority, which means that, you know, remember the

PT and SD and seniority are the same thing.

Then that would mean that if the monetary authority is

passive relative to what the fiscal is going, okay.

So that's why, you know, this is an additional reason

for why, you know, a senior rule is not a

good idea.

Um.

And you can relate this kind of, uh, notion of

the temptation of authority to start buying and paying some

of its bills, using the to various hyperinflation episodes.

And if you look historically at all hyper inflation episodes,

they're all kind of preceded by some fiscal crisis or

fiscal turmoil, which eventually led the fiscal authority to say

central bank can actually pay some bills with some seepage.

But we've seen here we've seen before that, you know,

you can start you can get some increasing seniors by

increasing inflation.

But at some point, you know, the bills you need

to pay are maybe too high relative to the amount

of synergies you can extract, because the amount of seniority

is going to be finite.

And at that point you get hyperinflation, you should get

inflation going to infinity, and you get in a very

bad in a very bad scenario.

Which.

Basically is also at, uh, you know, is not at

odds or is in line.

With the observation that all this hyperinflation would be observed

in history where all analytics platform.

So you basically you put you put your house in

order, you kind of restore fiscal credibility, which eventually regains

credibility from the monetary side as well.

Um.

And that's also as aside, um, you know, that's kind

of why the IMF is typically one of the first

things that the IMF does when going to troubled countries

to fix the fiscal 20 or the fiscal balances, because

this would give to agents and investors the hope and

the credibility would restore the credibility of the central bank.

If, you know, the government would be in a pretty

balanced budget situation.

Then again, this temptation of extracting resources by a senior

is quite high, and that could result into an acceleration

of inflation and eventually inflation.

Um.

Something I find very, very interesting.

So these are, um, episodes of, uh, hyperinflation, uh, from,

uh, very old paper that shows.

That.

When money, you know, when inflation is so high, actually,

our money theories work very well.

If you remember, you know, the, the table before you

know, this money balances were kind of all over the

place and we couldn't make sense of them.

So what I have here is kind of the inflation

rate and the average money growth.

So you know, I think in relation to the table

we've seen before, think about the this, the 1992 whatever

it was um thousand maybe.

So the, the behaviour over time and you remember there

was no kind of pattern whatsoever in design for inflation.

There is a very, very striking correlation between inflation and

money growth.

So basically when money growth and inflation are so high,

our errors, the use and the fees are kind of,

uh, you know, swamped by how big these numbers are.

So that dominated the variation in the U and V

are dominated by these big spikes in inflation.

So essentially our theory I was maybe a bit nasty

for the theory.

You know, the theory is solid and it works well,

but maybe points to the fact that we don't understand

money.

We can measure money very well.

And so we have these big errors.

Um, or maybe it's just a theory that works.

Well, sometimes it's just to give you an idea of

how bad things can go when you have a hyperinflation

with inflation rates of about about 20%.

Um.

Okay, I think I called you.

So let me just conclude, um.

On this on this part of the of the topic.

Uh, so I already mentioned that, you know, it is

really important to understand what is money and what particular,

um, needs.

It serves to understand what is the link between money

and inflation.

Um, I want you to remember that, you know, senior

age is kind of a natural thing that comes out

from the properties of money, which means that it can

extract resources from households, but simply producing goods which have

value.

But it has zero cost to me.

Um, it can be and it has been used to,

um, basically, um, pay for fiscal, uh, balances.

But there is a is very often very problematic.

And in particular because it has an upper bound, there

is a limit to which you can extract resources within

household sector.

Um, and these kind of the last week touched on,

which is, you know, there's nothing wrong about this theory,

but maybe we don't just understand, well how we should

measure money to make some of these big errors on

the both on the money supply side and the money

multiplier side, but also the money one side that maybe

would make this theory a much better fit.

Uh, if we were able to bring these operations back.

Uh, okay, let's stop here.

We'll start again.

Quarter two.

Uh, and.

As you take questions.

Hello.

How's it going?

How are you?

Because this is going to be.

So.

Strong.

And this is the reason why.

Yes.

This is because this.

Is about this linearised shape.

And the change.

That you have to think that if you're not, uh,

exist in.

This.

Control, too.

So here.

Um, I think this is only for, like, if we

say.

That this is, you know.

So.

Sorry.

This is what I have right now.

Okay.

I can imagine how to write that.

Is that you do something.

Otherwise, especially.

For targets.

Whatever that.

Inflation.

Target.

Target.

So you said.

It was another one.

That was working.

So in.

That moment today there's no choice that.

We can have.

I mean that's very.

Simple.

Yes.

It was, it was.

And this one.

Yeah.

I mean, you can actually talk to them.

Yeah, yeah.

But it was also just for, uh.

And now the government is saying, I know what you

mean, and.

I really want to know.

Yeah.

Um, and they, they told me on the phone right

now, we all know the phone order.

Was.

Gonna.

Be scary.

It was scary for.

A meeting or staying in this.

Um.

I still.

Think you're asking more questions.

Just because.

You.

Have some business on fire or able to be drowned

out.

You know, people are travelling so far.

That.

This notion of money.

And kind of emotional well-being.

I think this is a very.

That's the.

Reason why.

I'm.

Because, you know, these are these are nation needs to

be reliant very.

Cruel because that.

Inflation is.

For who is able to focus this country.

So much so is a weakness.

So I think it's kind of so.

I just want you to understand.

That you can achieve the same goal.

Different ways.

But this one, this is one.

Of those ways.

But it's not it's definitely not the best.

It's actually not appropriate.

And that's why.

Okay.

Sorry.

Sorry.

Okay.

So quite a lot of material to cover.

I'll try to speed up a little bit.

Um, next on our approach is going to be uh,

the gold standard approach or in other words, using tax.

So what's the idea here?

Uh, our the.

Question.

Here question we're going.

To start with.

Is, uh.

Is uh, the price index question.

So the price index question is standing is simply that,

you know, acknowledging the fact that there are, um, many

goods in the world, in the.

World.

And they all denominated in dollars.

And we're simply going to index by J each gold

in this economy.

And we're going to put a weight on each of

these goods to create the price index.

Okay.

So this is affecting the what the CPI, how the

CPI is constructed.

For those of you who are familiar with, you know,

boring, um, statistics of how the CPI measure is constructed

is a geometric mean, is a mean that is linear

only logs.

So these are log prices okay.

And that's how typically CPI, CPI indices are constructed.

Um the weights obviously have to sum to one.

Um.

And in a sense these weights are a physical choice

or a choice from the point of view of the

government.

So the central bank has no power whatsoever in fixing

these weights.

You know, it's not our job is central bankers.

Think about what weights you want to you want to

attach to certain goods in a consumption basket.

And there are many different ways of doing that.

The typical way the designing most advanced economies is to

think about the cost of living.

So you know, your basket of goods that reflect what

the our representative consumer consumes in the education model, for

example.

Um.

And so if you were to kind of the idea

is basically the set weights such that.

The one.

Unit of the consumption at this price is an easy

one.

You can have these weights changing over time.

Uh, which is actually happening in most countries.

You know, schools enter and exit the um, consumption basket.

Or you could even have, you know, equal weights.

That's what, uh, people call inflation.

So this will be a, you know, the same.

Um, well, inflation will be an inflation computed with equal

weights on each price.

So, um.

But so the main point I want to make is

that, you know, this is definitely not an object that

the central bankers, uh, power on is set by the

government.

And given these weights, the objective of the central bank

is to achieve certain inflation targets, uh, which is specified

in terms of the aggregate aggregated, uh, price of these,

uh, uh, in this economy, um.

So this approach is actually quite.

So this is going to be our key equation.

This approach is actually quite different from what we've seen

before because effectively it requires no optimisation whatsoever.

We don't need markets to do arbitrage.

We don't need a central bank to issue money.

We just need.

The government basically, or the central bank, um, to fix

the price of currency.

So the unit of accounts to a specific will the

economy.

So it could be, you know, £1 is equal to

one kilo or one kilo gold.

Okay.

Or um.

Or a weighted average of imported goods.

Okay.

It could be whatever you like.

And the idea or the hope is that, you know,

by fixing this one price to the unit of account,

we're going to be able to pin down all the

other prices and therefore the unit counts.

Okay.

So the fiscal.

Authority here is going to be even more boring than

before.

Uh, we're going to assume that, um, dividends from the

central bank to the authority are zero.

In a sense, you could even kind of live without

a central bank at all.

But this approach, you know, there's not going to be

a balance sheet of the central bank.

Uh, and so fiscal policy is basically simply setting t

our tax instrument so as to be equal to the

exogenous G, which is the expense of central bank.

So really, really, uh, pretty boring.

And the policy role is a commodity peg.

So as I mentioned, what we want to do here

is to say that the price of a good that

we're going to index by zero is going to be

set by the government in dollars.

I mean, I say dollars, but it could be, you

know, whatever, whatever, whatever country you are in or your

local currency.

Uh, you're going to use the local currency.

So the question is.

You know, before going.

Before seeing how.

How this works and whether and how again, this brings

down the price level.

So what's the intuition for why and how we can

implement this thing?

Right.

How can you force, uh, these policy to be actually

implemented?

Okay.

And the way I find most, most intuitive to, um,

to think about this is to think about a government

that tells citizens to pay taxes in a specific goods.

Okay, so imagine that, you know, you owe me $100

in taxes, and I'm the government.

And I say, well, you know, just give me $100,

right.

And so.

Whatever.

You know, whatever you do, you're wrong.

At the end of the year, you're going to have

to kind of take your $100, go to the markets,

convert them into apples, and give me the apples, okay.

And and so since taxes are such a big fraction

of expenses of households, then these would kind of, you

know, be enough to force people, kind of determine the

price of these goods in terms of the unit of

account.

And hopefully, as I said before, and we're going to

see exactly how we're going to be able to kind

of pin down all other prices in the economy.

Another way in which you can think about doing this,

which is maybe what you have in mind if you

ever thought about tax or studying, for example, the gold

standard or currency banks is to have the central bank

that is going to issue reserves consistent with the commodity

bank.

And the idea here is that, you know, you mentioned

that you have a central bank that promises to exchange

a unit of currency with a kilo of gold.

Any point in time, um, that will just that will

do it.

You know, there will be an implementation even though it's

going to raise questions about, you know, whether your credit,

you're able to do so.

And we're going to cover this in a bit more

detail.

Um, thinking about speculative attacks.

If you don't have enough gold coins to actually fulfil

this promise that you've made.

As a bank.

Um.

Okay.

So that's kind of the rough intuition for what we

want to do.

Um, let's try to microphone a little bit.

The, uh, the notion of the commodity bag and, and

the price index.

So we're going to have a utility.

So now we have many goods okay.

So there's not a, a um, an aggregate consumption goods.

And we're going to have a utility over all these

different goods.

We're going.

To.

Spend our endowment is going to be an endowment economy

on all these goods.

All these goods are going to have their own their

own price.

And, you know, for a given endowment and given preferences

and, uh, and given expenditure shares, you're going to, you

know, you can solve for your condition, for how many

goods you want to consume and how much of each

food you want to consume.

And this leads to this, uh, you know, should be

a very familiar expression from Michael.

If you see Buster, which is, as usual, is standing

as a variation of the marginal utilities between goods and

goods, zero is going to be equal to the relative

price of zero.

So in a sense, this optimisation problem is going to

pin down the relative price as a function of the

variation of the marginal utility.

So I'm going to use the arrow here to the

notes in a concise way.

The margin is between good J and.

The ball is rolled and it's going to be extremely

simple.

So I'm going to take the price index equation in

the previous slide.

I'm going to substitute PG for PG using the heat

that comes out of the optimality condition.

So I'm going to have rho j t plus PT0.

And I'm going to get this expression where I can

then rewrite t0 equal to p minus the sum of

goods from one to j.

I skipped a step here.

Maybe I should have.

I should have not done it, but I already wrote

down this in terms of the rule.

So, you know, if you substitute this guy into this

equation here, you're going to get this equation without a

star.

And then you can reshuffle things to write down your

rules.

That's exactly the same approach we've done so far.

Right.

You know, you solve for the conditions.

If you think about a rule that you can write

down.

And once you think about the rule, you can plug

in the star variables and the hard variables, okay.

So.

What this is telling me is that I can achieve

a price level targets.

Mr..

By setting P0.

Okay.

If I'm able to estimate these arrows row j's.

Okay.

However, you can already see that this is kind of

problematic because, you know, think about how many goods are

in the consumption baskets and potentially even more.

So we're basically asking the central bank to estimate the

ratio of marginal utilities between everyone in the economy and

our goods.

Zero.

And any deviation of our estimate relative to the true

at all is going to lead to an error.

Does it make sense?

So in literally this rho g t could be what's

the relative, what's the ratio of the marginal utility of

potatoes versus apples, of transportation versus outputs of whatever some

of the consumption baskets we have relative to zero.

But in principle, you know, these policy rules allowed us

to achieve this.

I can, if you think, as I just hopefully convincingly

argued in the previous slide, you can set P0 as

what you want.

You know, I just wants you to pay your taxes

in terms of outputs.

I can just set the price of apples or whatever,

and I just presume the price of apples in my

previous example such that give an estimate of this marginal

ratio, marginal utilities I'm going to hit a certain price

are.

Extremely embarrassingly simple right.

But as I mentioned, you know the error.

You can already see that the error here is going

to be it's going to be very large, because central

banks are definitely not in the business of, you know,

estimating the prices of potatoes versus apples and transportation or

supplements and whatnot.

And in particular, these prices can change quite significantly over

time.

Or very few marginal utilities can fluctuate over time significantly.

So you will also need to get some variation into

account.

Um.

Myself.

Um, let me just one thing I want to kind

of value, I want to clarify is that when people

think about banks, they have in mind a fixed a

fixed P0.

So, you know, one unit, one unit, one kilo of

apples is worth $1 and that's it forever.

Okay.

Well, this is telling us that we shouldn't necessarily be

the case.

You know, if these roles are changing over time, I

should be able to adjust my P0 to hit my

pistol.

If you fix P0 to a constant number like it

was during the gold standard, then you're going to get

in trouble.

And indeed, that's what's actually what happened.

You know, pistol was going all over the place because

P0 was kind of fixed.

There was no margin to adjust what a kilo gold

was worth in dollar terms.

Okay.

So this is what I meant here.

Um.

What I meant here.

So.

Shh!

For those of you who study international macro, you know

there's a difference between, you know, a hardback.

So I, you know, imagine, uh, Italy or, you know,

I don't know the example, uh, with other countries attached

to the dollar and keeps on going.

It's a slight difference.

Uh, but let's assume there is a country that says

my currency is worth a unit of my currency is

worth $4, and just keep that peg stable and constant

over time relative to what I typically call false negative

examples.

Singapore, which allows its currency to fluctuate within narrow bounds,

but potentially trending bonds.

And so by allowing the fact to move around, which

basically means you allow P0 to move around, you can

achieve stability.

If you were kind of blindly say no, you know,

one unit of dollar for dollar is equal to one

unit of my currency, then you're going to have p0

p style.

Moving on.

Okay.

So I just wanted to kind of debunk this idea

that, you know, be fixed forever.

This is actually one of the problem sounds.

Um.

And this is just the difference between, you know, the

only thing I want you to if you ever heard

about commodity currencies, we're talking about something completely different here.

Commodity currencies are where when even though account is a

is a commodity itself.

So we pay in gold coins rather than fixing the

price of the individual accounts.

Okay.

Um.

Okay.

So let's try to think about how this works.

And the best example is to think about the gold

standard.

So we're going to fix.

Our our goods here is going to be gold.

And we're going to say $1 is equal to one

unit of a kilo let's say.

So why gold in the first place.

Um.

The idea is.

That.

You kind of want something that has a relatively constant

supply.

Okay.

And also there is not very much related to my

fluctuations in my consumption baskets.

What do we mean by that?

Um, we said here that the errors were very large

because these arrows could change over time.

And the relative price of, uh, potatoes to, um, to

apples could talk to us because seasonality or whatever, because

we have suddenly we have more apples and potatoes.

Um.

And also the supply of these of these goods can

be affected by, you know, whatever, um, bad weather and

so on.

And so supply shock properties would just lead to a

massive change in the price of these apples relative to

the other goods, which would lead me to make mistakes.

Okay.

So we want something with a stable supply.

And these potentially decouple from a consumption basket.

And we think about gold.

Gold in principle.

Or maybe the first thing you might think is a

good candidate.

You know, it's not that we discover gold mine every

day.

And if you get if I give you £100 today,

you're probably not gonna, you know, increase your holdings of

gold, spread the £100 over your consumption basket, spend a

bit more on, you know, some restaurants and other stuff,

but you're holding your taste proportion.

So in math, this means there is little complementarity with

other goods between gold and other words, which means that

you can actually separate the utility you get from from

goods zero from the utility that you get from all

the other goods.

Which means that once you take derivatives relative to in

our optimisation here, you get this abstraction and zero, you

don't have all the cross terms with you with all

the other goods.

Okay.

So it makes our problem simpler and less less volatile.

Um.

So in principle is a good idea.

But if you look at it and you know how

much the price of gold fluctuates over time, you actually

think, well, maybe this was not a great idea.

So this is just a random chart taken over a

certain period of time.

But you can see that the dollar price of gold.

Basically dabbles in something that is less than one.

Right.

And these are these are exactly problematic because this is

going to induce a lot of, you know, fluctuations in

these erratic prices, and it's going to lead us to

make massive policy errors.

Okay.

Well, if we want, as I just mentioned before, if

we want to keep the price of gold fixed to,

you know, one unit of our currency would just allow,

you know, what what is going to just is bizarre.

And what if you can use a lot of fluctuation

overtime.

Um.

We already mentioned the kind of extended packages a little

bit.

So the idea of, of extended packs is that instead

of fixing the price of one, could you fix the

price to a weighted average of the imported goods?

That would be kind of a, uh, you know, the

price of that, um, weighted average would be the real

exchange rate.

You can also go to the nominal exchange rate is,

uh, which is how it's normally done.

I think this is a bit more, a bit more

intuitive, but basically your goods zero could be virtually anything.

Okay.

Could be any good in the economy.

Just you want this good to satisfy these properties of

stable supply.

A little complementarity with, uh, uh, the consumption basket.

And then we, in the interest of time, let me

just give you an example.

So what were the problems with the gold standard?

Um, I mean, I kind of tried to convince you

that, you know, it has a stable supply, and it's

it's not complementary to other goods that we consume.

However, I think we're all familiar with the fact that,

um.

Gold is a kind of a safe.

People call it a safe haven goods.

So it tends to appreciate or people tend to like

it more in periods of high uncertainty or in bad

times in general.

Which means that it's going to endogenously lead.

This behaviour is going to lead to a lot of

volatility in disruptive prices, which I argue is not going

to be good in terms of hitting our, our targets

and precisely.

And again, you.

Know, it is true that we don't, uh.

We don't find a gold mine every day.

But, you know, whenever you find a gold, mine is

going to be this massive, you know, potentially very large

shifts in the price of gold, which is going to

affect the price, all your prices, and potentially if you

don't affect your p zero, potentially going to affect your

b side, and you lose a lot of, uh, you

know, um, volatility in.

Is that?

An additional point is that, you know, the effort in

digging for gold is actually socially wasteful.

So you wouldn't want why would we want to spend

all this money digging for gold when you actually achieve

the same inflation targets by, for example, issuing currency for

no cost, right.

And to some extent this actually applies to wheat coin.

You know, think about the deflection.

But this is wasteful, wasteful use where, you know, uh,

something that these other um, people might attach to itself

on its own.

This.

Uh, we kind of mentioned this as well.

So the way in which the gold standard has been

used was to fix this price, irrespective of whatever happens.

And this was a problem because if you yourself, if

you if you want to find yourself in a boom,

then.

What basically what happened in this room is that inflation

is going to rise.

You're not going to change your p zero.

You're not going to accommodate this shock.

Should we see the inflation rise much more than it

would have done if monetary policy responded to it?

But an increase in inflation is going to depress the

real interest rate, which is going to lead to a

larger consumption boom.

And so you're going to have much, much more.

Um, you know, because bigger home and repossessions in this

country linked to the fact that, you know, historically has

been considered as fixed rather than adjusting here.

Uh, and very similarly, you have a similar thing with

exchange rates.

You know, going back to our example of the peg.

If you if you try to imagine you have a

bad shock happening, the exchanges are depreciating.

You want to keep your peg because you promised to

have a hard time.

You can increase interest rates, and by increasing interest rates,

you're going to make home essentially even stronger, which is

going to lead to even further depreciation.

And you end up with these big swings in activity

and prices.

Um.

So so then why people use this, uh, why this

kind of pegs have been so prevalent in history and

why actually there are still pegs, especially in international macro.

You know, there are many countries that take their currency

to the US dollar, for example.

Well, one thing is that, you know, this option to

bring down the price level is really, really easy to

implement, requires no markets, requires no central bank.

If you want to, you know, think about our taxation

example.

Um.

And it's actually kind of conceptually, you know, it's mechanically

very intuitive.

You know, you don't need any optimality condition.

If you were to believe that, you know, in real

life consumers do not, you know, write down the old

equation and then move on to something and so on.

These kind of, you know, is independent of all the

optimisation that we've done.

And we didn't rely on logging.

And so there are some benefits to it.

However, um, we still need to estimate these ratios of

marginal utilities, which I argue is not a radical idea

I think because it's very hard to manage.

And so it's very likely to be larger than the

other, at least the, uh, my preferred area is all,

um, realisable.

All right.

Um, last approach is going to be the budget approach.

So this approach is going to.

Be slightly different.

And um, uh, and it's very, uh, controversial kind of

controversial topic.

I mean, it goes under the name of the price

level for those of you who are familiar with these

things.

But basically, you know, instead of choosing interest rates or

choosing this pipeline or choosing a P&G, now we're going

to choose the government borrowing.

And by government, I mean we're we're going to try

and do now is to consolidate in a single agent

the fiscal and monetary authority.

Remember, the monetary authority, I think is something that is

settled by the beginning of the course.

There's no way in which you can think of the

couple completely, or think of one independently of the other

one, and we'll see.

We've always had some fiscal authority in the background doing

something, you know, more or less boring, but you kind

of need some of the oldest evidence that goes to

the Treasury or, you know, that need to go from

the central bank.

You can't you can never think of people being able

to build on cross level without thinking of these two

agencies.

And this is going to become even stronger in the

fiscal.

So, um.

Let's start with the fiscal authority.

So the fiscal policy choice is still t.

Um, which, you know, so far, we've chosen to always

ensure that the government budget constraint will hold.

Um.

Now, actually, what I'm going to do now, sorry, let

me just clarify one thing.

I always something with that question giving you some intuition

and then try to microphone this.

I think it's not going to work well because if

I started from this equation, it would be too complicated

to get the intuition for it.

So when I do, I'm going to start from an

example that is easier, I think, to understand the least

the math of it.

If it doesn't make any sense in terms of real

life kind of applicability, just bear with me, because then,

you know, when I get to the toy example, it's

going to make more sense.

So let me assume that the fiscal authority is again,

boring T is equal to.

There are no dividends.

Okay.

Um, but this is actually a choice of the central

banks of the fiscal authority so that, you know, kind

of imposing that is equal to zero.

Now we're also going to assume away money.

So there is no money issuance by the central bank.

And so there is no synergy.

But I'm going to introduce a notion of expenses from

the point of view of the central bank and real

assets.

Let me just quickly explain what I mean.

So expenses is some operational expenses the central bank may

incur, say, paying my salary as a Bank of England

employee.

Okay.

So there are these expenses which I'm going to assume

to be i.i.d. and mean zero.

Think about some kind of average level of expenses.

And there are shocks that make you spend a bit

more or be less that way.

Periods in an IAD fashion.

Okay.

And I'm going to also allow the central bank to

hold some real assets.

This is the part that is maybe less obvious.

Uh, but, you know, think of it as the Bank

of England owning a building, renting out and getting some

return from real return from this loss.

So the budget constraint of the central bank is now

going to look as follows.

The central bank can issue some nominal reserves.

It's going to get some return from its real assets.

These is usually noise level.

So these terms and the central bank is then going

to pay fast issuance of reserves.

And the nominal interest rate.

It is going to be um buying some or purchasing

new neo real assets and is going to uh, pay

out.

Well, this shouldn't be here.

We assume that this is going to be equal to

zero, but it's going to pay for some of these

real expenses myself.

Okay.

So the choice variables here for the central bank are

going to be the stock of real assets.

And how many nominal reserves to issue.

And what we're gonna do here is something that is

kind of different to what we've done so far.

So instead of driving an optimality condition.

Okay.

We're just gonna play with the budget constraints.

Okay.

Which is part of the reason why this topic is

a bit controversial.

And if you iterate forwards these, uh, these budget constraints,

and you assume an open C scheme where you assume

the usual condition, you get this expression here, which I

think is is relatively intuitive and is simply saying that

the real value of the central bank liabilities, okay, which

is the issuance of reserves, has to be equal to

the real value of its assets minus its expenses, its

operating expenses, margin.

You know, the reason why you have this e here

without, you know, in this simple term is because I

assume the zero mean ID process.

But if I had a stream of future expenses, I

would have had a sum of discounted future expenses.

So this is only in accounting identity, right?

You know, the real value of your liability is going

to be equal to the real value of your assets

minus any expense appropriately discounted into the future.

Now, the future here doesn't matter because of the assumptions

we made.

Just make things a little bit simpler.

Um.

So that's, you know.

The intuition for this expansion, which is, you know, coming

is coming from a budget constraint.

So and this is again an accounting identity.

So it has to hold right, as if exactly as

the budget constraint.

But the other interesting.

Thing is that, you know, if you stare at these

these equation, you can see that since both a T

and BT were chosen in one.

And one is known in expectation.

I know what this is because, you know, it's a

zero mean.

I'd process.

So I have information about the objects and then I

can actually target a certain price level.

By either.

Changing.

V2 or at.

Which are my policy variables?

All right.

So now for, you know, for sake of argument, fix

80.

So fix the investment in real assets by the central

bank.

And that's the issuance of reserves to change to change

the my choice variable I can decide to issue more

reserves or less reserves.

So what the equation kind of is telling you if

you started the math, simply telling you that if it

goes up, given that this is fixed and given the

price level has to adjust such that these accounting identity

holds.

Okay.

And so what is the interpretation of this?

We think of reserves as shares as claims.

You know that you have relative to the central banks

okay.

I think this term then the price of these shares

is going to be the inverse of the price level.

And when I issue reserves.

What am I doing?

I'm just increasing the amount of shares and rooting the

shares.

Same problem.

Which means that the price of the shares has fallen,

which means that the price level has to go up.

And so that is accounting identity codes.

So that's the whole idea.

The whole idea is that you have an accounting identity.

And there is a variable, which is the price level

that is going to move around such that this account

identity holds in expectation of some real expenses that potentially

accumulate over the future.

Um.

So if you get this notion, you're basically you're basically

done, um, in terms of understanding kind of the, uh,

the intuition for the difficulty of the first level.

So what I've done here is to put down, as

usual, my complicated equation, that we're going to kind of

expect a little bit better, um, in the next couple

of slides.

So you can see that the structure is kind of

the same.

We have some B tilde here, which is going to

be a real liability.

We're going to have some real assets.

And we're going to have a future discounted sum or

of, of uh um revenues in this case.

Okay.

So let me just explain a bit more of what

we have here.

So by tilde I'm going to denote the government nominal

liabilities for the government here, as I said before, is

going to be a fiscal authority and the monetary authority

together.

Um, and so all of this is saying is that

the real value of the liabilities of the government is

going to be equal to the real value of the

assets of the government, plus the discounted sum of fiscal

surpluses.

Right.

Taxes minus um, spending.

What is this coming from?

Um, let's think now let's move away from the simple

example I gave you before and let's like unpack it

a bit better.

So I'm going to have a more complicated government budget

constraint here.

I'm going to allow the government to get some dividends

from the central bank to invest in some nominal bonds,

to spend some money on some real assets and to

collect some taxes.

And these can be spent in government spending paying back.

Um.

Uh, government borrowing.

Sorry.

Bonds.

Well, it's the same.

But you should think of this as government borrowing.

Okay.

Uh, paying back the interest on these government bonds and

getting a return or purchasing some real assets.

Okay.

And then the central bank has the usual balance sheet

where the issuance of new reserves is going to be

equal to, you know, the interest has to be equal

to the old reserves and the interest rate attached to

them and the transfers to the government in terms of

dividends.

Now, what's the key thing here is that, of course,

PD dt appears both in the government and the central

bank.

And the only thing I'm going to do is to

plug this guy into here.

I'm going to consolidate the balance sheet of the fiscal

and monetary authority, and I'm going to call within that

as the sum of reserves and government bonds.

If you remember, you know, these two things are typically

close substitutes in, uh, when we looked at the Fisher

approach, we actually saw that these two things were exactly

the same.

We had two condition Euler equations that implied the interest

rate in these objects is the same.

Okay.

And then there is a date zero.

So this is going to happen for team.

But then one way to record them one at a

zero you have some initial conditions.

And.

So once you substitute this equation into this equation the

other thing I've done is to do exactly what has

happened before, which is iterating forward closing condition on, you

know, the results.

And I get to this equation here.

Okay.

So it's really an intuition is exactly what I told

you before.

So.

Okay.

So now the key is that we're going to assume

no Ponzi scheme.

So the condition holds.

Crucially, we assume no default.

So all of this is going to hold only if

there is no default risk.

If there is no default by the central bank, sorry,

by the government.

And whatever future deficits people think is going to be

repaid by the government.

Um.

And the other thing we're going to do here is

to kind of change the fiscal policy choice, which is

we're going to assume the fiscal policy is not Ricardian

now.

Or in other words, fiscal policy now is going to

choose an exogenous path.

What does that mean?

It means that before we're starting T such that g

was zero basically.

Now T is going to be set completely independent of

G, which means that there could be some government borrowing

as a result of it.

Okay.

And so under these assumptions you can take this equation

and this equation.

And so for P0 as a function of stuff that

I fully know, B0 is the initial condition for borrowing.

And these guys are fully exogenous.

You know we just said that G is exogenous.

Exogenous as it has always been and T is now

is going to be fully exogenous because of our assumption

of no Ricardian fiscal policy.

And once I know P0, if I take the equation

from t greater than one, I'm going to get this

expression here, which if you can, if you stare at

it, you can see that this is a difference equation

for the price level with an initial condition, which is

given by this dt minus one, which you can use

p0 for.

Okay.

And again.

If you look at this equation, you can see that

all of the objects in this equation.

Are.

I mean, not.

All, but you know, there's going to be some exogenous

objects here for which we have an expectation.

Okay.

It's going to be a choice variable by the government.

There's going to be other two choice variables by the

government and the central bank, which are now put together.

And the only residual thing that is left is split.

So in principle we can set a rule to hit

50, start in expectations of what the fiscal surpluses of

the government mean.

Okay.

So what's going on here.

Let me try to summarise.

So the idea is that.

Um, if this character is going to choose how many.

How much that is going to issue because of, you

know, TNG are going to be different now.

Uh, let's say I ran some deficits.

And the budget.

Constraint has to hold because this is a budget constraint.

We didn't do a transformation, we just iterated for the

state.

And so the only thing that is going to be

able to adjust is the price level.

And the price level is going to move in a

way that is going to make sure that the real,

the real value of liability is going to be equal

to the real value of assets, exactly as in the

share example I gave you before.

Okay.

Effectively what this throwback is doing is kind of doing

a real default on nominal obligations.

It's not, you know, the value or deflates the debt

such that the real abilities are equal to the assets.

And so what I want to kind of you to

remember is that it's kind of the joint path for

the issuance of new reserves, the borrowing of the government,

which is a function of taxes and spending, and the

choice of real assets.

That really brings down the price level.

So, you.

Know, imagine.

That.

And, you.

Know, whatever's going to whatever you think is going to

be the active variable here is the variable that moves

first, in a sense, is the one that's going to

bring down the price level.

So there's going to be an active variable and two

passive variables.

You can adjust all of them at the same time.

If B is what pins that is going to move

around.

And the other variables are just such, that's the price

level.

Uh.

So what is the problem with this approach that, uh,

you know, to be able to target that particular t

zero, the central bank can move B.

But to move V in a in a way that

is consistent with B star, you need to forecast all

the for all the future fiscal surpluses or deficits of

the government.

And this is obviously something that is very, very complicated

to think about.

You know, upcoming elections, uh, this year, you know, and

all the various kind of estimates of how, you know,

fiscal spending can differ depending on who wins the wins

election.

That creates massive uncertainty around the forecast of these objects

here.

Um.

On top of its, you know, measuring beat.

There's actually quite hard.

So it's easy to measure deletions of results, of course,

but there are many aspects of government borrowing or commitments

by the government that are actually hard to assess.

Think about Social Security.

You know, there is a promise about the future.

That implies some fiscal spending effectively, and it's really not

obvious how you should measure these things.

And it's not even obvious whether these are real claims

to some extent.

The other problem of this theory is that, you know,

we have to assume or we assume that there is

no default, even though there is a substantial fall for

many countries in advanced economies.

Um.

And things get can get even more complicated if you

were to start allowing for default maturity structure of the

depth of the fiscal cliff.

So, you know, we just assume that there is a

one period nominal bond and one real asset.

But if you want to start allowing for maturities of

these instruments, things would get even more complicated for you.

Um.

So let me conclude here on the borrowing rules.

So why they are controversial as they try to argue.

You know, it's kind of all this notion relies on

a budget constraint kind of holding rather than an equilibrium

condition holding.

And the reason why this is important is because, you

know, in a budget constraint, you really kind of shock

things.

It's very hard to bring these theories to the data.

And the reason is the following.

Imagine if I if I have a demand for money,

I could try and devise some interesting or, uh, smart

identification technique to have a shock to my money demand.

But on budget constraints, there's not no such an option.

You know, these things are just.

It's an accounting identity.

So if I push up something, something has to go

down and it's not really obvious, you know what moves

was.

That's why it's really hard to.

Lecture 16:

I want to tell you you're okay.

Everyone's been saying to me that something happened.

But this is like my way of communicating.

Really?

Yeah.

Look at us.

Speaking as if it's bad.

Yeah, I know.

Yeah, but, like.

It's the same as when I moved in.

It's just.

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

Like supernatural or.

Like.

Yeah.

I'm so relieved.

I mean, you were seeing a lot of men.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Very happy.

Yeah.

Oh, I don't know about this, but like this.

I was like, um.

Crazy.

Yeah.

Cause to us, they were just so present.

Yeah.

It wasn't.

Very exciting.

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

It's like the level of.

Violence.

Yeah.

Like here.

My point.

I don't care what you.

Do anymore.

Yeah?

Yeah.

Yeah.

My friend.

My friend from town.

So.

I just happen to have.

One of these.

Uh.

What's up?

Um.

So welcome back.

Every week was, uh, an isolate on algebra.

And related things.

So we're going to start the third of the four

weeks of the course, uh, which is going to be

about heterogeneity and monetary policy.

Um.

So the whole point of this, uh, part of the

course of this topic is to really relax one of

the assumptions in the new Kendra model, uh, where we

have a representative consumer or if you want to, a

continuum of identical people that behave the same way.

And so they could easily aggregate into a single one

and see whether it matters at all for other ones

or for the way in which we think about other

points.

And we're going to do it in increasingly difficult steps

of, uh, relaxing, a kind of a very fine assumption,

and then slowly relaxing more and more assumptions and making

them more and more complicated.

Um.

And we are also going to start, in a sense,

in a in an easier framework, we're going to have

a partial equilibrium setup.

We're going assume that.

Uh, we're going to ignore completely the supply side of

the economy.

We're just going to assume that monetary policy can somehow

affect the realities.

But we know that none of that policy can do

this.

That's what we've seen so far.

And at the very end of this topic we're going

to blog is ideas of writing to a fully fledged

general equilibrium model.

Okay, so we're going to really extend the equation model

to allow for this opportunity to show, um, I'm planning

to cover topic 3 in 3 lectures.

Uh, we just probably won't be three full lectures.

Um, and then we're going to have the last two

lectures on four, which is that, um, macroprudential policy.

While the interaction is not confidential monetary policy.

All right.

So let me motivate very briefly why we think originality

is an important thing to consider.

And I have two charts for you.

Uh, the first one is this one which plots the

behaviour over time of, uh, assets and liabilities of the

household sector as a percentage of GDP.

Okay.

So, I mean, the first thing to note is that

when you change a model and so far, we can

completely ignore the notion of assets and liabilities, right.

Um, our sensitive, uh, agent did not borrow in equilibrium,

right.

Because we had this kind of, uh, real bond, which

was an inside assets, but all houses be identical.

They nobody would borrow land because they would know it

would be an equilibrium outcome not consistent with, uh, well,

it would be an outcome consistent with an equilibrium.

And so we're completely ignoring from the fact that you

can have assets liabilities in the first place.

But what I think this I think this picture is

actually, uh, quite powerful because you can see that while

in the first part of the sample, assets and liabilities

were kind of behaving in a similar way, so maybe

that maybe they were there, but, you know, they were

constant over time, or at least the ratio between the

two was constant.

And so on.

You know, who cares about that?

But since the 80s, you start having, well, actually kept

on moving until the mid 80s.

And then from the 90s you start having some very

wide variation in assets and liabilities that don't match each

other.

And in particular, there's been a very big build-up in

debt by households, which some people, and maybe rightly so,

associated with the mass increase in assets is the the

market value of assets.

So it's not just the assets accumulated by household but

also multiplied by the price.

So there was a massive stock price boom here.

And then the subsequent crash which led eventually also to

do that and that also.

So you know, we're going to focus a lot on

this kind of will that wind up in that and

the reduction in leverage and not before and exactly think

about the role that Macroprudential policies can play in limiting

a behaviour like this.

But anyway, this is just a teaser for topic for

for what concerns topic theory.

What we have here is an obvious change and very

large change in the levels of households.

And so it's not just a new equilibrium people may

have.

Maybe not borrowers or debtors, but also the leverage can

change over time.

Okay.

So it is kind of a very powerful way to

show it.

By the way, just to I encourage you to look

at the magnitudes.

So these the liability of the household sector almost triple

or triple not.

But it's like 2.5 times or equals as a peak

of the just before the global financial crisis, it was

like two times, 2.5 times larger than what it was

in the 70s.

So we're talking about a massive increase in the leverage

of the household sector.

The second factor, I think, is even more intriguing is,

um, when we look at the cross section, so eternality

one minute originality, we mean where in mind the notion

of, uh, a hitter genius population of agents.

So there is a conceptual notion, um, and, um, what

I'm plotting here is basically the net worth of households

by their quintile, by the quintiles of networks.

So from the very rich to the very poor in

two different periods of time.

So it's like two snapshots of the distribution of wealth

in the US.

Um, in year 2000.

Sorry.

Yeah.

In year 2000in 2007.

And so there are two key things that stand out

from these charts.

The first one is that there is an enormous variation

across the quantities of the distribution of.

What?

The rich are.

The rich?

The poor are very poor.

There is high, as you probably know, concentration of wealth

in the very top of the distribution.

But even more interestingly is that if you try to

track what happens to this distribution over time, this call

it inequality or this cross-sectional variation because it has been

increasing over time.

But in other words, the poor became poorer and the

rich became richer.

Okay, so this is something that I mean, I'm sure

that's been documented by a lot of people.

It's actually very, very active research.

Because it is not actually obvious how you measure wealth.

Um, there are many different notions of inequality.

You know, you can plot a chart like this based

on income.

You can plot it based on wealth.

Measuring wealth is actually much more difficult and potentially more.

Correct.

If you want to get a proper measure of inequality

anyway, there are just to say that there is a

lot of work going into studying the facts about this,

but I think it's relatively uncontroversial to say that inequality

is definitely a feature of the data.

By inequality, I mean a variance in this network of

positions by different quantiles of the distribution, and also that

it's quite likely that this inequality, if anything, has not

fallen over time.

Okay.

So I mean potentially it has increased.

So all of these kind of tells us that the

very stark assumption was made of a single guy in

our model, you know, behaving as the average person in

the economy.

And with balance sheets playing a role may be problematic

and certainly not in line with what the data I

have to say.

So.

So this is one thing, the other thing that I

wanted to come up maybe the other way to motivate

to maybe what we're going to be doing today.

Is to think about why and how it is connected

in the way I, um, at least the easiest way

for me to think about it is to think about

the Fisher, the Fisher channel.

So remember the Fisher equation that equalises the real rates

on the real ones with the nominal rate or not

one of the nominal on the nominal bonds, um, minus

expected inflation.

And so.

If you think about this example where the central bank

can engineer a 1% increase in prices completely randomly and

out of the blue, that is completely unexpected.

If I'm a doctor and I owe you $100.

For any given increase in the price level, I'm gonna

owe you less real resources.

Okay.

Why do you think that?

I'm the saver and I'm all the $100.

I get less apples, less resources than I expected to

be surprised.

Okay.

And so these times you kind of, I guess intuitively

that whether you are a borrower, an saver, and you

have an inflation shock like the one in the last

few years, you're going to be affected by these rates.

Okay.

And I already mentioned you can think of these as

uh, in terms of the official equation.

If you are a nominal holder or a real bond

holder, you're going to be, um, you're going to be

affected by it.

And what this is basically telling you is that my

policy always involves some redistribution between different types of agents.

When you have someone obviously, you know, representative agent, this

redistribution doesn't exist.

But effectively here I'm shifting resources in this example.

Here I'm shifting resources from the owed to the guys

who did actors.

Right.

And there are many ways in which these, um, um,

redistribution can happen.

I think this is the most easy, the easiest to

understand.

Um, but basically we cover a bunch of different channels

through which monetary policy can redistribute resources in wider markets.

Um.

Okay, so what I'm trying to say is that there

are winners and losers from monetary policy interventions.

In the example I just gave, it was obvious.

But we want to kind of identified who they are

and what are the characteristics.

You know, I'll give you an example of someone who

has debt or a um, or a creditor, but it

could well be that while the consumption level certainly high

and something extremely low, you know, different and it could

be, um.

It could be a bunch of money and things, and

we kind of want to try and pin down what

these characteristics are.

The second important thing is.

You know, these are almost think of these as almost

like a descriptive exercise, you know.

I don't understand why these different agents are different about

monetary policy.

But then, you know, how do we care really, at

the end of the day, you know, monetary policy doesn't

really care about distributional consequences, is at least is not

in the mandate of most central banks in the world.

But what central banks care about is how monetary policy

affects the real economy and affects how monetary policy can

affect inflation.

And if there is a trade off between inflation and

output, how you manage the state.

And so the very interesting question for monetary policy is

whether this redistribution that I just talked about actually has

an effect on the way in which we think about

what policy policy works, what effect on inflation or not.

And I can already tell you that's the topic we're

going to be covering today, which is basically.

It's kind of a summary of what happened in the

last ten, maybe 15 years in the in the literature

really has quite dramatically shaped the way in which we

think we, meaning central bankers, think about the way in

which monetary policy have gone.

So it's been a very powerful example of how, you

know, academic research can shape.

Now the way.

Practitioners.

Think about, uh, the transmission mechanism of water pipes.

Uh, and so it's a very exciting it's very exciting

topic.

And it's still very.

Very well researched.

And you do you have courses with the band?

So, yes.

So some of you will.

So Ben is one person that.

You know, is very prominent in literature and.

Has been written extensively about.

Um, and as I mentioned, you know, genetic inequality is

a massive, uh, there is a massive literature that just

speaks about this question, even, um, even without caring about

what's the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to, uh, to

the real economy.

And so you can kind of flip the question and

ask whether for those people who are interested in understanding

where is inequality coming from, you can ask whether monetary

policy contributes at all to the patterns that we observe

in, uh, inequality, if there is a causal effect on

inequality.

I kind of already argued here that it does, and

it does all the time.

Right.

It's not necessarily a bad thing, you know, it's it's

part of the way in which monetary policy works.

But, you know, there is a whole you know, there's

an interesting question here and very interesting about studying these

topics.

You will need to think about how many points.

And that's important.

Okay.

So, um.

Enough with the with the motivation for what we're going

to be doing.

And so let me just state the goal of the

next, uh, three weeks, really, which is going to be

to try to describe how pathogenicity affects the response of

the economy to a monetary policy shock.

So basically, keep this in mind because we're just gonna

keep on doing.

Keep on trying.

Answer this question in different versions of, uh, more and

more complicated models.

And the key variable we're going to be focussed on

is the marginal propensity to consume out of.

Life and one.

I guess sin is not short of NPCs before most

of you.

The idea is I give you $1,000 more.

For your life.

This increases your life time, wealth.

How much are you going to spend today?

Out of that $1,000?

Okay.

And since we're gonna be a genius, we may well

have heterogeneous NPCs.

And if we have NPCs, that could affect the way

in which monetary policy affects consumption.

Because what we know that we want our policy does

is to increase income.

Right now, people are losing monetary policies, and I increase

the size of the economy or incomes, not go up.

But if we all have very different NPCs to reward

with the same NPC, you can have very different effects.

That's not where we're going.

Okay.

And again here is going to be important to see.

You know, he's the marginal propensity to consume for a

debt or credit or if and when you have tightening

rates when it's likely to be the case.

Is it the marginal propensity to consume of myself?

If you give myself $1,000 or if you give, uh,

you know, $1,000 that we're going to we're going to

spend this point probably different.

You know, I'm going to buy something that I need

or something I might get somewhere because.

So you can see that this is a very intuitive

notion, this idea that the MPC can be very.

Emotional.

Um.

And so I kind of mentioned this already.

We're going to be this up from very easy to

more and more complicated.

Uh, we're going to start with a very simple, which

is a very simplified but not very simple framework.

Think about it.

Originality at the house level.

So the whole topic is going to cover heterogeneity in

households.

Which is how the literature started thinking about originality.

But there has been very fascinating and interesting developments in

the literature, thinking about it or generating firm behaviour and

intentionality in financial intermediaries.

So nowadays, you know, there are these kind of genius

agents models for a bunch of different actors.

Some of them you have Ethernet, both on the house

side and the firm side on the financial intermediaries side.

Um.

And so, as I said, we're gonna start from a

very simple model.

It's going to be so simple that I'm gonna even

ignore vanishing if I just introduce some tiny fraction of

income into originality.

So we're only going to differ in the amount of

income we receive.

Okay.

And I'm going to show you how just adding this

tiny bit, you can already make some differences.

Then we're going to add balance sheet as originality.

And then as I mentioned we're going to put all

of these kind of machinery into a fully fledged general

equilibrium model.

Um, and as usual, I mean, or at least as

differently from topic one, this is going to be mainly

a theoretical topic, but we're going to use quite a

lot of data to try and discipline some of the

situations, but also some of the features of the model.

Okay.

We go back to slide three.

I think this would chart with Lise.

Yeah.

So here these assets, they do not.

Cover some physical assets that might be used as collateral

for getting loans.

So those are just other assets.

Cash deposits.

Um, like.

They don't cover houses.

That is.

Excluding housing.

Yes.

Okay.

So none of them.

So then there is no like overlapping.

For a second I thought maybe part of the assets

were shifted for using collateral.

Yeah.

I mean, you're raising a fair point.

Really?

The only thing I wanted to get out of this

picture is to say that there is a lot of

time series, variation in assets and liabilities, and that not

always this match up.

You could redraw this picture trying to match to better

match a notion of acid that matches the notion of

liabilities.

If I understand what that means, I understand your point.

But you don't overthink too much about this.

You know, the main thing I wanted to say is

that assets and liabilities position can change dramatically over time,

and leverage can change dramatically over time.

These are the two main points I wanted to make.

You can show it in different ways.

And then just to connect it.

So do we think of a household balance sheet that

we just mentioned in slide ten or whatever, like these

assets and liabilities.

Or you would.

See the more there's going to be.

Yeah.

Um, but again you could think of extending the model.

And the model is not going to be housing for

example.

Well, that's not true.

Um.

You see, there will be a change.

It's a very it's very good question.

Um.

The model is going to allow a very rich assets

and liabilities.

Um.

But it could make it even more complicated if you.

So this is just was motivational evidence.

Um, you see the model?

Exactly what I mean.

Uh, okay.

So readings for the topic.

Um, there is a very nice kind of high level

overview by, uh, Kaplan Vellante.

Most of what we're going to be doing is going

to be based on this really, really nice paper by

Adriano Clare, uh, which was published in AI in 19.

And then we're going to embed the notions by the

paper in class into a general equilibrium model.

In particular, we're going to use the framework by the

triangle.

Uh, but also these two other.

So this paper is these two other papers that kind

of recommended not really necessary to, um, to what we're

going to do in the topic.

This is very nice for the story.

So the narrative in this paper, if you want to

get the intuition, is really is really beautiful.

And if you want to go the extra mile, this

is the paper by Ben, uh, Kaplan and Violante that

I mentioned before, which is like a fully fledged model

with a lot of additional equations.

Um, just to give you an idea of exactly what

we're going to be covering, you know, basically we're going

to do a simplified version of a layer.

So what are you going to find in this slide

is a simplified version of the model in, uh, class

paper.

And a roughly speaking, something that is very similar to

the final version of this, of this paper.

Okay.

Um, but, you know, if you want to read this

up, it's, uh, it's definitely useful.

And then, as I mentioned, we're going to use some

empirical evidence on how, um, what can I do now

at the household level, for those of you who are

in the session about the, um, supervision for the essay

you talked about empirically, you could try and look how

different households respond differently to a bunch of shocks.

And that's exactly the empirical evidence we're going to review,

which is going to inform some of the mechanisms in

these models, especially in India.

Okay.

That's the plan.

So.

Okay.

So um, let's start.

So I'm going to start from our good old, uh,

Ukrainian model.

And just a summary.

So there were two kind of key elements in what

we were doing.

The first one is that we are living in a

closed economy.

So whatever is produced is consumed and there is no

net borrowing.

If you remember, there was this, uh, assets that allowed

us in principle to say, okay, but to the design

assets, which means that in the aggregate, the overall position

in the economy of the assets should be zero.

And since we are all identical.

We couldn't just borrow each of us for all of

us, because for each unit that is borrowed, there is

someone that needs to lend this unit.

And so this couldn't be an equilibrium.

So the only possible equilibrium would be k equals zero.

So this asset in zero supply.

However the price of this asset will still be priced

by another question.

Right.

And we had, uh, this question that I'm writing a

lot here where consumption that it depends on expected consumption

two plus one.

We care about these two labels for the moment.

And then we had sigma, which is the intertemporal elasticity

of substitution or also the inverse of the uh location

of the risk aversion coefficient.

The pre multiplies the real rates minus the natural.

Right.

Okay.

So in the way in which we can have, uh.

Described how to monitor the monetary policy shocks affecting affected

economies.

In the standard education model.

We talked a lot about intertemporal substitution.

We talked a lot about where monetary policy can affect

the reality if the real rate is higher.

I have incentives to either consumer or save more depending

on where the interest rate goes.

And this substitution between today's consumption and tomorrow's consumption is

governed by this slope here.

Right.

This sigma here thing here.

The higher the sigma the more substitution value okay.

And so this is what people call.

Or you can think of this as being the direct

effect of monetary policy.

Why?

Because monetary policy directly affects the real rates.

And so for a given willingness to substitute the way

things consumption will be, consumption, they will be affected by

giving movement in the real rates.

However, there is also a second effect, which is a

more indirect or more general equilibrium effect, which comes from

the fact that when matter policy loosens, for example, we

know that, you know, these are basically how post production

is going to move and prices are going down.

And in particular, we know that output is going to

increase okay.

But if output is going to increase and this market

condition holds, then consumption will have to increase as well

because we can't save.

Right.

So what happens here is that basically the pie is

becoming bigger.

We as households are becoming richer in our expected consumption

is going to be higher.

And this expected consumption being higher has nothing to do

with my desire to substitute between today's and tomorrow's consumption

units.

Now, the interest rate, which is the price of course,

is the price of consumption tomorrow.

Consumption today.

And so it's called indirect because it really goes through

this general equilibrium effect that monetary policy has on outputs

and prices.

And that really, you know, can be summarised with these

two equations here.

Is that clear?

So a little bit.

It's a little bit frustrating.

But basically these direct and indirect effects are referred to

in the literature by different names.

Um, the direct effect is sometimes called the substitution effect.

And the indirect effect is called an income effect.

For obvious reasons, here I'm substituting for a given change

in the price of consumption today and assumption tomorrow.

This is more of an income effect because we said

the monetary policy is affecting the size of the price

increase, the, uh, expanding production in the economy.

Um, or another way in which you can think of

these is partial versus general equilibrium effect.

So in other words.

This substitution.

You know, you can think of these as on keeping

output fixed and I change the real rates.

Okay.

So it's kind of a partial equilibrium because I'm not

allowing output to move.

And this gives me this substitute for the substitution effect.

But then there is a general equilibrium effect which is

that goes through prices and nominal rigidities which affects output

and therefore affect affect uh.

Effectiveness of individual.

Um.

Anyway, this is just to say that if you read

different papers, you may find very different labels.

This gives you the mapping between the various labels.

Um, now the perspective of this, the key thing of

the standard education model is that most of the job

from monetary policy is coming from the substitution effect.

And you can show that in summary calculation.

Basically it's basically all about substitution.

There is very little income effect.

And this is fantastic quote by will be in this

paper that we referenced in the previous slides that basically

says that the new control model, which is supposed to

be, you know, the general equilibrium reincarnation of gains of

the kingdom view 70 years after is really no general

equilibrium, because, you know, everything works by a partial equilibrium

effect, the substitution effect.

And it's not even changing because, you know, the whole

point about Keynes was that, you know, you spend more

and by spending more, your income goes up.

And if income goes up, your consumption goes up.

And there is this change across this multiplier, the multiplier

that I'm sure you, you know, at least you must

have heard in your undergrad that really goes via this

channel, you know, is the fact that monetary policy has

an outputs that should increase consumption and feed into output

and feed into consumption and keep on being multiplied.

Well, basically this channel accounts for basically nothing in the

UK model.

Okay.

And so.

Well, um, that's not very appealing.

Uh, for sure.

But now, you know, I just gave you the intuition,

but, you know, we can actually think a bit more

in a mathematical way about what I just said.

In other words, you can simply take the derivative of

consumption to a monetary policy innovation, which you can, um,

compute very easily as the derivative of the real rate

to the monetary policy shock multiply.

You multiply by the elasticity of substitution sigma times how

much, how consumption.

The plus one changes when there's a monetary policy shock.

But I can then I can just, you know, recursively

compute this derivative in t plus two, t plus three

and so on.

And at the end of the day you get an

expression like this that says that whatever the whatever the

effect of monetary policy is on consumption today.

Depends on.

The future response of the rates to monetary policy shocks

today, between now and infinity, plus some terminal condition that

is going to go to zero, because we're going to

go back to steady state, because I'm assuming that our

conditions hold.

And, you know, whatever the effect of the shock is

going to go back to our unique and stable steady

state.

So this guy goes to zero.

So if you.

Look at this expression.

So I'm sorry, I forgot to mention it is the

future realised path of the rates that matters.

Weight is mostly multiplied by the substitution.

This these are the two key components.

And so basically it's all about substitution.

You can see from here that you know the substitution

effect is plays an enormous role in the new control

model.

Um.

But there are a few kind of puzzling things about,

you know, this derivative here, especially if you start thinking

about what is it is implied by this derivative and

what you actually find in the data.

So in the data, we find, first of all, that

there is very little sensitivity of consumption to changes in

interest rates.

So forget about the latest the last cycle maybe.

But you know back in the zero bound period, if

if interest rates went up by 25 basis points or

50 basis points, you would not adjust massively your consumption

habits or your consumption expenditure.

And in particular, you know, look at this.

There is basically no discounting here.

So this is basically saying that if I tell you

that in 100 quarters time, I'm going to raise interest

rates by 1%, you should really decrease your consumption because

they're going to look through the whole thing.

You're gonna, you know, wait despite your substitution, and you're

going to adjust your consumption accordingly.

And this is even less credible in a sense.

Okay.

The second point is that in contrast to what the

equation model would imply, there is actually a lot of

sensitivity of consumption to income.

Go back to my, you know, lottery example.

If you give me £1,000 as well, I'm going to

spend half of it like in the next couple of

days and maybe the remaining half.

I say if you give it to, you know, Musk,

he's not going to spend a single penny because, you

know, that's peanuts in his consumption bundle.

And that's what you see in the data.

You know, if you give a random and unexpected sum

of cash to people, they tend to spend it rather

than to smooth it throughout their lives and allocate.

It's equally between now and the end of the end

of the model question.

So with this.

Benefit of the indirect effect, which on the previous slide,

it should have been like.

5%, uh.

On, on slide 11.

Yeah.

Uh, with this derivative, it's.

Like not even there, it's just zero.

Yeah.

This is, uh, this is just a very stark.

Where you had a.

If you had a more so in this in this

mother would be 100%.

So if you go to slightly more sophisticated models and

slightly larger model, you would have some income effects with

more functions and more, uh, features, but you wouldn't be

able to make it matter more than 95%.

Okay.

So in this example, straw is like 100% is all

about the substitution effect.

Okay.

Um.

The other thing we know from the data is that

transfers do matter.

This is kind of similar to this point.

If I'm, uh, you know, a tax rebate and I

give you some, you are expected to pay 100 of

taxes.

And I say, well, you actually have to pay only

50.

There is a lot of evidence that actually this affects

your consumption.

What we know from Ricardian equivalence that you shouldn't really.

Because if I just reduce your taxes today, you're going

to be you're going to be expecting to be taxed

in the future.

And so this shouldn't really affect your consumption path.

And finally, you know, there is a lot, a lot,

a lot of eternality if all of these points depending

on which kind of cohort or, um, slice of the

population you take, okay.

And all of these things are completely absent here.

You know, there is only substitution, only substitution.

There is no income effect.

We all behave in the same way and so on.

So this is really at odds with what's going on

in the data.

Now this doesn't mean that the equation model is a

better approximation.

Yet you know, it could it could well be that

these things actually do not matter.

And they do cancel out somehow because for reasons that

we're going to see in a very neat way in

a mathematically.

Okay.

So as I mentioned, um, here's we're going to start

departing from the equation model.

I told you, we're going to start with a very,

very minimal departure, which is I'm going to allow for

some form of income originating.

So what's the way I'm going to do that?

I'm going to introduce a new measure and a new

index J of households.

So before we had a single representative household, now we're

going to have a continuum of households of measure one

between zero, between 0 and 1.

But it is like.

It's exactly like the measure of firms that you have

in the engine, in the supply side block.

Um, I hope I've been consistent with my previous notation

where, you know, I think firms are denoted by EI,

and this guy is now J for households.

And you can define here for aggregate consumption as well

as aggregate income as the integral over Jae of our

own individual consumption.

So now this class is going to be the population

of the economy.

We all have our own J.

And I got to consumption is going to be the

integral of our own consumption across different individuals.

I'm sure that, um, Michael covered this, but you know,

the neat thing about having a measure, one of agents

is that the average and the aggregate is the same.

And this helps with a bunch of intuitions.

But, um, so I'm going to refer to KT as

either average consumption or aggregate consumption.

I mean, trivially because I'm going to divide by one

the sum of these things.

Okay.

Um, now here's where we're going to depart from our

previous, um, our previous assumptions.

We assume that an individual's income is going to be

equal to y.

JT.

So this is my income.

And this is going to depend on some aggregate income.

That is the same for all of us.

Plus some idiosyncratic income that is only specifically.

And I'm going to also assume that these the average

across all of our idiosyncratic income is going to be

equal to zero.

Think of it as, you know, the aggregate income of

the economist.

Then we'll get ten and then I get plus one,

you get minus one and so on.

So an average is the component is.

I'm going to change the notation.

Uh, apologies for that, but I want to be.

I wanted to keep consistency with, uh, the paper by

Adrian Clare.

So now capital DT is going to be the gross

real interest rate one plus you want.

And little R is going to be the um it's

going to be that rate.

We are going to assume that Labour is going to

be supplied in elastically.

So we're killing the labour supply part of the economy,

or killing the supply side of the economy completely.

But we're going to assume, as I mentioned before, that

monetary policy can affect wages and for men as well.

So we're just gonna pause it and think of any

movements in R as being driven by some monetary policy

with some nominal rigidities.

And the way in which I'd like you to think

about this kind of income process is think of each

of us as we work in different sectors of the

economy, right?

And so obviously, our income is going to be there's

going to be a common component, which is the economic

cycle.

So now, you know, there is a slowdown in the

economy about aggregating and falling.

But think of our example of the difference between a

construction worker who's in a very cyclical cycle, was probably

designing, as we speak in negative.

I just can't take income shock relative to a university

lecture, which is is that very easy or not really

affected by what's going on in the aggregate economy?

Right.

So that's why you get these kind of average two

zero.

Um.

We are still going to consider an economy where there

is only one traded asset, which is one period real

bond, let's say.

But now note that there is a J here.

So now we're going to be allowed to have different

k j positions okay.

It's not going to be it's going to be different

from before in the sense that we still have the

inside assets assumption.

So in the aggregate our position have to net out

but different from before.

Now we are at our genius.

So it is possible to argue that I behave differently.

Will do.

And so eventually I end up being a debtor and

you end up being a debit and credit risk.

Okay.

Okay.

Remember this is kind of the key.

So this is still an inside asset okay.

Because it's aggregating to zero in equilibrium.

But before we had a continuum of identical individuals they

couldn't just behave differently in steady state.

So you couldn't have any other option to have k

equals zero for every household.

Well now this is not going to be the case

anymore.

And we're going to assume to make things even simpler.

And we're going to relax this data that we're going

to enter the model with the same zero position in

our basket.

So that's why that's the way in which I killed

balance sheets in a sense.

All right.

We're going to enter this this world, this model economy

which we are all the same.

Okay.

But we're going to still be affected by different partitions.

Um, we've identified the relative price of, sorry, the relative

real price of consumption, right y over Q0.

So this kind of, uh, um, okay.

Just to make it simpler to understand, think about the

relative price of consumption between period one and period zero.

You will have that q one over q zero.

So the relative consumption in period one relative to the

price of consumption period zero is going to be equal

to one over R0.

Okay.

This is the standard relative price.

Way to think about the oil equation if you want.

Okay.

And the relative price of consumption between period two and

period zero is going to be a compound interest rates

R0 times R1.

Yeah.

Is nothing stuff that you've seen before.

And finally, you know, the other kind of, um, assumption

we're going to make to make things simpler.

We're going to assume perfect foresight, as you can see.

Perfect for that before.

So I'm just.

Going to just.

Quickly cover it.

Perfect foresight means that we all know everything about the

economy, including the shocks.

Okay.

You remember that you had the national expectation benchmark, where

people knew the structure of the economy.

They knew where the shocks were coming from.

Perfect foresight is even is even more information.

I know everything.

I know if there is a shock, I know it

in advance.

So you're basically killing the risk of being hit by

a shock at any point in time.

But we're going to consider what is typically known or

called a night shock, which is even though we thought

no shock could happen and we know everything, we are

actually surprised by a shock.

Okay.

And the reason why we're making this mistake is simply

because you want to keep some precautionary behaviour of people.

You know, if I knew that the shock could come,

I would behave in a different way.

You know, we need to come factoring this risk.

And by doing this perfect foresight and mid shock, we're

killing the possibility.

So we're making the the world a little bit safer.

So when you think about this is that, you know

imagine that we are in steady state.

We are happy.

We know that everything does not happen forever.

But then suddenly and completely out of the blue, we

are shocked by the policy, and the policymakers cannot make

a surprise change in the real rates which are moderating

in this one, because, you know, we have more on

the supply side of the economy.

These great facts that you are writing.

Zero is going to affect incoming period zero and zero.

But you know.

This is a real possibility.

And then everything else is unaffected.

So then it's like you switch on the light and

you switch off the light.

Period.

Once you get the shock and then you go back

to the steady state and you are just forgot what

happened.

And then we go back to steady state.

So it's not too different from any process past.

Just you know, the only difference is that I couldn't

expect the shortcoming.

And so I couldn't act in a precautionary way to

kind of protect myself from the possibility of the shock.

And as I mentioned, there's going to be a real

model, and we're going to add nominal claims and longer

term securities and results.

So.

You know.

Then the problem is actually very similar to what we

had before.

Just remember the notation change.

We're on the wrong side.

And so this is kind of like standard.

You know I can consume or buy bonds real bonds

and price one over on.

And I'm going to get some income which I'm going

to be modelling as you know, an endowment.

So you know, imagine you have your ten plus whatever

is your highest interest income.

And I'm going to get the return, the real return

money in.

The first hour condition are the standard.

You're going to get our Euler equation.

But now it's another equation with the j subscript.

So it's going to be an individual equation.

And here is when we're going to start kind of,

uh, playing around a little bit with, you know, with

this one.

Let's try to get to the question that we have

to remember.

The question we are after is, how does monetary policy,

what is the response to consumption for a monetary policy

shock and whether this is a positive financial information.

So to do that I'm going to start with the

first take, which is I'm going to move from a

period budget constraint to an intertemporal budget constraint.

If you haven't seen this, this thing, you're basically accumulating

over and over the period of budget constraints from zero

to infinity, starting from the fact that we know that

k t minus one at the beginning of time was

zero for everyone.

So I know this this number, I assume that k

minus one is equal to zero.

I can work out what k one is, and then

I can get an expression for k two and for

three and so on.

I can just keep on iterating.

And what I get is an expression like this, which

very intuitively tells you that my lifetime expenditure between now

and the end of time has to be equal to

my lifetime income.

Nothing too crazy.

I'm going to call my lifetime income Omega J zero.

Okay.

Um.

As I mentioned.

The whole topic is going to be about computing this

object here.

Okay.

Um, and in particular, you know, in this under the

assumption that the R0 is under this perfect force, that

thing is a one off shot that hits, uh, in

period one only and then goes back to respect to

zero.

Here is a very important point that I'm sure it's

going to confuse people.

So bear with me.

But you know, we need to get this, uh, this

tool.

So we're going to need to normalise basically we need

the numerator okay.

And the reason why we need the numerator is that

now we're working with an intertemporal budget constraint.

So before we just had a period budget constraint it

didn't really matter whether the uh what the numerator was.

But now to work out the relative prices of a

consumption or to attach a meaning to, uh, the price

of consumption a given period is basically having a, um,

that allows you to express everything in terms of the.

The normalisation I'm going to make is that the price

of consumption in period one is going to be equal

to one.

Okay.

Typically, I think if or implicitly you would set the

price of consumption period zero equals one.

Right.

So why why have I done this.

The reason why I've done this is that under this

assumption, it turns out that the price of consumption in

period zero is simply going to be equal to the

real interest rate in period zero, because it is, you

know, I normalise this, this would be Q1 over Q

zero equal one over r zero Q1.

I set to one because that's my numerator.

So one over q zero is equal to one over

zero, which is exactly what I have here.

Okay.

So why is this useful?

It's useful because I can express a change in monetary

policy as a change in the price of something.

Okay.

And if you think about what this is.

This very much looks like a standard microphone.

Right.

So here you have an endowment.

Okay.

You're endowed with a bunch of different goods.

I think you'll come.

You don't look very.

You look a bit confused.

Let me try in different way.

Think of this as.

Forget about what we said so far.

I think look at this equation and just put a

k a capital k here.

Okay.

Now think of each t instead of being t being

a different good.

You have different varieties.

Okay I've got k different goals.

I'm endowed with k different goods with their own price.

And I need for given preferences.

I need to allocate these endowments into consumption of these

goods.

Okay.

This is a very standard micro problem right.

And you've been taught intermediate micro how to work out

income and substitution effects for a given change in the

price of a good for your given endowment.

Okay.

All we're trying to work out here is the substitution

versus income effect of a monetary policy change.

Okay.

So what I've done here, I kind of I very

smartly tricked the version of the model by making a

very convenient assumption.

So that a changing monetary policy is like changing the

price of consumption in period zero.

And since the only thing that matters is what happened

in period zero, because then as we chop the the

shocks and everything goes back to a steady state, I

can apply the standard macro tools to work out substitution

and income effects from this problem.

You get the intuition.

So that's why this is crucial.

Of course, this is a you know, it's not it's

crucial for intuition and to make our life easier.

But it's not crucial at all for the results.

I could have normalised this.

I could have normalised 0 to 1, but then it

changing at zero would have not been equal to a

change in the price of consumption period zero.

And all the math would have become so much more

complicated.

So it's going to be basically this normalisation is much,

much, much easier.

So the final thing I want to say is, in

this world with this normalisation, what is the MPC?

So the MPC, as we said before, is defined as

how my consumption changes for a given change in income.

Right?

So is the derivative of consumption over income at the

jth level.

And again, because of our very convenient assumptions of perfect

foresight and switch on which of short.

My changing consumption is also going to be equal to

my change in my lifetime.

Sorry.

My change in income.

It's also going to be equal to the change in

my lifetime income.

Right?

Because it's just a one off increase in income in

period zero.

Okay.

And now when I go back.

To the states.

So I can rewrite this thing as this thing and

then I can, I can convert it back into period

period one consumption where it's specifically for one consumption units.

And therefore that's why it's multiplied by Q zero.

Okay.

Um.

Right.

So if you understood kind of where we're going, you

know, we're going to take these as a static macro

problem, basically, and we're going to apply very standard micro

tools to compute a new income and a substitution effects

using a very standard composition, which, uh, you've seen in

previous courses, probably this last term, um, and which I

added at the end of the slides, you know, the

algebra of how you get to how you get to

this expression.

So forget about the substitution effect for a second.

If you start the income effect, if you remember your

micro class, there is an element that is kind of

in addition to what would normally come out of his

last kind of composition, which is this derivative here.

Okay.

So you would normally have, you know, think about what

is this?

This is my endowment of good zero relative to how

much I consume a good zero.

Right.

I would like to consume I optimally allocate.

So in our world is going to be whether I'm

a borrow or saver.

If I consume more or less than what I'm endowed

with in period zero.

And this is what we normally have in in this

problem, in this class of this derivation, what is new

here is this term here, which is accounting for the

fact that monetary policy has an effect on total output.

So it's enlarging the pie.

You know, the micro problem is a micro problem is

partially driven, right?

You know, you're just you have a fixed income.

We have a fixed endowment.

They try to allocate to a bunch of different rules

okay.

You can work out the substitution income effect.

If there is a change in the price of a

given goods, which is exactly what we've done here.

But we are in general equilibrium.

Or considering there is an additional effect.

That is, my endowment is becoming bigger because monetary policy

has real effects.

And so this derivative of y over to zero is

exactly capturing the effect of monetary policy on output.

Remember the q zero is equal to zero under our

assumptions.

Okay.

Um.

I'm sorry.

That's exactly what I said.

So the income effect is two parts the size of

the pie aspect to it, and whether I'm a net

saver or not.

Borrower.

And then there is a substitution effect, which is very

standard, that is very much present in the Standard range

model.

And it comes from the Higgs.

And one curve for the cost base which cost minimisation

part of the problem rather than the utility maximisation.

Okay, just to make you sure.

You're not going to be required to do this derivation

for the exam at all, especially if these bits, this

bit here, which is a lot of tedious algebra.

But, you know, I'd like you to remember what's intuition

for this stuff.

And you know, there is a difference between the income

effect and the standard micro partial equilibrium problem.

And there is a general equilibrium effect here.

These things are important.

Okay.

So exactly in this period I'm going to state there

is also just, you know reported here for you the

substitution effect and how you, you know, you can at

the end of the slide.

But you can see how I got here, this information,

what you want to do.

Um, over.

But.

So if I put everything together, I can rewrite the

derivative of consumption with respect to a one off change

in the policy rate as.

The marginal propensity to consume.

Which.

I'm getting from.

Maybe I'm skipping a bit too quickly here.

So here I've done a few, um, I've jumped a

few steps.

So remember that Q0 is equal to r zero under

our assumption of normalisation of the price of the classic

assumption.

Remember that the derivative of C0 over lifetime income is

also equal to the derivative of consumption to output in

period zero.

So it's the is the marginal propensity to consume okay.

But we want to express everything in period zero consumption

units.

So we're going to divide everything by q0.

Okay.

And so if you do these steps, you're going to

get to this expression, which is simply saying that the

derivative, how consumption response to one of monetary policy shocks

depends on my own marginal propensity to consume times.

What's the total effect of monetary policy on the economy.

So this is kind of the general limit, the size

of the effect of monetary policy on output.

How am I income?

I just including income responds to monetary policy.

Okay.

And here's where the the construction worker versus lecturer effect

comes in.

You would expect these effects for the construction worker to

be much larger than for the university lecturer.

It's going to depend whether I'm a net saver or

a net borrower.

Why?

Because if I'm a net borrower and interest rates go

up, I'm going to have I'm going to I'm not

going to be in a good position because I'm going

to face higher interest rates, and then there's going to

be a part of the, you know, there's going to

be the substitution effect, which is, you know, is here.

It's kind of interesting to see that the MPC actually

is not going to change the sign of the of

the substitution effect, but can amplify its.

Okay.

Um, but.

You know, we're not going to focus on this, given

that this is basically what what we have seen so

far in this equation, that we're going to mainly focus

on these three bits here.

And then just two more slides and then we will

stop for a quick, quick break.

So now what I want to do I want to.

I want to aggregate this economy and I want to

work out what's the aggregate effect on the economy and

what.

Just to give you an idea of what I'm going

I want to see what's the difference between an economy

with eternality and economy without originality?

And to do that, I first need to aggregate and

then I can compare the two.

So aggregating is in principle very simple.

I'm just going to take an integral of each of

us in each of our consumption responses over J.

Um, I'm going to define MPC bar as the average

MPC in this class.

And let me start from the representative agent model.

So the representative agent model again, you can think of

it as being a bunch of identical people.

So we're all where many it's many of us.

It's just one.

But we are all identical.

Okay.

So what happens if we're all identical and there is

an inside asset?

We can save it.

Nobody can be a net borrower on that saver.

That's what we had previously.

Right.

Which means that this term is going to disappear because

in equilibrium I can have a net borrowing or not

saving position.

So this is gone on average across all of us.

Our basic income is by definition zero.

So we said we are all fluctuating around this kind

of aggregated income for the economy.

And some of us are both.

Some of us are below.

So this is also gone.

And we then have the standard substitution effects.

So we're left with a substitution effect.

And with the average effect the monetary policy has on

on the size of the income.

And so we're going to end up in this with

this expression which simply says this derivative is equal to

the average MPC times of output response to the monetary

policy shock minus my saving rate, which is one over

one minus the MPC, has a substitution effect.

Now that I know this guy, I can compute how.

The aggregate now effect, which is this guy here.

Relates to the average plus the genius component of our

model.

Right.

So I can always write the aggregate effect as the

average effect plus some force is due to the G90.

And what are these forces?

This 80 is the integral of whatever my MPC is

over and above the average MPC.

If I'm the average consumer, then I'm just behaving as

the aggregate problem.

But if for some reason I have a higher antecedent,

the average, then.

There is this integral key which is capturing, capturing exactly

what's the effect of heterogeneity on top of the representative

agent.

You can model okay.

And you can see that the two effects that are

left with, apart from the substitution effect that we're not

really care about, are how my idiosyncratic income is a

lecturer response to a monetary policy shock, and whether when

the shock hits, I'm a debtor or I'm a creditor.

Right.

Now I find this actually quite sticky.

So you change a very tiny bit.

You introduce a very tiny bit of it, not even

in the in the position of these agents.

We just have different income and we suddenly have all

these kind of elements that could potentially affect how the

aggregate consumption level of our economy respond for monetary position.

Yeah.

Um.

Lasting.

And then we pray.

So.

You know, for those of you.

Who have a Sharpie, you can, you know, the way

in which you can.

This is a product of two kind of, uh, mean

zero averages.

Exams.

Sorry.

Zero variables, which means that you can express this integral

as a covariance.

Wright is the product of some deviation from the average

on PC.

Something that you know is on zero.

So you can really think of these as currencies.

And so if you do so and you think about

what's the difference between the aggregate economy with originality and

the representative agent economy, you can see that it's going

to depend on a bunch of currencies, and in particular

how my MPC queries, with the responsiveness of my income

to monetary policy shocks and how my MPC covers with

the fact that I'm a savoury borrower.

Is that clear?

Example to just explain the difference between, uh, the derivative

with the bar and without the bar.

So the derivative with the bar I killed any heterogeneity

and I computed I want to compute.

This is what you would have in the representative agent

economy.

Okay.

That's what I'm after.

I want to compute what the response of consumption to

a monetary policy shock would be if there were no

heterogeneity.

If there is no heterogeneity, we kill this guy, we

kill this guy, and we are left just with the

income effects and the substitution effects.

And so that's it.

Now that I know this guy, I can take the

aggregate effect in the genius economy.

These are not killing heterogeneity here.

Right.

This is the effect of it will be embedded here.

And I can always write this aggregate effect as the

sum of something.

That is the representative agent plus some deviation between heterogeneous

agent world and the homogeneous agent world, which turns out

to be this guy, which I can more conveniently write

in terms of covariances.

And this covariances effectively, we're going to actually go to

the data and see whether it is true that high

MPC people are those whose income covariance more with the

cycle.

Is it true that high MPC people are those who

are not borrowers or not savers?

And depending on the signs of these covariances, then we're

going to work out whether there is amplification or not

in a world with originality, or importantly, if the covariance

between my MPC and my income is completely zero.

If every period, you know, our income is completely randomly

assigned, even if we have different NPCs.

Then the economy, the intelligence agents economy will behave exactly

the same as the homogeneous economy.

That's why I said before, you know, it's not.

It's not the fact that we can document that originality

doesn't necessarily mean that we're going to have differences in

the behaviour of these economies, right?

If it turns out that, you know, there is no

covariance between my MPC and my income.

Human.

This effect is zero.

And the difference between the agent economy and the representative

agent economy is going to be zero.

Yeah.

So I don't quite follow.

So uh, with this heterogeneity navies um mpg so is

the average of MPC JS uh equal to MPC with

representative agent.

But distribution of MPC JS can be anything like either

skewed.

Uh, I'm not sure I got the question.

Uh, so the MPC.

Individuals in the representative agent economy all have the same

MPC, right?

We are agreeing with this.

In these words.

The MPC J is going to be actually incorporate.

Um.

Let me cover it here.

Sorry.

I'll do the last slide and then we'll break as

well.

But I think we need to cover this to make

it clear.

To make this last point clear.

Um, let me just before getting to your point, let

me just restate this.

What this result is saying.

So the left hand side is the difference between an

aggregate heterogeneous economy and a representative agent economy.

If we were to find that this left the right

hand side is zero, then we would conclude that there

is no difference whatsoever.

There is no gain in modelling heterogeneity because consumption is

exactly the same whether I'm modelling these income ecological models.

Okay.

Whether there is a difference or not, it depends on

whether these covariances are positive negative or zero.

Okay.

In particular if for whatever reason, and I'm going to

get to this.

My MPC is very high, and I tend to be

a guy whose income responds a lot with exotic income,

responds a lot to monetary policy changes.

This is going to be positive, which is going to

be that the economy is going to respond by more

than the representative agent economy.

Do we agree on this?

And you can work out all these other covariances?

Okay.

Now a priori you have no idea what's the relation,

what these covariances are.

Okay.

It's a thing that we will have to work out

in operations.

We need to go to the data.

And going to your point I think.

There is a big downsides or, you know, uh, a

big caveat, which is these NPCs are actually equilibrium outcomes.

They're not the parameters.

You know, when you wrote down your model with, uh,

the present day, uh, sequence of price adjustments?

You know, that's a rebound and you fix that, and

depending on that, you get what's the half life and

price change is.

You know, one shot.

The NPCs basically are going to adjust such that, you

know, our equilibrium conditions.

All right.

And so what I'm trying to say is that.

You know these things are likely to change over time.

They're likely to change across countries.

They are likely to be different conditions and different shocks.

So it's far from ideal, but at least we have

some summary statistic.

And if we were to find that on average these

NPCs behave in a certain way, we could conclude that

the world is different from the representative world.

I think he's under the impression because you're asking, you

know what pins down the structural distribution of this thing?

Well, there's no such a thing as a structural distribution

of this thing.

It's just going to depend on.

You know.

Under our assumption that there is, you know, output is

equal to consumption.

These NPCs are going to adjust in a way such

that our market conditions, okay.

If we want to have the government or if we

want, you know, an external foreign economy, these things might

change automatically.

Okay.

Yes, we can still go to the data and measure

these things and conclude, well, actually, forget about one hour

and 45 minutes of doing all this stuff is completely

useless because, you know, the response of consumption is exactly

the same because these covariances are zero.

Okay.

We break here five minutes, so we'll be back.

At, um.

9 to.

11.

Yeah.

And have.

A question.

Can I follow up?

Yeah.

So this is.

Easier than it was there.

You have just been doing that.

And then it's just about.

11 and 1130.

There are hundreds.

Yes.

Yes.

Sorry.

I don't know how to do this.

No, no, no, it's it's a good point.

Oh.

I'm sorry.

The truth.

Is that you cannot.

Say I can't do everything.

I try to you can't say exactly what's going on.

There will be many options.

What you said is something that.

Could be done.

But it could also be that there is something else

that.

You don't have a very good structural story about.

How many?

You know.

I just need to have.

An on.

Average.

But I guess that it's an idea.

Yeah, it's.

Fine.

Any problem?

Well, I can say that there.

Are reasons to.

Believe that.

This is why I think about someone who's like, okay.

These numbers are going.

To be negative.

So that's more than what I want.

Yeah.

I.

Mean, that's.

The life cycle.

Or do you think that when you're young and then.

Well, now we have.

This.

You think about what my manager prefers to consume is.

Yeah.

It's fair to say that it's.

Probably quite high to reach.

I cannot stop the investigation.

I may get there at some point.

In the life cycle because.

In the upcoming distribution, tend to have a higher margin

mass consume.

Okay.

Think about that.

Could be.

I mean, I'm not sure.

I definitely have many.

More where all over the place.

There are 100.

Well, for example, that you still have something that goes

the.

Other way around.

We need to have a random assignment.

Which is the three.

Of us.

And, you know, high and low.

And we have to send more.

And then that will that's, you know, completely random.

So you need to have something like this.

And it could well be the case.

Nobody tells me, you know, in this class.

When you say.

The debtors are high and the characters are low MPC.

But you.

Can but.

It.

Can.

And so what I'm trying to say is.

That.

I have a summary.

Statistics here.

That tells.

Me so.

Then it gives me an additional.

Kick.

In this covariance.

For somebody.

To just keep in.

Mind that I'm not spending more and not quite sure

what I'm going to.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

That's what makes me feel like.

Oh I didn't know I might be so.

I know it's not really.

Because maybe in the beginning of.

The.

I guess it's in the story.

But some of the deviations from this.

Yes and no.

In econometrics.

Somebody.

Typically.

Yeah.

I want to tell them exactly which exam is going

on.

But whatever it is the average plus something.

David.

Yeah I think.

Um.

I think it's quite intuitive, you know, imagine you can

observe all of.

Us and our consumption in one month.

Oh, yeah.

Some of us.

Yeah.

Okay.

And then you can also say if we had been

the.

Same as I want the term.

Okay.

Yeah, that makes sense.

And I think.

The difference between the some of us and what would

have been the average if we have.

All the same.

Whatever is left.

Is the.

Distribution of it.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

I've got a question about this okay okay fine.

Thank you.

Yeah.

That's.

They need to speed up.

Okay, guys, I will need to speed up a little

bit.

Um.

Okay, so.

I had a question here about.

You know, I want to discuss the musical family.

The question is whether revenue neutral transfers can change our

agreements.

You know.

Obviously, that is the.

Whole point of view on this.

But I think if we are on board with what

we've done so far, this question was meant to be

translated by the.

Ex out of these parts of the class.

And I give that part of the cross so completely

neutral from the point of view of the of the

government.

You can actually get back at it, because I think

if I stay away from low and high embassy people,

then there's going to be a negative effect.

Okay, so we are breaking this notion that Virginia majors

can not identify.

All right.

So what we've seen so far is, you know, that

this heterogeneity can matter depending on the size of these

covariances.

Now that deeper dig a little bit deeper into what

are these marginal points into functions.

And so the starting point here is going to be

the lifetime budget constraint that we looked at already.

But I'm I want to express this lifetime budget constraint

which is normalised by the numerator and consumption units.

I want to get it back in period zero consumption

units.

Okay.

So I'm going to divide it by two zero.

So now is everything is in period zero consumption right.

And I'm going to call this guy Curly Omega whatever.

This thing is.

Um.

Now if you take your Euler equation and you iterate

it forward, you can get an expression for CTE for

agent j as a function of C0 times the compounded

real rates going forward.

This is very simple from the other equation.

Just keep going forward.

And what I've done here is simply took this iterated

for first order condition plugged into the lifetime utility budget

constraint.

Uh, lifetime budget constraint.

Sorry.

To get this expression here.

And now I can compute my marginal propensity to consume,

remembering that y0 is equal to curly omega zero.

Right.

Because our assumption perfect foresight.

And so it's very easy to take the derivative of

this expression one of c c0 equals.

This guy times the inverse of this this expression here.

And the derivative is trivial.

It's just this object here the power of minus one.

So what we're done.

You know we computed our MPC very very simple way.

Right.

Which is given by this expression here.

Now what's the problem here?

You know, we spent.

One.

Hour and a half talking about eternity and all these

things that can do to our economy.

Now we look at the marginal propensity to consume, and

it turns out that there is no originality whatsoever.

There is no J.

Okay.

So this is actually a bit of a problem because

if there is no energy whatsoever and you think about

a covariance or something that doesn't change across JS, all

these quantities are zero right across between a constant and

whatever would not be zero.

So then what's going on?

So the issue here is that we've been playing around

and using something that is called constant elasticity of substitution,

which basically means that the level of consumption has no

effect on my desire to move in that temporary consumption

across periods.

If you go back to my, you know, mask and

myself, for example, with the constant substitution utility function, you

know, mask of myself would behave perfectly identically.

If we are given £10,000, which is obviously nonsense.

Okay.

And so the fact that there is no heterogeneity here

is simply By-Products of our assumption.

And you can think of, you know, very you know,

there are many, many forms of, uh, um, utility functions

which we chose in CSS just because it's kind of

easy to deal with and it's easy to manipulate algebraically.

But there are like many different functions here.

I just wrote a very general form where you can

see that.

The.

Substitution here is going to depend on my level of

assumption.

So this is going to be across agents.

Um, and it's going to vary in a very long

trivial way.

It's going to depend on the ratio between the marginal

utility and the secondary consumption times the level of consumption.

So this is going to basically introduce back a notion

of uh heterogeneity in PCs.

And you can play around with the exponential functions.

I'm sure you've seen uh constant absolute risk aversion.

Uh, indeed functions.

And so but the only thing I want, I want

to come up to you to remember is that, you

know, even if you have income inequality, you can kill

effectively the robot by assuming a constant elasticity substitution.

Therefore there is no intervention.

Now there is a second aspects that, um.

There's quite important, uh, which is, uh, the role of

complete markets, which, uh, have you guys seen with markets

and just give me an idea of.

Oh, my.

Okay.

So.

Okay.

So let's try.

To do it quickly.

So basically complete markets is typically a is often an

implicit assumption in representation models.

So what are complete markets.

Um think about a now an income process that is

random and depends on a potentially infinite amount of states.

Well, to make it simple, imagine that there are only

two states.

You know, there is a rainy day and a sunny

day, and my income is going to depend on the

realisation of these two states.

And this can change across people, you know, if I'm

a farmer or if I'm a construction worker, whether or

not my income is not changed, that's a whole idea

of this skill.

So it's kind of an indicator variable.

Now instead of a single real one, let's assume that

there is there are as many securities as many states

that are in the world.

Okay.

Remember this is either two or can be infinity.

One will be infinity in the true complete market world.

But in our case it's just a discrete thing.

So there is a security that means we want consumption

units.

If it's a rainy day and there is another security

that pays me one consumption unit.

If it's a sunny day for each state of the

world, there is a security that I can buy, and

that gives me a consumption if that state arises or

zero otherwise.

And the cost of the security is going to be

Q or T given t plus 1ST plus one simply

means I buy this in T in t plus one.

The security that I pay for price Q is going

to pay me only if state's in T plus one

is realised by the son in security, which is claiming

one unit of consumption.

That sunny day I smoke and gas with me.

Now let's extend our model and instead of.

Having our real bond, we have our securities in our

case is going to be just the sum of two

securities sunny days and rainy days.

With their own prices and so on.

And the rest is absolutely, exactly the same as before.

Now, the question that I have for you is in

this world, how can I replicate the real one?

I'm an agent and I just want to I really

like the real bond, and I want to replicate it

by, you know, these new or different securities.

So what is the feature of a real bond?

The real point we opted for gives me one plus

R unit consumption, and the one in which.

Nanny stays to the right.

Whatever happens in the world.

Feature of a risk free area long is that, you

know, I give you one of our q q times

k user consumption today and I get k consumption tomorrow.

K units of consumption tomorrow.

So if I wanted to replicate that, I could just

buy one of each of these securities and boom, I'm

back to the real bond.

Right.

In our simple example, I buy sunny day security.

The rainy day security and weather is a sunny day

or a rainy day.

I'm going to get my usual consumption.

Yeah.

So the real bond is basically the price of the

real bond is just going to be the sum of

the price of each of these securities.

Now, what happens if I live in this world and

I just buy all the securities?

Well, and assume that all the securities exist?

It turns out that the.

First off, the condition is given by this expression here.

But all agents are going to behave.

But and basically this is going to hold for each

of these agents.

And the reason is that even if we have a

different income process.

Okay, I'm fully short.

Imagine that, you know, again, let's get back to our

example.

I am a construction worker.

And when I when I don't work.

Okay.

So my syntactic income depends on the states.

And one day I can't work.

And there's someone else that can work and can get

some money.

Okay.

If these two people trade these securities and buy these

securities that basically insuring themselves against the risk, right?

Because if it's a rainy day, I already bought insurance,

you know, via these securities to insure me against my

income.

Okay.

And it turns out that even if this guy J.

And this guy K very different income processes, that depends

differently on the states of the economy, their optimality condition

is exactly the same.

They're going to behave exactly the same way.

Which means that there's not going to be any generic

class.

So in a sense, you know, you started with the

term genius income.

But if you have a word with complete markets where

I can ensure all the risks.

In this economy, then this internet is killed by the

complete market assumption.

You have a question.

This means as one for the foundation for each state,

right?

Yes.

Yes.

There is an infinity in the true.

In the true out of the drawer security world.

The complete market for that.

If it's securities and if it's at the prices.

Okay.

And the real interest rate is simply going to be

the sum of all these prices.

Remember that the real rate is one over two in

these representative regions.

Uh, well, Q is not one over R, right?

It's the price of the real bond.

And that Q is simply going to be the sum

of all these continuous securities.

It's kind of obvious now, like if I have an

object whose price is Q, that gives me one.

Whatever is the state of the world, it must be

that the sum of all these S's, these shares have

to be equal to that Q, because by arbitrage, these

infinite amount of securities allow me to replicate the real

world.

Okay.

But I guess the main, the main thing I want

to kind of you to remember is.

These two households, even though they have a third of

the income they can insure against this, a traditional income,

okay.

By trading among themselves this infinite set of state contingent

securities kill this heterogeneity income and behave exactly the same

way.

And so there's more of what's happened for the left

because the complete market is completed.

You know, as, as this, uh, I use income risk.

Now, how reasonable is this complete market assumption?

Is not really, you know, as you may may guess,

is not really reasonable.

You know, a.

It's kind of crazy to assume that there is one

security database for every state of the world.

Now, states of the world are not, you know, even

thinkable.

Think of Covid.

You know, you should think of this.

This security is, roughly speaking, as insurances, right?

If you're if you're worried that when it rains your

income is going to be long, you just go to

the security you buy to get insurance and you know,

you're fine for keeping from risk and you're going to

behave exactly as all the other consumers in the world.

Now, obviously, there are events that are not insurable.

Covid is a good example.

Uh, there are a bunch of issues with, you know,

moral hazard selection that I'm not going to cover is

particularly important.

But I think another very easy to understand example is

human capital.

Um, and just, you know, just to make it this

concrete, this kind of your expected salary a few years

back, uh, at age 29.

And, you know, this is based on loads of observations.

Okay.

And no worries, like, from a few years back has

gone on, hopefully.

Um.

What I want to say is that, you know, these

dots here is based on a very, very large number

of people.

Okay.

So on average, you should expect to get this at

some point in the future.

But you cannot write an insurance contract saying if next

year are going to look for a job, someone's going

to give you your 60 K or whatever, whatever it

is.

Okay.

So your human capital is something that you know has

an obvious return.

But if you have a lucky draw because something happens

to the states of the world, there's no such thing

as a security that insured yourself for one year of

being unemployed.

Okay.

It's just an example to make sure to try to

convince you that, you know, this complete market assumption really

doesn't is not likely to hold any data.

Uh, and so we shouldn't worry too much about it.

Okay.

As much as we shouldn't worry too much about the

constant elasticity of substitution and assumption, which is crazy because,

you know, I'm asking myself to behave differently for a

given income.

Uh.

Um.

All right, so let's not cover this, especially because, you

know, you have an exercise to do on this stuff.

So now we're going to introduce some data generating bonds.

So the structure.

Here is going to be very similar to what we've

done so far.

But now we're going to allow people to differ not

just on their income but also their past holdings.

The whole equation is going to be very, very similar.

Any questions are going to be um, slightly different.

So yeah, let me just keep I mean.

It's actually quite important.

So remember the whole point is.

If.

These covariances we cannot have a prior.

And this variances we don't know.

It's okay.

We don't know whether you take this group.

And however the savers and the debtors, whether the savers

are the high MPC people or the borrowers or the

high people, or we're just randomly assigned MPC and status

or whatever, and we are getting this.

We need we need to go and check in the

data.

There's no way in which it can happen.

Well, we can say for sure, but we can have

a prior about these covariances maybe not being zero.

Because typically if you are that you're kind of young

and you want to consume maybe more than if you

are, you know, the person.

And so there might be something there.

But the most important point is that it's zero, that

heterogeneity does not matter at all.

And this.

So this is just to show that gross positions matter.

And then doing netting out like consider this world where

we all owe 100 to each other.

If you are to net out, nobody would have a,

you know, an X in that position.

And ignoring these we'll see is wrong or can lead

to wrong conclusions as much as.

If we have these and we do the netting out

so that, you know, this guy only holds these 200

nets, this is going to also going to be misleading

because the conditions under which we can do this are

very special.

You know, maybe this guy had a few real assets,

some nominal liabilities and so on.

And these things are going to be affected differently by

monetary policy because inflation is going to change and so

on.

Maybe these guys, maybe this guy had 100 in very

long term assets and 200 very short term assets.

And again this thing can matter.

So doing this netting out can be granted.

And now we're going to introduce this notion of deferred

19 assets and 90 in uh direction of the assets.

Um.

Which is just.

This slide that you just said what I said and

this paper by Adriano Clair, uh, he's going to provide

us with the framework.

Um.

Skip this.

So the model.

Is going to be the same up to this point.

So this is exactly the same setup.

But now we're going to allow some eternity in the

assets.

You enter the model and we're going to introduce a

slightly different notation here.

We're going to have a k minus one t.

Which is basically say.

This is the amount of.

Real.

Assets that I enter the model with, and I'm going

to pay for it.

Okay.

So if I add an asset I enter the model

with this asset and impurity is going to pay off

whatever was the promised return on the real asset.

And the same is true for nominal asset holdings okay.

Which I introduced here with B and which I'm going

to normalise what I'm going to make real by dividing

by the price level.

So I'm introducing kind of nominal nominal assets in this

world and therefore the price level.

And I'm going to normalise P0 equal to one okay.

And the price of these bonds is going to be

denoted by capital T.

Remember the price of the real bond was denoted by

capital sorry.

By lower case.

Yeah.

Yeah I was the markets okay.

Are we still in public markets.

We are still in.

No we're not complete markets.

So the only assets in this world are real assets

and nominal assets.

There are no other securities.

Okay.

Um, so just making sure make sure that the markets

have assign was to say if you had complete markets,

then this income would be killed by the markets if

you have real bonds wouldn't because that would be.

So here we are back in a world where there

are no complete markets, but we're going to add nominal

bonds and we're going to add a notion of duration,

okay.

Because we can have an asset that pays off in,

you know, that I entered the model with that pays

off today in other asset ways of two days into

the future, ten days into the future and so on.

Okay.

And you're going to have some official relation here.

The links, the price.

I mean this is in prices rather than in returns,

but it's exactly the same situation.

As.

We've seen in the last topic.

Okay.

So now I can rewrite the intertemporal budget constraint in

terms of I'm going to denote its total real wealth.

It's not income anymore.

Why is that income more.

Because there is an income effect.

When income is normal there is real lifetime income.

But there is.

Also the.

Accumulation of all the net real positions in the net

nominal positions.

Which we didn't have before and which matter to determine

what's my lifetime wealth.

Okay.

And it is in real terms and it is again

expressed in one consumption unit.

So if I wanted to convert it back to zero

consumption units I would need to divide up by zero.

So nothing else.

I've done nothing else than what we've done before.

But now we have this kind of different set of

nominal and real assets with different maturities that we're accumulating.

And crucially, this kind of netting pointer was not wanted

to make.

You know.

Here we are kind of netting all the assets that

mature at the same at the same time, you know,

could be in a one that I issued reports ten

years ago and it's material now that pays a certain

return.

And bundling was like two days ago.

And so the netting has to be mature.

Um.

And as before, we are going to consider an anticipated

temporary change in the real rate, the R0.

So this is the same Mitt shock we looked at

before is a change in monetary policy, and we're going

to assume that it does the following.

So this is just a repetition of seen before.

It's going to move income in period zero.

But then it's going to fully revert from period one

onwards.

It's going to lead to a permanent change in the

price level.

So there is a one the inflation that then goes

back to zero.

So the price level is going to be permanently higher.

Is going to lead to a change in the prices

of consumption only in period zero but not in other

periods, which is the beauty of what we you know,

that's the reason why we could do this last composition

and so on.

So the only thing that changes in the is the

price at period zero.

Okay.

Here is just some intuition on what happens if you

don't do our normalisation of the price of consumption one

equal one, but we were to normalise the numerator at

zero.

You know, if you want you can look at it.

Maybe you have an exercise robot.

Um.

And things are going to be much more convenient if

we have C1 as the numerator rather than C0.

And then the Fisher equation simply is, you know, implies

that this holds because inflation is going to be zero

from t plus one onwards.

Okay.

So all this is saying is that you should think

of the shock we're considering as a monetary policy shock

in the education model that has zero persistence.

It's like a bump in epsilon I with no persistence

in the shock or no smoothing.

That would give you exactly what we have here, which

is plotted here in this chart.

So you basically have when the shock heats up, goes

up, and then immediately goes back in the next period's

disillusioning.

So it's a fall in the area rates that we

assume monetary policy can affect.

And inflation goes up and then to zero, which means

that the price level goes up and stay here for

okay.

That's that's kind of the thing.

And we were looking at before.

And it is the same shock we looked at in.

Okay, so now, um.

I'm gonna do exactly what we've done in the simpler

version of the model.

So this is the lifetime budget constraint.

Total lifetime expenditure is going to be equal to total

lifetime wealth rather than income.

So we've got the real and the nominal assets here.

We can apply that to composition and work out what

the income effect is.

And the substitution effect is.

And remembering that I can rewrite the derivative of consumption

with respect to total lifetime wealth as the MPC over

Q0.

Because we've seen before remembering that zero over zero is

equal to zero over zero, because our normalisation of the

numerator of the consumption of one, then I can rearrange

this expression and rewrite things as in this equation down

here where I condensed the interesting bit in this d

omega j, which I'm going to analyse in the next

slide because slightly big objects.

Uh.

But all these steps are exactly what we've done.

What have we done before in this simple model?

Okay.

And now we're going to focus on this guy.

Because the substitution effect, as we mentioned already is not

very interesting and is um, essentially what we've seen in

this equation.

So what is this omega?

This omega has some, uh, additional components relative to what

we had before.

Before we just had the total effect on income from

monetary policy.

Is the Pi becoming bigger because of, uh, the general

effect of monetary policy?

And we have the net saving thing, right?

How much I consume relative to how much I'm endowed

in period zero consumption goods.

Now we have a slightly different object, which is what

other costs than an edge interest exposure, which is I

think that intuitively, whether you're a net saver important zero

or whether you're endowment is higher than your consumption period

zero.

But also depending this exposure depends on the net maturing

assets.

So if I'm a person who ends up with a

negative or a deficit position here, so I find myself

in a position where I need to borrow, then I'm

going to be in trouble if interest rates are higher.

What if I end up being a saver in this

situation?

I'm going to be higher interest rates and there are

benefits to this, uh, increase in uh, um, in higher

rates.

So it's simply, you know, it's the same notion as

before, but this is just a bit more complicated by

the fact that I have in period zero, all these

kind of assets that I had previously that are maturing

in zero zero and are going to affect my energy

interest.

And the third element is going to be the net

nominal position, which is instead the amount of.

Nominal assets that I hold.

And this is basically going to capture the ratio effects.

So if in period zero I end up with a

lot of nominal assets.

Right.

I'm talking about the stock of nominal assets, then surprising

inflation.

Right, because the real value of those assets is going

forward.

If.

Like me, you have a large mortgage on your house

and you have a large stock of nominal debts, it's

fighting inflation.

It's going to be beneficial to me because the real

value that is holding you end up being a lucky,

because if you need to remortgage, then your energy interest

rate exposure is actually quite high.

So it's not obvious whether you're worse off or better

off.

It is exactly what's going on.

So think of this through the lens of mortgages I

think is very intuitive.

I have a big, large nominal liability.

From.

Which I benefit from a spike in inflation.

But if I my asset structure was such that my

mortgage had to be refinanced.

Now I now face much higher interest rates and this

is not good for me.

Right.

And we have all of these here in this very

complicated structure with different maturities and different assets or real

assets.

So in a sense.

This is exactly the sense.

Going back to your question, where does this unhedged comes

from?

From the absence of quantitative markets.

Why?

Because if markets were going to ease, I could have

ensured everything with the full state set of state continuous

securities for all state of the world.

You know, I would have, you know, me as a

mortgage on the mortgage.

I would have bought insurance against the possibility that there

was a monetary policy shock.

And, you know, this would have not affected at all

my interest rates exposure.

And this would have brought me back to the emergence

case where it would not mattered.

Okay.

It will still be some effects, but not the exposure.

So that's that's.

The sense in which the.

Markets method.

All right.

With let's let's in the five minutes kind of where

we are.

So again I'm doing what I've done before, which is

I'm writing the total derivative consumption as a function of

the MPC times total income effect Uri.

And that nominal position minus the substitution effects.

We're still going to assume that there is net zero

savings in the aggregate.

So inside asset assumption.

The integral of these guys is going to be zero.

As well as these two uh are going to be

zero.

Uh so this implies that both the Uri and the

entropy on average are zero.

Um.

Now we have an assumption.

This is quite a happy one to be honest, but

it will make our life easier.

So just to give you an idea, you know.

We're abstracting from the government and the fact that there

could be, you know, we wouldn't need to impose that.

This is true.

This is marketplace condition.

It could be a government, but I would complicate the

world quite a lot.

There could be an open economy set up where I

kind of borrow from abroad.

And again, this condition may not hold because I'm just,

you know, I have a net for an asset position,

for example.

And also there are some real assets.

I think we discussed this at the very beginning, or

maybe the topic to, uh, you know, the idea that

there are assets for which there is no corresponding liability.

You know, if I if I want to see today

and I get a tree that gives me apples every

year, you know, there is no liability counterpart to this.

And so this kind of excluded just to be transparent

about the assumptions we're making, that's the world we're living

in.

And given these words then we can do the same,

um, exercise we've done before, which is we compute the

average economy or the average MPC, and we can rewrite

the total derivative of consumption as an aggregate income channel

and earnings heterogeneity channel, which basically depends on the covariance

between my MPC and my my income.

There is a Fisher channel, which depends on whether defined

in.

If there is a systematic correlation between having a large

mortgage and large nominal liability and having a high MPC.

And an interest rate exposure triangle, which intuitively is is

there any systematic correlation between being high and busy and

having a large exposure in maturing assets as well as

the substitution channel?

And you can already see that depending on the sine

of these covariances, you can actually get.

Amplification or dampening of a monetary policy shock to consumption

relative to the average or the representative agent.

Benjamin.

Which is basically what we're going to do.

Uh, so, um, so next week we're going to.

Cover a few empirical studies while these are all done

in, uh, in Oakland market paper, where he kind of

tries to get empirical estimates of these, of these numbers

to work out whether, you know, we are effective in

this situation, if there is a population, whether we live

in a world where there is no systematic covariance between

these NPCs and the various objects, or whether there is

potential even number.

Okay.

Um.

Right.

Let me stop here.

Um.

As usual, I'm sticking around for questions.

Right.

And just to make it, you know, I think this

week.

Yeah.

In this week's problem sets.

And I think you're going to do all the exercise,

number one, uh, which is quite reach, uh, exercise where

all these notions can be relevant.

So there is no need for kind of knowing about

data pathways and so on.

So we covered the need for extension number one for

this problem set.

Right.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Yes.

Anything in the morning comes.

Yeah.

Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

Uh, I get a.

Little confused.

You, everyone.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And this was the last.

Three hours of.

Monday?

Yeah.

Oh, really?

Yeah.

I think I yeah, man.

Yeah.

It's like tiring.

It's not the 60s.

It's like, you know, it's.

In the 40s.

Oh.

And then my Co is here tomorrow.

I see people back in.

Lecture 17:

And then you left and all this comes up.

And this is why we.

Need.

Them.

It's like.

What?

Are.

You waiting for?

I don't know.

What what what do you want?

From.

There.

Yeah.

So what?

Does that mean?

Yeah.

Some people.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I got it.

It makes sense.

It wasn't something.

That was difficult.

For me.

All right, guys.

Hi, everyone.

Um, okay.

Well, um, today I was saying that we're getting close

to the meeting.

Uh, things are getting spicy at work.

Please.

Um.

All right, so, um, what we've done last week was

to introduce topic three, and we looked at, uh, the

role of i.t and monetary policy.

So I, you know, I was looking back at my,

uh, notes and slides.

I like to call that quite a lot of money

here.

So I was planning to spend 20 minutes or so

reviewing what we have done.

Um, also because we're going to kind of take a

break from algebra and math, uh, that we as a

need for, for some.

And we're going to give you a few pictures and

some empirical evidence.

I think it's important to remind, you know, what was

the goal and what we had been learning last week.

And also, um, to remind you what, you know, that

information mechanisms that we discussed.

So, um.

So the plan is really to kind of go through

the main, the main features of the more that we

looked at and assign.

Which we.

So this is the starting point.

This is where we started from where we deviated from

the.

Model.

And if you recall, we just assumed a very tiny

bit of heterogeneity in the income process.

Okay.

So we discussed in general there is a lot of

many dimensions of vector generated matter.

And we said well let's just depart from the origin

model which is this tiny little ingredient, which means that

we all get some form, some average income.

But then our total income, each of us is distributed

and the average level is going to be random.

So it's going to hit every period where you're going

to think each of us is going to be equal

chance.

Uh, and we also assume that these idiosyncratic income sums

up to zero zero.

Right.

Um, and we made the example of the construction worker

versus lecturer thinking about the fact that some income processes

may be more correlated with the disciple model policy actions

than others.

In our example, the construction worker think that the housing

sector is very cyclical.

When there is a tightening of the policy, the housing

sector goes on.

There's going to be less demand for workers in that

sector.

The wage of the um workers in the sector will

fall, while my wages lecture will be very much impacted

by that.

Okay.

So that is justification for, um, uh, for the kind

of narrative behind this white budget.

If you remember, we also assume we simplify the model

the more that as much as possible, we assume that

monetary policy can affect the real economy in a fully

conscious way.

So we completely abstracted from the supply side of the

economy.

And we just said the monetary policy can affect the

real rates, actually.

Um, and so we thought about a change in monetary

policy as a change in this, uh, capital T, which

is the growth of interest rates.

Um, we can remember the difference in notation, previous, um,

uh, notes.

Um, we then moved on to consider the possibility of,

uh, saving in this economy.

And now and we went back to our simple one

period real bond, which we denoted by k.

Now there is a superscript j here, because each and

every loss can decide whether to consume or say via

this bond and differently from the representative agent model.

We have that there could be equilibrium positions that are

different from zero.

Recall, we are assuming here that the asset is still

an inside asset.

So this thing is going to average zero.

But differently from a representative agent economy where everyone is

behaving exactly the same way.

And that cannot be.

And this is an equilibrium condition that there cannot be

any single position that is different from zero equilibrium.

Now we are at our genius.

And so if I'm the lecturer and I have a

surplus because my income is not affecting monetary policy, and

you have the construction worker, we can transfer these resources

to consumption.

And so it will be that I end up being

a net saver in equilibrium, and you end up being

a nice borrower.

And effectively, that's the key distinction relative to what we

have done before.

This economic opportunity is going to show up as heterogeneity

in our net positions in terms of borrowing and saving.

We then define the real the real relative price of

consumption as it is standard.

This chart is just a more general way to think

about compounding.

Or if you want to translate consumption by hand with

consumption today.

And I think I said, you know, the easy way

to see this is by just setting T to one,

and you're going to get the relative price of consumption

that you would get in a standard Euler equation.

Okay.

As we discussed in the previous topic.

And then we made another simplifying assumption which was.

If you remember, simplified things quite a lot, and the

simplifying assumption was to assume perfect foresight or an MIT

shock.

In other words, we assume that nobody can even think

of the possibility of a shock.

So there is no precautionary behaviour whatsoever, right?

We just live happily in our equilibrium.

At some point something happens that we could not even

imagine.

And this thing goes away.

Laughter.

Right?

Um, and in particular, we assume that the policymaker could

implement a surprise change in the real time period zero,

which would then switch off exactly or offset exactly the

opposite in the in the next period.

And this would affect the real time period zero.

Incoming period zero.

And uh, the moment we are in a real mode.

So the only thing.

Right.

So this is the setup, as I said, minor deviation.

Then we solved our problem which is looks very standard

apart from the fact that now we have this right

here.

And if you solve this problem and you know how

to do this, uh, you're going to find the usual

equation for consumption, with the only difference that this is

now indexed by J.

So for each and every house in our economy is

going to be exactly.

So remember the whole point of this?

Um, first part of the lecture was to think about

the response of consumption to monetary policy shock.

I'm sorry.

In particular, we wanted to ask whether adding heterogeneity would

change at all, the response of consumption to monetary policy

changes, and if it did change the response of consumption,

in which direction to amplify the response of the assumption,

for example, in response to some.

So basically, just to give you an idea of what

one last week was, to find an expression that allowed

us to think about how the consumption response to monetary

policy shrank in the central.

And the way we thought about it was to say,

well.

Let me just use the micro standard micro tools that

we know about how substitution and income effect work apply

to this setup.

Okay.

Let me motivated this bit back.

So the original motivation for this topic was that.

In the representative education model, there is a lot of

substitution.

If anything is the most important is definitely the most

important channel response, the unique channel version.

While we know, or at least you know, our intuition

is that there should be also an income that's more

directly in effect, right?

And so.

To try and work out.

In fact, that's that's why we thought, okay, maybe let's

use the tools from some the micro tools to work

out the substitution impact.

But to do that we needed to modify the community.

So we needed to deviate from the usual way in

which we think about this class of models.

And that's why we're using the temporal budget constraint.

And then we had the normalisation of consumption one.

So what I want you to kind of, uh, visualise

is that the, the reason why we're doing this is

because.

We want to work out a responsible assumption for a

monetary policy nomination, and we need to try and work

out how much these responses are accounted for by two

different mechanisms the substitution effect.

And that's exactly why we're going down the.

Why is it important when you could've gone to the

computer and tried to, you know, charge for this kind

of complicated more than you are?

In fact, quantitative responses and how they differ but were

not understood.

What are the mechanics or what is the mechanism that

is actually driving these differences?

So that's that's the value as we speak.

So um, what is the intertemporal budget constraint is just

accumulation over time of uh, the period budget constraint.

So you just keep reiterating for once, considering that, you

know, K0 or k minus one initial condition here.

And you get this kind of very intuitive expression that

says that lifetime expenditure has to be equal to lifetime

income.

And we're called lifetime income.

Omega zero g.

Remember this holds all the data, so it's very chance.

This is objective.

And then this is the trick we used, which was

to say that where consumption.

Consumption is at different point in time, we need to

pick a numerator to be able to.

Express the price of consumption in different areas rather than

picking the kind of standard normal which would be zero

would be one consumption.

In other words, we fixed the price of the level

is not that of the price.

This is the price of consumption one equal to one,

which means that I now can express the relative price

of consumption in any other period relative to consumption one,

as in this expression here.

If you do it for period zero, you get that

R0 is going to be equal to zero.

Okay.

And this was the trick that was, you know, made

our lives so much easier in terms of understanding the

algebra behind these things, because now I'm basically trying to

solve a problem where I have a change in the

price of one goods.

You can think about it as a good thing of

time is different varieties of goods.

And for a given changing price you can work out

substitution effects.

I think I wrote in this box.

Um.

So we also define the marginal propensity to consume as

the derivative of consumption relative to lifetime income.

And again here there is.

Remember this kind of a very important simplification.

We made the fact that we are in perfect foresight.

And we assume that there is only one shortcut period

zero that then disappears simplifies our life massively because now

total wealth is going to be equal to income zero.

Right?

Because they just go up by the same amount.

There is no discounting in the future.

It's just much easier.

Okay.

Um.

All right, so just to make it clear, we've got

some endowments.

Remember, these are kind of endowments.

They are random and there is no production here.

So endowed with a bunch of goods with their morality

prices.

We want to allocate this endowment into consumption.

We can think of T as different varieties rather than

time.

We know that there is a change in the price

of one of these goods, and we can easily work

out income substitution effects with a standard stock position.

Okay.

Remember, you don't need to go.

You do need to know how to do these things

for the exam.

Okay.

But it's important that you know.

The general intuition for this expression.

So, you know, I'll never ask you to kind of

either that I will write down perfectly.

You know, the expressions most likely when I write them

down for you and maybe ask you to interpret them.

Okay.

Um, but it is important that you remember, you know,

what comes out of this decomposition, that you have an

income effect and a substitution effect in that within an

income effect.

We have different parts which we're going to analyse now.

I don't quite see why the perfect foresight is so

important, uh, in this.

Because even if we introduce the shock and we just

like mean zero shock and take an expectation will be

the equivalent, uh, lifetime expected income and expenses.

So.

So I think it's easy to think about it when

you go to the nominal model, which, you know, the

data is the same.

You have to remember you've had a losing policy or

one time.

Right.

That wasn't the case.

And you want to work out.

You know, your future.

Let's say you're a nominal asset position.

And how it affects your consumption.

With the care of you will need to take care

of all the period buy period realisations of inflation to

work out what's the real benefit from increasing inflation.

If you have a debt to me, and that's much

more complicated because you need to know the whole life

of the inputs and response if you want to shop

and forever period correctly discount for what's coming after you.

Is door one is just much nastier, much more nasty

as a, you know, for the algebra, because you just

need to take into account in our case here, you

want you would need to take into account how income

period zero, income period one and zero, two and so

on, which depends on the parameters of the model which

can have different systems and so on.

So we have more complicated expressions.

But you know conceptually is exactly same.

But for the algebra function it's mainly for the pencil

and paper solutions.

For question one large shock in time period zero is

that in the original sense, same as thinking of multiple

shocks across time, just discounting them to time period zero.

Certainly you can work out an example where the strings

are equivalent, uh, meaning, you know, there should be a

solution to the problem and saying or even.

Big shock given sequence of shock.

I can probably find the shock that works in practice,

but again, wouldn't change too much information on what we're

doing.

Uh, okay.

Then.

It's a good representation as well.

For that.

We just make the whole kind of.

At the end of the day, you want to track

or think how things are going to you.

You will need to track how things are going to

evolve from zero onwards.

And the beauty of this is that things can only

change in period zero here.

And so that makes it simply makes the algebra easier.

Just one clarification.

You mentioned in Big Shock.

Remember that for quite a lot of the things we're

going to be talking about.

We have talked about more shots here.

Because often we're going to be taking approximations around there,

and those approximations only hold in the surrounding area.

And I think it's going to be in this slide

deck where I would actually I'll try to remember to

come back to exactly respond to this.

Um.

Right.

So then.

For example, one important thing, you know, just giving you

an idea of how the final exam could look like.

So this income effect here is a bit different from

the standard income effect in a micro class.

And the reason was that there's this object here which

captures a general equilibrium effects, even though we have a

partial equilibrium setup.

But we know that monetary policy is going to increase

the size of the Pi.

So it really policy increase output.

And we know from our previous, uh, previous topics, and

this is kind of absent in the partial equilibrium world

of micro.

Right.

You know, normally when you do this kind of income

substitution effect, you have a change in the price, but

you keep the size of the pie increased.

Well, here you have this kind of additional effect that

comes from the fact that monetary policy can increase output.

And so, you know, that's the kind of understanding I

would like you to know about what we're doing here.

Okay.

Um, so exactly in this point, we said when the

income effect is going to have two parts.

There's going to have one element that is related to

how my own income is going to respond to the

policy.

It is the construction worker lecture example.

Right.

If I'm the construction worker and there is a loosening,

I'm going to be better off because I got slightly

more than you would otherwise do.

So my consumption is increased by more.

But it also depends on whether I'm a net saver

or not.

Borrower.

Okay, so think of this as being endowment minus how

much you want to consume.

And if I, if I, if I am a uh

in a saver and interest rates have gone down or

more so because you know, I'm going to get a

smaller return for an amount of savings of goods, um,

I have.

Here the substitution effect.

We again, you know, it's kind of here in the

background.

It's not particularly important for what we're going to do

in this topic, because the whole point is to try

and get some action away from the substitution effect and

give it to the income effect.

Okay.

Um.

Some derivations that are in, you know, again, you don't

need to know how to get to.

Everybody welcome to.

But otherwise just trust me.

And eventually we got to this overall expression here which

shows how in the simple setup consumption response to monetary

policy.

And we recast, we have written this expression in terms

of some substitution effect that again, we're not going to

focus too much on.

And the marginal propensity to consume for agent J that

multiplies in average effects of monetary policy in the economy,

the effect that monetary policy has on my own income,

the effect of monetary policy has, depending whether I'm a

saver and a borrower, and some amplification of the substitution

effects.

Right.

So here I'm just, you know, I opened up this

expression here, and you can see that the MPC can

basically amplify or dampen, um, substitution effect in the absence

of uh, uh, Covid 19.

And then we did this trick to say, well, you

know, again, remember our goal was to say, you know,

in a word with the Trinity, what is the marginal

effect of heterogeneity into a world where everyone is the

same.

And so to answer this question, we did we said

we said the following.

We said let's assume that everyone is actually the same.

If you have a continuum of identical consumers, you go

back to the representative uh, agent model.

And if everyone is the same, then we have, by

means of our assumptions that this guy is going to

be zero.

On average, this guy is going to be zero on

average.

And what you're left with is the average or aggregate

effect on monetary policy on output and the substitution effect,

which is exactly what we had before.

And then you can say, well, let me decompose.

The total effect of consumption is a true genius agent

economy into an average effect and something more or something

less.

We still don't know what this additional thing is, whether

it's going to dampen or amplify consumption.

And we can write this expression as the integral across

all agents of their own MPC in deviation from the

average MPC times synthetic income.

Idiosyncratically borrowing, borrowing or lending position and the substitution effects

which depends on consumption and the level of consumption.

And we finally rewrote this integral as Aquarians.

Someone asked at the end of last lecture why you

can think of these as covariances.

Remember, the covariances are the sum of the products of

a random variable minus its mean.

Take.

This guy is being zero.

These guys in deviation from the average.

So I can rewrite this stuff as Aquarians, which is

what I've done here.

And now we've got something very kind of intuitive to

think about.

The marginal effect of heterogeneity is a column.

Right.

Because this marginal effect is going to depend on some

covariances between the MPC and how my income fluctuates with

the monetary policy and how my borrowing or saver position

the response of monetary policy, which is something that, you

know, in principle, we could measure in the data.

It's not going to be easy, but in principle we

could do it.

Imagine taking this class as being the economy.

We all have different PCs.

If you give me $1 spent $0.20, I give you

one dollars and $0.30.

And it turns out that my income is more cyclical

than yours.

Then you can work out whether there is amplification or

not.

And that's what we're going today.

Okay.

So today we're going to go to the data and

try to measure these things.

Okay.

Do you guys remember um.

What's the downside or what's the problem with these covariances

and in particular with the NPCs.

So this is great, right?

I can go to the data to measure things.

I can work out.

Let's assume that I find there is an amplification.

We discussed, I think briefly, what's the problem with this

kind of expression?

I think to improve if you want like a formal

mathematical proof that they don't order something in a representative

in a heterogeneous agency.

Go for it.

About the assumption that we will make and adjust so

that we have market conditions.

That's correct.

And that's not super realistic.

Well, it's uh.

So the correct answer is these objects are not structural

parameters, right?

They depend a lot on potentially the state of the

economy.

You know, this the, uh, the way I think the

best way to think about it is think about an

open versus a closed economy, okay.

If you open up the economy, there's no reason why

your firms shouldn't adjust their prices with the same frequency.

So the parameter would remain the same.

You know, it's completely dependent on whether you are open

or closed.

What if I open the economy here now my saving

doesn't get to be equal to my consumption.

Sorry, my consumption doesn't need to be equal to my

income on average because there is an external sector.

So I would have a different market condition which is

income.

Plus borrowing from growth is equal to consumption.

Okay.

And by just changing this condition we would get a

different MPC, very likely because the MPC is an endogenous

object that, you know, that has to fit some conditions,

some equilibrium conditions in the world now.

So what I want to say is that this is

not a panacea.

You know, the fact that we get to this expression

is fantastic because, you know, we have a hint you

can go to the data, we can try to measure

things.

But we shouldn't take these covariances as telling us, oh,

you know, we found out we proved like mathematically that

there is always amplification or always happening in this world.

Okay.

This is a very important point because again, it's very

different from the kind of, uh, you know, we talked

a lot about counterfactuals in number one.

How would the world be if I change a structural

parameter?

I mean, in my model, you can't really do the

same here.

You know, you can't just say how the world change

if the MPC was higher because the MPC is itself

endogenous object.

Okay.

Um, reboot.

Okay.

Yeah, that's exactly what we said.

And the other kind of important point is that we

discussed very briefly the fact that now, you know, we

live in a world where potentially, if I were to

say, you know, half of the income of this half

of the class, we move into this other half of

the class if I have to transfer resources.

And so this is a completely neutral thing, right?

You know, I'm taking 50 and I'm giving back 50.

If I happen to give this 50 to some bunch

of people.

And this is higher, this completely neutral move would actually

stimulate the economy.

So you see, we're going to go into kind of

fiscal, uh, fiscal policy quite heavily at the end of

uh, uh, again.

Um, right then we covered like.

We basically covered three, uh, potential reasons for when eternity

stops mattering.

And the way in which we did it was to

say, well, you know, we're talking a lot about this

MPC.

MPC is, if you remember these objects here, how consumption

changes to a given increase to a small increase in

income.

You know, we've got all the ingredients to actually try

and compute this derivative.

And we've done it starting from the Euler equation, iterating

forwards, doing a few transformations and then taking a derivative.

It was very trivial.

And we got to this expression here.

And under our assumption in this simple model we found

that actually this MPC is the same for everyone.

And we concluded that this MPC is the same for

everyone because of the constant elasticity substitution assumption that we

made, which intuitively, if you remember, was the myself versus

the mask example.

If I give you $100 worth of spending power, okay.

And so a word with constant substitution is going to

be in a world where constant substitution heterogeneity would stop

mattering in the simple world.

So you want to kind of deviate.

You want to deviate from it if you want to.

That's amazing.

Also.

Um, we discussed why actually since utility functions are, um,

maybe not what.

I think.

We made a couple of examples all around utility function

scripts and lots of these files.

Yes.

So this is one reason for when it stops mattering.

We saw a second reading which was complete markets and

complete markets.

I mean, it seems more complicated than it is.

But you know, just intuitively, let me try to explain

what I meant last week.

So let's go back to the example construction work and

lecture.

Okay.

Um.

The whole idea is that if you are a construction

worker and you're exposed to, um, a state of the

world where.

You can ensure that the state of the world.

Right?

So if it rains, you know, you're gonna be constructing

your house.

And markets simply means that there is a security that

insures you against tomorrow's gonna rain.

So you can fully insure against that.

And if we can all ensure against any state of

the world where we are worse off or better, then

that means that we're all going to have the same

consumption levels, which means that it stops raining.

That's the whole point.

Okay.

And then and so we kind of represented this mathematically.

We discussed we discussed how to.

Derive from this expression the return on a real bond.

Right.

Because the return on a real safe bond is the

return that gives you, you know, give me one year

to consumption.

You one times one was consumption tomorrow in any state

of the world.

So it's like buying any single security of all these

securities.

But then we also concluded that, um.

It's actually hard to think that this complete market was

holds in reality because there are many risks or state

of the states of the world where it's actually impossible

to insure against.

Right.

And so we said, well, you know, this complete market

story potentially keeps the generality, but it is not likely

to be a reality.

Um, and the third thing we looked at.

Was.

A last kind of theoretical argument.

So for example.

The first argument we made was, well, you know, maybe

these covariances are just zero in population, right?

So just, you know, look at this expression.

If I were to find that, you know, imagine a

distribution of NPCs in this room, a distribution of cyclicality

of income.

And it turns out that our NPC are just randomly

assigned to our cyclicality of income.

And if I were to estimate this covariance to be

zero, then I would get that there is no difference

between the original agents economy and the average representative agent.

All right.

So there's a question here about this covariance.

Nobody tells us exactly that there should be a systematic

correlation between me being a saver and having a very

low propensity to consume.

Well, what about the second term?

Uh, because, uh, we saw earlier that MPC also depends

on the consumption part.

So the second term is not likely to be zero

or the second covariance term.

Yeah.

That's that's not likely to be zero.

Right.

Like even if the MPC are not correlated with the

income distribution like the Y by delta distribution.

Okay.

So there is still some, uh, systematic correlation.

And then uh, like.

This is kind of always going to be present in,

uh, you know, you can you can get rid of

all of this is the substitution effect that would be

present in the homogeneous economy anyway.

Yeah.

You got a little bit more or a little bit

less, but you, you wouldn't get any income effects.

If this is the question that you asked.

Yeah.

Well, we you know, we can, uh, if it's not

clear from this.

But you know the point.

That's why I want to downplay this substitution effect, because

this is going to be present anyway in the representative

agent economy.

You know, it can be slightly amplified or dampens, but

really, we want to work out whether there is any

kind of meaningful role for the income effect.

And remember, the whole logic is that the old Keynesians

were thinking about the failure model as a model where,

you know, I'm sure in undergrad they wrote down consumption

is equal to C times y, right?

You know, it's it's a it's all about income, right?

It's all the change.

N cross is all about the marginal propensity to consume

and the income effect and the fact that, you know,

if you get one out more, uh, income equals more

and more money comes off.

So it's all about, you know, the interesting things about

this.

Um, okay.

So last thing before jumping into the, uh, empirical analysis

was to say, well, let's move away from this kind

of simpler, simple model.

And let's make the assets actually be a little bit

more realistic.

And there's also a nominal side to the economy.

So here what we've done, we have this this upper

bit of the slide exactly as it was before.

And down here is where the new stuff comes in.

And in particular we allowed for a full term structure

of the assets because we said k j minus one

t is assets of any maturity that are going to

mature in period T.

Okay.

So it could be assets that about 20 years ago,

ten years ago or five years ago, three months ago.

But you just net them in the sense that they

are all maturing today.

And you're going to have the same for nominal assets,

okay.

Where you know, where the price level that we know

how the how to determine from topic two and we're

going to normalise, you know, we're going to just normalise

P0 equal to one.

So nothing to do with the consumption numeraire is just

the normalisation.

The price level is a unit of account.

We discussed all these things.

Um.

Right.

So what basically this imply was to move from a

total real income lifetime income to a total real lifetime

wealth.

Okay.

Why was because we have lifetime income, as you know,

the the value of your the future value of your

labour income.

But now you have your asset positions that are going

to affect your life.

Well, and this is the natural position in an economic

position.

And these kind of what we discussed before.

Or maybe I should start actually at the very beginning,

just to give you an idea of, you know, what

kind of experiment we're looking at.

But that's what I said before, you know, the beauty

is that, you know, P goes up here and stays

here forever.

So in this infinite sum, we don't need to care

about P.

If we were to kind of go all over the

place, then to think about my lifetime nominal position, I

would need to start thinking about what's going to happen

to P plus one and two plus two and T

plus infinity until you got back to steady state.

Okay.

So that's the beauty of uh, of this assumption here.

And you can apply the same logic to future income

and future interest rates and so on.

Okay.

So it's two things.

Remember the fact that you go back to steady states

and the fact that when we were here, nobody could

even imagine the idea of a shock.

And we'll see in a second.

Probably by the end of this lecture we'll see that

what we call proportional savings or proportional behaviour is a

key aspect of the work.

Okay.

Um.

Right.

Then we basically follow the same steps as we had

before.

We made the usual same transformation, same, uh, substitution and

income effect, which is not a wealth effect, which is

a bigger bit of a bigger, uh, element here.

And so we analyse it in this slide.

And here we basically have the direct monetary policy, what

we call unhedged interest exposure following which is just a

more sophisticated version of our simple net saving expression that

we had in the simple model, because now we have

all the net maturing assets, both real and nominal, and

we have a new object that is the net nominal

position, which was just based on the idea of the

Fisher operation, where if I'm a net debtor in nominal

terms, and increasing inflation is going to help me because

it's going to reduce the burden on my debts.

And again following the same steps as before, imposing the

same inside assets condition as before.

These were the kind of these were the um, the

open economy dimension would matter, right?

So these wouldn't be two anymore because I could borrow

from abroad.

Right.

And this would affect the NPCs in the parentheses.

By imposing the our user conditions, we can rewrite.

The response of consumption as the sum of an aggregate

income effect.

Sum earning heterogeneity effects the Fisher effects and the intrinsic

exposure effects.

And as before last substitution channel that we discussed already.

And as before, these things are going to depend on

the covariances between the MPC of agents and on the

acquisition, the renewal information and what.

And I think we closed.

Yes, I think we stopped here last week.

And we just said that by looking at this expression,

you actually can very easily work out what are the

conditions under which you do get an investigation connected to

a case where there is no intergenerational.

So I have a just go over them quickly.

So starting from the net nominal position.

Let me try to explain what you know, the logic

of this, of this equation here.

So if you have a monetary policy loosening, you're going

to have an increase in prices, right?

The one off increase in price that was in the

chart, a picture just a second ago.

We said that these increase in price is going to

benefit the most net debt.

So I have a big mortgage.

Inflation is going up.

The real value of my debt is falling okay.

So to get amplification you would need that.

The high MPC people are those who benefit from this

increase in inflation.

So you would need a correlation between being a debtor,

the next item in nominal terms, and high MPC I

guess with me.

So since the NNP is when it's positive you are

a net nominal, you are a positive assets rather than

liabilities.

You need this going down and is going up.

So you need a negative covariance between these two objects

here.

It's great for everyone.

Um.

With the minus sign and increasing prices is a plus

coefficient.

So you can see that it's going to amplify consumption.

Right.

For the Uri again you would need that.

What would be the story here.

You would have that if I'm a net saver and

there is a five minute borrower and there is a

loosening in policy, I'm going to be happy.

Right?

Because I'm going to I will need to roll over.

My dad's at a lower interest rate.

Yeah.

So again, if you want to have that net borrowers

and those with a high MPC.

You get a boost in the response of, uh uh.

A consumption.

How do you see that?

You need that?

If you need a negative covariance here, there's a plus

sign, a plus sign here, which implies that this option

goes down, but interest rates are falling.

He asked if this would boost consumption.

Is this?

Is this clear to you?

I know the Tuesdays.

I've been told that Tuesdays I.

Um.

And the last thing is about the income heterogeneity.

And so the story here would be that when monetary

policy loosens.

And my income increases by a lot or more than

you do, then you would want that.

I'm the high MPC person for generating amplification.

Okay.

So would you explain epsilon r again?

Like epsilon r which is the ura.

Um covariance is the following.

The story would be the following.

So what is the ura?

The ura is.

Okay, everybody.

This is the UI.

Okay.

Um, forget about maturing assets.

Imagine that.

Um.

You are a network you love to consume.

You're going to end up consuming a lot in zero,

and your income is going to be low because you're

hit by a shock.

You are bored with.

If monetary policy shocks hit and lowers interest rates, you're

going to be happy because they're going to be borrowing

at a lower interest rates.

Okay.

Intuitively.

So you're going to benefit.

You're basically benefiting relative to me I'm the lender.

In this case I'm going to be, you know, not

happy.

Right.

Because uh, you know, my my return, the return on

my saving or my investment is going to be lower

amplification.

You would want your MPC to be very high because

not only you're benefiting from this monetary policy shock, but

you're also consuming a lot out of it's you know,

you're just responding more.

So.

So that would mean that a negative Uri implies want

requires a high MPC for amplification okay.

So which means that this covariance should be negative.

Then you might ask what are you talking about.

You know this this this number is negative.

Consumption is falling.

Well is not because the interest rate is falling too.

We have a negative sign here, a negative sign here.

And this creates a positive result for us.

I also talk about the the liquidity of the asset.

How that relates to the.

People that have less.

Liquid assets, need to have a higher MPC or get

to this point in, um, 25 minutes.

So we get that at the moment, we are completely

ignoring the fact that some assets may be less people

than others.

Okay.

Um, but it's a further dimension of implication of discussing

models, which is now turned out to be excellent.

All right.

So, um, I hope that's clear.

So that was the journey.

Sorry we took a while, but I think it was

important to kind of fix ideas.

Right?

Just to give you a sense of what?

Because now we're going to really bank on these intuitions

to go and, and we're going to go to the

data and check basically what these covariances are.

And also try to draw some lessons from, from these

things.

So, um, what we're going to do here is basically

to follow the paper by algorithm class, uh, almost literally.

And he, um, he basically uses three different sources for

his analysis.

One is a survey on Italian households who which is

actually a is a fantastic or for our purposes is

a fantastic dataset because it literally asks.

How much people or household would spend out of a

windfall.

Which is exactly the definition of MPC.

Okay.

I mean, remember, an NPC is a derivative, right?

So it's not the easiest thing to measure.

And here they're basically asking what's your MPC.

Okay.

Um, the only problem is that as any, uh, survey

is self-reported surveys tend to be that there's noise stakes

and so on.

So that doesn't just use this thing, but also uses

a different data sources, the US finance volume dynamics.

Um, so we're not going to cover this part of

the evidence because it's a bit more sophisticated in terms

of, um, analogies and interesting objects that we need.

If you're interested is quite cool.

But, you know, when I record and I'll show you

some pictures, but you don't need to know how the

how they back out MPC from this, uh, um, these

data set.

And the last thing is this, uh, US consumer expenditure

survey, which is another survey.

Um, and the very, very cool thing about these is

that it basically allows us to allow us to allow

these people to see how people would respond to some

certain dates down by the US government.

And these tax rebates, crucially, going to be perceived as

random, which really allows us to measure these NPCs very

carefully with, uh, standard econometric treatments.

Okay.

Also, the tax rebates.

I'm going to come back to the point, you know,

we talked about a lot of shocks.

Um, these tax rebates are typically quite small.

So you know how these things work.

Um.

So the idea basically in the US when there historically

would not have been legal sessions.

This was a form of subsidy to consumers.

Okay.

Uh, so basically, you know, there's a bigger session, you're

sitting at home and you get some money from the

government in the form of some taxes that you pay

that are coming back to you.

Right.

Um, so we're talking about relatively small numbers.

So some other people in the literature trying to measure

the marginal cost to consumers have used lotteries to try

and get a sense of, you know, how much your

consumption will respond to increasing income.

But going back to your point, you know, if I

win a £30 million lottery, it's kind of far away

from the idea of an MPC where we're, you know,

measuring an infinitesimally small increase in my lifetime income and

how my consumption would respond, you know, probably stop teaching,

retire somewhere nice on the island other than me.

Um, so this is the beauty of this approach is

that, you know, it really aligns very well with, um,

the notion of MPC.

Okay.

So now we're going to go through a few pictures.

Oh, sorry.

Before doing that, this is the way in which you

measure NPCs.

Okay.

And then we want the covariance.

Well and so but these are actually quite easy to

construct because once I have my panel of individuals and

I, you know, it's kind of easy, relatively easier, easy

to measure income, to measure consumption, and especially to measure

assets.

You know, your house, you know, there's value attached to

your house.

If you have some deposits or shares.

It's actually quite easy to measure these things.

So the early is kind of easy to to observe

the MVP.

Even better, because it's just a subset of the you're

at the end of the day is just, you know,

the nominal position of its household.

Um, the only problem we're going to face is how

to measure the cyclicality of income.

Two monetary policy shocks the construction worker versus lecturer fee.

And it's actually quite hard, you know, as the MPC

is a derivative but is a derivative that is even

more complicated because it comes from the policy shock.

And so what people typically have done is not fully

satisfactory.

But the idea, at least in the paper by Adriano

Clare, was that you can proxy this derivative with the

level of income, while the inverse of the, you know,

will be the inverse of the level of income.

So the idea is that if my income is very,

very high, it tends to be less severe.

When my income is quite low, it tends to move

more with the cycle.

Okay, I think this is not perfect, but it's there.

All right.

So a bunch of pictures now.

Um, so the first thing we are looking at is

what we just discussed.

So the epsilon r.

So this would be the covariance between the MPC and

the UI on the uh explosion.

But we have on the horizontal axis is the measure

from our three different sources sources, the Italian data, the

survey data, the survey data and the consumption expenditure survey

data.

Um, with the Italian data, each dot is a household.

While with this data sets, um, basically the data has

been binned.

So you take bins of your array.

Um, this would be the average value for this bin,

the average for this meaning you have many individuals in

this in these various fields.

You know, the vertical axis, you have the marginal propensity

to consumers estimated, as I just said, from, you know,

either the survey or the data, which is in the

previous slide.

So what is this charts, what are these charts telling

us.

That's what good Italian data it's kind of there is

a relatively evident negative relation between the euro and the

marginal propensity to consume, which going back to what we

just discussed, implies that there's going to be amplification.

Right?

Because it's the.

Net.

The exposed net borrowers, which are going to have the

highest marginal propensity to consume, which means that when monetary

policy cuts rates, there's going to be amplification because these

people are going to not only are going to are

going to benefit from the monetary policy shock, but they're

also going to respond by even more because the MPC

is high.

Okay.

And if you look at the other, um, datasets, the

other data, you can see that there is a similar

negative relation between Uri and management.

So by simply looking at these prices, we can conclude

well that seems to be evidence based on three different

data sets, that eternity in an interest rate exposure is

going to generate some form of amplification to change the

monetary policy.

Second finding is about the net nominal position.

And here things are a bit, uh, murkier.

Um, so let me start with the Italian data, and

you can see that the, you know, there is some

negative relation, but it's not kind of very obvious.

Especially there is something we are going on in this

part of the, of the chart.

But in other words, if you were to look at

this chart, you would just conclude, yes, there is a

negative correlation between the net nominal position and my MPC.

But then there is this kind of some strange continuity

around.

Look at the chart around zero.

Anyone who can guess why it is happening.

So why should we expect any discontinuity around zero?

Remember this.

NPP is my holdings is my net nominal position.

So I'm netting out, you know, in my case with

a big mortgage, you're going to be down here because

I have a large negative nominal liability.

If I had a big nominal assets of the same

size on my mortgage, I would be bent on zero.

So it would be up here.

Um, so, I mean, the right side is, is more

straightforward.

Uh, people with, uh, not enough that they don't care

about spending a lot of money, but also on the

left side.

Um, I guess people would choose to repay their debt

instead of consuming or refinancing or.

Uh.

That is possibly true, but I'm more interested around this

kind of big spike in the MPC around around zero.

Or just below zero.

If you look at this chart, so what this chart

is telling me is that look at the size by

the way.

This is 0.75.

Remember the MPC.

So this number means you give me $1 I spend

$0.75 like it's a massive number for a fully optimising

or regression type of agent is an enormous number.

Okay.

What can justify that people bunched around zero at such

a high?

MPC really said last week about the age of the

people that we are fighting.

So.

It will be an interesting thing to check.

Uh, but in this, in this, in this, you will

need to condition by age is something that could be

holding.

Um, but actually it's, it's a correlate.

I think age with quality with the tourism and tourism

is different.

It's the income of the whole school, like all transplants,

doesn't have any debt because we cannot have assets to

cover that debt or to ask for credits, and therefore

they have a higher rate.

So we're going towards the equity story we mentioned before,

um, religion that I'm uh, you know, bit by bit

shocked today.

And I resigned my credit card limits and my income

falls.

There's nothing I can do to sustain my level of

consumption.

Right?

So I would want to move consumption to whatever demand

that they make that nobody comes on other than the

higher discount.

So if you give me an additional dollar, if I'm

in that situation and you give me one additional dollar,

I'm going to spend it.

I just want to desperately go back to my optimising

earlier question behaviour.

Yeah.

And the fact that these very high NPCs align very

well with a small number of nominal debts, it's exactly

the story.

It's a story where, you know, you can go a

bit in an overdraft on your bank account.

You maybe have a credit card at some point and

hit by a bad shock.

You know, MPC has asymptotes one, right?

And we are going to exploit a lot of these,

you know, in the remaining in the remainder of the

lecture.

Now, if you think about these people here.

These people are actually vectors but potentially unconstrained.

You know, they don't fall under this category of being

bang on a very binding constraint because they cannot borrow

anymore.

You can take my case, you know, have a large

mortgage, but if I go to the bank, I can

probably still get some money from the bank on consumption.

I can maybe extract some equities on my house, and

we're going to go back to exactly this one, but

assume that I can possibly extract equity from my house.

I could just buy shock.

I sell a little by my equity and let's move

the shop.

And so that's why again here you got let me

actually instead of looking at the chart like this, if

I were to kill this kind of around the euro

area, you would still see some form of negative infinity.

The trickiness is this kind of bump here.

Okay, let's just keep this in mind because we're going

to go back go back to this.

And once I told you the story then and you

look at these charts which unhelpfully have been some of

these observations, you can kind of recognise similar patterns, right.

You know, the MPC for very high and BP people

is quite low.

It goes higher and then it falls and it goes

higher at around zero or numbers that are close to

zero.

And then it falls again for very large negative numbers.

So now you know these things that basically look like

or there is nothing in there.

Stop making a little bit more sense.

Okay.

And the very final, um, thing we're going to look

at is the epsilon y.

So this was the covariance between the cyclicality of my

income to monetary policy shocks and my MPC.

Remember we're proxy in this with the level of income.

So now we have the level of income on the

horizontal axis.

And the intuition was again, if I'm in a mask,

whether I'm hit by a monetary policy shock or not,

you know, it's not really, um, affecting my, you know,

the little bit that I get additionally from my mother

because shocks not really affect my consumption.

While in some poor households my income was up because

there is a monetary policy easing.

I'm likely to be high end because.

And this chart is basically telling you exactly the story.

Which means that again, we get notifications from this code.

So in other words, just summarise.

If you go to the data with all the caveats

that we have in mind and you know, it's it's

a difficult endeavour, but we found that the covariances align

exactly with what we needed exactly to get amplification from

having heterogeneity in our model.

Remember that these things are not unlikely to vary over

time, across countries, across periods.

Some of these exercises may differ if you do it

in another period of time or under different conditions, but

at least for the US and for the sample, it

seems to be that adding heterogeneity is something that matters.

Now, before breaking, let's let's try in this case by

how much matter.

Okay.

So what I've shown you so far is that there

are the right ingredients to get some amplification.

How important is it?

Right.

You know.

Do I get a 0.02% stronger effect on consumption, or

do I get more chunky, more chunky numbers?

And so far we haven't seen anything that speaks to

that is what we're going to do now before, uh,

making amends.

So to understand what's the average what's the kind of

total effects and the quantitative effect of energy in these

kinds of models?

We need to understand what's the, uh, MPC on average.

Okay.

You want to know what's the average NPC in the

economy?

Uh, and that's when we're going to go back to

this US tax rebates, uh, um, paper which uh, which

I think is, you know, it's really a fantastic empirical

exercise.

So I believe, you know, I think this is the

best, you know, the most credible empirical approach to study,

uh, study in PCs.

So the evidence I'm going to show you comes from

these two tax rebates in 2001 and 2008.

Um, I mentioned already, you know, there's a big recession.

We're going to get some of the taxes we paid

last year in forms of rebates, relatively small numbers of

between $500 and $1000.

And the key for the exercise, which is kind of

the genius bit of the authors of this paper, is

that the timing of the rebates was basically random.

So imagine there was someone sitting in the bureau for

tax rebates or whatever it's called, and we'll say, well,

this week I'm going to process all Social Security numbers

ending with, uh, five two and something else.

Okay.

So you guys were waiting for your tax rebate, potentially

expecting it, but you couldn't, you know, you couldn't know

when the tax rebate would come because there was this

kind of complete random assignment of when the tax rebate

would come.

Which, if you see what I'm going, is basically the

way in which you can address.

The obvious endogeneity that there is between income and consumption.

Because remember here we're trying to, you know, get a

derivative.

We want to know how consumption responds to an exogenous

or an expected small change in income.

Right.

And that's what gives you the idea that you need

some of these rebates.

Uh.

Only during recessions or.

Yes, that might affect.

And that's a very good point and is exactly linked

to what we said here.

These things are not.

You've gone incessantly to suck up at all point in

time, in the same way that we're here, and the

fact that you can do these things during a session,

the animation resource in the sessions will be very different

than in a bigger session than in the normal cycle,

but that's the best thing.

So just keep in mind this is a very active

research, and I'm sure you know these people are working

on the activities.

It's very interesting about these things, you know.

It's a very, very fascinating and interesting story.

People are looking into these things and what you want.

Just come to the activity papers, uh, or just online

research.

That is actually quite.

Um.

So just quickly, let me just explain how how, uh,

how these people manage, you know, what they've done, basically.

So first of all, you know, they had this kind

of intuition and they added a, uh, a set of

questions of survey that allow them basically to track.

Both the consumption expenditure of the households as well as

when the timing of the activities which is not recorded

before.

And then once the question was there, you know, they

kept on using it.

Uh, we did it for 21 and then look up

to you.

So it's.

Uh, these specifications actually, you know, quite simple.

So you have an individual, I, you have the change

in consumption for other periods, you have some seasonal dummy

is just to take into account the fact that you

know what is more than in November.

You have some controls that say that you know the

controls for the fact that, you know, maybe very poor,

very rich, very old or whatever.

So I specific controls and then you have the amount

of the tax rebates that was given from the government,

government to individually.

So if you remember this kind of looks like a

local projection, if you remember what we've done in topic

one and think of these as being exogenous, then beta

two is the derivative graphed.

Right.

You know this is a exogenous.

Let's assume for the moment this is an exogenous increase

in income.

And looking at my assumption is changing.

This beta two is exactly the MPC is exactly right.

Um.

Now.

Why?

In principle, you cannot run regression like this.

Well, you know, because these things are typically endogenous.

You know, if I'm expecting my income to go up

because I know that a promotion is coming next year,

I will and I'm a rational consumer, I would suspect

now I like to smooth this on income.

It's a lifetime increasing income.

We're discussing it about as part of the policy side.

So if I see this coming and I just smooth

it as much as I can in my lifetime, right.

And so by the time my income arrives, my consumption

change may be very small or even zero.

So that's why, you know, you can get all sorts

of endogeneity if you run this regression with OLS.

And as it is typical in this type of approaches,

what these authors do, they run this regression as is

with OLS, and they compare it with the instrumental variable

version of this regression, where you instrument the tax rebate

with a simple dummy that takes value one on the

day in which you received anyway.

Okay.

Do you see can people see why instrumenting this way

helps.

It out.

And.

So the dummy only on the day of the day.

And for once I actually day was this monthly.

But.

So imagine that I'm receiving the rebates this month.

You basically you are instrumenting you regress this variable, which

is the amount that I receive with a dummy variable

that takes value one whenever I receive some some some

sum of money.

See what I mean?

And the reason why this helps is because.

According to them, which is quite credible.

The timing of when I received the sum was completely

unexpected.

All right, so the timing of when I received my

rebates was decided by the random guy in the world

of tax rebates.

I couldn't know exactly when this money would come.

And so I can only start spending it when I

get it.

And by doing this instrumental variable approach where I get

these on the dummy and then the fitted value of

the assumption I can take into account.

Now if you look at the results we have that,

um.

You know, here we have a bunch of categories.

You have foods strictly on durable goods and on durable

goods.

So these are kind of increasing subsets of uh uh

non durable goods.

And the coefficient you want to look at is this

one the rebates which is the amount of um uh

money you get.

And so you should really think of this coefficient as

being the MPC.

So this is telling you that for a $1 that

I received for my tax rebate, I'm going to spend

$0.10 on foods, $0.24 on Australian durable goods and almost

$0.40 on non durable goods, which is enormous.

Right.

So you get $100.

You need to spend $40 straight away in food in.

Sorry in uh yeah in spent $10 in foods on

the same month and $40 on.

This number.

What happens if you do the IV version of it?

So I'm now instrumenting the tax rebate with the with

my timing dummy.

You get numbers that are actually quite similar to the

regression.

Anyone who knows why this what this book is telling

us about.

The fact that what the coefficients are on social media.

Now.

There's no reason I think there.

Could be two things.

It could be either that the endogeneity concern was not

a big concern, which I think is a fair interpretation

because, you know, since the timing was so random, the

value of the rebates, you know, the amount of the

rebate is random, so the instrument does not match or

your vector of controls is good enough to account for

all the potential endogeneity, the fact that I spent less,

and so on.

Right.

It's either of the two.

But, you know, basically this kind of in a sense,

telling you that the way I interpret it is that

there is not much endogeneity projection.

Anyway, the number you should trust is this guy here,

because that's kind of one, uh, caution approach if you

want.

And this is telling us that there are massive numbers.

And if this I think was for the 2001 recession,

while this is the 2008 recession, the categories are roughly

not exactly comparable.

They have foods, um, strictly non durables and durable spending.

They also include services.

But basically you can see that these numbers again are

relatively large okay.

Especially if you add services you get almost a 0.5

uh MPC.

Um, which kind of confirms that these things are very,

very high.

Just for reference, maybe I'm thinking of probably but I

in the setup, do we know that the, the, the

rates are on this part of the world?

Because if it wasn't like if there was not, uh,

on the first day of the quarter.

So then the results.

Point, I mean, I think it's fair to assume that

there should be.

And you can think about it in two ways.

You can, I think one randomly distributed over the month.

And so, you know, you get some bias because there's

going to be someone who gets the rebate on the

31st.

So there's no MPC in the sense.

So according to this logic, believe me that the two

number is bigger.

So if anything, it works against the exercise that that's

that's the right way to think about it.

So if your concern is a concern these numbers could

be even bigger which.

Is robots.

Um, which let me just call a point related to

this.

And then we break quickly.

Um.

So.

Basically, we found that these NPCs are quite large.

For the order that I give you, you tend to

span between two, um, 20 and $0.40, with your kind

of caveat in mind.

It could be even larger number.

Okay.

Now, can we make sense of these numbers?

Can we toss them?

You know, is a is there a way to think

about whether I want to deliver this kind of number.

And so to do that, um.

Let's do the following exercise.

I'm going to assume I'm going to start from what

we derived.

This was the closed form expression for our MPC, remember.

And I left the elasticity of substitution to be a

general one.

So without assuming C.

Yes.

Okay.

Now if you look at these options, the objects that

compose the MPC are kind of observable things in a

sense.

You know, this is related to interest rates.

This is related to consumption.

Um.

And so we can have a go at try to

kind of plug in some numbers and work out what

comes out of, uh, of, uh, this expression to get

a sense of what the, the, the MPC should be.

And so I just made a, you know, some stark

but not crazy assumption.

I assume that the real interest rates are relatively stable.

You know, think about the last, I don't know, 25

years and around 3%.

And you can work out what this expression is or

the sum of these of these objectives.

I also assume that consumption growth was on average equal

to 1%, which is not a crazy assumption.

If you look at what happened to consumption over the

last 25 years.

And finally, I assume that the ease is doesn't change

too much over time.

So it's kind of constant over periods, which, you know,

just for sake of, uh, trying to get some numbers

out of it.

You plug these numbers in.

You work out what you know, what the implied MPC

should be, and you get that the MPC is going

to be 2%, 2% means 0.02.

Which is very far away from what we estimated in

these empirical exercises.

But you think about what is 2% where this 2%

is coming from.

This 2% is coming from this expression, which is simply

R minus g, which is the growth in consumption, sorry,

which is the real interest rate minus the growth of

consumption.

Now you can already see that you really need some

crazy level for the real rates or some ridiculous levels

of negative consumption growth to get to an MPC or

point for.

Nice.

So there is no hope whatsoever to be able to

get to those numbers.

Through the lens of our simple model and our simple

model with our simple assumptions.

So there is something that doesn't quite suck up.

Which is going to lead me to sleep.

Now then.

Um, it's going to lead me to.

Let's let's do.

That's tough.

I mean, since he was quite late, uh, and then

we'll, uh, we'll reconvene at, uh, five two.

And we do want to.

Talk.

Oh, yeah.

And I think this is the best available evidence on.

This.

Um, just two quick questions.

The first one, when you're running.

The ask is where?

Do we not need to clarify the assumption that everything

else is exogenous to or to be consistent?

Why?

Um.

Uh, because if anything, if any of your regressors.

Um.

Yes.

If any of you endogenous.

Uh.

We are.

That's why you.

Don't have any of that diligence.

Okay.

Why?

Why is it that.

Even though we are only interested in conversion to any

of the other worlds, any of the other universes, according

to the timing of all the other races?

Yeah, so I'm just asking.

That.

You can always relax one time.

You can include in that box just in the forecasting.

Forecasting.

So that basically then you can think of, you know,

think about a local projection.

Yeah.

You know, imagine the monitor position of the monitor here.

This equation would look exactly like the projection of the

type of error.

And there is what you can do.

This is you know I can put enough lengths on

the whatever other variable.

But in principle I could just run this thing with

no other variables and get the right answer.

If this was truly exogenous, makes sense.

I don't quite understand what's happening between.

The.

Two and that I don't know.

Right?

We can think of a way.

You know we can benefit.

Um, yeah, I think I think the best way to

explain it is put yourself in my shoes.

So I have a nominal, I have a nominal that

because I have a message.

Okay.

So I am a negative and.

Uh, um.

I also have to refinance.

A five year.

Mortgage.

I fixed my five year, my interest rate, my mortgage.

That's what expired tomorrow.

Okay.

One morning.

Central bank rules and policy.

Right.

And what happens?

I am happy because there is inflation.

And I'm happy because it may be lower interest rate

on my.

I don't know.

So we will be trying to say that the MP

is just, you know.

Um.

How many assets are you in the same.

Situation you have in Brooklyn?

NY?

Uh, I mean, those are the things that matter.

But the reason why we want to have them separate

is because.

This is a fantasy.

Fantasy?

I was just.

Thinking about this.

If I if I envisage a world where interest rates

are not moving, my intuition is going up.

Which could be.

That this guy is going to be happy.

But this guy is completely like that.

Yeah, exactly.

They're not exactly the same thing.

You can envisage situations where you have no early.

So I think now not only in that position by

30 year fixed mortgage.

There is a monetary policy loosening.

I'm double happy this other guy is single story gets

the inflection.

I mean, it's just the same thing.

No no no no.

They are independent effects.

Of course they are related.

Because eventually if monetary policy moves.

And you're right, the one depends on the last six

months inflation.

These are they are related.

To them.

All right.

Um.

Let me see how much.

Are you?

This is great.

I'm sorry.

Um, and I think this is going to happen very

badly in the sense we're going to finish the lecture

with some marker, and which is exactly what you don't

want to do on a Tuesday after a long day.

But here we go.

Um, okay.

Uh, so we basically left it at saying that our

kind of model with ingredients that we plugged in is

definitely not able to deliver any more, because what we're

seeing in the data.

So, um, we're going to go back to this kind

of idea of, uh, constrained consumers when we looked at

these, uh, early, sorry.

And then chart.

And so the typical thing that the way in which

the literature has addressed this problem was to consider what

is known as hand-to-mouth consumers, and to see what I

mean by that.

That's modified with one on one ingredients or various models.

So I'm going to take the simple, the simple, um,

data model and add a borrowing constraint.

So what this thing is that you need to do

is that yes we can roll different with the same

and so on.

But if I'm hit by a bad shock and I

want to borrow, I can actually borrow only up to

a five units of consumption.

And the way you should think about these is in

order to credit card units to small amounts, that at

some point it becomes binding and very intuitive.

And we're discussing before, if I hit a constraint, there's

nothing I can do.

And off my own equation I'm going to behave in

a very different way because, you know, if whatever additional

dollar you give me and desperately try to go back

to my order equation.

Let's assume that my optimal k will be ten.

Your constraint is six six.

If you give me $1, I just want to try

and go back to the optimal.

That would have prevailed in the absence of these constraints.

And as intuition pointed out, that would help them out.

Exactly.

Because, you know, if you give them $1.

Okay.

Um, mathematically, nothing really changes.

I mean, you know, these things basically have additional constraints.

You are they are the expression you can end up

your Euler equation with.

Now an additional object here, which is the shadow value

of this constraint, which when the constraint is not binding,

is obviously equal to zero.

There's no price attached to it.

While running becomes binding, this thing becomes positive.

And so starts mattering in your optimisation.

Right.

Um.

And it's actually quite nice, you know, to think about

this problem.

If the, if the uh, problem as well, if the

borrowing constraint is binding, then you can substitute k bar

for CX and you can actually solve for the budget

constraints.

And you can find out immediately that consumption for agent

J is going to be equal to income.

Whatever is my maturing asset from the previous period minus

k bar over.

So what is the MPC of this guy one.

Right.

Hence the hand-to-mouth notion.

I'll give you one.

You eat one.

And suddenly we can start making sense of these charts.

Because we already said that, you know, around zero we

have this kind of big jump in the NPCs, which

you think about, you know, the narrative I've been telling

you of this thing about the overdraft of such small

amounts that you can borrow up to if you are

a poor household, then these charts are making quite a

lot of sense.

So as we mentioned, you know, these are typically considered

poor households that do not have access to financial markets

or they do have access to financial markets, but maybe

they don't have, um, access to saving vehicles or they

cannot with their own equity from their own assets, or

they don't have liquid assets and stuff like this.

Um.

I mean, there is a big literature on emerging market

economies thinking about hand-to-mouth consumers to model the absence of

financial markets in the first place.

But, you know, this kind of, you know, data where

we can certainly compete.

This is an opportunity.

But then if you go to the data and you

try to measure how many of these poor households with

no access to borrowing vehicles are, it turns out that

it's only 10% of the households that fit this narrative.

And if you do the math and you do a

MPC one for 10% of the population plus a 0.02%,

0.02 MPC, for the remaining 90%, you still get crazily

low values of the average MPC economy.

So there's something that still doesn't you know, we're going

there in the vacuum is something that still doesn't work.

So.

These basically were doing a little bit of a tour

of, of the literature in a sense.

And what, what brought the literature to the present day.

Um, and, you know, I was um.

I remember studying this paper and, you know, the paper

that's, uh.

Um, well, I was on the market on the job

market just a couple of years before this paper.

So I was dealing with this paper was very much

presented and in conferences and so on.

And I remember this as being something that really dramatically

changed the way in which we think about, you know,

intelligence agents, models in a sense, because up to this

point, basically nobody would take very seriously heterogeneity, because there

was this kind of big conundrum in a sense, you

know, like, okay, you talk about, you show me all

these things and so on, but then this thing cannot

matter in the aggregate because the MPC is such the

average MPC.

This was.

Right.

And then these guys came and had this kind of

brilliant intuition thinking, well, you know, it's true that they

only have 10% of poor households, but how about.

The asset rich households, but whose assets are very liquid.

Okay, so the whole idea is imagine that I'm, uh,

you know, a, uh, a homeowner.

Okay.

And I have I'm reaching assets, right?

Because I already paid quite a big chunk of my

mortgage.

But I still, you know, use most of my income

mortgage and then to, you know, eat and feed my

family or whatever.

And then I hit by a bad shock.

There's not much I can do to smooth consumption.

You know what I would need to do?

I would need to consult.

If I could cost less, extract equity from my house,

then yes, of course I could move the shop.

But I kind of know that extracting equity from a

house is not exactly the easiest thing you need to

pay for fee.

It's going to take time, and there are frictions associated

to this procedure.

And so it's not obvious how much you can stop

the consumption.

In other words, the example I think is, uh, pensions.

So, you know, after I've been working almost 15 years

at the bank, probably sitting on a reasonably chunky pension,

but if I hit by that shock, it's not that

I can go and, you know, withdraw money from my

pension and smooth consumption.

Right.

So if you if you were to measure my NNP,

I would be probably, you know, with some decent model

Y, but it's very liquid right, in the fact there

is a liquid or that I need to pay a

cost to extract.

It makes me start thinking about is it worth paying

the cost of extracting as well?

Or should I just take the heat and reduce my

level of consumption?

Okay, and that's the whole idea about, um, wealthy, hand-to-mouth

households and what these people have done.

They basically try to document and measure in the data.

And this is what they found.

They found that out of the one thing to mouth

consumers, sorry, out of the they classified hand-to-mouth consumers into

poor, hand-to-mouth and wealthy.

And to mouth.

This is the 10% number that I kind of mentioned.

And the blue bar are the wealthiest consumers.

And you can see that this actually is a relatively

large share, almost up to 20% of the population.

Uh, so these are the consumer like in the MPC

versus RnB plot.

These are the consumers on the on the very left,

very negative.

So these are.

When the it is a correct kind of way.

So this definitely could be someone who's down here and

who is not happy to withdraw equity from your house

for example.

Okay.

So that's why it becomes, you know, as I said

before, you could fit a line here, but also there

is something more or not.

So when you get to this side of the zero

line, it's not exactly obvious what the sign of decline

should be, because they're mixing up wealth into mouth and

unconstrained, wealthy households that make sense.

Yeah.

So the ones with the ones we are talking about

now, they would have higher, higher end pieces like these

are pretty cool.

So you would need to think about these dot here

to this dot here for given.

So you could justify heterogeneity NPCs for given negative net

nominal position with differences in how binding the constraint is.

Obviously these are scatterplots that are it could be one

zillion things going on.

But you know, if you want to test these, it

would be a reasonable thing to test them.

If you are able to kind of check and separate

in this group of people who are developing mouse and

whatnot, the implication is that these guys should have a

higher the the constraint guys should have a higher MPC.

Yeah.

But again, there's not much we can conclude from this

chart because we're not conditioning on our things.

It's just a bunch of clouds as a cloud of

dots.

Is a scatterplot okay.

At the peak we are likely for hand-to-mouth.

These guys are likely to be poor.

But again.

It can be almost everything, because you can see that

once you start introducing 98, you can think of some

of the more of it, but also the asset and

some deposit assets, but with a liquid asset, so some

liability and then a very liquid assets.

So a house that is exactly the same value of

the mortgage.

Second house that would be zero.

And so could still could still be the wealthy and

the mouth.

It's going to be hard to map from this chart

to this notion of poor and what came to mind.

But, you know, the main intuitions that they both should

have very high indices.

And if you remember what we started from, we started

from a puzzle where we couldn't reconcile these very high

NPC's from empirical analysis and very low MPC from our

models.

And now suddenly, if you do the math and you

have 30 or more percent of the population with one

and the remaining fraction with an NPC of, say, a

point or two, then you start having numbers that stack

up with numbers that are around 20% or 0.1 basis.

Um.

And as I said, this was very, very I mean,

it was a fantastic paper and it really would change

the way or gave a lot of impetus to the

to the agency model literature, because suddenly people thought, well,

actually, we should think about this, maybe even for the

90s, that we documented this covariance that we recommended only

actually matter because the NPCs are so high and we

start out with our numbers.

Okay.

Um, you close up our D to empirical data and

finish off with some nice heavy algebra.

And, um, actually, one last picture.

I just wanted to give you a sense that, um.

A sense about, you know, you don't need to go

to these beautifully but very complicated micro studies to actually

back out notions of NPCs or kind of test some

of these implicate implications that come out of these models.

And these are, um, I'm going to briefly talk about

this paper by an ex colleague of mine, uh, James

drawing and um.

Basically used I'm just go straight to the picture.

The intuition was, you know, even if I don't know

each individual in economy, I can form a priori about

who the wealth in the mouth, the unconstrained people and

the poor hand-to-mouth people are.

It's going to be a bit coarse as a classification.

What do you think about mortgages?

Right.

Owners, outright owners and renters.

You can think of these guys as being kind of

the rich, unconstrained Euler equation people.

You can think of the mortgage owners as the wealthy

and the mouth because, you know, they sit on a

large pile of debts and if they're hit by a

shock, there's not much they can do apart from cutting

consumption.

And you can think of the renters as being the

poor.

And now, okay, so obviously is a is a bit

of a coarse description, but it's not a crazy description.

And then what they've done was simply to say, well,

let me see how the consumption of these people respond

to a well identified narrative.

Monetary policy shock.

So these are basically local projections, which is one of

shocks.

Or James actually had a paper what he constructed the

UK version of the Roma Roma shocks.

You adjust the shocks, your gas consumption, these three group

of people on the shops and you get a bunch

of different responses.

Can you think about what the sequence of spaces are

is exactly what we'll be looking at for now, like

three hours or whatever time, you know, it's DC over

there.

It's a total response to consumption from a monetary policy

shock.

Right.

That's been what we've been doing, you know, since last

week.

And what this is showing you is something that stacks

up very, very nicely with the notion of unconstrained models

and warrant models.

Because if you see what happens to the unconstrained people,

the response to monetary policy shocks is basically zero.

If not, respond to another policy because they um, this

is a so this is a loosening policy if consumption

is going to go up.

So there is a loosening in policy.

And these people really do not react.

So.

Um, to the shock.

So maybe because the income is not cyclical, maybe because,

you know, the, you know, the Frankenstein and there's one

consumption.

But if you look at rentals and mortgage laws, you

start to see that there is a very strong response

to this monetary policy.

And by comparing these responses, you can conclude that this

narrative and the document is quite explicitly how actually plays

a non-negligible.

I just want to show you this because, you know,

if you think about it in your essay on the

staff is related to this hand literature, there's no need

to go and create your own survey.

You had the question to the existing surveys to actually

do some analysis.

If you were to get some notion of it generated

from the data, even if it's not as granular as

individual level, but, you know, across groups of different people,

you know, that would be a very interesting exercise to

do.

And in this paper has been published in a top

five journal.

So.

So exactly.

Five.

Years back now, we'd be more difficult to publish something

like this in the top five, but also.

Um.

I think this is basically summarising what we've just sent.

Yes.

So let me just close the empirical tour by saying,

um.

Maybe two things.

Well, actually, one important thing.

Heterogeneity really matters, okay.

Or can matter depending on how we make out.

You know, we said this isn't always the norm.

They don't need to be stable over time.

But there is the scope for it originated to matter.

It seems to have mattered in a cross-section of people

because of the covariance that we looked, that we looked

at, and it seems to have mattered in aggregate responses

of large groups of people.

You know, in a time series, etc..

Okay, so what we're going to be doing next is

to, uh, take this notion of eternality.

Now we kind of understand how it works.

We understand what are the mechanics of things we know

that quantitatively matter.

Now, what we want to do is to try and

slot these ideas into a proper macro model.

Right.

Because what we've done so far was to assume a

way, the production side of the economy, to assume the

policy rate without specifying how we would do it.

The goal of what we're going to be doing for

the next 50 minutes, and the whole of next week,

is going to be to think about general equilibrium models

with notions of originality.

And so, um, these are known as Hank's model intelligence

agency equation model.

They are quite popular at the moment.

Uh, the most commonly cited paper is the paper by

Catwoman.

And, uh, probably you guys know Ben Moore, who's been

working a lot on these things.

And so this model is actually not this paper is

not the seminal paper, but it's the most commonly cited

one because it's kind of a it's a very rich

paper.

It has a lot of ingredients.

It has uninsurable income risk.

These are our tildes.

It has liquid and liquid assets.

These are the, uh, um, deposits versus houses.

Let's say there are borrowing limits.

The K bar we see, and these ingredients all together

generate endogenous, hand-to-mouth behaviour.

So basically, we are all consumers who are constantly hit

by shocks that are independent of each other.

The thing does, if I'm hit by a sequence of

bad shocks and maybe holding up a lot of illiquid

assets, I may end up against my K bar and

I may become constrained for a few periods, or my

MPC spikes and I behave like a constrained, hand-to-mouth consumer.

But then I may grow out of it because I

have a series of good shocks, and all of this

is going to be endogenous in the model.

So.

It's great.

However, given the time that we have and the complication

required to understand this thing, we are going to go

for a simpler version.

Simpler, not simple unfortunately.

Version of this setup which is going to retain most

of these features.

But despite this, this model that is, you know, is

in continuous time.

It has to be sort of particular, you know, very

specific, um, solution techniques.

The whole name of the game is that we're going

to tie in lots, all these kind of ingredients into

a standard equation model.

You can put it in AR.

And so.

That's kind of the ultimate goal of what we're going

to be doing now.

Um, and just, you know, we're going to I just

I got confused at all with all these kind of

acronyms.

So Hank stands for a heterogeneous education model.

There is a national tank, which is two agency model,

which is basically simply assuming that there are two agents

constraints and other constraints that are not varying over time.

So there is no endogenous kind of benchmark behaviour.

And then we have what are going to be representative

of.

And effectively I think when people refer to this model

is tank which is tractable heterogeneous agent model.

And we'll see exactly what I mean by that in

the sense that, you know, it's going to take this

feature, the Hank features, but we're going to work out

if there is one way to actually make it possible

and sort of yeah.

Okay.

Good.

So I'm going to try and laid out the problem

and then we'll fix it.

So we're going to have our usual set of households.

Um, as before.

Now we're going to introduce the label supply and the

supply side of the economy.

So there's going to be some difficulty from working.

And the key aspect that is new in this setup

is that there's going to be a set theta T.

Of unconstrained households.

So these people are the standard consumers will be looking

at.

These people have access to a single period real bonds

like our Katie that we used previously with a gross

return.

Our team.

And I'm going to denote, well, you know, these people

being unconstrained and being exactly the same as the one

we've seen before.

They have the same usual, uh, first order condition, okay.

That holds that at the J level.

And let me denote one minus lambda t the share

of households for unconstrained.

So one minus lambda is basically the mass of this

set theta t okay.

So that means that if I'm taking.

The integral of the consumption of each individual that belongs

to our data sets, scaled by the share.

I'm going to get the average consumption of um, of

these people okay.

Which I'm going to denote by c r.

Why cr.

Yeah, I have it here because I call these people

Ricardian.

Ricardian?

Because they're for looking.

They see it on the earlier question.

They, you know, if I tell them that tax them

in the receiving coming ten periods, they're going to optimise

and move this income campaigns into their lifetime.

Lifetime income lifetime.

So this one standard, the only difference is that now

we have a mass one minus lambda t of these

agents.

Um.

And the remaining share is that we're going to assume

that are fully constrained.

So in a sense we're kind of assuming that these

people are bang on their borrowing constraints.

Okay.

But in a even simpler way, you know, we're just

simply going to assume that whatever income they get, they're

going to eat.

MPC one.

I can integrate over the complement of theta, over the

mass or the share of this, this population.

I'm going to get the average consumption for this group

of people, which I'm going to call K.

And, you know, going back to the example we gave,

you know, this is kind of this is the kind

of one that kind of change and equations that you've

seen with some MPC in front of it.

We're just going to assume some MPC equal to one

here okay.

And I can compute aggregate consumption by just, you know,

uh, putting together these two groups, uh, weighting them with

the right, uh, masses.

Okay.

So the whole point of this.

The whole point of this, um, model is that there

is a key in this sense.

So what does it mean that there is a T

in this sense?

It means that this the whether I belong to the

unconstrained or the constraint group.

And change over time.

Okay.

And so if I'm sitting in the unconstrained, let's assume

that this this class is the unconstrained rule.

Okay.

So this is the set.

We're all happy and unconstrained.

But if I hit by a benchmark, it may be

accomplished by by shouting go to the other room and

go to the kingdom.

Okay.

Obviously I'm not going to like this, you know, because

if I end up in the control room, I'm going

to have my MPC equal to one.

I'm not going to be able to smooth consumption the

way I like and something that I don't particularly like

right now.

Yes.

What's the mechanism for the agents going from constraint to

constraint?

Vice versa.

Is an individual productivity or completely.

Is this kind.

Of where my model is later?

Or think of it as I say, income realisation.

You know, there is uninsurable income risk which is the

y tilde.

Right.

So each of us is hit every period by, you

know, more defined me.

And I will say to the in the room while

you guys are happy and this can happen to any

of us, I mean, there's not going to be I

forget about what I said because I'm going to get

employment here, but there's going to be income based on

hit by very bad income shock.

But enough that I'm going to go to the other

room for the moment.

Let's leave it unspecified.

But I like the perfect foresight model.

Now we are all of us who are sitting here.

We all know that given a bad shock, we may

end up in the control room.

Well before, with the perfect foresight example, nobody could even

imagine that you could have ended up in that.

So we're going to act in a precautionary sense.

We're going to act against this possibility.

We're not.

We really don't like to be constrained.

But even if like an unconstrained agent gets out, gets

a bad shot, like their income is zero since they're

unconstrained, can't borrow enough to, like, satisfy the Euler equation.

In a sense, we're assuming.

Um, I'm assuming that there is a very hard borrowing

constraint, or there is in the background the borrowing constraint

that is binding at some point.

So we should think about this is I haven't specified

it, but imagine that there is a k bar somewhere

in the background.

And if they get a shock a y tilde shock

that is big enough.

I'm going to go straight against my borrowing constraints, and

I'm out of this room and I'm going with the

tangent people.

And I have an equal to one and all things

go wrong.

It's like it's just.

I'm confused with this severity.

Does it matter if one person goes through it and

then the other one comes to cancel?

So are we looking on aggregate changes in share or

it actually matters the distribution of who is in which

room.

We are going to keep this, um.

Well, it's a two way thing and we're going to,

we're going to then model the whole of the economy.

Okay.

And how big the shares are will depend about the

shocks that hit the economy.

Okay.

But in principle, inasmuch as I can go to the

other room, then someone has from the control room that

comes back to this room.

If they get a good shock after they move away

from the two states.

So if that happens from period to period, and then

the shares are same just with persons having changed rooms,

it's not the same for.

It would be would impose an additional restriction.

Which uh, I need to think about whether it would

make sense.

But for the moment, imagine that the shares can vary

over time.

Okay.

Um.

Always beauties.

Uh.

And we.

Okay.

Because you need to bear with me, I want to

I'm going to go over by five minutes.

Um, I want to show these kind of couple slides,

at least given the intuition for.

It's partly because I think you have an exercise in

things.

So, um, what I'm trying to say is that now

we are not care about risk, because it was nice

to really think what the risk property.

Now we're going to care about the possibility we might

end up being in the other room.

Okay.

And I'm I think you've seen this in previous studies,

but, you know, if you linearise in a linearised world,

risk cannot matter.

You know, you're familiar with Johnson inequality, and you need

some form of curvature to care about risk.

If I linearise the model around the steady state and

I have a linear approximation, I won't care at all

about risk.

And risk is going to be a key feature of

these models.

As we kind of tried to describe here.

It's kind of you know, we started with y tilde.

You know y tilde is uninsurable income risk.

So we want risk in our model.

And the way in which you're going to get a

risk to mattering is that in this class of models

is by taking not just a first order approximation of

the equilibrium condition, but we're going to go to a

second order approximation condition.

So now we are approximating, you know, 100 calibration.

It's a it's a quadratic function.

You get some curvature which means that the risk is

going to matter.

I'm going to spend five minutes and six showing you

how that plays out.

Again we're not covered this again next week.

But I just want to give you an intuition for

what's going on.

So the whole point.

So then, you know, keep this in mind that we're

going to try and do exactly the same we've done

so far with all the other models, but now with

the second order approximation, and we did originally.

What I have here is the Euler equation.

And if this equation holds at the individual level, it

has to hold at the aggregate level.

Okay.

So I'm just taking integrals on the left hand side

and the right hand side of the order equation.

Um for the unconstrained people.

So I'm just integrating over theta.

Forget about the forget about the region now.

So we're integrating ourselves.

What we want to do is to take a second

order log approximation of this thing.

And we're going to do the left hand side first

and the right hand side.

So let me start to the left hand side which

is easy.

You don't need to know how to do this again

I'm never going to test you on how to get

here.

But I want you to remember what's going on here.

What's the intuition for this?

So if I take a second order log approximation of

this part of the equation, I get with this expression

here, which is a very I think is a very

intuitive expression is just saying that you have a linear

term, which is exactly the usual one we normally look

at, plus a correction term that depends on the variance

of consumption in the cross-section.

So what is this object.

Here is the variance across g.

So is the variance of the consumption in this room

at time t for consumption.

So today I take a cross-sectional variance of x.

And if you want okay.

Why does it matter.

Because I care about what is.

So if I want income and therefore consumption is very

dispersed I'm going to draw.

I'm going to infer that there is a lot of

income materiality.

And the more incremental opportunity there is, because the likelihood

of me being hit by the bed shock and ending

up in the other room is quite hard.

Okay, so that's why this variance shows up here.

The reason why the weights.

The reason why this is a variance is because when

you do a second order approximation, you get out.

You can come out to this expression here, which you

know is similar to the covariances we had before.

Right?

Is just, you know, c, j minus the average C,

right.

And is just the form of the variance in continuous

time and continuous form simulations.

Okay.

So that's enough inside.

Let's go to the right hand side.

And this time.

So we are going to get confused about this.

Be sure.

But we call it again.

So I'm going to define.

So the problem here is that we have people that

move around from one room to the other one.

And to work out the right kind of optimisation problem,

we need to basically keep track of the same people

over time.

Or in other words, in my example, I'm hit by

the bed shock.

I hit the collateral, the borrowing constraint, and I go

straight to the other room.

But you, we want to keep track of my consumption,

even if I move in t plus one in that

room.

In expectation.

Okay.

So that's why I define this object here, which is

c r t plus one given t.

What is this object.

Is the integral of consumption in t plus one over

the set in.

Lecture 18:

From there.

I'm just.

Hi everyone.

She's.

It's.

Right.

Now.

So if you guys do.

Does anyone happen to have an.

Hmm?

Hmm.

Die.

Uh, to usb-C converter in case I fail miserably with

my attempt to login into Moodle.

Nobody does.

29.

To one.

Thank you.

Sorry.

Oh, wow.

Okay, I managed.

To.

All right, I managed.

I didn't expect this to be so smooth.

Um, last thing is.

Oh, okay.

All right.

I managed to deal with, uh, technology, surprisingly.

So, um, a couple of, uh, announcements before we start

with, uh, the end of topic three.

So I've been corresponding with Marcus a little bit on

when to schedule the, um, essay supervision sessions, and it

turned out to be a little bit of a nightmare,

given that your schedule is very busy.

My schedule is also busy.

So where I ended up is with two options.

One option is going to be next Monday in the

afternoon in slots in two slots that were, you know,

we should be able to allocate people so that you

guys are listing.

So there is no clash whatsoever with stuff that you

have.

And but this is earlier than we anticipated or at

least, you know, we when I sent around this survey

to check out when you guys put a preferred to

do this, this sessions.

And so I also asked for another option to be

scheduled.

And this would be.

On Tuesday 26th and two and Wednesday 27th.

Uh, kind of either in the morning or in the

afternoon, the time.

So basically, they're still looking for a room.

I still don't know what time it would work.

So what I was planning to do is to coordinate

with Marcus again, send around some form of, uh, survey

where we choose out of these four days that I

hope we're going to be able to book what people

prefer.

And then we need to find a way to allocate

people to the right slots.

So it's not going to be it's going to be

a bit of a constrained optimisation problem, but I hope

we're going to make it work.

Um.

So it's either next Monday or the week after Tuesday

and Wednesday.

I couldn't do it.

Couldn't find slots for the same day.

And, um.

And once we have the date, which I hope is

going to be today.

I'm still waiting for the admin people to get back

to me on the availability and so on.

Um.

Maybe I'm going to send you an email, uh, telling

you what?

You know, what we should be doing?

What?

You know, it's going to be mainly you ask the

questions to me, I think.

Uh, but, you know, if there is anything that, um,

I think I will.

Yes, I think we need to tell you.

Uh, just a little question.

Uh, in the second meeting, could you, like, run us

through a live reading of what we.

So Marcus sent me some a few examples of past,

uh, essays.

So I was I was thinking about picking one, um,

like a good a good example, something that, you know,

the marriage or something that is.

You guys would need to read it beforehand.

These are not very long papers or typically 8 or

10 pages or something.

And then we can go through it.

I can actually maybe what I can do, I can

actually mark it for you or, you know, I can

go through it and tell you, this is good.

This is less code, you know, or here you could

have done more.

This was not easy.

So I think that's the most useful thing to proceed.

If you have other ideas or you think you know,

we can proceed a different way, you just like.

And we thank you for that.

Um, there is actually a third option that is I

think is suboptimal.

But, you know, if people really feel strongly about the

two options that, you know, next week or the week

after on Monday, the 25th, 25th, which I think is

a day that is relatively free for you.

I'll be travelling so I will not be in London,

but I can hold a zoom session.

I think it's suboptimal because, you know, especially with a

large room is not gonna work that well.

Um, but maybe I can.

I can put it down as an option when we

send around this survey and so people can vote, and

then democracy will win and we'll pick the final options

that way.

Okay.

Good stuff.

Um, okay, so, uh, having said this, what we're going

to be doing today is to finish off with, uh,

topic three, uh, which was about heterogeneity.

How so?

That resonated.

And, um, you know, we kind of rushed through some,

uh, quite complicated algebra at the end of last, last

week at the end of the lecture.

So what I'm going to plan to do today is

to kind of briefly review what we've seen.

Make sure we're on board on the notion of, you

know, occasionally couple consumers that we've seen, uh, last week

and then we'll look at the tank model.

Which is two agents, um, you can model, and then

we'll go to a full blown tank model, and we'll

check whether all of the things that we learned from

the paper about actually do play out in general for

you.

Remember, the main objective of this part of the topic

three was to say, okay, we've got these nice intuitions

about how monetary policy can transmit to the real economy

through heterogeneity.

And we've seen many different dimensions of it overnight.

How does this play out?

General equilibrium.

Okay.

One, two.

The ultimate goal here, in a sense, is to get

back to our question equation model and add the minimal

amount of ingredients to slot in some form of heterogeneity.

Right.

So that we can.

If we are good enough, we can solve some differences

in paper and we can expect a little because there

all of it originated in general rather than equilibrium.

And then for the things that we can solve on

paper, we can go to the computer and ask, the

computer is okay, um, good.

So we're happy with what we've seen last week.

Um, we said that, uh, we talked about this very

nice and comprehensive paper by coupling modularity, and we talked

about the features that the typical features that model has

is, is so obviously a very key feature is an

uninsurable income risk.

By that we mean the inadequacy in the model.

So we are all similar, but we are buffeted by

different shocks that we draw from a known distribution.

Okay.

And what happens if I'm hit by a negative shock

then I can borrow I can smooth my consumption by

borrowing, which is what I would normally do.

Uh, but the difference is that you may be hit

by positive shock.

And so you're going to lend to me.

So there's going to be a notion of equilibrium net

savings or net borrowing differently from the representative agent that

we have.

Um.

But if I'm hit by enough, if I'm very unlucky

and I'm hit by many, many negative shocks and I

am borrowing and borrowing and borrowing, at some point I

may hit the borrowing limits, in which case I become

what we described as one.

So I'm hit the I'm hitting the my borrowing limit,

which means I'm not I'm not optimising anymore.

I'm not on my earlier question now.

And we talked about 1012 because these people have a

marginal consumer one in the sense that if you give

them $1, it's immediately because they just are just desperate

to go back to the other.

Um, we also talk about this notion of liquid and

liquid assets.

You know, in principle, if I had some assets and

I were hit by negative shock, I would sell some

assets to smooth the shock rather than borrowing.

We said that there are actually many assets that are

not very liquid, in the sense that you need to

pay some form of cost to get hold of the

liquidity in the house, and then in two days, I

can sell my house at no cost at the time

is going to be, you know, fees and so on.

And until I managed to sell my house, possibly at

a discount, I'm going to be a hand-to-mouth consumer because

I'm not going to eat.

Uh, I will need to I will be away from

any other question.

So the distinction between liquid and liquid assets is an

important one.

And this class of models typically have a notion of

liquid assets.

Um, and so all of these features combined are going

to generate some endogenous and so endogenous and market behaviour.

What I mean is if in this model economy under

a luxury one hit by the stock or hit by

a very large shock, I may be the one constraint.

But then if I get some positive shocks, I can

even work my way out of the hand-to-mouth.

I can go back to the consumer.

Now, we've said that this setup is actually quite complicated

to solve.

Um, and so what we.

What we started to do last week was to try

to kind of retain as many features of the classical

standard model in a setup that allows us to do

it quite a long way in a political sense, and

derive things in paper.

Um.

Again, and which would allow it to to kind of

investigate what are the role of these features in a

general setup.

Uh, and people refer to this framework as a tractable

tank or tank.

Um, right.

So.

Before going to the.

Full model.

We started from kind of the household side.

Okay.

Without thinking too much about the supply side of the

economy and when we added labour or leisure to the

optimisation problem with households.

Now what is the utility of uh, um, of an

individual household which assumes and works.

And we said there are two sets of people.

Okay.

There is a set of people who are fully unconstrained,

and we refer to this room as being the unconstrained

people.

Okay.

There is a room outside someone else's building which is

constrained and consumers.

Okay.

And we define a set of unconstrained people starting with

size one minus lambda t.

We said that these things the size can vary, which

means that some of us may end up going to

the other room.

We kind of left it a little bit on models.

Why you end up going in the other room, but

just keep in mind that this is the story, okay?

So the story is that, you know, I may receive

some shock for the big one and I end up

going the other way.

Okay.

So that generates some time variation in the size of

these two sets.

Okay.

Um.

And since these people are full time constraints, they are

optimising and their behaviour is described by our standard Euler

equation.

Um, and then we've also defined the notion of average

consumption of the unconstrained agents as the integral over individual

consumptions of agents and j divided by the size of

these sets.

So you can think of these either as per capita

consumption in this set or.

Women's households.

We define them as Keynesian or constrained, and we simply

assumed, again, you know, in a, uh, maybe more simplistic

way relative to what I described here.

We just said, these people, the only thing that can

do is to whatever income they receive, their constituents, okay,

there's no borrowing.

There is a borrowing limit in the background, okay.

Just ignore for the cycle.

And but let's simplify our lives and let's just assume

that that's the behaviour.

So this is going to be the per capita consumption,

the constraint agents.

And then we can define aggregate consumption as the sum

of the capital consumption.

The Ricardian times the size, the consumption per capita, the

occasion times the size.

As usual.

Remember this is aggregate and average consumption because we have

a mass one.

Consumers.

Right?

Um.

Okay.

And here was what kind of, uh.

I'm sure I lost some of you last week.

So what we want to do here is to write

another equation for the group of unconstrained people.

Right.

So we know that the individual level this has two

holes, but we want to aggregate over all the unconstrained

people.

And things are complicated by the fact that we are

unconstrained today, but not necessarily this group is going to

be going to be exactly the same unconstrained people tomorrow,

because I made their powers and some people from the

other room may jump.

Okay.

And so to deal with that, we what we do,

we just took the individual equation.

Um, for the average or aggregate consumption.

So we divide it by the distance.

And we took integrals over all the J's in our

economy.

And once we have this expression we said, well you

know, we can't just uh, simply so what we normally

what we would normally do is to take a linear

approximation around the equilibrium condition.

But we discussed that we can just take a linear

approximation around the equilibrium condition of this expression, because a

key feature of this class of models is related to

the fact that there is some risk that we all

are facing sitting in the zone of ending up in

the control room.

And we dislike this idea because we like to smooth

out our consumption.

And if we by any chance we end up going

to the other room, we're not going to be as

happy as it was that same year.

And so we're going to act pre-emptively.

To optimise over the possibility that, you know, if I'm

unlucky when I end up with the other.

This notion of race.

Remember, we are going to lose completely if we take

a first approximation of this condition.

Why?

Because in a real world that is cannot matter.

There is no curvature.

Think about a linear utility function or think about just

inequalities.

I'm sure you've seen in past courses.

So you need to go to the second order of

approximation to get to stop metric.

Okay.

And that's what we've done.

We said let's take a second order approximation is uh,

is a global condition.

And um, one point.

And.

The way we did it was while this is quite

complicated, that starts from the left hand side and then

we go to the right.

So starting from the left side of the of this

expression, this is kind of a relatively easy.

Again remember I'm never going to ask you to kind

of do this in an exam right.

You know you don't need to know how to derive

this stuff.

Uh, I'm never going to ask you to remember the

expression here, but I may be stating this expression and

ask you to tell me what it means.

And what what is the interpretation for this expression.

Right.

And so what is the interpretation for the expression?

We have something that looks like the left hand side

of our standard equation, because we have a consumption aggregate

consumption for the agents and the power minus one of

the sigma times one.

So that would be the standard case.

But then we have a correction there.

That is a function of what we defined, what we

call the variance across JZ at time t of consumption

values.

So what is this object is a cross-sectional variance of

the consumption of all agents in this world.

Okay.

Now can anyone tell me?

What can affect his number here.

Whether this number is very small or it's very big,

given the kind of overarching framework that we described at

the very beginning here.

So out of these features, what is the feature of

the method for this variance?

For example, I think, like the particular subset of households

are more likely to lose their jobs in a given

time period.

That which in terms of the primitive of the model,

you can think of as being the variance of the

end of the income shocks, the idiosyncratically influence of shocks.

Right?

Remember, keep in mind what we had in Clare and

what we're going to go through in the next few

slides.

I think we made an example of we all have

an average income of hundreds.

And then there is a distribution.

Where we throw our ideas in karate.

Income sharks from.

Let's assume that the standard deviation is one, right?

Well, let's assume that the standard deviation is ten.

Obviously, the larger the standard deviation of these income shocks,

the larger is going to be in equilibrium.

The variance of this consumption right.

And intuitively I'm going to care about the variance of

this consumption because I'm going to care about the variance

of the income shock that I'm I'm hit with, okay.

If I live in a world where the variance of

my income shock is 0.0001, who cares?

This is going to be very small variance of our

assumptions that be very small.

Who cares about risk?

But if I if I may end up with -50

starting from a position of 100 average, then I will

start getting even more.

If I know that the minus -50 shock is going

to be looming against my borrowing constraints.

Yeah.

Okay.

Question.

So this right.

Hand side part of the middle equation.

So that's very oh sorry.

This is the cross section.

The section is household J.

And then it holds for every household j.

And the reason why it is approximate to the left

hand side.

Does that follow from the fact that households are on

unity distributed.

So is that some sort of average representation.

When we're seeing average aggregate for.

This, I think the intuition is correct.

To see mathematically, you need to go to the mean.

I think that you have to see the math.

So if you go to the back of the slides

I've done, I think in the second order expansion, Taylor

expansion of this expression.

And you see exactly how this expression is computed.

But the whole idea is.

We are sitting in this room, okay?

We all have an average consumption of hundreds.

And we all draw our idiosyncratic personal income shock from

A01 normal distribution.

Okay.

So on average, there will be some of us within

97, some of us with 103, a bunch of people

102, 98, and a lot of people with unknowns.

Okay.

By cross-sectional variance, I mean, I take an average for

a fixed point in time across all of the people

that belong to this size.

Across all ages.

It is across.

Okay, okay, okay.

I mean, in Excel it would be, you know, have

J columns.

I thought for each.

Point in time.

I'm just taking the average over a row, which is

the many agents at each point in time I may

have a different variance.

Because of different shocks.

This is great.

This is not.

I thought for a second.

It's over.

Like for every household variance of all possible distributions.

No no.

No.

It's forgiven.

You fix the.

The only remaining variation that you have is in the

construction of these people.

The people in the zoo.

And you take in the various cross people.

Okay, I have another question.

So my question is related to what you said.

There is no intertemporal trade off in this or well,

he's going to come.

We just took the left hand sides of this.

This is the approximation of the left hand side of

the equation.

The intertemporal bit is not coming from the right hand

side.

You get more information.

The Robert Ford variants.

Um.

So we're just like.

We showed you the sum.

This is the.

The practice of substitution.

Well.

Well, that was the easiest would be that the higher

one over Sigma.

The stronger should be these effects, right?

While the sigma is the coefficient of corruption.

And the more risk averse I am, the more clear.

Now if we look at this expression, we should see

that.

This man?

Yes.

He's amazing.

He didn't want to receive one.

Sure.

Well, you can work it out.

If it doesn't.

If it doesn't work.

You tell me what you know.

That should be the intuition.

Doesn't make sense, right?

You know, the more.

The more risk averse I am.

If I weren't risk averse.

Okay, that's the other.

Another way to put it is that if you had

a utility, I wouldn't have any connection here.

Because I, I wouldn't, I couldn't possibly care.

Um.

About risk seems promising for one.

That's probably the best way to explain it.

Okay, so this is the left hand side, so job

done.

Let's go to the right hand side which is slightly

thicker.

And I think here is where I got some fashion

last week.

So what's the thickness here.

The thickness here is that we are we're thinking about

the future.

Okay.

So everything is an expectation.

We just discussed how in expectation and individual Jae here

and thinking about how to allocate consumption between today and

tomorrow.

And I know that I may end up in the

control room next period.

Okay.

Now.

What you want to do is, you know, we're talking

about the the decision of us unconstrained agents today.

And so we need to define an object that keeps

track of us.

Otherwise it will be mixing different people with different optimisation

problems.

Okay.

How do we keep track of this group even though

the some of us may end up in the constrained

room in the next period?

We defined this object here, which is the consumption of

this very group of people, the 25 people in this

room tomorrow, irrespective of in which Roma, okay, in the

case in which you all remain in this room and

I'm the lucky one going to the control room, it's

going to be the consumption of all of you, plus

my consumption, even though I'm the constraint.

Okay, agent, and I'm not going to be on my

earlier question, what is this group one one?

So once I find this object, I can take a

second order approximation of the right hand side around this

point, because that's the relevant point on which, you know,

we are thinking about.

That's a good we're thinking about.

In this, uh, more involved, uh, expression where we have

the usual come standard weight, which is the consumption t

plus one to the power one minus one over sigma.

But then we've got two additional bits.

We've got what we defined phi mean and, uh, phi

bar, which is um.

Well then with the violence, violence, correction and the same

spirit of the previous expression.

Where I defined thymine as the ratio between c r

t plus one given t.

So this is the consumption of you guys plus me

going in the other room over the consumption of all

the unconstrained people in T plus one.

So I'm not included in this object here because I

want to gather.

These objects may be including all the people that came

from the control room into this room.

Now.

Is this clear to everyone?

Thank you.

So and similarly we define this variance as being the

variance.

Of the same thing except to match.

But is the variance of consumption of this group of

people, including myself, who ended up in the control.

Okay.

While these other terms.

When you think.

Yes.

Sorry.

Let me think back to last class.

So just to make it clear, this.

This object here is the bias of this group, including

myself and I may I may well be constrained to

the next page.

Okay.

And we finally defined this object here, which is the

ratio between.

These two objects that we define already, and the reason

why we defined these objects together with these objects, I

mean, and five is because once I put together these

right hand side.

These left hand sides.

I can write something like this.

Where now I have something that really looks like our

standard Euler equation plus a wedge, what we call the

wedge v t plus one, which is equal to the

product of finding and.

On the previous slide and the variance expression.

The first set of should should that be j plus

one.

Uh let consumption of the group will constrain unconstrained and

time t in time period T plus one.

So.

Let me check the analytical to the back of the

slides and check with this.

But you may be right.

There is a missing T plus one here.

I'm just thinking it won't be in this.

Let me check the.

I need to check the second expression.

Um, that's, uh.

I'll put it in order.

And the other question is.

Uh, the I mean, can we, like, can we say

something about the ratios of the consumptions of the tools?

They should be able to say something about both objects.

And I think we did it last week.

So what do you guys think this number inside these

parentheses will be.

Yes.

That's the one.

Why?

Because the consumption.

Of this group with me going to the control room.

Certainly going to be lower than the consumption of all

the newly unconstrained people.

Why?

Because I'm the one bringing down the consumption of this

group.

Because I'm borrowing constrained and consuming.

Lastly, I would want to.

Okay, so it's very reasonable to expect that this number

is smaller than one.

The power of minus one over sigma.

This number is going to be greater than one.

What do you guys think is going to be this

number here.

Okay.

So the.

Should be larger than it should be larger than one.

That's the one.

Why?

It's, uh, one.

Maybe some people would have it by the.

And it goes in this.

Well, so, uh, some of the Armenian gardens could be

larger than the two.

Imagine that.

You know, you guys.

And the only one that is kind of constrained, I

end up consuming 50 or hundreds.

You are around 100.

And so the variance of this group in my fixed

is going to increase the variance of this of this

group.

Well, people coming from the constrained room to the unconstrained

room are going to have a consumption similar to yours

is going to be smaller okay.

Which means that this wage is likely to be greater

than one.

And then we did a very simple partial equilibrium kind

of exercise saying, you know, does this make sense at

all?

And again, for a simple kind of approach, we said,

well, if this thing was up, it means that the

left hand side has to go up.

This is the left inside this consumption of power minus

signs and assumptions to go down for the left hand

side.

What does it make sense that for a number larger

than one, consumption goes down?

It does exactly.

Because we talked about risk and acting upon risk making.

It plays the possibility of being critical, say, tomorrow, because

you think you'll never see the shock of size two,

let's say, which brings you on the kind of thing

where you say, well, if I save, you know, just

a tiny bit more, that same shock of two is

not going to bring me all the way to the

critical thing.

Can we have the question?

Please explain how we arrive to plus one.

But being expressed as the product of this.

So simply, if you plug these two numbers here and

you plug the definitions of this guy and this guy

in there and you collect terms, you can find this

expression.

So it's simple algebra but basically comes from.

Taking this.

Taking this one.

Put it together with this expression.

You put them together, you collect terms, and you could

be the product of these two guys.

Okay.

Um.

So I think this is kind of, uh, it's very

intuitive.

So we we have a story about precautionary savings.

Okay.

We have a story about risk.

So a story about risk within a group of unconstrained

people.

Okay.

That's why I call it within heterogeneity.

Okay.

We haven't talked at all about who are these other

people in the other room doing just as being happy.

And our other question optimising over the future, considering the

risk, there is the possibility that we're going to end

up in the other room.

And it turns out then in the aggregate, we're going

to actually save a little bit more to act upon

this, this risk.

Right.

And the larger is we, the more we're going to

do it.

And again, this is very intuitive.

You know the larger is V.

What does it mean.

It means that there is a larger variance of consumption

tomorrow for our group that are optimising today or.

That's your consumption tomorrow or actually my consumption I'm thinking

about I'm the one going to the same room.

It's going to be so low that this issue is

going to go up.

Not okay.

So not just in terms of.

The number being greater than one makes sense.

But also if this is increasing, it makes sense that

the consumption will be falling by more because there's more

risk in the economy.

And I want to save a bit more to take

these things into account.

The last thing I want to say is that while

we can do this kind of partial equilibrium reasoning, we're

not going to be able.

Can derive an analytical expression of how this object V

is going to respond to shocks.

I remember, you know, with Michael, you actually get the

impulse response of all the variables, all the endogenous variables,

as a analytical function of the shocks.

We do something similar for another watch.

But this one you need to go to the computer.

This is actually this is the most complicated part.

When it comes to solving this class of models.

So we need to set it to the generic.

Okay.

Um, in this sense, what we just discussed, when I

ask you this right now, we're not done yet, because

what we have here is a normal equation for the

behaviour of the unconstrained people.

You know, we talked a lot about being within a

given set.

We need to bring in the other side how to

bring in the other set.

We simply define a new variable h that is, is

defined as the ratio between the consumption of Ricardian over

total consumption in the economy or average consumption economy.

And if I do this, if I define this variable

here, I can now rewrite everything in terms of CT,

but not as before in city.

Huh?

But the cost I have to pay is that now

I've got HD and HD plus one showing up in

his equation.

It is very clean.

So what is HD?

HD is what we are referred to as the heterogeneity

index.

In this index different differently from the previous one is

going to capture.

Between science and originality.

Obviously, because, you know, this ratio is going to be

affected by the relative consumption of Keynesian and, um, secondary

regions.

Okay.

Now, can we do a little bit of kind of

partial equilibrium reasoning as we've done with V?

Yes.

I mean, we can even though this is slightly more

complicated because we've got two plus one, so it's a

bit more involved.

The way I find it intuitive to think about this

is to think about.

An increase in an expected increase in Http plus one.

So imagine that I expect h t plus one to

be larger.

The need for the heat is increasing.

So there is a shock that makes me think that

he is going to go off.

What does that mean?

So it means that the consumption of Ricardian agents is

going to be greatly larger.

To the consumption of the average.

Uh, yeah.

The average consumption.

Okay.

Um.

Now.

So in a sense we're kind of shifting resources towards

the Cardinals.

Right.

Because all the Cubs are going to have more resources.

But the Guardians didn't like resources tomorrow.

You know they like to smooth things over time.

So if I'm a Ricardian and I'm not going to

be richer tomorrow, I'm going to bring some of this

being richer tomorrow to today.

Right to smooth consumption.

Um, and so this is gonna make demand stronger today.

Okay.

Anything to convince, but, um.

That's one way to think about it.

If you want to think it another way, um, which

may not be, you know, it may or may not

have, um, it's kind of the flip side.

Do you think that H is going to increase today?

What is an exogenous increase in H.

It means that, um.

Primary allocating resources to the unconstrained people.

Okay.

But unconstrained people have a low marginal propensity to consume.

Right.

We've seen that.

And these the crisis demands.

These are two different sides of the same coin.

Yes.

The second story would make more sense because in the

first case, what would be the SOG that would go

into place?

It's a pretty good example, so it's very hard to

actually think in terms of a shock that happens in

these.

Effectively, what we're going to do in the next 40

minutes is to try and work out how this guy

evolves.

Conditional shocks okay.

This is just to give you some intuition.

Maybe maybe this is not it's not too helpful to

kind of get down on this expression because as I

said, these are partial equilibrium exercises.

And so you may miss part of the story.

Effectively, you see, you know, this reasoning misses part of

the story, but it's just to give you an idea.

I think this helps you with the mechanics of what

does an increase in H means exactly in the terms

in which we were talking about, you know, the things

I want you to remember are if h goes up,

it means that you have more money for the Caribbean.

More money for the Caribbean intuitively means more money to

people that have generally lower high, a lower propensity margin,

propensity to consume.

And then you can start thinking about what happens.

So that's that's the only thing I would like you

to remember about this.

Not just, you know, that simple partial equilibrium.

We're going to go a bit deeper in this.

We have a question in the first story.

Is it that we assume the unconstrained in this logic

do not consider the risk of going to the constraint.

Remember these are two separate stories.

So sorry.

The answer to your question is no.

They're not concerned because what you talked about is embedded

in these objects.

The object is only about ignores its condition.

This ignores the idea that I may end up being

in the other room.

This is all embedded within it.

It's embedded here.

So the index is just going to be about the

eternity between the two groups is between heterogeneity.

And so by definition it ignores we can afford to

keep thinking about.

Or it may end up being constrained in experience.

Right.

Um, the story about the expectation of a C plus

one.

And, um, you know, recording, streaming, consumption and reducing it

makes sense.

But, uh, is it aggregate city that goes down or

just city?

Uh, they're going to bring down aggregate city relative to

a world where you didn't have to shock.

Under.

Aggressive.

False.

I mean Cedar Falls and as a result aggregate cities

for.

Anyway, as I said, don't get too bogged down in

this, I hope.

I hope that will give.

Intuition I think are just critical.

So as long as you understand what these objects are,

then what does it mean?

If h goes up, you'll be fine.

As well as A, B, and so on.

All right.

Um.

We are kind of done on the household side.

Because we now have what I can promise we are

going to, which is another question where actually this is

the kind of, you know, this is the kind of

thing I want you to I want you to remember.

How does this relate to rank representative agent.

Economy.

What can bring us back to the standard deviation model

that we see.

Obviously if VN h are equal to one okay.

Then we go back to our standard order equation.

What does it mean for v and h to be

equal to one.

Let's start with h.

Oh you want this.

So yeah it's fine.

Yeah.

Uh, so there's no difference between the recordings and machines

that we're recording.

Yeah.

And in Greece there is no variation in the variance

in consumption.

And so we all have the same income.

Right.

Have you?

Are you on board with this?

So that's the kind of thing I would like you

to remember.

Not too much about the, you know, but the intuition

for why you can easily go back to the, uh,

representative case and why that's the case.

Obviously, mechanical is one and a different one, but the

intuition, that's something that I would like to have a

question.

Uh, so for one, is it is the interpretation that

there is no variation or the variation is.

Equal to one means, um.

That this guy has to be equal to one.

Okay.

What does it mean?

It means that if I end up in the other

room, I still consume exactly as you do.

Which means that the other room is the same room

as this one.

So it's the same means, right?

Like the mean consumption as well.

As you remember, V is the product of these two

guys.

Both guys are either one or larger than one.

They are bounded by one from below and they are

bounded from from above.

Okay.

So it is invariant over time.

So it becomes invariant over time.

What does it mean to be evaluated over time.

It means we are all the same if you are

all the same.

We're back to the standard representative agent economy because, well,

we're going to an intelligence agent economy.

We're all the same.

We have the same income.

You know, we have we have the same way.

And so I can just average and get to the

rank benchmark okay.

So.

That was our goal.

And now what I'm going to do, I'm going to

do the usual thing.

I'm going to impose monetary condition where output is going

to be equal to consumption, and I'm going to log

linearise this expression here.

Which brings me to something that now really looks like

our standard penalised for the equation for additional terms, the

terms that depend on the growth rate of H, which

is kind of why I wanted to have this example

here.

You can see now there is H is growing income

has to be growing with partial derivative signs and the

terms that depend negatively on um on.

Um, and if we just discussed you know what these

things are zero and log deviation from the steady state

value.

Then we'll go back to the rank model.

If we shut down the.

We have only we're only left with between as we

discussed.

So there is only the difference between Ricardian and Keynesian.

But there is not anymore any within group risk of

ending up in the other room.

Okay.

And this is what we call a tank model.

Why?

Because now you know there are two sets.

These two sets are fixed.

The only people in these sets are the same.

And so you can think of these sets as being

your two representative agents a representative Keynesian or representative.

Exactly.

Exactly zero.

We said we have a full blown model.

Okay.

So this is basically what is new, what we've seen

before.

And, um.

So what we're going to be doing now is the

following thing.

As I told you, this object is actually the complicated

bits on these models.

Well, this is kind of easier to deal with.

But in other words, maybe intuitively a tank model.

Where I only have this guy.

Is easier to solve and to inspect than a full

blown model.

So what we're going to be doing for the remaining

half of the lecture is to kill off this guy.

Think about a tank model only between personalities, non-lethal methods,

and try to get as much as we can in

terms of intuition from an expression.

Um.

How do we do this?

We simply assume that the sets are fixed and not

changing all the time anymore.

What does it mean?

It means that I can't jump anymore from this room

to the other room.

Okay, if I'm born, change and I'll stay forever.

If I'm gonna stay forever.

Uh, or in other words, means that v t is

equal to one at any point in time.

So back to your question.

Um, because this cost, this means that basically the world

is going to reduce to a world where there are

two J's, only representative R and representative K, lambdas are

constants and so on and so forth.

Also, this means that there's going to be a stochastic

discount factor given by this expression here, which is the

usual one that we see in topic two.

Can anyone tell me why the consumption of the cabin

appeared in?

And only that one and not the average aggregate consumption.

Because there's new ones that aren't constrained by cancer.

So.

That's correct.

So.

Another way to think about constrained and unconstrained, if you

remember, was to think about access to financial markets.

Hey, we made an example of, you know, in developing

countries, you can think of the new models as those

that don't have access to a developed financial market.

In this sense, here is the same, you know, the

our Kenyan people here, they don't have access to the

bond.

And so for the pricing of the bonds or whatever

asset in the economy.

The stochastic part of the method is.

The decision of is based on the consumption decisions of

the correlations.

These guys have the marginal bias of the bonds in

this economy or whatever assets.

And that's why the stochastic discount factor is only based

on Ricardian assumption.

Which leads me to.

This point, which is kind of a slight departure from

what we've seen so far.

So this kind of the asset structure, uh, of, uh,

of this economy.

Uh, as I mentioned, designing for the unconstrained agents.

We're going to assume that there are nominal bonds which

pay a net interest rates.

Uh, I and this kind of stuff that we see

with lots, but the only small departure we're going to

do is that we're going to assume that unconstrained households

can save in shares of a fund that owns all

the firms in the economy.

Okay.

Think of it as a mutual fund.

You can buy shares of these funds.

The fund owns the firms and gets all the profits.

And you get some shares out of the profit of

this fund.

We're going to call these shares set up superscript R,

because only the audience can buy this thing.

And these firms are going to pay a dividend, which

is going to be in real terms in consumption units

and have a price, uh, duty.

Right.

And this is uh, is going to make our life

slightly easier.

We should think of these as being.

Of the return to capital or deep.

This is going to create.

Kind of the.

This is the is going to create what is the

opposite.

What is going to be the opposite of what is

going to create a fraction of the economy that is,

that accrues to, to share shareholders of the economy?

We're going to let me just discuss this later.

Um, what the moment just think about the second asset.

That is asset that is shares in mutual fund that

owns the, uh, economy.

And then we have everything else, these kind of standards

we're going to have.

Um.

Variety of goods.

We're going to index these goods by eye as we

did before.

Both the consumers are going to have a CSE aggregate

or of these varieties with the standard substitution parameter.

Inside these kind of very standardised we have in the

equation model.

Um.

And the other sort is when I said there's going

to be two more departures from the differential model.

This one is the first one and the second one

is related to this point.

So what's going to happen here is that.

We're going to have labour supplied by the two sets

of agents.

These agents are the principal difference.

So they are in principle supplying different amounts of labour.

Okay.

Well, I assume there's going to be a unique real

wage.

For both sides.

You see, that wage to wage here is not, uh,

indexed by um.

And I'm going to cover the next slide with identification

on making this assumption.

And so hops are going to supply labour.

They're going to get this wage.

And they're also going to pay.

Or they're going to be paid some lump sum taxes

or transfers.

Okay.

Let me go to the labour market, which is kind

of the um, also the budget process for us.

Uh, so before we go into the labour market, these

are the budget constraints for the, uh, constrained and unconstrained.

So these are quite standard and very much in line

with what.

Well, the unconstrained is very much in line with what

we've seen before.

You have the consumption expenditures plus purchases of nominal bonds.

Obviously this margin constraint is in real terms divided by

the price level plus purchases of shares.

And the price of shares are going to be equal

to labour income.

Whatever I get from the previous bond holdings, whatever I

get from my previous shareholdings, which include dividend payments and

capital gains.

And whatever taxes or transfers I get or I have

to pay, that is.

Standard for the constraint agents is going to be even

simpler.

These people are going to get some labour income and

we're going to pay taxes on this.

Okay.

Before we just had, you know, why in our simpler

version of the tax code and now where, where someday

when it comes because we're going to specify the supply

side of the economy.

The price level is exactly what we've seen in the

first part of these.

Uh, uh, this course.

And the asset prices again are very standard.

These optimality conditions for the nominal bonds.

And these these, you know, the asset pricing equation for

the price of the shares.

We've done a lot of these in topic two.

If you remember, we described especially when we when we

looked at the approach or the interest rate approach to

determining the price level, we talked a lot about how

the stochastic discount factor can be used to price any

future payoff.

If you think about what is the payoff from owning

a share in the mutual fund?

The share is going to give me dividends plus some

capital gains.

This is my future payoff discounted by the stochastic discount

factor.

It gives me the price of these assets.

It's kind of, you know, the very standard asset pricing

equation again that we've seen a lot in topic two.

Right.

So let's go to the labour market and then we

break for a year.

So as I mentioned there is a slight complication here

in the sense we have two different groups of people

supplying labour.

And these are potentially supplying different quantities of labour.

Right.

And trying different quantities of labour.

That means that its originality could also matter on the

supply side of the economy.

Or in other words, it could matter via the Phillips

curve.

Right.

Because think about.

From the point of view of a firm, you know

you're hiring labour.

If there are two different labour supply equations that could

be at or generating the supply side of the economy.

And for simplicity, we're going to shut this down.

Okay.

So what I'm what I'm basically trying to do here

is zero anything generically coming from the supply side of

the economy, I want to stick to it.

Originating on the demand side of the economy, on the

household side of the economy, as we did in Oklahoma.

Okay.

That's subjective.

So how I'm going to trick this model to be

able to get there.

I'm going to assume that, uh, labour is unionised and

there are wage mark-ups in the following way.

So.

What you need to, you know, to understand this, you

need to have in mind an apple sloping labour supply

curve.

So I'm happy to supply more labour if the wage

is higher.

And these two labour supply labour supply curves are in

principle different.

Right.

Because there is a common wage w we know that

consumption occasion and consumption of Ricardian people are different.

So that means that the labour that you're happy to

supply is likely, is likely going to be different between

constrained and unconstrained agents.

Okay.

Um.

Now imagine that instead of going to the firm directly,

we go to the union, all of us.

Okay.

We go through union, and we just supply labour to

the union.

And then the union takes all our aggregate labour hours,

goes to the firm and negotiates with the firm.

And the Union.

On top of taking our hours and offering to the

firm, it says, well, I'm going to hold some talk

of the market, okay.

Which basically shifts up the aggregate labour supply for.

If I hope you can see that if the mark-up

is large enough.

Firms are going to demand less labour because, you know,

this implies a higher wage in terms of pay.

So the labour demand from firms is going to fall.

And if the mark-up is high enough, the labour demand

is going to be low enough such that we all

supply the same amount of labour.

You see that?

Is all confused about this.

It's not super crucial.

But I just want you to understand.

You know what we're doing.

So we're basically assuming that this mark-up is big enough

such that eventually we're going to supply the same amount

of, uh, well, sorry, there is a last step, which

is once the union applies a mark-up and the end

firms demand a certain amount of labour, then the union

is going to come back to us and redistribute labour

equally across all the people in the union in respect

of how much you supplied in the first place.

Okay.

Think about, you know, you can think of it numerically,

you know, if I'm unconstrained.

So I probably want to supply less labour and supply

X.

You're constrained on supply than.

The mark-up has to be enough such that labour demands

is maximum eight so that, you know, the union can

supply eight among eight units of labour for all the

people in the Union, then come back to us and

whoever wanted to supply them, since that's kind of the

numerical.

Right.

So in a sense these model these these this kind

of a common thing is it's called the model with

voluntary unemployment.

In a sense, because there are going to be some

people who would be happy with you buying a bit

more labour, but the union just gives them back a

smaller amount.

That makes money now in buying the groceries.

Is that clear?

Okay.

Um.

So why all of these, as I mentioned.

What I wanted to.

Do I want to simplify your life?

Because I wanted the eternity only to have an impact

via the demand side of this economy, via households, and

avoids eternity via marginal cost through the supply that would

feed into the Phillips curve and would make things, uh,

that I didn't.

So just to summarise before baking, um.

Even if we think about what is the source of

it originate in this economy.

Okay.

This is actually quite important, so just bear with me

for a minute.

So let's think about what causes us in this room

to be a genius.

Okay.

There's no charge on the on the supply side of

the coin.

All right, so we keep this off.

It's, um.

There's no alternative coming from the fact that I can

jump from one room to the other one, because I

keep that off.

So again, it's very subtle.

So the only thing that makes it makes the generator

work is.

Why is that?

So, um.

Sorry.

Sorry.

The wiki is not here because we all have the

same, uh, effectively same income.

Because we get the same wage and we strike the

same amount of hours.

Okay, so there is no income effect in this economy.

There is no adjusting shock.

The one that we have described before.

So the only income differentials arise from asset holdings, i.e.

the fact that unconstrained people can save in shares and

in bonds and receive some income from these, uh, developments

is discussed here in this part here.

Well, sorry.

Isn't this.

This is from and from taxes, which we haven't specified

and we're going to cover next.

Right.

But this is kind of important because you can see

that we, um, to simplify things, we have to peel

off quite a lot of the, you know, um, aspects

of it that we talked about.

I just want to make crystal clear.

What is the authorisation mechanism?

This was just a tiny bit.

You see that even with this tiny bit of eternity,

it's going to be quite large implications from now on.

And with this, we can stop for maybe five minutes

and we'll assume it's, uh, 540.

Thanks.

I have to take questions.

Yeah, I just did one draft.

Anyone?

Wages, and they all received same wage and they were

the same.

And all these years of living wage comes from the

fact that people have switched roles.

No, there is no.

So remember, in.

Any previous setting.

The previous setting, we had so in a very general

setting, we eventually were going to have white influence.

So there's going to be an increasing risk.

So if there's not going to be any more common

wage than the same amount of hours forever.

So I mean that's plus something specific to your some.

Specific issues are only about switching the.

Non or no.

It's going to be um.

Let me just skip ahead one seconds.

So ignore everything on this slide apart from this thing.

Okay.

This is what you have now.

Okay.

Imagine this.

Your labour income is the 100 number I mentioned quite

a few times now.

But on top of it, each of us gets a

exponential.

E j.

Okay, so the E Ambrogio is minus two.

Yours is going to be plus three.

And so and this is kind of affect your average

income.

Like getting one three times or not.

It could be you know um my my sector stock

trades.

You know in our example it was the construction worker

and that kind of work.

You get a negative income shock okay.

Okay.

And so.

He's a full blown model.

But we have uninsurable income risk.

That's what we mean by a national income.

There's going to be a shock that is specific to

each of us, which for the moment we kill off.

Okay.

And so we started from a very general model where

we said there's going to be uninsurable income risk.

It's going to be liquidity.

There's going to be borrowing limits.

It is generating dodgems.

And we killed off quite a lot of it.

Right.

There's no borrowing limit because you just ended you're born

in Cajun and born uh Caribbean.

So in a sense like limits on some matter.

But there is this borrowing constraint, just not in.

The sequence that we described.

There were no.

It was kind of a useful way of capturing what

we needed, but we didn't specify any what we mean,

what we just said, dummy.

He can just go up in an hour.

And for some reason we end up being described by

this equation without explicitly warning.

But in fact, we need a way which is going

to work in a food order that is going to

be a borrowing constraint.

And, you know, I get many of these EJ that

the chocolate shock at some certain point I use my

credit card limit.

And I stopped breathing this way.

Okay.

So just to make it, you know, hopefully crystal clear.

In the model we're looking at, there is no uninsurable

income risk.

Right.

Because we all get one we will get the same

wage.

There is no difference between liquid and liquid assets.

Right.

And this kind of it doesn't really matter.

It matters.

Quantity matters.

I mean, there are no limits because we assume that

you are born behaving this way, this way, and I'm

born here.

Okay.

So the only reason that, uh, is why we are

different.

Is that I can save I have access to some

financial assets, and if I save some shares and the

is doing well and profits go up, I get some

dividends out of my profits.

I'm out of the profits.

And the motor funds are going to bring back to

you why you don't get any of this?

Because you just keep on getting your hand right.

Income.

Okay.

The other thing is going to make a difference is

the taxable or the transfer.

So these are the two only sources of heterogeneity.

If there were in a sense what we're going is

that, you know transfers can.

Distribute things in a way that make our income the

same.

If you see where I'm going.

Thank you.

Sorry.

No worries.

I think important point.

Is like this was really not a break.

Sorry about that.

Any other clarification question on the what we've seen so

far?

Is the capital real transfer capital?

T is a real per capita transfer in real terms?

Yes.

So is, you know, apples that you get from the

government.

Um.

And just to follow up on what we just what

we just said, you know, we are going to get

back to.

So the ultimate goal is to go to a model

like with all these features.

We're going to ignore the assets, but we're going to

bring back the uninsurable risk.

We're going to bring back the borrowing constraint, and we're

going to bring back some endogenous behaviour.

While at the moment is useful because there's no way

in which I can go out of my paper and

say.

Um.

All right.

Um.

Cool.

So this means that now the only thing we haven't

specified yet.

Okay, this is quite important because we just discussed this

is going to be an important source of, uh, income

and originality.

Remember.

You know, if you remember what we started where we

started with at the very start of this topic, you

said, let's start with the smallest possible departure from the

rank model when looking at the model.

And we added the y tilde.

Right.

So it was income heterogeneity.

That's what we're doing here, okay.

That's effectively what you're doing.

But just kind of thinking about where these wild things

may come from.

And dividends and transfers are the more structural reasons for

why this waited than my eyes in the second, but

maybe more, as we've seen, you know, this is the

one we're going to bring to.

Okay.

So let's think about fiscal policy.

Um, and we are going to make two assumptions here.

The first assumption is that the government is going to

run a balanced budget role, which means that whatever it

takes from occasions and gives the guardian of the ground

the sum of these things has to be zero.

Or in other words, the government cannot run a deficit.

Um.

And if you remember what this means, you know, we've

done quite, quite often this assumption.

This means that.

Y equals C in equilibrium.

Right.

Output has to be consumed, which means that.

Um.

Actually, anyone can tell me why.

Implying a balanced budget rule implies the BFT is equal

to zero equilibrium.

So we are P is obviously the nominal bond holding

of the balance is a common.

The government doesn't need to borrow because its spending is

financed by taxes.

That's that's true.

Um, but there is an additional implication.

You know, as a household, I mean, I may want

to borrow anybody from other households, right?

Not not necessarily from the government.

But what we're saying here is that we are going

to be in equilibrium.

What is the case?

Because we're thinking about these three types of agents like,

uh, Ricardian, Keynesian, and government.

And if the government doesn't bother me, no one could

borrow.

That's exactly right.

So the government cannot borrow the Cajun borrow.

And the unconstrained people are all the same.

They all have the same income.

We just had this.

They all get dumped on this.

There is no reason for them to behave in this

way.

If there is no way for them to be heading

this way, there's no way in which even if someone

wants to borrow this, there will be anyone willing to

lend to this person.

They would have seen these.

You know, we talked about we talked about this.

When we think about incidences.

You may love this example.

Even if I wanted to borrow one unit, we all

want to borrow one unit.

And so the interest rate is going to just such

that we actually don't want.

Okay.

So in other words, in equilibrium, our unconstrained people are

not going to be not borrower or not savers, okay.

Which also means.

That we're killing off other bits of heterogeneity that we've

seen in nuclear.

The Uri, the NP, NP and so on were all

coming from the fact that we actually allowed from borrowing

not to be equal to zero in equilibrium.

In that world, if you remember.

So this is just telling you you are simplifying things

a lot.

So the price you need to pay to go to

general, think about it in general is that many of

these kind of aspects.

It works for each new player.

What's your way to do that one?

I mean, there are ways to do it, but it

will be definitely beyond the scope of these clips.

Um.

Okay, so this was assumption number one.

Assumption number two is a transfer rule.

So we're going to be we're going to assume the

government is going to behave.

And in particular we're going to assume that.

There's going to be a transfer rule to Kim Jong

UN agents?

Understandably so.

Those are those whose consumption is low.

They want to transfer resources from the unconstrained capitalist if

you want, because those are the only ones who have

access to capital markets and to shares to the Canadians

who don't have access to any of the assets according

to this rule, which is a function of dividends.

Why functional dividends?

We said it in the previous slides.

The only reason why we have defence absent fiscal policy

is the presence of asset holdings.

He killed off heterogeneity from one holdings were just left

with originality in shareholdings.

Okay.

Between constraint and constraints.

So basically now these two towns are two policy choice

parameters okay.

Is the policy makers set policy or D is going

to set D in terms of dividends and steady states

and deviations of dividends from steady states?

Okay.

Why is this useful to write down a rule like

this.

Because it allows us to think about different kind of,

um, uh, fiscal policy.

Rules or fiscal policy, um, scenarios.

And just to kind of give you an idea of

what I mean is imagine that both zero and tau

d are equal to zero.

That means that the first occasions are gonna be equal

to zero.

And that's what I call the last fair fiscal, uh,

fiscal.

So in other words, there is no transfer whatsoever.

The capital is keep on getting the dividends and the

occasions you don't get anything.

You can have some form of redistribution where.

Well, actually, in this case, if you set both doors

equal to one.

You can immediately see that you're going to basically.

Give.

All the dividends back to the kingdom, right?

And this corresponds to the representative agent quantities.

Anyone tell me why that's the case?

Why?

If I set the two is equal to one?

Because the dividends were the only part of, uh.

So if we excluded all of them, and all of

them have exactly same income, if all of them are

exactly the same income.

Then there's no need anymore.

It's like assuming that the y tilde is equal to

zero.

There's also the component of ownership and shares of the

form of s t that's different between.

Uh engine recordings.

No, they're going to be.

So the the cabins are identical.

Right.

Because under our assumptions within the set, these people are

completely the same because we assume that there is no

incoming personality.

There's no syntactic shock to me.

And it is a shock to you.

That's the only thing that would generate.

A need for me to borrow from you.

Okay, but we just assume that our labour income is.

This is the same for everyone.

So there's no reason whatsoever why I should have a

different shareholding for just the same people.

I'm in between recording and with you in case it

cannot buy its shares.

Right.

The difference between me as a teenager and you as

a record is that you are.

You are giving you an opportunity, right?

And if you're redistributing the capital dividends.

You're getting all the dividends in the economy and then

redistributing them in a per capita sense, to everyone in

the economy.

Then when it comes identical, which means that we're we're

the same.

And if they're all the same, we're back to rank.

To put it differently.

This assumption here is £2.

You can think of it as basically a government official

authority to replicate the out of the grow, complete market

world, right?

If you remember the complete market word, you know, there

was some heterogeneity in the background, but there was insurance,

you know, to buy an asset that would make sure

that the income of everyone in this room would eventually

be the same, because if it rains, the construction worker

gets the distribution income from the lecturer and so on.

And what the government here is doing is just replicates.

The complete market is.

Closing the markets, giving up that effectively is giving back

access to financial markets via the distribution points.

And the last two things I want to talk about

these are kind of become important in a couple of

slides.

You can think of.

Two different kind of in-between policies.

One policy that is.

I give to Kenyan people.

Just a steady flow of money that depends on steady

state dividends.

And this is irrespective of what's going on in the

in the cycle.

So what are you in session.

Just keep on getting some D or a fraction of

d.

And this would be the full steady state of the

distribution right.

Which means that it's steady state.

We all we are, we are all the same.

But when shocks hit we may not.

Right.

Because when shock eats, these dividends are going to move

away from steady states.

And you're not giving the change on the fraction of

dividends that are generated or destroyed by the shock that

move dividends in the first place.

Or you can do a partial redistribution where you actually

allow, um, an intermediate case, basically.

But now the transfers are going to evolve over time.

It's going to be some steady state transfers and some

transfers that evolve over time consumption.

Yeah.

Okay.

Um.

Supply side of the economy is very standard in the

sense that production is the usual function with the commodity

labour.

Mark-ups are exactly those that you see in the model.

Um, what is the marginal revenue in the middle?

The first is the marginal cost is the mark-up.

Uh, sorry, there is a typo.

Here is how Mark-up is.

This is how mark-ups all of these variables.

And we know that this is the mark-up I fixed

and independent of substitution between varieties of goods.

We see this many times in this economy.

You can think of outputs.

As being is going to either workers or to capitalists.

Okay.

And so if I divide this by, um, expression by

one, I get that the dividend share of the economy

is going to be equal to one minus the labour

share of the economy.

Again, you've seen this up before.

This is the Labour share, which is kind of, you

know, it's one over.

Uh, output okay.

And this is going to become remember the next question

is going to be on the next slide.

And then we have the standard Phillips curve.

Now just a note if you're going to read the

the water in this paper.

Which is not necessary.

But you know, for more details about what we're doing

here, that is, you know, very close to what they

are doing.

They assume Rothenburg pricing, which I don't think you have

seen.

Um, I'm just kind of, uh, I've already arrived.

Everything with Calvo.

Just to make it more similar to what we have

seen.

Right?

Rothenberg simply assumes that, uh, there is an adjustment, cost

changes and changing prices.

It has some implications that I'm not going to go

into up to the first order.

These things are basically.

So there's a massive difference.

Um, second note, sorry, I need to change this because

there are many versions of versions of this paper.

And the ones if you want to read the papers,

the 2017, uh, one because the paper sample many evolutions,

uh, stories about this paper.

Interesting.

Um, all right.

So supply side is very simple.

And now, um, another simple expression which is great at

6 p.m. in the afternoon.

Um, but I promise we're almost done.

Um, okay.

So remember the you know, what we're trying to do

here is to try and inspect the behaviour of the

h index.

Okay?

The v index, we the v one, we killed the

within a trajectory.

Here we are just left with between a 90 which

is our h index.

And what we're trying to do is to kind of

derive an analytical expression for this action.

So that we can actually add an equation to our

model.

Effectively we have a new variable which is H.

We just need that additional equation for you.

And then we can have everything else like the standard

model.

Then we can have a standard equation plus a new

equation formulation.

And this is what we're going to.

Okay.

All right.

So um.

What would we do here.

We're saying that.

In equilibrium.

Under our assumptions of zero net borrowing and savings, and

under the market conditions for consumption equal to output, the

Ricardian consumer is going to be given by labour income

plus dividends minus taxes.

Okay.

So I'm going to play around with this, uh, expression.

Well, I'm going to play around with this expression and

plug this thing into here.

Right.

And then I'm going to start doing a bunch of

transformations that involve the neighbour shell that we described before.

Is the regression right.

So I'm going to transform basically.

Oh sorry.

Um.

So whenever I have a d of a Y, I

can rewrite one line so they will share.

One line.

So they will share.

I have an expression for transfers.

That I can guess from the previous slide.

Let's do some algebra.

Very simple, actually.

Very simple algebra.

In fact, this expression.

So what is this monster of expression telling us?

As usual, things look worse than they are, actually.

As usual, we have one here, which is.

Which is kind of our benchmark.

If you you know, if I were to drop all

of this stuff, then each would be one, which would

mean we would be back to the rank benchmark, right.

Because we would be.

So what is the additional term here?

Um, the additional term is something that depends uniquely on

parameter values like alpha, lambda and this.

Policy choice parameters the tools and effectively models.

Okay.

There is an addition here, kind of, you know, what's

happening to the business cycle, you know, with the outputs

of prevention.

But you can see from this expression that mark-up is

really key in generating heterogeneity.

For movements in the h index okay.

It's kind of.

Intuitive in the sense that if you think about the

social determinants in this economy, we said it's about the

dividends.

It's about dividends.

And obviously mark-ups affect some profits.

Which eventually proceeds to dividends in this country.

And so obviously fluctuations in mark-ups are going to affect

dividends and therefore heterogeneity.

And you can see in line with the way in

which we thought about transfers as some part of the

transfers that come from steady state and part of the

transfers that come from a business cycle of deviations from

steady state.

You have.

Part of the eternity that comes from.

Movements in mark-ups over the cycle and steady state mark-ups.

Yeah.

So not that there is no such thing.

So the only typo was.

There is a missing T here, but that's the only

time.

Um, and you can play around with the towers to

see how we can actually go back to the days

when you set the virus to one and so on.

Okay.

Goods.

Um.

Well, one thing to note is that you get the

effect.

This is expression.

You can see how the mark-up was up.

This expression was down to the minus in front of

this goes up.

Okay.

So an increasing marker means increasing H.

And you can do it if given what we just

discussed.

Right.

You know, increasing mark-up whatever.

The reason for it again is a bit of a

partial equilibrium exercise.

But increasing mark-up is likely to translate into an increase

in dividends, which means that absent transfers or distribution, the

H is increasing because the consumption of the guardians or

their guardians can benefit from this increase in the.

Um.

So the next thing I wanted to do is to

kind of quickly look at the steady state of this

economy.

Um.

And I wanted to get a expression for my first.

So that's, um.

I mean, there's just different ways to think about this

expression.

What I want to do in this life is to

just drive a steady state expression for H.

Okay.

Um, and to see how we said that if we

were to set zero equal one.

Will kill off any steady state later tonight.

If you remember, this was.

This guy here.

For steady state distribution, you kind of wouldn't be able

to see the full, steady state distribution.

From this expression, you would need to go to the

steady state expression for H, which is what I've done

in designs.

And you can plug in one zero equal to one.

And then you would see that effectively each state is

going to be equal to one.

So it's just to clarify what I meant by two

different transfer policies whose steady state distribution would be.

This would.

Yeah.

Uh.

All right.

So.

We're basically.

And then with the model, there is still two sides

of algebra.

Bear with me.

Um, so as I mentioned before, now what we want

to do, we want to go to the Euclidean model

and get closer and closer to the equation model.

So what we're going to be doing, we're going to

we know the steady state.

We know we have an equation for H uh and

we can log in.

Arise mark-ups.

I think this you've seen already.

You can log Linearised index, which is a bit of

a.

Again his expression again.

I will never ask you to be driving this in

an exam.

Okay?

Um, and what this expression is showing is simply that

as we had, um, as we kind of said before,

in the bigger expression here in this monster of expression

here, we said this h index depends on cyclical variation.

Mark-up plus, um, something that depends on the steady state

level.

Mark-ups.

Whenever you have a deviation of output from city state.

Okay, so if there is a shock, if shock is

going to lead to movement markers, you don't know obviously

movement and output as well.

So there's going to be these two effects affecting units.

One coming from lockups and one coming through the business

cycle mediated if you want, or scaled up or down

by the level macro systems.

And so.

What I've done then is to kind of as we

said, you know, there's a bunch of parameters, a bunch

of policy choices.

So what I've done here, I rewrote this expression here

in a simpler form, and I collect the terms.

Um, using the fact that mark-ups you can express as

a function of, uh, deviation from steady state as the

gamma parameter times y, which is composed by gamma one

and two.

And these figures are two analytically they're going to be

two, two.

You're going to expect these two objects here.

And then we're going to go to the computer and

look at some pictures.

Um yes.

About that.

Um okay.

Obviously, you know, there's an economy already because under our

assumption, everything is the same.

Okay, so the Phillips curve is the usual one because

our assumption of mark-ups same labour across different groups and

so on, we're going to assume a monetary policy all

of the time that we know.

And this is the IRS curve that we defined from

our previous version after having killed off.

And now we have an expression for each.

So in principle we can go to the computer if

we're doing that.

Let's unpack a little bit is uh equation is H

equation.

And let's start with the number one.

So if you look at demo one, you will see

that.

Return to number one is always going to be smaller

than scale.

And the reason why this term is always smaller than

zero is that even you can.

Your model mark-ups are always countercyclical.

So does it mean that when there is an output

boom.

Mark-ups for.

I think you've discussed this with with Michael.

Um, but basically the intuition is that go back to

our supply label supply schedule, which is a map of

location.

If firms need to produce more outputs, they need more

workers.

If they need more workers, you need a higher wage,

and a higher wage is going to lead to a

higher share of the economy going to workers, higher labour

share.

Which means that mark-ups are.

Okay.

And this is true in any equation more than is

true in the wrong version.

The model is true in this version of the model.

Um, and it's really embedded in the uh, in the

behaviour models, which, by the way, is a reason why

it's maybe the biggest critic of your model is based

on this observation.

Because if you go to the data is not obvious

at all that mark-ups behave in such such a countercyclical

fashion.

It is true the mark-ups are actually very hard to

derive.

You know, it's kind of the ratio between two derivatives

for once.

Uh, you know, marginal revenue or marginal cost.

So it's not really easy to kind of get a

good empirical approximate.

But there is an enormous debate, you know, in between

there is a very big industry in terms of trying

to establish whether mark-up are countercyclical.

In any case, for our purposes, this term is going

to be smaller than one, because mark-ups are countercyclical.

In this case, models.

Um.

So what does it mean?

It means that.

When there is something that increases output, the h index

is going to fall.

Right.

And the h index falling means that the consumption of

a Ricardian is falling right to average consumption, which is

going to reduce it.

Okay.

Um.

Well, in other words, maybe, you know, going back to

our partial equilibrium example.

You can think of the relative share of income that

goes to the constraint agents going up.

Right.

Do you remember we were talking about H in the

partial equilibrium sense.

We said if H falls we are transferring resources towards

the constraint agents.

So this kind of likely going to amplify any effect

at least an increase in output.

Right.

Because we're giving money, money, we're going to give you

the resources of people to have a high propensity to

consume.

How about H.

Sorry.

Gamma two.

Gamma two is given by.

Um, sorry.

Let me just see if I forgot to mention.

Well, maybe trivially, transfers can play a role in this

effect.

So depending on how big you store, in which cases

you are in, you can jump into the fact and

affect.

How big is Lambda?

Um, gamma once.

How about gamma two?

Gamma two?

So why gamma one was always negative.

On gamma two.

We cannot say much about its sign because its sign

as as it is clear from this expression here.

It's going to depend crucially on the physical regime.

Depending on whether zero is greater than LG or the

other way around.

You can have the design of this thing is either

positive or negative.

And.

The whole idea is that.

If power is high.

Remember what zero is.

Sorry to keep me back.

Here is the kind of a cyclical component of a

transfer.

The thing that you get any in any period, irrespective

of whether you are in a cycle.

And so this is that the thing that you get

when you are in this state.

And so if you are getting a lot of transfers

no matter what else.

This thing is very, very large.

These are the uses of the income right.

Which means.

That.

There is going to likely to be positive.

Uh, the size.

There's a.

30.

This sentence will be confusing.

Okay.

The way to think about this is, uh, I need

to go back to the sentence.

We're going to be back there.

Um.

But basically, I think it's easier.

Think of his worry.

Um.

How?

Zero.

It's.

Oh, sorry.

Okay.

I understand if there was.

I was missing a sign here.

So a large double zero means I get a lot

of, um, transfers, irrespective of the cycle.

Okay?

Which means that all is equal.

If a shock hits is going to be more terminating

in this economy.

Right.

Because the recurrent.

Because all the dividends are not going to benefit at

all from the increase in dividends is going to increase

the index.

Okay.

So it's basically that this thing is going to be

negative.

And so this is, uh.

And so on.

But forget about.

What I just said.

Think about intuition.

You can work out the signs.

Exactly.

But you don't think about the fact that.

The only thing that reduces the heterogeneity is a policy

that gives me for a given shop, and this is

going to be increasing a lot.

You need to transfer a lot of dividends to the

constrained people for them to be closer to their accounts,

okay.

And so depending on whether how zero of these dominate

is dominating, you can get amplification or damping.

That's that's kind of the intuition.

I'm getting confused with the science here.

And I come back to it is not clear because

some of you but you know, otherwise just do the

math and see whether this makes sense to you or

not.

Um, but I do mean that, uh, like, so the,

uh, Asians are getting the same dividend in, uh, every

period, and then, uh, hi.

Or like, if it is very high in a certain

period, then it is very high.

And, uh, the recording can capture a greater share of

their increased dividends.

So that's exactly what I was trying to say is,

if you get a fixed number, no matter what the

cycle and you are in a boom, what dividends are

going to go up.

It has to increase.

Right?

Because there are a lot of benefits from these increased

dividends.

But they can't.

The constrained people are not these increases eternity okay.

So as you are.

Why?

If I get a lot of variety, which means if

I'm in, if I am in a boom, I'm going

to get a profits are going to increase, dividends are

going to increase.

Okay.

I'm going to get a lot of resources transferred to

me as a as a constrained agent.

Then I'm going to reduce the gap between the constraint

people and Yankees.

Okay.

I mean, all of this getting from me getting confused

to say eventually that in practice we would expect these

numbers to be roughly equal to each other, which means

that this gamma two is generally either very small or

even zero, which means that the gamma one is the

one that dominates.

Although when you look at this equation, this thing is

going to be it's likely going to be very small,

because when you look at these controls, typically zero is

equal to.

A typical and more steady state aspect of some of

these components.

So we kind of expect this number to be negative.

Which means that I can rewrite this expression here as

we had before.

I can now substitute for um, I already substituted the

h index for this equation that I have here, which

means I end up with a modified IRS curve.

What the government's going to show up.

What I just said is that this gamma, we expect

to be negative.

And if you look at this expression and you think,

well, if this is negative, let me just assume for

the moment that this gamma is between -1 and 0,

then what you have is a form of amplification of

the effects of monetary policy compensation, because this number is

basically going to make your system substitution even larger.

Yeah.

Economy.

So any shock to monetary policy, if there is some

heterogeneity by a H is going to lead to for

a monetary policy contraction larger pulling outwards than it would

have had in Argentina.

Now why is that the case?

Because basically you're reallocating income towards the.

High margin consumer constraint agents in this economy.

Okay.

Because we said because of what we said about the

negative signs.

The last thing I want to say is that if

you allow for gamma to go below one below minus

one of Origin's.

You can actually get some crazy things happening, right?

Because basically it comes all in one.

You can click the sign in front of the inter

real interest rate in escrow, which means that a monetary

policy tightening could even increase outputs.

Right.

And if you're interested about these things and this kind

of what people call the inverted curve, and there are

multiple equilibria and kind of horrible things that can happen.

And if you are interested about these kind of aspects,

the paper by Florian will be that I started at

the very beginning is a very good starting point, if

you're interested.

Um, okay, so.

Exactly what we just said.

So basically then we ended up in a place where,

um.

Well, we've shown that we can refine how the economy

responds to shocks.

Right.

So we are here, we said in the kind of

additionally, let me actually measure that.

For example, empirical numbers, you get a number between 0

and 0 minus one.

So for reasonable calibration of the model you can even

get an amplification from the presence, which was exactly the

question we really started from at the very beginning of

the topic.

Okay.

And this is only coming from between heterogeneity.

However, there are few things that we kind of don't

particularly like.

If you remember how we motivated this topic, we said,

oh, it's actually a bit weird that if I announce

an interest rate increase in 100 years from now, you

guys are going to respond to it and substitute a

lot.

And now we basically just made these effects even stronger

in the sense because, you know, we had sigma now

we have sigma over one plus gamma.

Um.

We, um.

And I kind of.

I did discuss this, but you basically have that in

these specifications.

The equation.

What makes you you need a Taylor rule that is

even more aggressive than the one that we've seen in

the new control model.

So there are a bunch of different issues that are

being talked about.

So kind of ignore this one.

Just you know what, you guys are interested what it

is.

Um, so the next thing we're going to do is

to kind of go to the computer and see how

this kind of modified model, which is simply a modified

S curve, a new equation for H and a standard.

Um, and the standard part of the model is going

to behave under different configurations of transfers.

So I have three lines here.

The no transfer case.

So this is the loss for where you know what

is only the change.

Only the unconstrained people have an evidence for a distribution

case where I now set policy such that I replicate

the complete market case.

And so we're basically back to the the rank solution.

And the constant transfer rule is something is the steady

state that we discussed.

So what you can see from this uh, uh chart

is a loosening in monetary policy.

Again if you look at the original paper there is

a there's a mistake.

So these in the paper you would see that there

is a black line, but there shouldn't be a black

line, it should be a red line.

So I just I throw myself on top of it,

the red line.

And when we confuse if you go to the paper.

So what is it showing is that if there is

a loosening in policy, we have of course, an increasing

output as we've seen so far, but the increase in

output is much larger for the case of tank model

with no distribution.

And the reason is that the h index is falling.

The h is falling.

What do you mean?

Again?

It means that you're moving resources towards the consigned people.

You're moving resources towards people that have a very high

MPC, and as a result, you're going to have a

much larger increase in output.

If I redistribute everything, I go back to the wrong

case, which is the black line.

And the reason why this is a typo is obviously

that the h index k is going to move, right?

Um.

What happens if you allow the share of constrained people

to increase across different or different models?

Obviously the larger is the share of constrained people, the

stronger is going to be the effect of monetary policy

on outputs.

It's kind of intuitive.

They're just giving more weight to the shared population that

has an MPC one.

Okay.

All right.

The last ten minutes, we're going to do, um.

The full blown hang model, which again is mainly for

illustrative purposes, I.

You know, this is a very complicated model.

It's also actually quite complicated to go to the computer

to.

So I'm expecting you to know how to derive all

the beautiful state.

But it's just to kind of, uh, close this topic,

so.

What we're doing here.

As we discussed before, we are allowing for the full

set of ingredients to describe the very beginning to be

in our model, and the departure from what we've seen

so far is some idiosyncratic income risk.

So now we don't have the same, um, income, all

of us.

But we're hit by specific shocks minus one for me,

plus three for you, and so on.

I'm giving up of this distinction of.

Two sets of ages with access to financial markets and

without access to financial markets.

I'm going to let economy two endogenously generate income and

behaviour.

And the way in which I'm going to do this

is by writing down a constraint, which simply limits the

amount of borrowing I can do to a fraction of

income.

Okay.

So what is the question is saying is that I

can borrow only up to a fraction by which I'm

going to set to one.

Okay of my income, which is kind of in line

with what you would have for mortgage.

You know, it is important income.

Um, so I could borrow the full amount of quarterly

income every period or four times the income.

Um, and this generate is basically generating a share of

consumers or constrained consumers.

That is this is fine.

And I'm going to assume that this income risk is

going to evolve according to this process, which has obviously

zero mean.

So in expectation, I guess average labour income.

But again, I'm hit by shocks.

And this is the whole idea of what we described

throughout the whole lecture.

Right.

You know, I'm sitting here and getting my labour income

in expectation.

I know that I can be hit by shock.

And if I'm a negative shock today and when I'm

for a little bit and then I hit by another

shock tomorrow, I'm going to leave a little bit more.

But at some point I'm going to hit these constraints.

I'm going to become endogenously hand-to-mouth.

And until I get the positive shock or anticipation of

the previous shocks, that's when I'm going to grow out

of my being being assigned.

Okay.

So that's exactly kind of before the full blown, uh,

fictional newscast, before, um, there is a kind of foxhole

that I'm not going to explain that can, you know,

it's different from what we've seen so far but can

be mapped into the zero.

You don't need to talk much about this.

Um.

But what I would like you to remember is the

following kind of charts, or the implications of what we're

seeing here.

So now in this world we are allowing for.

The V index to be back at play.

Right.

Because now we're going to have eight sets of agents

and the set of agents is going to be um.

They're going to be the same example, but they're going

to be different exposed depending on the shocks they get

and so on.

And so now we're going to get back the notion

of me thinking about the future and thinking about the

possibility that I'm going to be borrowing constrained at some

point in the future.

So we're going to have some role for the V

index move around, which we didn't have in the tank

version of the model.

Okay.

And if you look at this chart, what have.

You know, the main thing I would like you to

remember is that if you look at the difference between

outputs in the tank and the model, they're basically on

top of each other.

What's going on here is that.

In the Hanke model, there is a little bit less

of a fall in the h index, so there is

a little bit less amplification from between heterogeneity, but there

is a bit of an amplification.

From the V index.

Okay.

Which in a sense is generating is going to deliver

a similar profile for outputs in equilibrium.

So what I want to say is that if you

kind of care about the aggregate behaviour of the economy,

like how output and inflation respond to shocks, which is

come to the job if you want a central bank.

You really need to go to full blown hang to

get reasonable predictions about or, you know, intuition about what's

going on in the economy.

Let's see the story about what the role of the

United plays in shaping macro dynamics.

But obviously, you may want to care about other things,

including how policy affects the country, for example, in which

case you definitely need to have a notion of the

index, because otherwise would be something to be important aspect

of it.

Um, this table is just to show you that whatever

you do with the parameter, with the tax rules, with

the share of unconstrained, uh, people, you always get a

similar impact effect on monetary policy, on output design for

output.

I think if you compare it to the model.

So it's not a it's really an embedded feature of

these models where you have that bank and one and

Hank are basically very similar and obviously very, very different

from one.

You can see that you can get massive amount of

amplification if you want to know if you like the

share of consumers to increase a lot.

And we get five times large effects on output from

one of three policy shocks, which is obviously massive.

Um.

This is exactly what we just discussed.

So basically out of time.

But, uh.

And he's also collaborating.

Um.

Lecture 19:

Left me for good.

Yeah, that's a problem.

There.

Might be some.

Kind of limit.

What?

Uh.

You can take it in work.

And it's really.

Gone.

So here's my clock.

I.

Think it's more of a, you know, value function, iteration,

all that's needed to solve.

Equations and everything.

We had a lot of that was I'm sure he

has to do it to pass or whatever, but.

Through experience.

Yeah.

It's.

Not true.

So it's.

Really just on the ground?

Somewhere.

It's never done anything yet.

It.

Has merit.

Yeah.

I know, I was actually.

Like, that's not happening.

So this is like, next.

Yeah.

Yeah.

How would the trees.

Like to make a numerical solution?

Yeah.

No.

It's not just that.

Yeah, yeah.

I mean, maybe there's a.

Limit step, right?

I tell you, just find.

A solution.

Yeah.

I mean.

Like, I don't know if it's.

Like the three.

Three equation model that can come.

Up.

But you need some sharpening.

That's like.

Like.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Hi.

Hi.

Nice.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Yeah, I do that all the time.

Like, I wasn't sure some of these structures, what they

are or what I really like.

I think there is one structure, but it's.

Very opposite.

The graph is like.

Where are your support?

Why doesn't it say.

The gradient.

It's just like I just explained to you.

It's just.

Not working or not.

And this is when I show this is.

What if I do this and then I, which I

just I still.

Yeah.

So what you do is you don't just suffer, I

guess.

Yeah.

You know, like, it's really hard to imagine.

Yeah.

Maybe it should work.

I when I was like, I have a few ideas

about, like.

Where does the reserves come?

Up.

Yeah.

And I, I was, I was like to I was

like yeah.

I was like, I wonder how she's gonna say this,

actually.

I just turn on the printer, you know?

Yeah.

Yeah.

So I really like if I don't have access to

this.

But they also have.

But maybe like being able.

To.

Beauty.

When you go out to the.

Sea.

That's the one.

Next to the.

Subway.

Hi, everyone.

Sorry for me.

Late.

Uh, well, I set myself up a couple of, uh,

admin points, so I think we managed to schedule the

supervision session.

Uh, I am assuming the split between groups has been

sorted out.

Kind of.

Yeah, but but, uh, administration has circulated, uh, form.

But then the form.

Has been.

Fine as long as, uh, you know, something is happening.

Um, on how you guys are going to split each

other.

Uh, that's fine with me.

Uh.

The second thing I want to mention is that for

this supervision session and tonight's one of the past essays

that I would ask you to read, um, so that

we can discuss it in class, um, so we can

do a little bit of that and we will be

asking questions, uh, around, you know, your topics and you

faced already, uh, ideas, problems and so on.

And then we'll take it from there.

Um, the other thing I wanted to mention is that,

uh, as you probably know, there's going to be a

mock exam.

Are you aware of this?

Yes.

So I'm coordinating with Michael on, uh.

Uh, exactly when to circulate it.

I think it's going to be towards.

The end of this week.

Uh, we'll publish.

It is going to be a mock exam, so there's

going to be no solutions.

I think you would be able to do this over

the next following couple of weeks.

And then Lawson is going to go in class through

the solution for you guys.

Um, and at the same time, or maybe, just maybe

after the Easter break, Michael and I are going to

publish on Moodle past examples of, uh, of exams.

We have, I think, 4 or 5 vintages from 2019,

maybe.

And I guess the idea would be to, um.

To publish a couple of them with solutions and a

couple of them without solutions.

So you guys can, you know, uh, you have something

to work against without not being guided by solutions.

Um, and this should give you an idea roughly where,

you know, what's kind of the level for the expected

level for the, for the exam.

Um, I think that's basically it on admin, unless you

guys have any questions around, you know, exams, mock exams

or supervision sessions.

Anyone else?

Uh.

The.

Second one.

The third.

The third.

The final.

So the.

Third.

The first session is up to you guys, you know.

Um.

And relatively easy, as I said, as I mentioned, um,

when we first kind of introduced the, um, when we

discuss first discuss the essays, I think, at least in

my experience, is good for you to have a conversation

with me about the essays towards the final stages.

Um, I mean, after this one where, you know, this

is going to be a chunky one in terms of,

um, it should we do ideas or problems?

The final session should be quite close to the end,

in the sense that you should be able to refine

certain details or to kind of clarify what to put,

how to polish the analysis you've done.

This is just a suggestion.

If you prefer to have a session that is not

too far away from the second one, I'm happy I

asked to maybe coordinate among yourselves and maybe offer me

some dates.

The earlier the better so that I can.

Um.

I kind of clear my schedule a little bit.

It's going to be a bit easier than, uh, now

in this period was a bit messy with the policy

meetings, and Easter holiday is always a bit tricky, but

if we organise ourselves in advance, I'm very happy to

accommodate whatever is the, um, average will of the class.

Um.

All right.

So if there is nothing else.

Let me see if I manage to send up these.

So we're getting to the oop.

Yes.

Good.

Good stuff.

Okay.

So we're getting towards the end of the course.

So we covered three topics we're going to do for

now, which is um, I think follows quite naturally from

what we have done in the last few weeks.

When we looked at the third 90, uh, we are

thinking, I have a notion of eternity this week, but

we're going to cover a topic that is quite different,

what we've done so far, which is going to be

around Macroprudential policy.

Um.

So let me try to motivate why this is an

important topic, and also why it is an important topic

from the point of view of a central bank.

So what I'm plotting here is the is a very

long run chart starting from the 1800s, the late 1800s

of us that were our GDP.

And I think this paper speaks by itself.

Uh, you can see two enormous print ups in debt

over GDP.

One was in the late 20s, early 30s, and one

was just cumulated with the 2008 global financial crisis.

And so obviously when you look at this chart, it's

the two things you think about is a link between

the two biggest financial crisis events that we had in

the last hundred and 50 years, and a very large

result in indebtedness of both.

Okay.

And so we kind of looked at these graphs in

the chart in topic three to motivate heterogeneity in balance

sheets.

We're looking by different cohorts of wealth or different quintiles

of wealth.

And the distribution is a purely aggregate series object.

But this suggests that, you know there could be some

link between that and anxiety.

Note we're talking about rare events okay.

We have two episodes of financial crises in a period

that spans really almost hundred and 50 years.

So we are not really talking about anything.

We you know, we've been talking so far of small

deviations around steady state stuff that happens every quarter, you

know, whether it's drawn from a random, um, distribution or

thinking about it very infrequently.

Uh, and a very large, potentially non-linear thing, you know,

look at if you compare the dynamics in this period

to the big boom and bust or going bust here,

it's a very different business.

Um, so for companies.

That.

Make up for these massive fluctuations that come down to

crisis, the second fact, um, which I thought was interesting

to show is the relation between, uh, debt and kind

of longer term consequences of the association in particular, also

the correlations.

So what I'm plotting here is the change in household

debt over GDP by US state or by country, over

the period just preceding the global financial crisis, 2002 2007.

This was the acceleration that we had in this period

here where the derivative was spiked up.

Against the change in unemployment that followed the financial crisis.

So it's almost like a predictive regression.

You know, you're trying to say, can I forecast the

output loss or the unemployment loss that followed the crisis

with the build-up in debt that occurred before the 90s?

Okay.

And as you can see, these lines, uh, obviously this,

uh, or this data obviously follows a very precise pattern.

For example, take the cross country comparison.

If you take countries like Ireland that so an extremely

large dot with uh, with up in uh, GDP over

the five years preceding the crisis is almost a 5,050%

increase in the percentage points increase.

There was a massive fall in unemployment.

And now again, this is not a business cycle thing.

You know, we're talking about a cumulative effect over three

years okay.

Everything we looked so far go back to our first

slide deck from topic one.

We're talking monetary policy and things of the seven 1040

steady states okay here we are after what is this,

three years.

So four quarters.

We're still extremely far away from steady states okay.

So we're talking about what we need to have some

notion of uh, permanent or long term effects of these

things.

And it's actually why we kind of care about that.

Because if it goes.

Something like this and then you have a big recession

in the last couple of periods.

Who cares?

But there seems to be an association between longer and

longer term effects on exactly those and real measures of

real activity.

And and this is true across countries.

It is true across the US states.

So if you are concerned that identification here is not

precise because or not, there are so many factors that

change from one country to the other one, you know,

beyond the correlate with the build-up in that.

You know, this chart should convince you that maybe there

should be a relation.

So here you're just within a given countries or controlling

for any common factor from monetary policy framework and from

fiscal policy, actually state specific.

But this is a slightly better identified version of this

chart.

But, you know, conveys this very similar message.

Um, and this is taken from a very nice paper,

Sophie, which, um, which is probably on the reading list.

So bottom line, the bottom line from this kind of

very simple motivating charts is that crises seem, at least

on this chart, associated with a larger persistence of the

glass and seem to be associated with this large build

up in that.

Now, of course, I've shown you just a couple of

charts.

There's actually a very large literature that tries to establish

these two points.

Um, and I would say that, you know, if they

go together, the wealth of evidence is available.

It's fair to say that this is actually something that

you would consistently find across colleges, sample periods, uh, in

response.

Um.

So within this context, how do we think about macro

prudential policy?

So the way you should think about macro prudential policy

is if you take these two factors through a given,

then one might say, well, you know, if I could

believe it would be that, that exactly.

If I were to avoid this kind of massive spike

in nets, then I may either reduce the severity of

the bust follows.

I only go about here.

And so the fall is going to be smaller, or

I can even maybe avoid the episode altogether.

You think about that?

You know, at some point there's going to be some

kind of trigger that then leads to a very nonlinear

dynamic, like the burst of a bubble or something like

this.

Then by limiting the betas in that here, maybe you're

just going to have a gentle slowdown and you're not

going to have this massive falling output that is persistent

and very large.

Yes.

The previous slide is that household debt.

And, you know, one more before that.

Yes.

Is that household government or all combined.

I think.

This is um private sector that so companies and um.

And house and.

Households.

I can double check.

Um, I mean, the charts will look very similar if

you were to go in.

I'm sure that if you take the whole of the

private sector as, uh, as a sector, we will have

something in this pattern.

Um, and within that private sector for the council or

companies, the financial companies that will be similar for financials

are not expected to be the same.

Um, but you can easily look at, you know, and.

Actually, for those of you, this is kind of an

aside for those of you who are interested in using

very long range data, there is a fantastic data set

built by, um, these guys called what is the cost

of the projections?

Okay.

Um, it's what it's like in Ontario and put together

a, uh, is called the microfinance or Microfinance History database.

I think it's available online.

You can download it.

Excel is data, and it has, uh, an amazing pilot

dataset for a large number of countries and countries in

the 1870s all the way to move to the in

the latest iteration, 2016.

And if you're interested about these things, I think they

are the composition of that, uh, for households, for the

private financials and the financials.

Thank you.

Um, is a very good resource if you ever want

to play on it.

So it's a Uno frequency.

So you have play off between you know what.

Yes.

Sometimes is um, right.

So we're discussing what is my version of what is

the way which you should think about potential policy is

an exam is really an exam device.

Okay.

So you sit there, you're sitting and observing the economy

potentially.

And the question is, shall I do something to kerb

or to rein in this boom to prevent something that

could potentially happen.

But you have no idea whether it's okay.

And we're going to draw a kind of very neat

distinction between what we call ex-ante policies or ex-post policies.

An exposed policy would say is that, you know, I

don't care about this boom.

I'm just going to deal with the mess when I

wake up.

Okay, so this would be an X policy in the

next force policy to deal with the potential of the

global or potential financial crisis.

And by the way, these these discussions have kind of

what has been around you probably I can remember.

But, you know, when I was studying, when I was

in university, there was impetus in the middle of the

dotcom bubble, and Alan Greenspan was the chair of the

Federal Reserve.

And this discussion was actually I remember exactly, you know,

articles talking about this.

And there's a large number of papers that followed the

2001.

First of all, exactly this point.

You know, should you act ex-ante and try to limit

something that is clearly going to say which are just

waiting to happen?

And effectively, you should think of any example policies in

place, right?

Exactly.

In the sense of prudential, uh, to avoid the large

monetary.

Okay.

So these are good and nice and it makes perfect

sense.

But then at the end of the day, you know,

we will be more precise about, um, why we may

want to do the policies and the individual theories.

You know, think about our standard model.

We want to be, uh, you know, looking for one.

So.

In a sense, once you deal with nominal rigidities, which

is the only friction that is present in that model,

there is no role for policy to do absolutely anything.

You know, why should you do.

Everything is perfect.

You know, we have expectations.

Things are working fine.

Uh, once I undo the effects of nominal GDP on

the economy, then I mean, an efficient benchmark.

Okay, so even if we were to upgrade to the

economy, okay.

And credit will go up and down.

Why would you ever need to code the.

World in an efficient world.

So there's no room for policy.

And so the question really in the first part of

this, uh, of this, I thought before, we're going to

look for a reason why policy should intervene.

Okay.

I remember this, um, a monetary policy committee member for

basically joined the bank saying that, you know, obviously we,

uh, the agricultural sector makes losses.

We're not going to stop or change the orbits of

the sun.

But the interesting thing is, even if you keep on

going with it.

Right.

And so a similar logic applies to what we're doing

here.

It could well be that this be the thing that

crashes affordable, are completely efficient, and there is no way

in which a policy action could improve the welfare of

agents.

And our economy is going to be more precise about

what it means and what the.

Policy is on this forth.

But as a notion, you know, maybe I'm doing a

national policy to kerb this big build-up in that.

But then you guys are worse off because you consume

less on average or whatever.

Right?

So it's not obvious that kerbing that is actually going

to include there's a big presumption that it was given

the size of these, you know, these corporations.

But we need to find, you know, a formal definition

of, uh, why policy is needed.

And the way in which you're going to do this

is to look for market failures and or inefficiencies.

Okay.

And go back to your standard model.

Which is corruption arising from sickness would be a source

of inefficiency, inefficiency in the model.

Right, because it would lead to this allocation of resources.

And that's why you want monetary policy to undo that

inefficiency and to act the way we saw it.

It does more than once.

It does that, you know, there's nothing else you can

do.

We are an efficient benchmark.

Now we're going to look for market failures and or

and or inefficiencies that justify in example, parts of the

economy.

Okay.

So that's that's why we're going at least with uh,

today is today's class.

And if we were to find that there are market

failures and inefficiencies, then we should think about, okay, then

how do we implement this policy as a category?

What do I do with that tool?

And so on.

Okay.

Um, so as usual, we can start from a relatively

simple model that's going to become simply not that simple.

Um, and the whole idea is that we want to

release the feature that we want is we want the

model were built up in that can generate a recession,

as we see in this, uh, um, we saw in

this chart, and potentially we're going to cover this next

week.

Potentially.

We want the idea that falling asset prices can even

further amplify the basket for us.

Okay.

And for for this week, we're going to completely ignore

the role of asset prices and amplifying.

But obviously is a big part of the story.

Or maybe intuitively should be a part of the story.

And then going back to this kind of notion of

ex-ante versus exposed policies.

Um.

At least this week.

Well, I think we're going to cover both.

So among the various ex-ante policy we're going to consider,

we're going to think of two different policies.

One, there is a hard limit on debt.

Okay.

I step in as a regulator and say, you guys

can take more than fraction of your income under income

or, you know, 80% of the value of your house.

And in this way, I'm going to limit how much

that you're going to take.

Or I can actually use monetary policy to try to

kerb the build-up in that right.

If I raise interest rates like crazy, at some point

you guys will stop to take mortgages, okay?

And that way I'm going to leave it on top

that they're going to take on.

So we're going to try and compare the two policies

and the two inefficiencies that we're going to see in

the next two weeks are what are known or what

we call aggregate demand externalities and fire sale externalities.

Positive externalities we're going to cover next week and are

related to asset prices, to the fact that you're selling,

you know, stuff and you're causing the price problem.

This week we're going to do what matters.

Um, and as I mentioned, you know, all of these

is based on the idea that there are very rare

occasional events which can lead to very large fluctuations, both

on the upside and downside.

So maybe we'll come up short all of these that

we're not going to linearise anything.

So no locking in our approximation for this topic.

We're going to work with a fully nonlinear model.

Finally, to kind of conclude the motivation for this.

Basically, you might ask, you know, the course on monetary

policy and water economics, why are we doing this kind

of stuff?

Well, because these macroprudential policies these days, nowadays are a

big part of what central banks actually do.

Right.

And so, you know, we covered in topic one kind

of the monetary policy directorate of the bank.

You know, how monetary policy strategy works.

How do you respond to demand shocks, the market shocks

and so on.

We thought about implementation of monetary policy, how we pinned

down the price level.

Right.

And this is done mainly in the markets and banking

directories.

And virtually everything else you see as a big chunk

is about potential policies.

You know, if you remember, we started discouraging for banks,

as you know, lender of last resort, there is a

financial stability notion of central banks.

That's exactly what we're going to be covering now.

Um, just again, a quick a quick aside or clarification,

all of these bits is called the prudential part of

the bank.

But there is a difference between the financial stability directorates

and the prudential regulation directorates.

You should think of the Prudential Regulation Directorate as the

micro regulators.

So these are the people who go and check every

need, one institution that is regulated by the bank to

check their behaviour and whether they, um, you know, fulfil

certain principles that are set by the regulator.

While the Financial Stability Directorate for the governorships actually, um,

really thinks about the aggregate consequences of the individual behaviour.

So it's called the macro prudential policy because, you know,

and when you see this, that's exactly the of the

topic, is that I may behave in a way we

are realising that we won't behave the same way.

We're going to generate some financial stability risks in these

parts of the bank is the one that should take

that basically takes this into account, okay, and is effectively

the one that is going to implement the macro prudential

policy tools that we're going to derive after having seen

whether the models.

Right.

Um.

Uh, or indeed, as usual, there is no kind of

uh, the main, the only requirement really for the exam

is going to be this set of slides.

But there are a couple of readings that, uh, could

be useful.

This paper is a very nice, easy and very eloquent

description of macro financial policies.

These, uh, uh, I mean, I recommend, if you like,

this topic is a very good introduction, but the main

thing we're going to, um, base our slides on is

this paper by Anton Simsek, um, which was published in

the ah and has, as usual, you know, what I'm

what I've done in the slides, simplified all that and

gets the main bits and pieces.

If you want to go the extra mile, there are

a bunch of additional things in this paper.

Uh, that again, are not required for the exam.

But if you care about these things, there are quite

a few extensions.

We're going to make a lot of simplifying assumptions.

If you don't believe me that these things go through,

if you relax the assumptions, these guys shop for you.

You can go and check the appendix.

And there is this other paper by Sophie that I

used to I took the charts from.

It's also very nice.

Right.

Um.

Let's jump into the model.

So as I mentioned, we are going to still have

a model with, uh, a form of eternality.

Um, we're going to have two sets of households, borrowers

and lenders, and we are going to parameterise the modern,

uh, in a way that and you'll see exactly in

math terms in a second.

But basically what happens in the model is that I

interpreted zero the beginning of time of the model.

And borrowers are going to borrow from like this okay.

In an unconstrained way.

So I just optimise, I decide how much I want

to borrow and I work on manuals.

Then you go to period one and in period one

is going to be the key kind of shock in

the model.

There's going to be a tightening in a debt limit.

When what happens is that, you know, I may have

borrowed optimally £100.

And then in period one the bank is not happy

anymore with lending me £100 and says you can borrow

only up to £50.

Okay.

And this is what this is going to imply is

that, well, I already borrowed one.

It sounds okay, and I was happy to work on

the bonds and keep rolling over the summer bounce.

Now I need to cut back on my borrowing.

So to make up for this deleveraging effectively reducing my.

That's how we need to cut consumption, right.

This will be the source the only source of variation

in the world.

Now what's going to happen is that by reducing my

consumption I'm going to reduce demand and monetary policy as

we would have in the standard model, can lower interest

rates to support the demand by falling more and more.

But if the shock is large enough, then at some

point monetary policy is not going to be able to

lower interest rates below the zero bound.

So we don't have a notion of the CMB.

And therefore, since monetary policy cannot just lower interest rates

and support consumption, there's going to be a recession.

So it's going to be the combination of a tightening

in this that limits and a zero binding constraint on

how low interest rates can go.

That is going to engineer the severe recession we're talking

about.

And you can already see that this is very far

away from what we've done so far.

Right.

Because is there is a notion of infrequency of this

shock happens.

You need.

You need to have a large enough tightening in the

debt limit to hit the CFP.

If the tightening in the in the debt limit is

small and monetary policy simply lowers output and consumption, stay

where they are.

Um, to make things simple, we assume, as we did

in topic three, that everyone knows this is coming.

So there's perfect foresight, okay.

Which means that I'm setting period zero.

I'm not deciding that I want hundreds of deaths, even

though I know there's going to be deleveraging in the

next period.

Okay.

So from my own point of view, I'm totally happy

to borrow up to 100 consume today.

What is going to be is that limits being tighter.

Whatever I'm going to deliver, you know, consuming billions, but

it's going to be a fully optimal decision from my

individual point of view.

This fresh spring supplementation is better to our food service.

Well, imagine that you have a very strong preference for,

uh, borrowing.

Say, because you are young and you want to buy

a house, right?

And you know that there is something that's going to

limit your borrowing.

Tomorrow is not a different day, right?

You know, you still can get a lot of utility

from borrowing today.

We're going to pay a cost which is deleveraging tomorrow.

But if you are impatient enough, if you value enough

your consumption today and you are borrowing today, then you

can see that, you know, there is a case where

I'm totally happy to borrow today and tomorrow.

But there's going to be a condition.

Basically, you need to assume some form of impatience, which

is not maybe, maybe the math is going to clarify

this.

Really.

But let me just get to the to the mark

if you're confused, you know.

But the idea is that obviously I can parametrise a

model where the borrower actually is not happy to borrow

all the way above the borrowing limit.

But there's going to be parameter values that can then

allow me to control this thing.

Let's wait until the market as I see it.

So.

Then you mentioned that this is the case.

Then Macroprudential policy is going to be, as we just

described, the policy that is going to limit working in

period zero.

Right.

Because I'm sitting here, I know there's going to be

a big recession coming tomorrow.

Okay.

And Macroprudential policy can just say, well, you're not going

to borrow 100 today.

You're going to borrow only 50.

So that when tomorrow the borrowing constraint tightens.

You're not going to have to deliver it.

Deliver.

And so there's not going to be a session.

And we're going to show that actually this policy is

going to bring benefits to all agents in this economy.

What the lenders and the borrowers, because of an aggregate

demand externality and the whole thing, I want you to

keep in mind in the next hour and a half,

is that we are going to have a very Keynesian

model.

Now we're going to have a model where my own

spending is going to be someone else's income, which means

that my own cutting consumption is going to reduce the

income of other people.

Right.

But individually, we're not going to be able to realise

that.

I say, oh, you know, I'm happy to borrow thunder

today, cut by 50 tomorrow, whatever.

But I don't realise that by doing that I'm actually

cutting your consumption.

Sorry, your income, which means that you will need to

reduce consumption and by reducing your consumption, I'm going to

reduce my income.

And you're going to have the Keynesian cross the Kidron

multiplier, which is exactly what was missing, in a sense,

from our standard model and a model that was very

little Keynesian and with a lot of substitution here, we're

going to have a lot of, you know, a neutral

kingdom.

You see exactly what I mean.

So this is basically the story of what we're going

to be doing now.

We're going to formalise this story with my.

Okay.

Um.

Okay.

So we mentioned perfect foresight.

We know exactly what's going to happen at zero, one

two up to infinity.

And there's going to be two group of households indexed

by J as usual.

But now the key of households coming in two groups

is going to be borrowers and lenders as I mentioned.

So B and L are going to be the subscript,

the superscripts for borrowing lenders.

And these two households have um are of the same

size.

We're going to assume that they have one out of

size.

So that is a measure one in total households equally

split between borrowers and and then in a sense you

can think of these borrowers as the constraints and unconstrained

households that we've seen in, in publicly in the tank

model, for example, with a tiny with a few tiny

differences.

First of all, this actually doesn't apply in period zero.

And the reason why this doesn't apply in period zero,

where we're all born, you know, in the same way,

is that now we're going to assume that the heterogeneity

is going to come from preferences rather than from shocks.

So what I mean by these is if you remember

topic three, what we said was oh, we all have

income 100.

Some people get an income shock because the income shocks,

some people get a negative income shock.

And the construction work uh, trades I cannot work.

So I need to borrow some of my while.

You guys are unaffected because they're lectures.

And, you know, if you're not affected by this.

Is not going to be a notional.

This is a there's going to be a notion of

genetic preferences, which I'm going to characterise with the discount

factor on these two groups of people in particular, assume

that borrowers are going to be more efficient than others.

Okay.

So these guys basically want to consume a lot today

relative to these guys.

And if everything is the same, but these guys want

to consume a lot, to consume a lot, they're going

to borrow from lenders.

Lenders are very happy to lend because I actually don't

want to see that much.

And this is going to generate data about.

Um.

And we're going to denote with uh, bt J the

holdings of one pair of bonds by housing.

So the lenders are going to, are going to have

a positive vault, and the borrowers are going to have

a negative b db.

Right.

Um, now we're going to see these.

But technically these are real bonds.

Um, but I haven't, you know, mentioned the price level

at all here so far because we're going to make

a very, um, stack for same assumptions of full price

and GDP, which is going to help our life.

So obviously, you know, it's a very stark assumption.

Assume that the amount of money that you want, the

other one, you can relax the assumption they do it

in the paper.

They do it so you can think of nominally as

being the same.

But now our Fisher equation is going to be equal

to one.

Right.

Because expected inflation.

Okay.

So we have.

Some divisive issues.

This economy will consume this standard zero net saving condition,

which means that.

Whatever is borrowed by borrowers is whatever the lenders lend.

So this quantity won't be the same in equilibrium.

So that on average or next is going to be

zero borrowing.

Um, which means that we can just focus on one

object.

Uh, or this is just one quantity.

The least quantity can keep track of both the lenders

and the borrowers positions.

In a way that seems very confusing here.

Um.

I defined bt with no superscript as the negative of

this b, which means that you should consider this as

that right?

While you should consider the superscript b as an asset.

I know it seems to be crazy, but it's going

to help you with some of the math later on.

Okay.

This always gets me thinking, you know, just always the

positive.

So if you don't see a superscript here, you should

think of this.

And actually let me clarify this way.

Um.

Let me do this.

Explain that.

So the timing of the model, as I kind of

mentioned already, is that in period zero, we just, you

know, we enter the model, we can decide you can

optimise given our differences in preferences okay.

But then in periods from period one onwards so or

in period one we're going to have that.

The borrowing constraint is going to stop binding okay.

There is this kind of shock that comes and says

whatever you had done in period zero I don't care.

Now there is a binding borrowing constraint that limits you.

Here is coming back to your point, the borrowing constraint.

You can think it you can think of it in

two ways.

Either that that in the next period is going to

be smaller equal than number five, or the assets have

to be larger than a negative number minus five.

Are you all on board with this?

It's just two identical ways of writing the same thing.

The only thing is that if you have a superscript

here, you have an asset.

So that here would be a negative number one without

superscript b.

This is that.

Okay.

Um.

So this is the timing of the model.

Now on the notation.

You should think of the time subscripts for v.

So this is that okay.

As the amount of that that is maturing.

So potentially you have some V0 that you enter the

model with.

So you know the time for the model is that

you may inherit some that the end of the period,

the model with the B0 that you either have to

repay or to get interest on, which is going to

be uninteresting, and B1 is going to be the crucial

element of the whole model.

So B1 is the debt that you decide to get

today in period zero.

And it's going to mature tomorrow, okay.

And tomorrow is when the binding collateral, the binding debt

constraint is bound.

Okay.

So from B2 onwards our borrowing constraint is going to

be.

Always binding.

Okay.

So the constraint is going to bind forever.

It's going to come in in period one and stay

with us forever.

Which means that that from period two onwards be three

before and be infinity is going to be equal to

five.

Or less than five.

Okay.

Now, as I try to, you know, motivate the beginning

of the more of the of the lecture to make,

the more that interesting we we need to assume that

the choice of B1 is going to be larger than

five.

What do I mean by that?

I mean that I can parametrise this.

Back to your question.

We can parameterise the betas such that when I'm sitting

in period zero and I'm a very impatient household, I

find I find it optimal to issue an amount B1.

You know, I'm sitting in t0.

I say how much that I want today to consume

today.

I will need to repay this, that tomorrow.

I know that tomorrow there's going to be a tightening

in the credit limit, which is going to limit my

future issuance of debt.

Okay.

So my limits might be two right to five, but

I'm going to be totally happy to do that.

What that means is that I'm setting period zero.

I should be one I'm happy to consume.

I get to period one.

I will need to issue b two.

Okay, but I cannot issue as B2 as much b1

I had okay, the new level of debt that I'm

going to issue is going to be smaller than the

level that I usually build here.

This is what we might like as the some of

you confused is very important points.

And what is confused now.

I'm confused.

The limiting implies on the issuance of new left or

the like accumulated them, because people know that there is.

A one year of debt, right?

That's okay, because I thought, why wouldn't everyone just borrowing

period zero and then not be subject to talking about

one periods?

You know, what is it?

Anyway?

Do you want me to do that?

Okay.

Uh, which means that again, you know, imagine t0 I

show hundreds in Q1, I will need to pay hundreds

and issue something new, that something new is going to

be smaller than hundreds.

And I know it's what does it mean from the

point of view of the chart that we looked at

at the very beginning, it means the aggregate.

That is what is the deleveraging activity.

That's what I'm trying to say.

And we want to be in this situation because if

there is no deleveraging then the model is completely uninteresting.

Okay.

It's just you know it's going to be always in

equity.

Um.

And so that's kind of the key point.

You know, borrowers given our assumption that we want is

going to be greater than five.

It's one that we need to do that we need

to decrease the 2 to 11.

That is consistent with the new finding constraint five.

And so decrease the amount the amount of debt to

the.

Right.

So given the setup let's try to um.

So let's set up the problems.

So the problems are going to.

I'm going to start from a household problem.

Which is going to be, uh, very standard and very

standard problem in the sense that we are going to

maximise the different consuming from this utility, from walking.

The budget constraint, again, is quite standard.

You know, I'm going to consume, I'm going to get

some labour income if I'm a borrower.

Uh, this would be a negative numbers.

This would add up to my consumption.

Right.

If I'm a lender I'm saving, which takes away from

my consumption.

The same applies to, um, the income I get on.

Oh, sorry.

This is what I received.

So let me do the, uh, lender case.

Uh, I'm going to receive B today.

Okay.

And I'm going to lend.

Yes.

I'm going to take some away from my consumption, which

is what I'm going to land at price one over

R.

Okay.

This is the standard way of writing the price of

a bond.

As you know, in our presentation, there's going to be

dividends and transfer taxes, right?

Um, note that we're going to move away from this

idea that we can tax and and do taxes and

transfers and dividends from, uh, um, from the two groups

of households, which is a very big difference relative to

what we've done.

Okay.

This is going to be the same for everyone.

And in the second is going to become clear why

this is going to be the case.

Now, some of you may have noticed that there is

one difference relative to what we've done so far, which

is in the way in which you specified utility for

for these households.

Okay.

And normally you would have what we normally call a

separable utility function, where the utility from consumption appears separately

from the utility from labour.

Well, you can see that this utility from labour here

is within the utility operator of, uh, of our household.

Because seen at all separable processes so far.

Yes, yes.

No.

I think we did in the module.

Okay.

So are you familiar with the notion of, uh, the

income effect on labour supply?

Um, let me let me go very quickly.

Um.

Is is not super important, but you kind of need

to get it to understand.

The markets for us.

So the whole point of this specification, the end point

of why you want to choose this, this specification of

preferences is that you're going to give the labour the

income effect on labour supply, okay.

Which basically means that if you remember your kind of,

uh, first order condition relative to ours in the standard

Model is a is the marginal rate of substitution, where,

you know, the relative benefit of consuming today and, and

the cost of working today.

You can't pay that off.

Well, if you want to take derivatives and compute the

first order conditional with this utility function, you're going to

get that your wage, that wage is going to just

be a function of hours.

So there's no consumption here anymore, which means that I'm

not going to care at all by how much consumption

is going to change.

If you shock it, I'm going to kind of only

optimise depending on hours, don't care for the next period

as well.

Well, in this case we have a shock.

That is only one period and then it's going to

stay there forever.

And we have perfect foresight.

The combination of the perfect foresight, the single shock in

period one and in preferences.

GG stands for these guys who came up with this.

Specific preferences implies that this problem is going to be

basically cyclical in a sense.

What I've done, you know, in practice, what I've done

a couple your labour supply decisions and households from the

consumption saving decision that comes with.

The observation.

Okay.

So if they're additively separable.

So shouldn't the UB inside the bracket.

So it should be u of C minus v of

n.

So.

Yeah, it's.

In the lake.

The labour supply and consumption are additively separable in the

utility function.

Right.

That would be a separate function.

Oh, so GG is not.

This is called.

Non-separable utility function.

Exactly, because you're not going to be able to, you

know, if you take a derivative of this.

Yeah, you're going to get whatever is is the derivative

of the bit inside, but you're going to be left

with the function itself.

And that's exactly the difference.

So in a separable utility function um you are going

to have that's what we've seen so far.

And you have you will have u c minus v

n okay.

These are called non-separable.

Exactly.

Because they have this specification.

It's clear.

You know, the the point of this is to make

sure that the labour supply doesn't bend back.

So look at this condition.

You think about how this condition would have looked like

in standard separable preferences.

This is what you get with this set of preferences.

What you would have gotten with separable preferences would have

been the usual ratio between consumption and hours.

Uh, function peak.

Which means that when you decide how much you want

to label or you want to how much hours you

want to offer, you're going to take into account whatever

was the effect of the shock on your income and

hence on your consumption.

The fact that consumption doesn't appear here anymore means that

there is no income effect on your labour supply decision.

Yeah, yeah.

Over again.

Now, uh, we get started problem?

Uh, eventually, because, uh, if I understand correctly, this.

Is the.

Sort of condition with respect to labour supply.

And then there should be another with respect to consumption

that is that that will be intertemporal.

Right.

And you're perfectly right.

So the intertemporal condition for the consumption saving decision is

going to be our standard equation.

Exactly.

And that's the this is still the still going to

work the same way.

The only thing that's going to change is that this

labour supply decision is not going to depend on consumption.

So only on ours.

Okay.

Now think about what I'm doing.

You know, I have two groups of people with different

consumption.

Right.

Because if you assume that I have different discount factor,

some of them they want to consume or some of

them want to consume less.

If I had the standard preference condition for the labour

supply decision, I will have two heterogeneous labour supply curves.

I mean, these numbers will look different here.

We'll have a whatever it is, consumption of the power

of one minus the elasticity.

But if consumption is heterogeneous across borrowers and lenders, I

will get two different labour suppliers.

And exactly as in topic three, we wanted to kill

heterogeneity coming from the supply side.

If you remember, the way we did it was by

introducing the union that will generate a common wage and

that would equalise the amount of hours everyone would want

to supply, and basically doing the same thing, but playing

around with preferences rather than with the union.

Okay, okay, so we killed off anything coming from the

supply side of the problem.

We are intending data coming from the demand side of

the economy exactly as we did in 43.

So the other questions are going to be if.

We do this for.

Purely modelling reasons.

This is not due to empirical, is it?

This is purely to simplify the problem, because if I

were to allow for net income from the supply side,

there's no way you're going to be able to get

it needs um, analytic extraction.

So think of this.

That's why I say it's not super important.

But you need to know this to understand why would

that needs what the implications are and understand why.

It would be for for medical reasons as well.

Because like in this context, if we have some kind

of, um, recession and deleveraging, then we have to impose

the yields and we increase the labour supply so they

can pay that because otherwise they would increase the levels.

Um.

That means well, you can argue whether this is a

good description of reality or not.

And you can come up with cases whether they are

and they're not for my own purposes, the only reason

why I've done this is to simplify your life and

to make things more intuitive.

Certainly the problem will become more complicated, but maybe it

could be that in certain cases, if you believe that,

you know, borrowers, it goes back to this dimension of

eternity.

So if you were to believe that the high the

low price evaluation guys are also, let's say, maybe the

poor people in the distribution and the people wouldn't be

able to increase their labour supply by shock, then this

would be a good distribution.

So just, you know, keep it in mind.

It's going to depend on the application.

Um, but it's not obvious that this should be a

better or worse description any time soon.

These low beta people are okay.

So why is this useful to me in a month?

You know, for the month that we're going to do

is, as I just said, you know, what I'm trying

to say is that I can ignore almost two hours

here.

It's almost like this optimisation is happening.

You know, it's not optimising over my time.

I mean, taking derivatives and taking certain conditions and so

on.

But it's happening in a different room and it's nothing

to do with my consumption saying intertemporal variation, okay.

So that's why I'm going to define net income as

this edge here, which is simply going to be my

labour supply optimisation problem.

Right.

Which is independent of consumption decisions, the consumption saving decisions

plus dividends minus taxes.

Okay.

And the way I can do this is because of

this decoupling between consumption saving and the life choices.

And then I can rewrite everything in terms of this

kind of net notion.

I'm going to define net income this way and net

consumption this way.

Let me spend just one second thinking about what is

this.

So.

There is a max here just to tell you that

I'm, I'm I'm optimising.

I'm kind of taking derivatives and my optimal.

I'm going to get my labour income.

And then I need to net this income out from

the disability of working.

One intuitive to think about it would be, you know,

I'm here, I'm getting money from the LLC to work

and I get my salary, my income, but I'm paying

childcare because somebody is at home and someone has to

take care of my daughter and that costs.

Then, you know, I get hundreds.

My net income is going to be 90.

Think about it this way.

Right.

And these I do get respective of, you know, my

consumption saving occupation.

So equally I can define with a pure definition.

I'm going to define net consumption as my consumption minus

these objects that is independent of my consumption choice.

Okay.

So that's why I can take a net consumption thing

based on this object here.

And if I write c tilde as this guy and

e as this guy here, I can rewrite the problem

in terms of net consumption and net income.

And you can see now that the labour supply choice

is gone.

Basically, we can just focus on the temporal choice between

consumption and savings.

So I need to just choose city and B right.

So from now on I'm going to talk about.

Consumption and income.

But what we mean is net consumption and that.

Right.

I'm going to stick to these definitions.

Uh.

Let me just do a couple of more slides on

Thursday.

Um, so.

And sorry, this is an important point because of our

assumptions.

It is going to be the case that net income

is going to be symmetric.

Okay.

So since, you know, the only thing that makes us

different is our consumption choices because we have different discount

factors.

Our labour supply is going to be the same.

Going back to the same point of like the parallel.

We took three I killed off the internet supply.

Okay.

Because there is no income effect from uh, uh on

my labour supply decision.

Now we're going to supply the same amount of labour

even though we have different consumption levels.

Okay.

So let's move to the production side of the economy.

We're going to do the usual, uh, nuclear engine, uh,

thing.

So there's going to be one producing firms producing differentiated

goods.

We're going to assume a linear and fully linear technology.

So every unit of labour is going to map 1

to 1 unit of output.

And let me for the moment assume that the firm

is going to be totally free to set prices.

Okay.

There's no rigidity whatsoever.

So this is a super standard.

Uh, monopolistic competition problem.

So these firms are going to maximise, uh, revenues minus

the, uh, labour cost.

And what I'm going to assume, subject to the standard,

uh, demand function coming from the SES.

You think you've seen already?

And I'm going to assume that there's going to be

a subsidy in place so that I'm going to undo

the monopolistic distortion.

You guys have seen this.

I'm sure you've seen this with the with micro, right.

So the story here is that I'm going to tax

households to get some money to subsidise labour and the

point of aid firms so that the price they set

is eventually the competitive equilibrium price.

And now these guys are.

To make some profit out of, you know, the competition,

even with the subsidy in place.

And I'm going to rebate those profits back to the

households.

Yeah.

So this is very standard.

Um, which basically means that TT is going to be

equal to TT.

Right.

Because I'm going to tax people to kill off these

monopolistic distortions, then give back exactly the same amount of

money to then income transfers.

And what this is going to imply is a couple

of things.

The first one is that the T is equal to

TT, which means that our net income definition is going

to be even simpler because in this appeal, it also

going to imply that the wage is going to be

equal to one.

Okay.

And the reason why, you know, it should be obvious

because the problem solution.

But you know, if you can do the market distortion

under monopolistic competition, you can have a, you know, a

free market, you know.

You should think.

Which means I can rewrite my, um, net income this

way.

So don't disappear.

The wage is going to be equal to one another.

I also added a star here.

And the reason why I added a star is because

I'm in a world without any friction.

There's no price rigidities.

Okay?

I just assume that when I remove the policy distortion.

And so this is the efficient level of output in

this economy okay.

In a sense, what I've been doing here is.

I removed by stickiness.

I introduced the subsidy to firms so that these firms

are going to behave as if they were in perfect

competition.

Right.

So the outcome of this that I'm going to, you

know, demand labour in a way that's going to consistent

with this efficient level of income.

Um.

And interestingly, this level, this official level of income is

completely independent of the Parliament.

Exactly.

Because we killed off.

The income effect from labour supply.

Okay.

Um, as an aside, you know, the reason, basically what

we're doing here, which is so this kind of we

draw, we drew a parallel.

We talked three things about keeping the internet from the

labour supply.

But the difference is that.

Effectively, what we are going to care about now is

how big is the pie?

You know, how big is the economy rather than how

the pie is sliced between consumers of different types?

Okay.

As I mentioned before, you know, remember, keep in mind

what we're trying to do is to see whether there's

going to be any inefficiency in this economy condition on

this one, focus on heat and the entire world.

So we're basically going to compare whatever is the outcome

in a world with some frictions compared to this benchmark

here, because this day obviously is the efficient benchmark with

prices, nobody's competition.

Okay.

On the previous slide, this is technical detail about.

Yes.

So, um, you really don't need to know about this

for the exam, but what's going on here is that

in the stuff that you've seen with Michael, this store

would be simply one over Epsilon.

Okay.

Because the mark-up is epsilon over time minus one.

And this star would be the power that would bring

the mark-up equal to one.

Right now in this class of models, you need some

form of state dependence of the tau, because there are

certain parts of the space of the model where basically

you need a larger tau to make sure that there

are no multiple.

So I put it there for completeness because it would

have been, you know, it would have been a bit

sloppy not to put this function of n t here,

but again, here, you don't need to know about this.

Uh, it's something that, uh, we should know we should

cover.

In this class.

Um.

Let me see.

Okay.

Let me do the slides.

And that was very funny.

Um.

The last ingredient we need to cover before solving the

model is that there is, uh, you know, we need

the zero bound and motivated all of these with, uh,

with the CMB.

And as now there is no ZB.

And so what we're going to do, what we're going

to be doing here is to do kind of a

little trick.

Have you seen have you seen the crummy example previously?

No.

No.

See it.

So the whole.

Idea is that we're assuming that there is a very

small amount of money in this economy.

Okay.

It's small enough that you can ignore it's going to

take the limit of this money going to zero, but

he's going to be there.

And since money pays zero interest, there's going to be

a problem on on interest rates in the sense that

if I were to lower interest rates below zero one,

you guys will go into money because there would be

no reason for why you would pay.

You would need to pay me a negative interest rate

to see if you could store your savings in cash.

Okay, then you don't need to.

You don't need to know exactly how this thing works.

It's just to give you a little bit of intuition.

But, uh, the only thing that matters is that the

nominal rate would be greater than zero.

Under our assumption that I mentioned before about full price

stickiness.

So prices can be fixed forever.

That simply means that the nominal rates are equal to

really that special question which was here.

And this means that there is a lower bound on

real rates as well.

That's why the nominal versus real, you can kind of

ignore it for the rest of the class because.

Um, and what I have here is the standard aggregation

of outputs, um, and the standard deviation of the price

level.

Okay.

We just assume that this is fixed.

So, um.

Okay, let's.

Think for five minutes without a quarter to an answer.

This is the difference.

And.

This is what the question.

So.

Great is that.

Yeah.

I think sometimes we make.

A reasonable.

Price I mean, for.

Me is almost like.

I don't know.

What?

It is.

We.

Know.

From studying without a break.

Any norms.

Okay.

I think I.

Think.

Yeah.

I think so.

What is still there?

I mean, I.

Think.

Right.

We can just price.

I don't know.

Yeah.

I think this is just something that we have.

Maybe.

Now it's good information.

I have some more, uh.

Not.

So much.

You want one?

More?

No, we don't want.

I.

Think it's really.

Neat because I.

Think it's like, uh, like Instagram.

Um, but.

Uh, this is just.

One example.

You know.

Yeah.

All right.

Yeah.

Oh, guys.

It gets right.

On your shoe.

Yes.

Yes.

Okay.

Um.

So let's try to.

So this basically concludes the setup.

So we can now think about starting solving this modelling

model.

So let me try to kind of, uh, give them

tuition and see how the model works.

Then we go into the proper equilibrium conditions.

So we set the terms.

I'm not going to be able to adjust prices.

We said that firms have a marginal cost is weakly

below prices.

Remember where the subsidy plays, okay.

And so in a sense, these firms are going to

be always happy to supply as much as you want

okay.

The second thing is that we again keep the income

effect on labour supply, on our supply incisions, which means

that we're going to have a completely demand determined car.

Okay.

We have a linear technology that transforms labour into income.

And this income is going to be in this optimisation

is going to happen somewhat independently.

What happens to consumption.

So this means that changes in consumption are going to

affect income.

So the causality if you want goes from consumption to

income okay.

That's what we mean by a demand determinant economy.

And in particular our total income is going to be

equal to the consumption of the borrowers plus the consumption

of the lenders, each of those multiplied by their own

mass, as we usually do.

You know, this could be the, you know, the lambdas

we had in topic three and the one minus lambda,

that would be one half and one half and one

half here because we assumed the same size of these

two groups.

So.

It follows that there will be there will exist an

interest rate R star.

I'm going to define I'm going to call All-Star, which

is consistent with the income equal to its efficient level.

Okay.

It's going to be equal to well, it's going to

be consistent with e equal to V star.

And obviously there's going to be a notion of n

equal to n star.

There is a linear mapping between our and ours.

Then we're going to have a policy rule that sets

in principle the nominal rate.

But under assumption you can think of monetary policy as

setting the real rate directly because prices are fixed.

And what the zone is going to try and do

is to set are equal to R star Y.

You know, because think about what's going to happen in

this economy.

Imagine there is a bad shock that leads consumption to

fall is falling.

Consumption is going to generate a fall in income because

we're in a demand in the economy.

But on a monetary policymaker, I can lower interest rates

and stimulate some consumption.

And if I lower interest rates all the way to

half star, then I'm going to just bring back the

economy to its efficient level.

As easy as that.

Okay.

But it turns out that if the shock is big

and I try to lower our star all the way

to minus something, then at some point I'm going to

hit the zero bound.

So this max operator here simply is a way to

write the policy rule as a policy rule, that is,

that depends on whether the zero one constraint finds or

not.

Which go back to my example, you know, if if

there is a batch of consumption falls.

Monetary policy lowers us up to our star is going

to is going to achieve efficiency.

And so whenever R is greater than zero we're going

to have that output is going to be equal to

its efficient level.

But as soon as R is going to be equal

to zero then consumption is going to fall.

And there is no way in which monetary policy can

lower interest rates even further to stimulate more consumption, because

we are stuck at the zero lower bound, which means

that eventually output will need to fall.

Okay.

I'm going to reduce, you know, hours are going to

fall, which means that income when the zero lower bound

is going to be binding is going to be below

its efficient level.

So it's really the combination of these binding consent that

is the zero lower bound and the presence of gauge

preferences that make this, you know, the kill off the

labour income, uh, the income effect from the supply that

generates these type of dynamics.

Okay.

And so this is exactly what we want, right?

We want it in unusual shock that if large enough

is going to bring the economy to a, uh, recession.

States.

Okay.

Which we're going to now try and characterise a bit

better, bit more formal.

Um.

And we tend to call these things since we are

we are in demand.

Determine what this would be a demand driven recession.

The incoming outputs are two or.

Okay.

So this is kind of.

This is the intuition for the equilibrium.

Let's now work out the math for the equilibrium and

the way in which I've seen these models before.

But you know, these models with perfect foresight, uh, you

kind of typically solve them by backward induction.

So you start from the end.

You can slowly work your way all the way up

here.

And so what I'm going to start from where I'm

going to start from is period two onwards.

Remember from year two onwards, very steady state.

Nothing is happening.

Right.

Because the leveraging shock is heaped in period one compared

to one.

What's this delivering the critical state is going to be

binding.

But there's going to be no shock.

We're going to be an equilibrium.

And we're going to be actually steady state all the

way to infinity.

Now in period two, borrowers are going to be constrained.

Right.

Because we assume that.

In an unconstrained world, they will borrow more than that.

Limits.

Then that lens is going to kick in.

They will need to deliver in period one, but then

from 0 to 1 where they're going to have just

borrowing equal to the maximum that they can get.

Okay.

So.

Um.

The real rate.

Is going to three days from period two to infinity

is going to be greater than zero.

Can anyone tell me.

Drawing.

Trying to draw a parallel with, uh.

Topic three.

Topic three.

Why the BL the discount factor of the bills here

in the determination of the completed one?

Because they're.

Unconstrained.

Consumers.

They can.

Actually.

Smoke.

Consumption.

So that's.

Exactly right.

So these guys sit on their Euler equation.

They have you know, in our speak from topic three

they have access to financial markets.

They can decide how to, you know, how much they

would save in world by the bonds, what the borrowers.

They can do anything.

You know these are these were our our constrained agents

that are stuck in the debt limit.

If you were to give them an additional dollar or

euro, they would just eat it, right.

These are the hand-to-mouth consumers that we call the market.

You know, they are very similar to this kind of

notional importance in trade.

So and as we discussed in topic three, you know,

when you have multiple agents, there's going to be always

one price in this bond.

Either they behave the same way or they're going to

it's going to be one plus in the bonds.

Otherwise we would have two equations for the pricing equation.

That is anything that would be consistent with an equilibrium.

So if the.

Interest rate is going to be equal by the unconstrained

agents.

And so I hope you can see what this coming

from, right, is the this steady state version of an

equation.

Right.

You know, consumption is going to be constant over time

because there is no shock.

If constant is the same you take the other equation

is expression rate, which depends on the discount factor on

this number is greater than zero.

And we just agreed that when r is equal is

greater than zero.

Income is at its efficient level.

Okay.

So I can then work out what's the level of

consumption from the budget constraint of the agents where I

substituted for E1.

Well, for e t star, because we said we're always

going to be at the efficient level.

And you can work out this expression by just noting

that from period two onwards, that's the point of the

borrowers.

And then it will continue.

Uh, lenders is given by the constraints.

You know, there is a debt limit that limits borrowing

to fine.

So these guys are going to land, I'm going to

borrow Phi and these guys are going to lend Phi.

Right.

What is the status of beauty?

Plus one is equal to anyone.

Okay, so in other words, we work out and we

know all of these objects.

So we worked out a solution for period two onwards

or something else.

Let's go to player one which is obviously the tricky

bit.

So what we have is that um, we assume that

B1 is going to be greater than five.

So I interpreted one with a lot of that.

And the amount of data condition one is going to

be smaller than that.

So which is average.

Which means that from the point of view of what

was consumption in period one has to be smaller than

consumption in period two, right?

Why is that the case?

Because in period one I actually need to deleverage.

So whatever I need, you know, imagine I have a

big debt.

Okay.

And I was perfectly happy to have with this amount

of debt.

Now you tell me I was 100.

Now you tell me I can you can get only

15.

So I need to use some of my what I

would have consumed to pay back to the average to

reduce this amount of debt.

Okay.

Which means that, um.

Which basically means we just said that I said this,

that the real interest rate is going to be smaller

than what implied by the Euler equation of the borrowers.

Right?

Again, just these two.

And the other question.

So the main intuition is that what this guy is

the borrowers will want to do.

They are like our hands.

So they will want to consume as much as they

can because they're really unhappy to get hit by this

deleveraging shock.

And so they're going to try to borrow as much

as they can.

So they're going to wait.

We're going to go all the way up to why

we have that.

Which means that we know what they're going to consume

from the state.

We still don't know what E1 is going to be,

so E1 is going to be their income, but then

they're going to repay B1, which is what they decide

to take as a as a debt.

And they're going to borrow five.

Right.

Um.

So what happens here is that the falling consumption relative

to the absence of the deleveraging shock.

Okay.

Actually sorry.

Think of this as the deleveraging that has to happen

right.

Because you know I had B1 I cannot get this

B to go up enough.

Okay.

And so I'm going to reduce my forgive anyone I

have to reduce my consumption because this is going to

be a positive number.

This is going to be smaller than this one.

This thing is going to be positive with the minus

in France.

I will need to, you know, reduce my consumption relative

to the occasional deleveraging.

Okay.

What happens to.

The falling consumption due to the borrowers is going to

be made up by lenders.

All right.

So what happens here?

Remember when the demand determines where the Y is gonna

be equal to one half the consumption of these guys,

plus the consumption these guys.

And this has to hold period by periods.

This consumption falls or given income this consumption has to

increase.

Okay.

And what is that incentivises.

This consumption decrease is a fall in the real rate.

Okay.

The real rate remember is the price that makes the

goods market clear right now.

Consumption is for the year.

These guys all else equal they're very happy to keep

on saving and to keep on landing unless I lower

the interest rates.

If the interest rate falls then they say, well, you

know, I don't get enough return for my savings.

Let me consume a bit.

Of what I wanted to say.

And that beat is going to be equal exactly to

the amount of deleveraging from the borrowers.

So in other words, the interest rate is going to

just unfold in a way that is going to induce

savers to consume what is not consumed by the models.

You can see it very, very clearly from the Euler

equation of the lenders, which I wrote here, and what

I substituted for c to n, what we worked out

as being set well before.

Okay.

So this is simply the solution that we found here.

This is a known number.

It's not just a no number is a fixed number.

It doesn't depend on anything you know.

This is a fixed number.

This is the debt limit.

And this is a parameter.

So the denominator of this equation is not changing.

Okay.

So the only way.

Which I can get this thing to um this thing

has to fall, which means the consumption is going to

increase is if I get a fall in the real

interest in the interest rates.

But this is what I meant when I meant, you

know, the only thing that I can incentivise these people

to consume more is a falling in the market interest

rates.

Okay.

So the interest is going to adjust in a way

that we're going to still have income fixed and not

moving.

And we're just going to reallocate resources for consumption resources

effectively from the borrowers to the lenders.

But I hope I hope you see what I'm doing.

You know, the market rate can fall and fall and

fall until at some point the consumption of these guys

pulls out.

Then I'm going to hit the £0.

And if this guy can afford anymore and the consumption

of these guys falling off, then the only way that

the only thing that can adjust is the consumption of

these.

While they cannot adjust the kind of you know, these

you can put in off, insurance consumption cannot increase by

as much as needed to keep up with the pressure.

I mean, this is the the mechanics of how intercession

is engineered in the model.

And so I'm gonna call C bar the maximum amount

of consumption that lenders are willing to entertain.

Given is your lower bound constraint, which can easily get

by setting this guy to zero.

If I set this guy to zero, this thing is

a number.

This is in a given function.

I can actually know this number, which is what I've

done in the next slide.

That's exactly what I have.

So I set out to zero things in an expression

in terms of marginal utility of a given functional form.

I know all of this right side of the equation.

So I know what class.

Right.

Now.

Um.

These can be intuitive.

How can we prove it formally that there's going to

be an assertion?

Let's try and work out what E1 is.

So E1 we still we still haven't worked out right.

We have this expression here for the consumption of borrowers.

It depends on one.

And similarly for these guys.

So let's try to work out one when the zero

lower bound is binding.

Okay.

So what is the E1 101.

This binding is going to be equal to c l

which is the level of consumption, the maximum level of

consumption that lenders are willing to entertain under the zero

lower bound in binding and the consumption of the borrowers.

Where I simply took this expression here and put R1

equal to zero.

Yeah.

And this is kind of trivial.

It's super easy to solve.

Just meet me in algebra and you work out an

expression for each one that is going to be equal

to c bar n minus the amount.

This is again the deleveraging.

You know this.

We are equal to zero.

This is the amount by which household borrowers have to

deleverage.

Okay.

Which basically, um.

From which you can derive a condition.

Under which the economy is not going to be at

its official level.

You can see it either.

This way you can define the level of consumption kle

bar, below which the economy is going to be at

the inefficient level.

Or maybe more intuitively, I think this kind of makes

probably more sense.

If you.

Call.

B bar the level, uh, in which this thing of

the same.

So e1 is equal to v star, then you can

work out an expression for you can work out this

condition basically, which simply means that if b1, which is

the amount of data issued in period zero, is large

enough, then I'm going to get the recession.

Why?

Because if I leveraged up like crazy at zero and

I'm hit by the deleveraging shock, it means that I

will need to deliver by a lot.

And we just worked out a way to to say,

well, the more I deleverage, the more it's likely that

the zero lower bound is going to be constrained.

And then one is going to be likely the E

is going to be smaller than this time.

Okay.

Um.

That's it really the mechanics of.

Are you with me?

Yeah.

Okay.

Picture is worth 1000 words, so let's try to do

it.

Uh, which are other than equations I think is actually

relatively easier.

So what I have here is B1.

Okay.

Uh, on the horizontal axis and I have two panels,

one with the rear rates and one with the income.

This should be.

Better said I think this is E1 over star.

All right.

So this is one.

It means your deficient level E1 is equal to okay.

So what happens if you know I have a low

B1 to start with.

We said that if B1 is not large enough from

this condition here, if B1 is lower than a threshold

value b b bar okay, then we're fine.

There's no recession.

It means that I'm going to deliver the level, but

I'm not going to deliver like crazy, which means that

the market rate is going to fall and the lender

is going to be happy to consume what I'm not

consuming and output is going to stay fixed.

Right.

That's the story you can see here.

Low level of B1 output is equal to potential.

And the reality is positive value.

Now increasing B1 and leveraging up more and more in

period zero.

And that's defined because the market is going to imply

the market right.

The market mechanism is going to lead to a falling

interest rate, which is going to induce the lenders to

consume more and make up for what is not consumed

by the borrowers, which are now hit heavily by the

deleveraging shock.

And so income is still going to stay fixed at

this time.

But as soon as we go beyond the bar, then

the interest rate can fall anymore because we are stuck

at the zero lower bound.

And on the lender, I don't see the market is

falling and I'm saying I'm not going to consume that.

I have no reason to consume the money.

And by not consuming more, I'm going to reduce total

income.

The economy.

Okay.

It's very simple and effectively that's exactly what's going on

in the in the mechanics of the model.

Okay.

So we kind of ended up having a very, very,

uh, called the Uber cancel model because at the end

of the day, if you take our condition for what

is E1 when this bond is binding, you have that

any additional unit of that I take on in period

zero.

Is going to lead to a one unit of income

that is falling.

Okay, which is enormous.

Right?

You know, saying I'm in period zero, I borrow 101

instead of hundreds and our income is going to fall

from 100 to 99, all of us.

Okay.

And obviously, I mean, you can see it from here.

You know, there is a one coefficient in front of

B1 that's I think a little bit why this one

is coming from.

And the way we think of it is just thinking

about the composition of income.

So again we have the consumption of borrowers, of lenders

and of borrowers.

And you know, the fact that we got the shock

is a falling B1 right is a deleveraging shock.

Well that's all in the monthly average right.

So.

I mean I'm the borrower and I'm going to increase

my borrowing in period zero by one unit okay.

This means that if I'm working if I if I

look at the effect on, on my on total income

is going to be one fall by one and minus,

minus one times the size of the economy.

So you get a one half I'm sorry 0.5 to

negative position.

But these were the zero bounds.

Interest rates cannot adjust, so the 0.5 is actually reducing

my own consumption.

It's going to feed back into my own sorry my

own income.

Let me start again.

Excuse me one by one.

This goes by -0.5.

But this minus 0.5 is a fall in my own

income which feeds back.

Multiply by one five.

It becomes a fully my income by one fourth and

feeds back here.

And this is the Keynesian course.

This is what we talked about that was missing from

the UK model.

Right.

Is the fact that, you know, if I consume less,

I'm generating less income for all of us and less

income, less consumption, less consumption, less income and so on,

so forth.

And if you take the geometric progression of this stuff,

you get a coefficient of one in this expression.

Um.

And you know, I think there is a very neat

parallel with what we've done in topic three, because effectively

what we're doing here, we are transferring resources from high

MPC people to low MPC members.

And you can think of this as a transfer of

resources, right?

Because the borrowers that reduced their consumption and the lenders

really don't want to consume, um, that, uh, these resources

will actually see we go to this in a few

slides.

Yes.

On the diagram, when when net income starts falling, that's

the exact point at which is zero, right?

Exactly.

See, that's exactly the point.

I think this.

Yes, but there is.

So actually I mean.

This is a time to actually think this should be

a less equal than.

Yes.

I mean, because you can see it, B bar is

the B that allows you to have E1 equal to

e star.

This should be less than equal.

And as soon as b1 is strictly above b bar

that means that the interest rate.

So when these two things are the same then the

interest rate at zero.

But you're still a deficient level of output, right.

And it's only when I go strictly above B bar

that the interest rate is still zero, but output is

going to be below.

It's efficient.

All right.

So finally the last thing we need to do is

to work out uh, t0 which is uh.

Which is relatively simple.

Um, yeah.

Everyone is, uh, unconstrained.

And so we're going to have two Euler equations, which

are different kind of factors, but also two different levels

of consumption.

So everything is fine.

Um, and I mean, this is uh, this kind of

trivial.

The only thing that maybe is useful for you to

see is that you can see from these conditions that

I can, um.

To answer your initial question, you know, how can it

be that we get.

Optimally, me wanting to consume more, even if I know

that are going to be the leveraging experience.

I think you should you should be seeing this from,

uh, from from these expressions.

Right.

So either you enter the model with a very large

data rollover, or you are so impatient that you just

love to consume today and you don't care about tomorrow's

deleveraging.

You can work out these conditions.

Okay.

So that's the description of the model and how the

the model works.

So in a sense this is the positive side of

the analysis.

Let's try to think about the normative side of the

analysis.

So um you know why would we ever need that

policy okay.

So the question is can a policy intervention here make

everyone better off, which in a sense, if you've seen,

uh, the notion of improvements in previous courses, that's kind

of the notion of, you know, apparent improvement is some

change in the allocation that improves the life of someone

else without making the lives of someone else worse off.

Okay.

Everyone needs to better, either equal or better off.

Um.

And so, you know, we've seen we've seen this chart.

We saw that, okay, income is going to fall because

of the zero lower bound of obviously, if I were

to have a policy that, you know, the market equilibrium

would be here for B1 and I say, well, I'll

tax you like crazy or impose some limit.

And I think that here, obviously we don't have a

recession, we just work it out.

But the question is is this efficient or do we

want this as a as an outcome from a welfare

point of view?

That's what we're going to do next.

Um, so in, in, in more kind of precise terms,

you want these excessive borrowing to be excessive, to impose

an externality on someone else.

So the fact that, you know, this part of the

class is going to be the borrowers.

You kind of want for policy to be playing a

role, that our decision is going to impose an exit

on all of us because our decision is not going

to we're not going to realise that we're going to

we're going to be worse off by borrowing the amount

that we want to do.

And the way beautiful is, like with so much math

at 6:15 p.m., um, so the way in which we're

going to do this is by, um.

By looking at this horrible slide, which is, um, have

you seen value functions?

Yes.

Okay.

That makes it quicker to do so.

What I've done here basically is to write the value

function, uh, for the utility of our agents.

So that is the uh from period one onwards.

So there is a period one plus um.

The activity for all subsequent periods.

And I call these value function from period one onwards.

Okay, I call this thing v and for lambdas and

v for products.

I'm going to.

Explicitly say that this obviously depends on my own borrowing

decision as a lender, but also depends on the aggregate

level of borrowing.

Okay.

And the whole point is that households do not think

of aggregate borrowing as having an effect on allocations.

Households are small individuals.

They take decisions thinking about their own consumption saving decision.

They can think about the aggregate effect they have on

total borrowing, and the effect that this total borrowing can

have on.

You can't ignore it.

And this.

You've always done this.

You know.

They never cared.

Okay.

The thing is that typically.

The effect that they don't, the fact that they don't

realise that they have an effect on aggregate quantities or

prices, washouts in the aggregate.

And so we don't care about it.

But here you'll see in a second that it's going

to matter.

Um, so this is just another way of rewriting utilities,

really.

I haven't done anything fancy, but now I'm going to

take the first order condition of utility from period one

onwards.

Relative to my own individual borrowing.

Okay.

Which is, you know, very easy to work out.

I'm left I left this V, so this is the

total utility is zero plus beta utility from one to

infinity okay.

I'm taking derivatives.

So there's a standard for certain condition in this particular

condition is going to depend on this derivative.

Here the derivative of the value function over that which

we're going to work out in the next slide.

But the rest is going to be is the standard

optimisation problem they've seen many many times.

Um.

So to characterise the externality we want to characterise these

derivatives here.

So in other words.

Let's do it now.

You know given these two expressions let's go and inspect

how these derivatives look like.

Okay.

So to look at how these derivatives look like we

need to differentiate the cases where deaths is going to

be low.

By low I mean below B bar which we know

is not going to generate an inefficient level of output.

And when that is going to be above B bar.

Okay.

So let's start from the case when that is low.

That is low.

It means we are on the left hand side of

the charts that we looked at.

And if you take these derivatives, which is, you know,

trivial to do, you get these two expressions here.

And you see that these two expressions are the same

up to a sign for borrowers and for lenders.

Okay.

So intuitively, what is this telling us is that.

The fact that.

So basically consumers or our households are not realising that

their own individual decisions are going to have an effect

on the interest rates.

You remember our story, right?

You know, I'm hit by the the leverage constraint.

I know this is going to happen, but I'm going

to rely on the fact that I'm going to reduce

my consumption is going to reduce to a fall in

the interest rate.

Okay.

As an individual, I'm not going to realise this.

I'm not going to think that, oh, you know, I

borrow a lot in period zero.

I will need to reduce my consumption.

Period one and this is going to generate a fall

in the aggregate interest rates.

You don't care about that okay.

But this is basically is going to impose a peculiar

externalities.

Is an externality something that you don't realise, but it's

an effect that you have on the economy.

Okay.

And this actually benefits you.

Okay.

So this is a negative negative number.

But this derivative uh is negative which means that you

know eventually utilities can increase y because moreover you know,

interest rates are falling.

You're happy.

Right?

Yeah.

We're on the left side of the chart.

Our income is not affected.

Interest rates are lower.

I'm a borrower.

I'm just happier.

Okay, but it turns out that this beeping happier is

perfectly cast allowed by how angry I am as a

lender.

Because now again, I do realise that my.

My decisions have an effect on the rate.

Now the rate is low when I get a lower

return from my, uh, savings.

So at the end of the day, the fact that

these two things are exactly the same with an opposite

sign is what I'm trying to tell here as being

you always have these externalities, but you really don't care

about them because.

There's no.

Way in which I can increase.

The teeth of these guys or these guys without worsening

the utility of someone else, right?

They're perfectly offsets.

Right.

And so we call this pecuniary externalities, right?

Because it has an effect on the prices rather than

the quantities.

And we just we just kind of went through the

reason why these broken externalities have no, uh, imply that

no Pareto improvement is possible.

Okay.

And this is actually present in the equation model.

So, you know, everything you've done so far when you

took your optimisation of the standard regression model, there was

this externality at play.

But nobody cares because there's nothing you can do.

Okay.

Simply saying that when you take your borrowing decisions, you're

not going to internalise the fact that you have an

effect on aggregate prices.

Because we all behave, we all behave the same way.

And so eventually we're going to have an effect on

the aggregate economy.

If we start, take the derivative of.

DV over aggregate that when B1 is greater than the

bar, what we get is that this derivative is going

to be equal to the derivative of e1 over b1

times the marginal ht of consumption for either set of

borrowers.

And so there's no distinction here between lenders and and

borrowers anymore.

There is a marginal utility here okay.

And there is this derivative that we worked out to

be equal to minus one.

That was the equation cross area right.

Remember it's coming from this expression here.

That's the minus one derivative.

So what does this saying.

This is saying that.

I do not internalise that when I borrow.

And if I borrow too much.

And I'm in this parameter space.

I'm going to reduce income.

And by reducing income.

And reducing the utility of everyone not just myself.

There is no offsetting element from the savers or the

borrowers.

And so we are all worse off.

Okay.

So.

It is really.

Because of what we just described.

You know, rates are fixed at a zero lower bound.

The fact that lenders are not going to be incentivised

to consume more.

And the only thing that's going to happen is a

fall in income that is going to affect everyone.

That gives rise to the cross.

Okay.

And this is basically, you know, the fact that this

thing is negative for both sets of households is the

demand, the aggregate demand externality, what is called aggregate demand

relative to pecuniary externality, because this affects prices and this

affects income which is aggregate demand.

We have we are in demand in the economy.

And so we kind of just proved that there is

scope for policy intervention.

Because if I now were to implement a policy that

would force you guys not to take B1 greater than

Barr, let's say, you know, from now on, you take

only, you know, 10% of your income as a maximum

amount of debt.

I'm going to force you to be below b d

by and by forcing you to be below B bar.

Then I'm saving you from a falling utility of this

much.

You go back to this case.

Everyone is better off.

Everyone doesn't suffer from the falling marginal minus u prime

of c one.

You look very confused, guys.

Is it clear?

Question if the second bullet point, like both households, benefit

from increased spending when there is less debt?

And but aren't we discussing the case where there is

where we are beyond issue?

Uh.

Yes.

But the.

Fact that.

Um, I think what I meant here is that less

that that brings you below B but.

So imagine that, you know, we we live in these

worlds.

Imagine that, you know, you I let you guys optimise

in this room.

You come up with your choices and you end up,

you know, this side of the class decides that you

want to be one above on the other side of

the class of the landers.

Okay?

Then you hit the zero lower bound and you know

income is lower than it would have been otherwise.

Okay, then I come in, I'm the social planner and

say, forget about the market.

Okay?

You borrow the one below the bar and you save

the same amount.

Okay.

Both these groups are going to enjoy an increasing income

from the fact that is proportional to this term here.

Right?

That's what I meant.

You need to be below the bar to enjoy.

The.

If this is the market equilibrium, if I manage to

kind of force you to borrow less than zero, I

will bring you here.

And this income per capita is also the per capita

consumption.

So you're going to be happier.

That's what I mean.

Okay.

You've just shown formally that by not considering the aggregate

effect that you have on income, your individual decisions are

inefficient.

Right.

There is an externality.

There's a market failure.

Um.

Okay, let me quickly write downs because I think it's

going to clarify.

And then we think about the social planner problem, which

I just hinted to next time.

Um.

So yes.

Um.

So.

God.

This is my way.

Are you.

Are you on any old series?

The first one is effect on prices.

Only and no effect in quantities.

And the second case is in testing purposes and no

one is right.

And you will see it's because.

You know, if you stick in the right objects in

the instructions and you, you complete this derivatives, you're going

to see that, you know, it's going to be I

as well.

It's not it's not the usual simple steps of algebra.

So, you know, it's kind of easy to get to

these expressions.

But it's important to remember.

Okay.

Let me forget about that.

I will do next time.

Let me get this decision.

That's just a recap where we are, as we said,

just shown in this chart, basically that my own borrowing

decision today as an individual may imply a full income.

Okay.

Because if I if I start summing up all our

borrowing, then this side of the class, we need to

increase our consumption.

And also when we get hit by this diverging stock,

and at some point we're not going to be able

to do it anymore because this is all about.

So this this means that effectively income in here, one

is a function of how much that we take on

this side of the class.

Right?

We normally don't like this okay.

Because we don't specify the fact that, you know, our

individual decision is going to affect the aggregate thing and

we take that into account.

But that's exactly the ratio of the externality okay.

And next week we're going to look at a planner

who sees all of our behaviour and is actually taking

derivatives with respect to B as well.

That's the difference right?

As, as individuals, you know, when I decide to buy

my house, I didn't think about the aggregate effects on

house prices in all of the UK, as well as

the aggregate debt in the UK.

Who cares?

I'm optimising when I if we all behave that way.

Lecture 20:

Maybe today.

Let's go.

What's this pig pig thing?

Just going for a picnic.

Is it raining?

Should.

The wind is sunny.

Means every time it's raining.

How are we?

Going to be able to continue?

Yeah.

Yeah, we can say.

So.

Are.

You just going to.

Do.

One 20 minutes.

Like, uh.

I'm not sure of the time.

Yeah, but it's only one session.

Yeah.

I would say probably most.

Everything would be having this year.

Like, the worst thing is not listening to professor.

Yes, Micah is probably right, because.

In five months, I mean, I think celebrating the musicians.

Yeah.

Sometimes you meet.

Some friends from your.

Yeah.

We need somebody else.

There's only one, right?

Yeah.

Yeah.

I'd like you to meet it.

Yeah, like some works.

Could you get some?

Like you can take it like.

I said and.

It's probably.

Like my last ten years.

Just.

Start talking.

Like talking.

But this one is just the one.

Yeah.

I mean, I'm not that professional, so it's.

Very low level.

Photography.

It sounds like a very, very.

Hi, everyone.

You just revealed that you.

Know.

Because.

You know.

What?

Okay.

Um.

We have, uh, supervision session with, uh, with some of

you.

So nice to see you again.

Um.

So.

All right, so we got to the last.

Lecture, uh, which is going to bring us to the

end of topic four.

And as usual, what I'm going to do is act

in the first kind of, uh, 10 to 15 minutes.

And I'm trying some ideas and I'll try and summarise

what we know last week, especially that we finished off

last week with some, uh, nasty algebra and uh, uh,

some social, some, uh, extensions.

So let me try to summarise how we got there.

Um.

So.

So we basically have a model where now the only

depends on borrowers and savers.

So we have J denoting borrowers and savers and lenders.

Um and different from what we've seen publicly we generated

going down to different preferences.

So we had the B agents being very impatient and

wanting to borrow a lot and um, leverage up in

zero while lenders had a lower discount factor and were

happy to lend.

We made some funky assumption on the structure of the

on the functional form of the utility function, which meant

we could, which meant that we could decouple the labour

supply decision from the consumption saving decision.

And we spent quite some time discussing this and understanding

what that meant, which basically means we can ignore or,

you know, this optimisation happens in a room and then

the consumption saving decisions are only coupled to which allow

that which allowed us to rewrite our problem, uh, in

net income and net consumption terms.

So net income would be labour income, net of disability

from labour plus dividends minus taxes and net consumption would

be similarly my consumption net of the disability from labour.

Um.

And then we have this idea of.

Then we saw the supply side of the problem, which

we made as uninteresting as possible.

Um, so for prices the usual way, uh, we assume

complete price stickiness.

And then we introduced two additional ingredients.

One was the zero lower bound on interest rates.

So we assume that there is some cash in the

economy that needs us not willing to hold, um, um,

likely to lend at some point because I would be

better off with, um, um, keeping cash with zero interest

rates rather than going into negative territory.

And the second ingredient we assume was this high shock,

which, as you remember.

Let me just pull back.

This fine shock was a, uh, borrowing constraint that would

kick in in period one of the model.

So remember the timing of the model was visiting period

zero.

I'm very impatient.

I'm going to borrow lots, and I'm fully unconstrained in

my borrowing.

I'm going to sit on my other equation happily.

And you guys have the lenders.

You're happy to lend me the money.

Then we enter in period one.

And now I have this deleveraging shock so that I

need to cut back on my desired level of borrowing.

Okay.

And this made me this shock makes me deliver.

So I need to reduce my consumption so as to

pay back some by that my that and this deleveraging

shock.

We kind of we didn't describe you know particularly what

is what this means.

Today we're going to get a bit more into more

practical practical interpretation of this shock.

But what this shock is, was to um, as I

said, reduce my consumption because these are the amounts I

had to deliver.

Okay.

So this remember B1 is the debt issuance period in

period zero.

And I need to pay back in period one.

And this would be the amount of data newly that

that I can issue in period one which is limited

by FY.

Okay.

So I can borrow all the way up to Fi

only because there is this deleveraging shock hitting great borrowing

constraints.

And if you remember we had this demand determined economy

because of our assumption which means that any change in

consumption basically the demand pins down outputs the causality from

demand to output.

And we had the following logic.

Maybe let me explain it with uh, let's go back

to this chart.

So we start you know, imagine we start with very

low levels of B1.

What happens if, uh, um, I increase B1.

When I increase B1 it means that when the deleveraging

shock hits, I need to decrease my consumption by more.

Okay.

If I want to decrease my if I need to

decrease consumption by more since we are in demand determined

economy is the the lenders are going to increase their

consumption.

Right.

And the incentive for them to increase their consumption is

a fall in the interest rate.

That's how we describe this chart.

Right.

And so we just keep on increasing B1.

This means that in period one I keep on having

to deleverage by more.

I need to reduce my consumption by more, which means

the lender have to increase their consumption by more, which

means that the interest rate keep on falling, keep on

falling, and to reach a level that we call B

bar, that is the level where the interest rate hits

the zero lower bound.

And from this moment onwards, our lenders are not happy

anymore to keep on consuming.

Okay, but they're just going to sit there with a,

with a, with our consumption consumption stay flat from that

point on.

But if their consumption is going to stay flat at

that point, and the consumption of borrowers is that keeps

on falling because they need to leverage, that means that

net income is going to start falling.

Okay.

Well, net income until B bar was constant because whatever

fall in the consumption of borrowers was exactly offset by

the consumption of lenders.

Yeah.

Um.

And we actually worked out an analytical solution.

For Clay bar.

Remember, caviar was the level of consumption of the lender

in period one that is consistent with the XLI.

Okay.

So lenders are not going to reduce their consumption below

this level.

And we saw it from this Euler equation.

Okay.

So we have this consumption period two where in zero

two from 0 to 1 we are in steady state.

So this thing is fixed.

Right.

Um, when we hit the zero lower bound this thing

goes to is going to zero.

You can bring these bits up here, we can work

out.

And now basically you prime here one depends on a

bunch of numbers.

And that's why we could work out, you know, this

level of CR bar which is the level of consumption

that makes the binding and below which uh, assumptions not

just keep this in mind because we're going to kind

of relax.

Uh, or extend somehow this equation, uh, towards the end

of the election.

Um, we saw that there is a very Keynesian, a

big Keynesian multiplier in this economy, if you remember, because

of our assumption of half of mass equal to one

half between borrowers and lenders, we said that there is

any change in any increase in debt.

Imperial zero is going to transform.

It's going to lead to a fall of 1 to

1 with income.

And the reason was that, you know, this falls by

one.

Sorry if this increase by one, this falls times one

half the mass of the population.

But if all income feeds back into the consumption of

these people, which decreases by one half and comes on

fourth and 1/16 and so on.

And so you have this kind of change across this

multiplier that leads the derivative of the E one.

Arrive to be one to be equal to one.

Okay.

So we have a multiplier of 1 to 1 from

that to income.

This is just a restatement of what I said before,

which is in period zero.

Everyone is unconstrained.

So we have two Euler equations that both holds for

this given interest rate.

And again remember this is this equation because we're going

to come back in slides.

And simply the reason why we're both on the other

equation is that these views are different and can adjust

to make sure that both lenders and borrowers are on

the order equation differently from period one, where the borrowers

are not on the on the Euler equation anymore.

And they are our, you know, in our in the

speak of topic theory, these are the constraints.

And to my favourites.

Right.

So I think this is where we this is where

we stopped last week.

So basically what we've shown so far is this thing

right, that if, if the shock is large enough or

if I'm indebted enough, if I'm too leveraged.

Because of the CRB.

It may well be that I'm going to end up

in a world where I have a larger session because

of all the assumptions we made.

Okay.

And we've also seen that, you know, if basically this

chart is telling you that if I, if I were

a policymaker and if I managed to force you guys

to, you know, borrow instead of 1 to 0.8, we

might be better off.

Okay.

Because we would avoid that.

Now the question is can we formalise this intuition and

is it really worth employing.

So.

The idea is that for to create a scope for

policy intervention, you need some form of distortion in the

economy.

Okay.

And we we talked about a in aggregate demand externality

in the sense that we said, well, you know I'm

a single consumer.

I'm going to borrow a lot.

I have no idea that you guys are also borrowing

a lot, or I don't internalise that.

My borrowing is going to sum up to a very

large level of borrowing in the aggregate economy.

And so I can see basically how much an increase

in one unit of debt can lead to a fall

in my own income.

I just take things as given.

I don't consider the aggregate when I do my personal

atomistic optimisation problem.

And if this is true, if this story is true,

and so I borrow more than what a social planner

would do, for example, then we would have something that

is known as a novel borrowing distortion, which then would

formally justify a policy intervention.

Okay.

And what we tried to do was to characterise this

externality.

So how do we how do we do that?

We started by defining two value functions, which are the

sum of utilities from period one to infinity, one for

the borrower, one for the lender.

This is simply using the budget constraints.

So this will be the utility in periods one from

consumption period one.

So I'm just using the budget constraint here.

Substituting inside these expressions.

And the only difference relative to what we've seen so

far is to say well I normally take these and

these as given okay.

But what if I internalise that my own borrowing decision

is actually going to affect my own income and the

interest rate which I'm going to borrow or lend?

That was the whole point of trying to characterise the

externality.

Um.

And so to characterise the externality, then we.

Uh, we said, you know, given this.

Let me try to maximise utility.

Now is full utility from zero to 2 to 1

and plus the utility from one to infinity appropriately discounted

relative to my own borrowing.

And we saw that this optimisation problem leads to the

standard term plus the derivative of the value function over

uh v one, which also depends which we take into

account these people.

So effectively what we have.

Done.

Hope this is there.

I thought I had corrected this time, so I hope

I have the right version of the slides.

We'll find out soon.

Um, so then let's try to characterise it, this externality.

And we said let's work out what these derivatives, which

again would be by, by doing this and basically letting

people internalise that their own individual decisions are going to

affect.

I'm going to show up in the aggregate, and I'm

going to in turn affect income and interest rates.

And here we have these two kind of expressions.

Um, and we said well when b one is below

B bar then you have these derivatives for DV for

D or DV one.

Which cancel out okay.

So there's going to be some winner which has an

increase in the utility and some loser.

But these completely offset each other.

And so no policymaker would be able to improve welfare

in this economy.

And we related this to the Uri that we seen

in topic three.

We said.

These guys are the winners.

Why?

Because.

This term has a minus in front, and we know

that the interest rate is falling when borrowing rates go

up.

When you are in the in the region where the

GLB is not binding.

So these guys are going to experience an increase in

their utility.

Well, these guys are going to lose by the exact

same amount.

And this is very intuitive because if I'm a borrower

and I face lower interest rates, I'm happier if I'm

a lender or not.

Instead, when we are in the region of the parameter

space where v1 is greater than v bar, we found

that this derivative is equal to d1 over db one.

How income responds to an additional borrowing, which we said

because of our tangent cross is equal to minus one

times the marginal rate of consumption period one.

And now there is no offsetting sign between borrowers and

savers.

So basically here everyone because of this minus sign is

worse off because of this additional unit of that.

So one way to kind of rationalise or to see

intuitively what's going on here, which came up in the

Q&A after the lecture last time, is to think about

this chart here.

Okay.

So if you think about.

What happens when I increase a unit of that in

this region of the of the model you can see

the derivative of income is zero.

Well the derivative of interest rates is negative.

Which is exactly why this term when B is low

when v1 is below it doesn't move.

The derivative of this relative to b one is zero.

While this gas this guy moves around and forwards, which

is what we have here.

That's why you don't have the derivative of income relative

to enter through V1 in this in this part of

the parameter space.

Well, if you are in the region where v1 is

greater than one I think basically flips because now is

the interest rate that doesn't move anymore, right?

But it's income that starts falling, okay.

And that's exactly why when you take the derivative of

these two guys relative to B1, you're left with the

D1 over D1.

But this guy is not moving anymore.

It's stuck here B so there is no change in

our for a given increasing.

Okay.

So we can really map this to you know this

D over DB one and this d r over DB

one with the chart of these.

Guys all on board with this.

Is that clear?

Um okay.

So basically then we said there is scope for policy

intervention, right.

Because if I managed to bring B1 below par, everyone

is going to be happy.

There's going to be happy by these amounts for an

additional unit of of B that I force you not

to take on Imperial zero.

So then the question is, um, how do we do

this?

Okay.

And the first thing that you know, may come to

your mind is to think about, uh, write downs.

So what I write downs simply, we're saying, okay, you

owed me B1, which was above b bar.

Why don't you just give me back a bar?

Okay, so I'm cancelling some of your debts.

I think intuitively, you want to kind of cancel the

amount of debt that if you were up to here,

you just want to go back to here.

Because we know that the up to this point, we

were in the efficient world.

It is only from this moment onwards, from this point

onward where the aggregate demand externality starts to kick in.

So what happens if I try to write down this

amount of debt, which is exactly the difference between b

bar and B1?

I'm living in a world where B1 is above, obviously.

Then.

We know because of our King John Cross that there's

going to be a 1 to 1 mapping between the

reduction of that and increasing income for in other words,

income is going to increase exactly by the same amount

of the write down, okay, which intuitively is going to

be the difference between deficient level of income and the

level of income that would have held if B1 was

over B bar.

So what happens if I do this?

Income has gone up by these amounts.

B one minus b bar.

Let's think about consumption.

So I think let's think about our constrained borrowers.

These guys are super happy right.

You know first of all I cancelled some of the

debts.

And remember these people had to pay.

They had to cut their consumption to pay back the

debt to deleverage.

And I'm saying, well, you need you don't need to

deleverage.

Okay.

So I'm basically handing them free cash.

And they have a very high marginal propensity to consume,

actually propensity to consume equal to one.

So they're just going to eat this up immediately okay.

But on top of this we have the amplification from

the cross.

Right.

Because we have now the multiplier that kicks in.

And so they actually get twice as much as the

initial write down.

Do you see this?

So basically these guys enjoy a very high increase in

consumption relative to the case of, uh, no intervention.

How about the lenders?

The lenders are less happy.

You know, they expected to get quite an amount, a

big amount of debt repayments that they're not going to

get.

But at the end of the day, it is true

that they're going to get this much less than they

expected.

But the income is going to go up by these

amounts because now demand is pushed up by these guys

for consuming.

And so it turns out that the the increase in

income perfectly offset the amount of, uh, consumption goods they

would have received from the borrowing of the of the

world wars.

Okay.

So basically, we're in a world where these guys, at

the end of the day, are indifferent.

You know, they're not they're losing some, um, interest rate

payments, but they're not losing the income they would have

lost if the CRB would have been binding.

And these guys are better off, which is the definition

of a positive improving policy.

Okay.

We improve the life of these guys without making the

life of these guys worse off.

So that's great.

You know, we have not only we have shown that

there is in this world, we justified an intervention, and

we also found an intervention that actually improve the lives

of everyone.

So then one could say, well, we're done.

You know, that's let's do let's do this.

There is a there are a couple of issues though

with this.

Um, the first one is the generality of this result.

Um, so it turns out that this result is not

exactly very general.

I think the best way to see this is, you

know, this kind of perfect netting off obviously works well

because we have equal masses of borrowers and lenders.

I think you can immediately see that if you were

to change the masses of borrowers and lenders, that may

not be such a perfect offset.

But also we made a bunch of assumptions to simplify

our life.

We remember we had the separability utility, which implies that

the labour supply was independent.

It turns out that you if you relax this assumption

that I now result that I shown in the previous

slide breaks down.

So unfortunately it's not it's not a very, um, very

robust result.

Um.

And maybe most importantly.

So what we're talking about here is some ex-post intervention.

Okay.

So basically we're waiting until the mess comes and then

we're mop up.

We're going to clean up the mess by just transferring

some resources from certain people to other people so that

eventually we're all we're all happy.

But this can cause any sort of problems.

And I guess, you know, uh, you should have relatively

fresh in your mind the SVB episode from from last

year.

And to some extent, you know, you should really be

able to map the discussion we're having here with what

happened with SBB.

I mean, we obviously as a bank, you know, we

have a banking sector here, but when it comes to

ex-ante versus exposed policies, if you act exposed, there are

a bunch of issues that arise.

First of all, you create an incentive for whoever over

borrowed to do it again, because you create if you

have an expectation that someone is going to come in

and write off your debt and then make everyone happy,

why not?

You know, if there's no crisis, I'm happy.

You know, if there is no deleveraging shock, then I'm

going to be better off.

If there is, someone is going to save me.

And so you create some form of distortion in the

maximisation problem with these agents.

And it could even be that you're going to borrow

even more than you would have done, because you know

that the write off.

So you can even worse the problem in a certain

sense.

Um, on the other hand, if the lender in our

case, imagine our, our lenders, our consumers that are the

lenders anticipate this, they may start saying, well, you know

what?

I'm not going to lend in the first place because

I know this could happen and I'm going to just

stop lending zero because I don't want to be written

down, because then, you know, I really wanted to make

my interest payments.

And this would create what is known as credit, actually.

So less amount of credit in the economy, which could

be inefficient.

And then there are a bunch of the additional issues

which are kind of that relate to the implementation of

this right off.

You know, it's a complicated legal problem.

Uh, I guess you can see already that, you know,

it's not that obvious how you can just say, oh,

you know, I'm sorry.

That's constant.

This is ongoing, you know, on the debts contract that

you have.

Uh, it's something that is costly.

That is not obvious.

Um, there are many, you know, death holders in the

world.

It's very simplified world where life is quite different.

So it's not obvious that it's very it's going to

be very smooth.

Implementation can be very smooth.

So all of these makes write downs kind of uh,

maybe not too appealing.

And so what is the alternative here.

The alternative is to say let's active ex-ante okay.

Let's try to sort the issue before.

The shock hits or before the crisis happens.

And obviously, you know, it's kind of nice because you

avoid all these problems and you also avoid the implementation

issues.

But it's quite tricky, right?

Because you would have to act upon something that may

or may not happen in the future.

Now, in our setup at the moment, it is going

to happen.

You know, we know that there's going to be a

an increase in the fine.

Right.

Okay.

What exactly?

But what you know in your life, you don't know.

And so it may well be that you're going to

reduce borrowing isn't imposing effectively a cost to the economy

or something that may not realise.

Okay.

And, uh, and I hope you're seeing what the trade-off

is.

Trade off is here.

And on the one hand, there are these issues here.

But this is not a silver bullet either, because it

could be that, you know, if you're overly tight, you're

kind of choking the economy.

No crisis will ever happen, but you're not happy either

because you're being too, uh, conservative in your, uh, in

your policies.

Okay.

So let's try to see anyway how these ex-ante policies

would work.

And so what am I going to do here is

to think about a, uh, the problem of a planner.

Uh, have you guys seen the social problems?

Oh my goodness.

So, so the whole idea here is, you know, there's

no market anymore.

There is this person here who decides allocations.

Okay.

It says, well, I'm going to put myself in period

zero and I'm going to decide for each of you,

you know, how your lenders have your borrowers.

I'm going to choose your labour, how much you consume

and how much you owe to each other in period

one.

Okay.

And that's it.

And then I'm going to go to go to bed

that, you know, the the market actually reopens.

So there is a notion of remember there's a notion

of a choice of allocations.

So there is in principle there is no market price.

Right while in the market economy allowed the price to,

uh, to decide your location.

That's exactly what happened before, where the interest rate, the

market interest rate would fall and lenders would increase their

consumption because it would affect their consumption saving decisions.

Here there is no markets price, but there would be

a market price in implied by the allocations chosen by

the the planet.

And we're going to go back to this notion.

Um, so what does this planner do?

Um.

They're going to maximise utility of both agents with some

weights.

Gamma.

Which I'm going to describe in a second.

They're not important.

Uh, there's going to be some, uh, weight attached to

each of the utility of each of the group of

consumers.

Crucially, the planet is going to internalise that these the

sum of individual borrowing decisions is going to be equal

to total debt.

Okay.

So differently from individual agents.

Now, the planner knows that if we all want to

go to a unit more, we're going to increase B1.

It's going to also maximise the utility subject to the

uh aggregate resource constraints, uh, which is uh which uh

stable.

And as I said, the idea is to choosing allocation

imperative.

Now, if you, um.

If you take a set of conditions relative to C0,

you're going to get basically the weights.

As I said, these are not super important, but you

have to do with the initial conditions.

You can think of them as being one half and

one half doesn't really matter.

But just for you to know where this is coming

from, this would be the first order condition of these

problems subject to these relative tool consumption.

Then the planner is going to choose labour.

Again, we're lucky because the labour supply choice is completely

linked from the consumption saving allocation.

And now we need to take derivatives or for certain

conditions right into B1, which is obviously the interesting bit.

And to do that, let me just define these two

objects here I'm going to find Delta J as the

same.

This was the definition of the externality in the previous

slides.

Right.

This is the derivative of the value function relative to

b1.

And I'm also defining another object which is eta, which

if you remember is the um.

Is the is this derivative in the part in the

region of the model where b1 is below b bar?

Okay.

So just to.

These object here okay.

And remember here we don't have the E over DB

one because the E stays flat.

There's no falling income because the B is not binding.

And we only have the interest rate that is falling

to incentivise um.

And then there's.

Now, the issue is that, you know, I think we

can see, you know, we have a we have a

model that has the key, right.

You know, there's no there's a discontinuity in, in this,

this economy.

Because when we hit a zero Obama had a king

and king come on non differentiable.

And so we need to look at you know.

We need to take derivatives of something that is, that

has a kink, which means that we can do derivatives

this normal way and we need to use some gradients,

uh, kind of work out what is uh, what is

optimisation?

Have you guys seen some gradients already?

No.

Yes.

And that's okay.

Others?

Okay, but very quickly.

Um.

So basically we're kind of trying to take a derivative

of something like this okay.

And obviously there is a kink here.

And obviously you can't take a normal derivative.

This function is not differentiable okay.

So the whole point of some gradients is that you

think about what the derivative is.

You're trying to work out the slope of a curve.

Right.

And the king, there is actually a range of slopes

that are consistent with the kink itself.

So if you come from this side.

You have you know, imagine that this is a flat

line.

This would be a zero derivative.

Obviously.

You know, it's a flat line or this would be

a negative derivative.

And if you come from this side you get this.

So basically all these changes are consistent with the derivative

of this key.

You see what I mean.

So now we can't work anymore with the points.

With the evaluation database, we defined what we need to

work with ranges.

Okay.

And this is exactly what these are.

Okay.

So we need to work in all these possible ranges

of, uh, of uh, angles that are consistent with this.

I think it's going to become clear in a second.

But just to give you an intuition, you know, what

is updating this?

And again, this is not too crucial, uh, for what

we're doing.

Right.

So let me take the recognition of, um.

Of the utility of both borrowers and lenders, subject to

the weights that the social planner has right to be

one.

This is what's going to come out.

If I take the definitions of the weights that I

had in the previous slides, which again comes from the

recognition rate to see zero, I get this expression here.

And what this expression is, is something that looks like

two Euler equations, one for the lender and one for

the borrower with an additional object, which is this delta,

which is exactly the externality you remember defined delta as

being the derivative of the value function over b1.

Okay.

So what this is telling you is that since the

planner is internalising the affected by that, the individual decisions

have collectively on the amount of debts.

Now the planner is going to internalise that there is

a need for adjusting the consumption and saving decisions of

agents to maximise their utilities.

The planner knows that you can achieve a period of

improvement by changing by basically limiting borrowing in period one

and bringing B1 below.

And he knows that because he knows that the aggregate

in the aggregate, the individual decisions of borrowing, which not

that income, which not that interest rates, okay.

Now.

Have you actually done this?

I don't know, have you covered this with last week?

Uh.

Last week?

Yes.

Okay, so the whole point of, uh, you know, the

exercise was to show that if B1 is below B

bar, strictly below B bar, then this condition boils down

to the market equilibrium.

So the planner is going to choose exactly the same

allocation that you would obtain under in a market economy.

Okay.

And it's it's relatively easy to see you know, you

can you can just, you know, do the algebra and

work out a condition that simply says that these things

are gonna disappear, right?

You're going to you're going to be left with, uh,

the condition that we told you to keep in mind.

It was this one, if you remember.

Okay.

So.

Let's.

So now basically what I'm going to do this kind

of the easy case.

Now we need to go to the more difficult case

we need to consider.

When B1 is greater than B bar.

And when b1 is equal to b bar.

From the point of view of the plan.

Okay.

So let me start with the, uh, case where I

guess this is not this nice, right?

So let me just.

2023.

That's why.

Um.

So what we were saying was right.

So let's imagine that V1 is greater than v bar.

Okay.

Basically, the question I'm asking here is would the planner

ever want B1 be greater than before?

Okay.

Now we know from.

These slides that when between when in the market equilibrium

we want is greater than b bar.

The externality is minus u prime of c one okay.

So if you plug this in here you have that

remember.

And I remember the excite is the same for borrowers

and lenders.

So it's kind of easy to work out what's going

on here.

You have minus minus becomes plus.

So you have twice the marginal consumption and zero here.

So you have an obvious inequality here.

You have a positive number on the right hand side

and zero on the left hand side, which means that

there is no equilibrium.

But in other words, the planner would never choose which

one would be gone.

Okay.

It's not an option for you.

Okay.

So this is kind of ruled out.

Now we are left in a case where instead.

B1 is equal to b bar.

Okay.

So again the question here is would the planner ever

choose b1 equal to b.

And the case I want you to consider is a

case where, you know, think of a market economy where

the discount factors are different enough so that agents would

actually want to borrow B1 above the bar.

Okay.

The planner steps in and allocates consumption and that's okay.

So now the problem is that we are looking here

where exactly at the king.

And so we need to work with this gradient.

So I'm going to basically what I've done here I

took the left hand side and the right hand side

with the optimality condition of the planner.

And as I mentioned before this derivative remember delta is

the derivative of the value function that we want.

It's not going to be a point anymore.

It's going to be a range.

And what you.

And what you can show is the following.

So let me start from in from the case where

you're coming from above B bar okay.

So I'm coming from the region where the xlb is

binding.

We basically already worked it out.

Right.

Because if we're coming, if you were coming from, uh,

you know, the one, this is just an example.

But where B1 is greater than B bar and you're

coming from this direction, it means that the angle, the

right derivative is the one that we just worked out.

So a derivative equals zero for the lenders which would

be this one minus UC prime would be one top

of the bottom of the range.

And the derivative for the borrower would be twice beta

b u prime c b over u prime uh, right.

Now, what happens if I come instead from the other

side of the bar?

So I'm coming from the region where the one was

below.

Okay.

And this is now more complicated.

But basically you're going to need to rely on these

derivatives here.

Right.

And kind of taking the two extremes.

Are you seeing are you saying what I'm saying or

I'm confusing you.

You don't seem to convince, but um, basically I'm coming

from B1 that is approaching the bar.

Okay.

Now what?

I remember our chart and I'm getting to the kink

and I'm evaluating the derivative from that limiting point.

Okay.

And so the right you know the, the the limiting

case is this derivative here.

So what I'm what I'm doing here, I'm simply remember

that ETA has been defined as exactly this object which

was this object here.

And so.

We need the derivative of the value function to be

one from that limiting case.

And it turns out that this is the expression that

you get.

We are going to recognise that this is exactly what

we had in that slide.

Slide number.

Slide 27.

Now I'm going to kind of ask you to do

that.

And I don't know if you can see that, but

basically is going to it turns out that this upper

bound for this derivative is greater than the lower bound

for this derivative.

Just take this as a you know, if you start

a this is work with this enough you're going to

see this in the next slide.

I'm going to provide an intuition for why that's the

case.

But basically what I'm trying to say is that.

You have.

You have zero here and an upper bound.

That's.

That's cool.

It's the.

Lander.

We have the upper bound, the borrower, which is a

two time thing and the lower bound of the borrower.

So basically this point is greater than this point, which

means that there is some overlap in the angles that

are consistent with this.

I guess with me.

Okay.

And again, I don't want you to.

I will never ask formally prove why that's the case.

But in the next slide we're going to see an

intuitive reason for why this there is this overlap.

Okay.

Um.

Any questions on this?

I don't know if you're completely confused.

We are on board with this.

Um, okay.

So let's try to summarise.

So we solve the problem of the planner.

We said the planner will never choose any one that

is above the bar.

So even if the market equilibrium would imply b one

above the bar, the planner wouldn't be happy with that.

It would be happy with the b one equal to

b bar.

Because we show, we shown.

Or actually I told you that there is some overlapping

in these angles that are consistent with the subgradient of

taking a derivative of a non differentiable function.

And of course is if in case B one is

low bar, then the market equilibrium and the planar equilibrium

will be the same.

Okay.

So basically there are two cases.

The case in which b one is equal to b

bar, which we said is exactly as the same as

the market equilibrium.

There is no need for policy intervention.

There is no recession.

We are all happy.

Where on the other equation nothing interesting happens.

One is that if you are in a world where

if left to our own devices, we're going to borrow

a lot, the planner will force us.

To borrow up, to be borrowing and not beyond that

point.

So what happens if this if this is the case?

Well, it happens that for given preferences and given allocations

by allocations, the mean choices for C0 and B1, there's

going to be an implied market interest rate, right?

You know, I know consumption and consumption is one of

the lenders.

I know these guys are.

On the other question.

This is one bit of the other equation.

So there must be an one over here.

There must be another zero which is consistent with this

allocation from the point of view of the lenders.

Yes, that will be the standard equation.

There's nothing weird with that.

All we're saying here is that at these given interest

rates, given the preferences of our agents, borrowers would really

want to borrow more.

It would be unhappy with the level of borrowing, have

to be bad because the interest rate is low, and

they would just be happy to keep on borrowing until

B1.

That would be above the bar, which means that these

Euler condition is greater than this other condition.

But in other words, the interest rate that the borrowers

there will be consistent with this allocation from the from

the borrowers would be larger than what actually happens in

this economy.

Which intuitively tells you that there is some overlap there.

So in other words, look at these two terms.

And look at these two terms.

One minus ETA cancels out and you're left with.

Exactly these two things.

And we just argued that this guy is greater than

this guy.

Which means that there is some overlap in his angels.

I hope it wasn't enough.

But again, yeah, those are just the.

Bounds of the intervals.

They're free to choose any value or the it could

be any value and it.

Could be any value.

You will never you would never be able to find

out what the value is.

But you know what the allocation is.

So in a sense the only thing you need to

know.

Okay.

Let me put it differently.

Um, we argued in this case that there will be

no equilibrium in the case.

What we want above is that there's no because there's

no equality condition.

Um, I think that's right.

You know, we have a positive number here is zero

here.

There is no way in which an optimum can be

achieved.

Okay.

With some gradients.

We can't resolve this way anymore.

There is an equilibrium as long as there is some

overlap in the gradients, which is exactly this thing here.

Once I have some overlap, then I can conclude the

there there must be an equilibrium and it's consistent with

any of these derivatives.

Okay.

But we can still work out the allocation which is

better because we know where the kink is.

Does it make sense.

So I know this is kind of a bit heavy.

Uh, but I hope the intuition is, is relatively straightforward.

Although all we're saying is that a social planner that

internalises that our own consumption and borrowing decisions are going

to affect the aggregate, which in turn we've seen and

proved it's going to affect income and interest rates.

Such a such a planner would never allow the economy

to go to an equilibrium where V1 is above pi,

which means that as a borrower, I'm going to be

unhappy because once the planner sits and decides allocation, then

I'm going to say it's going to go to bed

and you guys are left there to work out your

optimal decisions because the market reopens and borrowers are really

going to be a bit pissed off because they would

have said, I really want to borrow more with this.

Such a low R0.

Okay.

So in other words, we kind of prove that there

is over borrowing in this economy.

The competitive equilibrium implies a higher level of borrowing relative

to the social planner equilibrium.

And this is the source of inefficiency in this economy.

Let me try to explain this with a chart which

maybe is simpler.

So we have the usual thing.

You have V1 increasing.

And as usual this is a comparative static.

Okay.

We're just saying what would be the allocation if V1

was this number this number or this number.

This is the market equilibrium that we looked at before.

So what actually let me do it this way.

That starts from very low levels of B1.

What happens if B1 increases.

It happens that the borrower.

Who's entering in period one very leveraged is going to

be hit by the leverage.

The deleveraging shock is going to have to reduce consumption.

Okay.

That's our story from last last week.

So reduce consumption reduce consumption.

But there's going to be the lender stepping in and

perfectly offset the falling consumption from the borrowers.

And so in this economy these plans are exactly opposite

to each other.

Income in this economy is going to stay flat.

And in the background there is a falling real interest

rate that's going to incentivise these guys to consume more

and more and more.

At some point, the real interest rate is going to

hit a lower bound.

Our lenders are not going to be happy to consume

anymore, and I'm going to stop consuming.

But this stopping consumption implies that now, since income is

pinned down by consumption, these guys will have to consume

even less because you have the Kendra multiplier kicking in.

And this is the doubling of the slope that we

discussed.

This is the Keynesian multiplier.

You know before you are going at this slope.

Now you keep on going at this slope because you

have to deleverage.

But for any unit of additional debt that you have,

you get an additional kick from the multiplier.

So this becomes steeper.

Okay.

In other words, to look at the same picture is

to look at total utility, you know?

By the way, super simple.

You could, you know, you could basically I told in

Excel is like super simple.

You know, you put in some numbers, you make a

vector for B1 and you work it out so you

can work out total utility.

And you can see oh sorry, I forgot to mention,

kind of importantly, that what the planet is going to

do is if this was the market equilibrium, the planner

is going to say, well, I don't like this.

I'm going to force the location to be where b

one is equal to B bar.

Okay.

That's exactly what we've shown in the previous slide.

And here is graphical represented graphically okay.

Why does he do that.

Because total utility here is going to be higher.

You can obviously see that total in some of these

utilities is going to be much higher than the market

right now.

What I was trying to say before is the exam

tables which cost, you know, think about a policymaker and

think about, you know, this plan are going a bit

crazy in saying, well, I'm going to limit B1 to

something like here.

I mean, you can achieve total utility outcomes that are

even lower than the market equilibrium.

There are just going to be worse than the optimum.

But they could there could be worse than the market

equilibrium.

So all of this is going to imply that basically

the planner knows exactly where the bar is, which obviously

in real life is going to be a you know,

it's a strong assumption.

Okay.

So is this clear?

Yeah.

Okay, now the question is fine.

We've shown that there is an externality.

We've shown that the planner would address this externality by

reducing borrowing.

We showed that there is another borrowing externality in a

sense.

Now, we don't live in a world where the planner

decides how much I consume and how much I owe

you in the next period.

How can we make how can we make this allocation

happen in a market economy?

So how do we implement this allocation in a market

economy?

And there are, broadly speaking, two ways to implement the

policy.

Macroprudential taxes or debt limits.

So let's cover them in term.

So a macro prudential tax is simply a tax on

borrowing that acts on the inequality that we had that

we have seen in the previous slide such that the

two equations for it.

And we just go back to this slide.

We argued for a few minutes that, you know, these

two equations would not hold with equality, that borrowers wouldn't

be happy because there was a lower interest rates and

they would want to borrow more.

But you may well be wanting to borrow more, but

if I'm going to start taxing you, then I'm going

to reach a certain point in which, well, you know,

if the tax is high enough, you don't want to

borrow anymore because you don't get any benefit from it.

And that's exactly what a macroprudential tax is, is a

tax that you can work out analytically, as we're going

to show in a second.

There is going to close this inequality between the two

questions.

Does it make sense.

And so this is going to bring back exactly be

one equal to p bar as the planner would have

done.

Obviously there's a question about what do you do with

these taxes.

And the whole idea is that you're going to rebate

them to the borrowers themselves, so that you're basically is

neutral from the point of view of the borrowers, but

you help them internalise the externality.

So you tax them so that they you bring them

back to the borrowing levels to the efficient one, and

then you just rebate those taxes, lump sum to them

so that they can, you know, you're not basically removing

resources from them.

So this is one option.

The other option is just to say, you know, it's

illegal to go above the bank.

That's it.

I decide that you guys, you know, I know what

everybody is.

There's no way you can go above that.

And at the end of the day, this is basically

what people do these days.

People meaning central banks or whoever is the financial regulator

in any given country, think about mortgages.

But even if you are a firm, you're typically subject

to some kind of form of borrowing limits, which is

typically a function of the value of your house or

a multiple of your income or a multiple of your

EBITDA, and so on and so forth.

Okay.

Um, and we're going to cover them, um, in the

next couple of slides, if we're going to the um,

that limits, let me just talk about taxes for a

second.

Taxes are actually quite, um, quite cool in a sense,

because they can bring us back to the notion of

marginal propensity, propensity to consume.

So I'm not going to ask you to so this

slide, just take this as, uh, you know, coming from

God, you need to understand where this is coming from.

Uh, there is in the back of the slide deck

the derivation, if you're interested about how you can come

up with this question.

But basically this is kind of the general form for

the derivative that we had in the algorithmic similarity, which

you remember was this bit here.

And you can easily see that.

You can easily get back to the minus one number

in our in our special case, right.

Because we had the the borrowers have a marginal propensity

to consume of one.

The lenders have a marginal propensity to consume of zero.

Right.

Because the flat their consumption is completely flat.

Right.

So this is my one half.

What's the average MPC in this economy where one half

mass of each set of agents.

So this one, this one half divided by one whatever.

It's minus one.

Okay.

It's super easy to see where, you know, our case

comes from.

This is just a more general representation.

And basically the only thing I wanted to stress here.

Is that there is kind of a nice mapping between

topic three and what we're doing here.

So effectively when that goes up we are inducing the

borrower's consumption.

Right.

Because they need to pay back.

They need to deleverage.

But you're reducing the consumption of very high MPC people.

And and transferring resources to very low MPC people, in

this case zero MPC, which is the worst you can

do.

That's why you have this big recession coming in.

And so and then you have the kind of standard

kind of multiplier, which is the first round effect is

simply the difference in the NPCs, appropriately weighted.

And then you get the multiplier which comes from the

average NPC.

That's how we got.

It's another way to kind of get to the minus

one multiplier that we had in our, uh, you know,

in the slide that.

But, you know, not only you know, there is a

nice parallel with the three and the way in which

we thought about transferring sources from high to low MPC,

uh, agents.

But we can also.

You can also show.

And again, you don't need to know this that the

town that we described in the previous slide that closes

the gap between the two equation can be written as

a function of the NPCs.

Okay.

And this is quite cool because we have estimates of

these NPCs.

And so it seems quite hopeful to be able to

calibrate this tax based on relatively, you know, well identified

data.

At the end of the day, you just need to

know what the borrowers in the economy, who are the

lenders, what's the MPC, what's the average MPC in the

um.

Not even what's the average on the economy?

And you can set your tax.

On borrowing and achieve the optimal allocation.

Okay.

Which, um, which seems great and easy to do.

However, um, there are a bunch of issues with these

taxes.

And the first one that I wanted to raise, and

then maybe we can, uh, yeah, let's stop there after

these two slides.

So basically, what happens if you relax?

The perfect foresight assumption.

Now let's assume that there is some probability pi where

this kind of delivering shock is going to hit.

Then basically what would happen is that, well, if I

knew that some probability this fine shock is going to

come, I may self-insure.

But the idea is the same.

You know, I'm going to under-insured, um, because I'm not

going to realise that, you know, the amount I'm going

to get from the insurance is going to lead to

an increase in income, which is going to lead to

an increase in consumption.

I'm going to still miss this kind of multiplier effects,

but this aggregate demand is still going to be there.

And obviously some insurance is may not be possible.

Um, at the end of the day here we're talking

about systemic risk.

So if there is a deleveraging shock that brings the

economy to a recession, there's no way in which an

insurance is going to work.

You know, insurance works whether I go bust and you

stay alive.

But if we all go down, there's no way in

which to trust my work.

And, um.

Yeah.

And then basically, this is what I.

What I said before already, you know, there is this

kind of tension between the ex-ante versus post policy.

So setting a policy that is still going to be

especially in the work with uncertainty, I may kind of

tax you guys like crazy.

You don't worry as much, but maybe a crisis will

never realise.

Okay.

And just to, you know, finish off with some try

to, you know, a rough quantification.

What I've done here, I took, you know, in this

case with uncertainty.

Simply the tax would be what we worked out before

times the probability of the crisis.

And if you take pi being one crisis every 30

years, which is kind of the historical frequency of crisis,

even though these days it seems that we went down

to one side, um, and you just take, you know,

from our old papers, the MPC from the borrowers and

the lenders and you work out a bunch of things.

This gives you a tax of 1.5% of the world.

Now, you may be, you know, I may be taxing

you for like, 100 years.

And if I get some lucky draw that for a

hundred years, no crisis happens.

It's not obvious.

You know, I obviously face a trade off.

You know, I'm kerbing, you know, the economy and consumption

of who actually wanted to consume more for a shock

that never materialised.

So this kind of the trade off going back to

SVB, you know, we want to save the bank and

create all these moral hazard problems and so on and

so forth, or you want to let it go bust.

Obviously the ex-ante policy didn't work well because the shock

realised.

So this is kind of the real life implications of

uh, this are really, you know, kind of related to

what happened with this will be just to create a

link with the real world.

All right.

Let's stop for five minutes.

We'll be back at quarter to some some charts.

Your drive.

Right.

Is that what?

I mean?

Hydrated.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So you ended up at.

Your meeting this.

Morning.

And how did I think it was?

And you.

Know, I just saw.

Right.

Otherwise, I don't know.

If, you know, the whole time.

You don't have this kind of.

I don't know how you get.

Did you get the structure and everything?

Yes.

Yeah.

Most of the meetings.

Yeah.

I'm thinking, like the.

You selected me.

Oh, yeah.

Because, like, some some sort of stuff, like.

That.

Yeah.

Sure.

No no, no.

I just brought my.

Where?

Did you get.

The green ones?

Yeah.

Um, I.

Yes.

So I was just trying to get as much as

you can.

It's going to be painful, I guess.

Yeah.

It's.

It's a lot of work.

It's been a long time.

Really?

It's been a long spring.

Yeah.

Well, that's.

Actually.

Made.

Some sense.

It's given me enough technology.

Then we're going to have surprises a couple of times.

Right?

Now, because we ended.

A.

Couple weeks here and.

Because of the technology.

That you have for the long.

Run and then good optimisation.

And it's not a normalisation is.

A.

Consequence of the of these two.

Things.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah I think so.

Yeah.

So yeah.

Yeah I mean.

Oh my god.

Yeah.

So I mean this.

Doesn't work maybe as well.

You.

Know because this is the estimate of the central.

Portion.

Of your data.

Okay.

I think it's real.

I have yeah, that's just how we started.

I think you.

Know.

Oh, okay.

So if you.

Also have a meeting today.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

That's.

That's sad.

Otherwise, we're not going to get you anything.

Um.

Okay.

So what we've done so far is to show that

there is an inefficiency in the economy, that there is

a, um, one that can sort the efficiency, restore efficiency,

and we also saw that we can restore efficiency in

a market economy with some taxes.

Now, the problem is that in the real world, when

we think about taxes, we actually have almost the opposite

of what I just described.

But in other words, you know, if you look at

the US, for example, you have a big mortgage tax

every single day, taxes on anything on your mortgages and

the mortgage payments.

Um, that was the case in the UK until a

few years back.

If you look at companies, you have similar, uh, tax

reliefs from interest payments.

So it seems to be kind of the opposite, you

know, um, you're subsidising that rather than taxing our existing.

Right?

Um, also, it's quite tricky to think about these taxes.

You know, you need to coordinate with the fiscal authority.

There is a vast variety of taxes in this world

that make the implementation complicated.

Um.

But on the other hand, you can kind of turn

the problem upside down and just, um, tax interest income

from savings, which basically would reduce the willingness of lending

from the point of view of the lenders.

Um.

Or in other words, actually, better said in the model

is kind of similar to an increase in the interest

rate in period zero, which you're going to get to

in seconds.

By this, I mean basically we're going to see whether

monetary policy can do anything to address the inefficiency here.

Because, you know, monetary policy by increasing interest rates is

not how much we want to borrow, how much we

want to land, and so on and so forth.

Um.

But so as I mentioned before, you know, this kind

of tax is very neat from a theoretical point of

view.

It's kind of neat from an implementation point of view,

at least in principle, because its function is MPC and

everything is quite neat.

But effectively what we do a central banks to limit

borrowing.

So as I said, you know, we have that limits

on households on their mortgage debt.

Uh, typically banks impose that limits on firms in terms

of, you know, multiple of the leverage or and fractional

multiple of the $80,000 properties.

Um, and so this kind of, you know, try to

have finance by, from, uh, from algebra and giving you

some background of, you know, kind of a real life

example.

This is taken from a financial stability report, um, from

a few years back and basically is just showing how

big that increase was before the global financial crisis.

Which was followed by a very painful deleveraging.

If you look at the, you know, debt to GDP,

um, this is the aggregate that's a household debt.

To income to household income ratio and went down from

almost 150%, something like hundred and 25 or 30%.

So it's kind of a painful hole in leverage, which

arguably contributed to push the economy to the zero lower

bound and to generate that prolonged recession that we we

observed in these years.

Yeah.

So, I mean, I think I really I really like

this kind of simple model.

I mean, it's despite its extreme simplicity, it captures some,

some notions that, you know, a very powerful way to

describe what happened in this period.

And, um.

You know, having been at the bank during this period,

I remember that, you know, this class of this model

and other models at the same time that were kind

of dealing with similar issues, really were kind of driving

the way in which policymakers thought about macroprudential policies and

what to do and how to deal with these issues.

Um, so at least at the bank, the macro prudential

policy is controlled by the Financial Policy Committee, which is

known as the FPC.

And what they can do, they can basically set the

rules for residential mortgages and also set the rules for

kind of how easy it is for banks to lend.

We're not going to cover this.

I kind of initially plan to cover this in, uh,

in this topic, but we're not going to have time.

So we're going to stick to what we see so

far.

Um, and if you look at the kind of mandate

that they have, um, which is a separate mandate to

what the Monetary Policy Committee has, which is stable inflation,

uh, mandates and supporting growth, is that the responsibility of

the committee is primarily to identification of, monitoring of and

taking of action to remove or reduce systemic risk with

a view to protecting and enhancing the resilience of the

financial system.

So you can see that you know, these statements is

really is really aligned with the idea.

Of ex-ante policies.

In theory, this year you think about the macroprudential policy

tax that we described or the borrowing that limits to

avoid that, a serious deleveraging that happens and the consequence,

the consequence, the subsequent recession that would be implied in

that.

Um.

But yeah.

And, you know, it could also be some discussion about

this that, you know, we kind of avoid the deleveraging.

Shock happens in the first place.

Uh, which we are not going to call.

Um, so basically what what happened during uh, this period

in the middle of 2013 as this literature was evolving,

the basically the bank made a recommendation to banks to

extend whatever loan they would extend.

New loan they were extend to households.

Then these loans.

Um, the 50% of these new mortgages would have a

limit, basically an LTI limit, which is a loan to

income limits.

And the first is banks not to lend four times

more than the income of the world.

And this is exactly, you know, the kind of legally

mandated ban we're talking about.

Okay.

Um, and as I mentioned, you know, this kind of

class of models were very much used to think about

this problem and to come up with this policy recommendation.

Uh, and the other things that I wanted to mention

is that, you know, there are many ways of implementing

these.

There are loan to income limits that often coexist with

loan to value limits, loan to value limits.

For those of you who are not familiar with these

would just be you can borrow up to a fraction

of the value of your house.

Typically, you know the house is worth hundreds, the LTV

is equal to 80%.

And um, and so you get £80 or $80 out

of, uh, of mortgage debt.

To buy your house, you need to put down 2070.

And there are also, uh, even find a kind of

more granular, um, policies that applies to households as well.

I would say these two are the most common ones,

or at least the two that are most binding.

And maybe fronting myself a little bit, we're going to

see, uh, towards the end of the class.

There is an interesting element.

When we have loan to value kind of constraints, because

as you can imagine.

So and this goes back to what I said at

the very beginning of the class that we didn't really

try to link Phi, our deleveraging shock, something that happens

in real life.

But you can think of five as being a sudden

fall in the price of your house for example.

Okay, so imagine that you have a loan to value

ratio.

Your house is worth hundreds.

You're happy.

The bank is happy to give you 80 because you

have an asset.

But now there's a big shock.

Something happens in the economy.

Your your house is not worth 80.

Okay, so now you are borrowing 100% of your house,

which means that you will be hit by a leverage

shock you need to bring back.

From 80 to 64, or roughly 64.

Your amount of debt.

To still be subject to that don't value ratio, and

the only way in which you are going to be

able to do it is either by selling your house

or increasing your consumption.

Now, we completely abstracted from the notion of assets and

selling assets in the model, and the only option for

our household to deliver was to reduce the consumption, which

would have reduced income.

Right.

In a cycle, we're going to see what happens when

we plug in asset prices.

And we allow for this dynamic of, um, you know,

falling asset prices, tightened further tightening constraints and so on.

Okay.

Um.

This is just, you know, this picture designed to show

that these policies and these that limits are very common

across countries that are very tragedians.

I would say that monetary policy was still very much

experimenting with these things.

There is a lot of, uh, a lot to learn

on on this topic.

And, you know, a lot of research is very welcome

because definitely we know so much less than we know

on the monetary policy side.

Um, and if anything is something where we, we, as

you know, advanced economies have to learn a lot from

emerging market economies where these tools have been in place

for much longer.

And it was actually very instructive, uh, in the last

few years, to learn from other countries that maybe had

these policies in place on a more regular basis.

Um, before going back to theory and, you know, monetary

policy surprises.

Let's just quickly.

Look at some, uh, some empirical evidence now.

You know, I kind of told you this, this friction.

We know how to solve it.

It works.

Well, it works in theory.

Uh, a lot of countries use it, but, you know,

do we have any evidence on how these tools work?

Okay.

And so there has been quite a lot of research

in the last few years, about.

1025 the effects of changes in these policies or what

these policies can do.

And I'm just, uh, citing a couple of papers.

Um.

That especially this paper is quite nice.

This paper compiled a very large database on Macroprudential policy

actions.

Now there is actually much more.

The IMF has constructed their own macroprudential policy actions and

data sets, and it runs from a very relatively long

time periods over a very large panel of countries.

So it's kind of a perfect setup to run a

parallel local projection across countries.

Obviously.

As for the monetary policy shocks that we see in

topic one, there's going to be a matter of identification.

You know, you don't change these policy tools completely randomly.

You normally have some.

As we discussed with the Bank of England, there's some

shock.

You can move them in response to things.

And so basically what these people have done to deal

with this endogeneity issue was to adopt something similar to

the narrative approach of the Roman enrolment.

So they cut down and said, oh, well, this policy

action was really a response to something that happened, or

this policy actually set was unexpected and therefore exogenous.

So they selected a, uh, they came up with a

selection of these, uh, uh, 246 policy actions.

And once they had them, they announced regression like this

one, which is nothing else than a standard local projection.

When the change in the LTV for those events that

they claim are surprises and not a systematic, systematic response

to something is the equivalent of our monetary policy surprises.

If you want in topic one.

And so then this coefficient is going to tell you

how, whatever the endogenous variables x in response to the

LTV, uh, shock and picking out LTV, they've done it

with many different instruments.

You know, they classify all these macro actions in activities

and these kind of various, um, various policy options that

are available.

So this is what you get, um, you get the

tightening in LTV, which means I'm going to allow you

to more or less out of the value of your

house unexpectedly, is leading to a fall in GDP and

an increase in prices, which is kind of a bit

weird.

Um, I mean, the fall in GDP kind of makes

sense, but increasing prices is not obvious.

You know, it's hard to rationalise.

Maybe, you know, there could be some supply side effects.

Maybe.

But this to me personally, I think this speaks a

little bit to not very well identified shocks in this

step.

Okay.

So I don't buy too much this kind of narrative

approach.

Um.

But that's what that's what they found.

And it could still be that there are some supplied

effects, you know, in the last period of the cost

channel of monetary policy.

Remember this topic?

Um, this is, uh.

Much stronger for emerging markets economies, where these policies probably

have been used more and in a more gradual fashion.

But this price puzzle, if you want, remains, um, and

not much for developed economies.

But again, there's not much variation in these leaves and

much less experience with these tools.

So it's not obvious how much we can make out

of these charts.

The very I think the very convincing chart is when

you look at credits, these measures actually work.

And at the end of the day, you know, through

the lens of the model that we looked at, that's

the thing that matters, okay.

Because at the end of the day you want to

reduce p one to below.

And these tools seem to be doing it uh quite

strongly and quite well actually.

Uh, so in the model, uh, tightening of LTV would

correspond to the social planner, uh, bringing, uh, the debt

limit down.

Right?

Uh, so, uh, that should lead to an increase in

the GDP, right?

Like that's, that's what the.

So doing that.

Oh, sorry.

I think I'm, um.

Tweets.

Uh.

Yeah, sorry, I flipped the, um, I flip the logic

of, uh, of the puzzling facts.

So the puzzling fact would be you should engineer an

increasing demand.

Right, which these then would be consistent with increasing demand,

but not this one.

Apologies are just flipped.

I remember there was an inconsistency between output and prices,

but in the opposite, in the opposite direction.

Um.

Let me just keep this.

I mean, this is just, you know, some motivating evidence

on the fact that there is some evidence on on

these policies.

There is a big issue about identification in this literature.

And if you ever want to work on these kind

of topics, I think there is a lot of, uh,

space and open questions that you can contribute to if

you are on this topic.

So we want to work on these things.

All right.

Um, we have half an hour and we are going

to cover two things leaning against the wind, by which

I mean, can monetary policy do anything to deal with

this problem?

And collateral spirals, by which I mean the introduction of,

uh, um, asset prices as we just described, the loan

to value, uh, label to value.

Exactly.

Okay.

So let's start with monetary policy.

We saw this chart in topic two.

And we kind of briefly discussed that.

Some people pointed to the fact that the federal funds

rate has been much lower than one implied by a

Taylor rule in the lead up to the global financial

crisis.

Uh, and these people argued, well, you just kept the

interest rate below.

It's kind of asked our, um, you know, efficient level

in these engineered the massive room and increasing that which

eventually led to be possible for us.

So the question that I'm going to ask now is,

can monetary policy act in a prudential way, exactly as

the tax would do to kerb and to avoid this

big recession here?

And that's kind of the question.

Okay.

So we are in an example policy words.

And so I'm going to start from period zero.

And what I've done here I simply rewrote the two

Euler equations in period zero which we know are holding

okay.

And with the equality.

And I simply substituted, you know, the various bits and

pieces that we worked out in the previous bit of

this lecture into, um, into this Euler equation.

So just to make clear, we're all on the same

page.

We have the marginal rate of consumption period one for

the lenders over the majority of the consumption period, zero

for the lenders, the same for the borrowers.

Okay.

And this has to be equal to one over one

plus R0.

That's the kind of equilibrium condition we worked out for

a period zero optimality condition for the market equilibrium.

And I simply substituted what we know is going to

happen, assuming that V1 is going to be greater than

v bar, or in other words, assuming that people are

impatient enough.

So there's going to be a zero lower bound value.

So we know that for the lenders there's going to

be a C bar c L bar level of consumption.

These aside from the budget constraints, you're going to get

some income, uh, in period zero.

This is predetermined.

And this is what they lend to borrowers in period

zero.

And the opposite would be holding for, um the borrowers.

And here you have here you just, you know, use

the multiplier, the one minus one multiplier to work out

what their consumption is going to be in periods one.

Okay.

So this is just application of what we the various

bits and pieces will work out in the various nice.

Now, the whole point of what we want to do

in this couple slides here is to say I'm the

central bank.

I, I know that you guys, uh, don't internalise your

the fact of your decisions on total borrowing and therefore

on total income.

So I may increase the real rates above the efficient

level of efficient interest rates.

So above R zero, which is the R star that

allows to achieve the efficient allocation is to invert zero.

And by doing that I'm going to bring down your

borrowing because more expensive.

And you will want to borrow less.

And by bringing down borrowing I may hit a sweet

spot where you know, I bring it down enough so

the zero bond is not binding tomorrow and I'm going

to avoid the crisis.

Okay.

Um.

So.

So basically now we have, you know, if you think

about these two Euler equations equal to r0, we have

now two equations into unknowns.

We don't know what B1 is going to be because

B1 is going to depend on R0 which is set

by the central bank.

And we don't know what E0 is going to be.

Why?

Because by raising interest rates above R0, income imputed zero

is not going to be any more equal to R,

right?

Remember we have a definition that said r is equal

to r star.

Then E is going to be equal to e star.

Then intuitively if I'm tightening monetary policy I'm going to

create a positive outcome.

That's basically what we're saying.

Okay.

And so now I don't know what E0 is going

to be I don't know what we want is going

to be R0 is my choice variable is my policy

choice variable.

And so I have two equations into unknowns.

Um.

And we know.

That.

Um.

Basically, we know that E1 is going to be equal.

You know, we are still in the humanitarian economy.

You know, the one consumption of the lender is going

to be given by these objects.

Minus, um, whatever they, um, sorry.

Minus whatever they get from the borrowers, plus whatever they,

uh, lend out.

Not sorry.

This is the, uh, apologies.

This is the the period budget constraint, period one for

the, uh, for the lenders that we seen last week.

So all we need to know, basically, is to know

how borrowing respond to the monetary policy shock, remember?

So let me just repeat it.

Where in a world where I can set R zero

and start by doing that, I hope I can decrease

B1 and bring it back to the region where the

XRP is not going to bind anymore.

And so I basically need to work out the sine

of this derivative.

Okay.

I would also need to find the sine of this

derivative because by raising interest rates in period zero I'm

going to decrease e zero below E star okay.

So I need to work out this to the matrix

here.

So I'm not going to I'm going to just pause

it that this derivative is smaller than zero.

So income is going to fall when monetary policy tightens

is not particularly you know, uh, you should kind of

expect this.

It's not obviously set up.

So you need to prove it.

But you know I'm just going to I've done it

at the end of the slide deck.

So let's focus on this derivative here, which is what

happens to that when I raise interest rates okay.

So to work out this derivative what I'm going to

do I'm going to take the ratio of these two

Euler equations okay.

These two ones get rid of uh um well rearrange

terms.

In, uh, in this way.

So I have period one stuff on this side and

period zero stuff on this side.

And now I'm going to try to reason by contradiction

here.

So I'm going to assume that borrowing forwards when I

tighten policy okay.

I'm going to assume that this is the case.

And remember that the second derivative of the utility function

is is negative.

So this is a function which means that.

Now I'm going to work out how the left hand

side responds to an increase in interest rates and how

the right hand side responds to an increase in interest

rates.

And to do that is relatively simple.

You know, this is a fixed number.

So I don't care about this.

If you look at these, you just take the derivative

of this guy relative to interest rates, okay.

Which is basically going to be the second derivative of

u minus two.

Times the derivative of b1 over the r okay.

Simple kind of classic formula for the derivative.

Under the assumption that is negative, I have minus times

minus times minus.

So this is a negative thing.

Which means that if this goes down this left hand

side is gonna increase.

Okay.

So when interest rates go up under this assumption, this

left hand side part of the equation is going to

go up.

Measures clarified before we.

Had the interest rate.

Um, the segment within the middle.

Right.

So it was the interest rate was determined within the

model.

Right.

Um it was the market clearing price.

But here we are choosing it, choosing the price.

Okay.

That's exactly what was happening.

So before it would be the.

Well.

We have assumed implicitly that monetary policy would set R0

equal to.

There is still remember, we have a monetary policy to

um, authority that is able to move the interest rates

because of the complete rigid price assumption.

And we're basically assuming that R will be set equal

to our star at any point in time.

So that's still going to be an inner star pinned

down by markets, which we consider to be consistent with

the efficient allocation.

But the monetary policy authority as an equation model has

the power to move R around, and it's going to

be able to move out directly because prices are okay.

But it's the policy to.

Okay.

So now we basically argued that this side is increasing.

Well, if I look at this side I take the

derivative relative to r of the numerator and the denominator.

What I'm going to see is that we assume that

b1 is decreasing in our, which means that this thing

is going to be positive.

There is a minus in front of it.

So.

Times.

The second derivative of the utility function gives me a

negative sign.

So this thing is falling.

Here I have a minus sign, which means that this

isn't going to be increasing.

Which means that basically the right hand side is decreasing.

You know.

Which means that this cannot be the case.

By this I mean this cannot be the case.

For this thing to hold, we must have that.

When I raise interest rates, borrowing goes up, which is

kind of counterintuitive.

So let's spend a minute thinking about why this happens.

So basically what's going on is that by tightening monetary

policy and I'm reducing income.

So I'm generating effectively zero.

There was no need for a recession to have two

minds.

And basically this recession is causing borrowers to borrow more.

And as usual, the reason for why this happens is

a combination of substitution.

So the substitution effect is once as to uh, um,

more or less because there is a higher interest rate.

And so in principle you want to more or less

consume more.

But the income effect, because we have this very strong

allocation of income from the borrowers to, uh, to the

lenders.

More than offsets this desire to substitute.

Okay.

And so you kind of have this quote, verse effect

where a tightening in monetary policy leads to an increase

in borrowing.

And I leave you kind of, you know, go through

these.

But basically there is again quite a nice link with

the previous topic.

You can link this to the h index.

And the whole idea that, you know, you increase the

eternity.

If you remember the top three, we had the h

index, which was the index that by, you know, by

whenever it increased the transfer resources from a set of

agents with higher wages with a lower and B, C

and so on and so forth.

Now, the only thing I would like you to remember

is that I can obviously engineer a parameter combination that

delivers the more intuitive case of raising interest rates and

borrowing vaults.

Playing around with substitution.

You know, the substitution effects, maybe making the borrowers and

lenders subsequent ability different, for example.

But the thing I want you to remember is that

a tighter monetary policy is, is not a general silver

bullet with this problem.

Okay.

So it can work in our business model.

It doesn't actually worsen the problems is going to lead

me to war even more, and therefore to generate even

a stronger recession next period.

I can overturn this result by changing some some things

in the model, but it doesn't seem as robust as

the macro prudential tax.

That's the main message of what I want.

What I would like you to remember and in any

case, you know, you may reduce the probability or the

severity of the recession, but you still have to pay

a cost in terms of generating a recession in period

zero.

You still you are still generating a full of income

in period zero.

That is below the efficient level.

So you need to add that on top of, uh,

of the ambiguity in terms of whether borrowing is going

to increase or not.

Okay.

Okay.

So last 15 minutes.

And so the policy prices.

So we kind of touched on this, um, what this

chart is showing is uh.

Is simply kind of, um.

Doing.

This is a cross sectional analysis of state level house

prices, mortgages, amount of debt and employment.

And the main thing that you know, you get from

these charts is that states that experienced a very pronounced

fall in house prices during the global financial crisis are

also those states where employment had the most growth in

construction in total and in construction employment, and where that

was higher.

So basically, there is a correlation between how severe was

the fluctuation in asset prices and how severe was the

deleveraging episode and how big was the recession.

Right now.

I'm sure you're thinking, well, you know, this could go

both ways.

You know, these asset prices dynamics could well be a

function of weak demand.

Meaning I just that state that had a larger fall

in demand.

And that's why asset prices fell as a result of

it.

Okay.

I'm going to claim in the next in the next

50 minutes is that.

There is actually a causal.

Effect from asset prices into employment and, uh, and deleveraging.

And this is exactly what we discussed with neoliberal when

we made the example of the valuation.

Right.

So we said if there is a shock that reduces

my house prices, then I'm going to be above the

limits, which means that I need to deleverage by deleveraging,

I'm going to lose my income.

And this may reduce even further the asset prices or

may try to sell my house, which is going to

lead to a fall in the price of the house,

which is going to lead to further tightening.

Right.

So that's what we you know, that's what we call

collateral spirals, because basically your loan is collateralised by your

house and the value of the house changes can have

this effect.

So to kind of think about this problem, we're gonna

have a, um, we need to tweak slightly our model.

We're gonna assume that there is an asset at that

only borrowers hold.

This asset is in fixed supply, so I think it's

better to think about it as housing, you know, which

in the short term is kind of think of I

can construct many houses in a given quarter, and it's

going to only be owned by borrowers just for simplicity.

And basically borrowers can trade assets among themselves at a

given price, which is ex-dividend.

So basically you buy the asset, you draw the dividend

from the asset, which is a fixed dividend.

Um.

Yeah.

Well, it's going to be fixed.

A fixed dividend.

Why on on this asset.

And then I'm going to sell it.

So ex-dividend and the whole point of this part of

the uh, of this kind of tweak of the model

is that the borrowers are not going to internalise that

the asset is in fixed supply and is equal to

one, and they're not going to internalise the fact that

their own decisions are going to have on the price

of these assets exactly as they did, and internalise that

their own decision would affect the price of borrowing, i.e.,

the interest rates in the previous version of the model.

The second trick we're going to do is that we're

now going to modify our, um, that limit by just

having if so.

But before it was fine, it was fixed.

Now we're going to say that I can borrow up

to a fraction of the value of my house.

Okay.

This is exactly the LTV.

If this is point eight, then I can just end

this.

My I own a house, a house, one unit of

house that price 100.

I'm going to be able to borrow up to 80%

of all of my house.

There are many ways to make this, uh, which we're

not going to get into, and we will have basically

that in the first period if I want is very

large.

So basically you are unconstrained and then the deleveraging shop

hits.

So Fi is going to fall and become binding.

But now the new thing is that we're going to

allow A and P to kind of vary, which means

that there's going to be some interaction between the price

of these assets, which is an endogenous optic objects and

the tightness of the constraint.

Okay.

So I'm going to simplify even further the model just

because, uh, you know, there is an additional element which

can complicate things.

I'm going to assume that from period one onwards the

discount factor is going to be the same.

So these people are going to be exactly the same.

This is quite harmful.

It just helps with the derivation of the asset pricing

equation.

And then everything kind of follows from what we've done

in the previous part of the course of this topic.

Sorry, with just an important difference.

You remember we looked at period two, which was steady

state and we said things are, you know, we could

pin down numeric values for it, right.

Borrowing would have been equal to five only.

But now we have p one.

So now you know the steady state values are going

to be affected by the asset price okay.

You're going to be able to see this, you know,

very easily following the same steps that we've done before.

We have the same expressions for consumption from period two

onwards.

Again with the only difference now p one is going

to appear here just substituting V2 here.

Before we only had five.

Otherwise it will be identical.

And we have a new element which is an asset

pricing equation.

That is just a standard asset pricing equation.

It says I'm discounting the dividends from my assets by

one minus beta.

If you're wondering why the beta here is just because

we have an ex-dividend asset price.

So the reason why this beta is up here is

because we're doing this dividend.

Uh.

Okay.

This is kind of the more complicated bit, but I'm

going to go through quickly and show you a chart

which, given the.

Time is probably.

Uh, is probably better.

But just to give you an idea of where the

where the math is coming from.

So everything is kind of the same as before.

Okay.

We're going to assume that there's going to be a

threshold bar above which we're going to get the zero

bound and the usual story exactly as before.

Um, exactly as before.

We are writing the Euler equation for lenders in um,

period one and period two.

The only difference is one in period two.

If you remember, when we did this before here, we

had a known quantity that was fixed.

Remember this is how we pin down the CL bar

element.

Now we can't do this anymore because we have P1.

We have an endogenous variable which is going to affect

the marginality of the consumption period two.

Okay.

That's where the complication is coming from.

If you remember then you know here I assume that

the you know, the interest we hit, the zero lower

bound interest rate has gone to zero.

We had this kind of fixed thing and so we

could work out what that was.

That's how we solved for one in a simpler solution.

Now we can do this anymore.

And so you should think of this.

So now there are two unknowns here.

If you want there is e1 b1 1 to 3

unknowns.

Um.

Just put on these eigenvectors.

But remember that the difference that is now depends on

the asset price.

So now we can now use the borrowers constraints.

And so let's start from these expressions.

These expressions are coming straight from the budget constraints.

And the usual ones are saying borrowers get income in

period one.

They get the dividend from their own asset holdings.

They have to pay back the debt in period one,

and they're going to borrow the maximum they can, which

is given by the asset price times the two states.

And the same with flipside, uh, with uh, what is

what period for period two again follows through straight from

the period budget constraint.

Now what is this bit here?

These bits shows you what the presence of the asset

can do to the problem of the household.

So basically the household has the opportunity to sell and

buy assets.

Okay.

So effectively what the house is going to do is

going to sell a fraction or buy a fraction of

assets.

He was holding a one.

He's going to hold now A2 at a given price

P1.

This we looked at.

These is what you get as a maximum amount that

you can borrow in period one.

Because now that's your borrowing limit.

Basically that is kicking in.

There's income and there is the dividend you get on

your whole asset holdings.

Now if you take for if you maximise the utility

of consumption in period one plus beta, the utility consumption

in period two, then you take a derivative relative to

A2.

You're going to get to this expression here which is

an asset pricing equation.

Okay.

So this is basically the equation that makes this the

price that makes borrowers indifferent between holding or selling the

assets as any asset pricing equation to imply.

Okay.

And if you stare at this equation here and you.

Substitute.

C to be for this expression here.

And C1B for this expression here, you're going to end

up with another equation that depends on P1 and e1.

Exactly as this equation.

After substituting for a B1.

Through this the usual budget constraints, but.

So as I said, this is quite, you know, it's

quite messy and you're not required to know the algebra

of this.

I just wanted to kind of give you a sense

of what the math is going, but let me just

show what this implies in a chart.

So effectively we can have our two equations into unknowns

okay.

And you should think of the Euler equation of the

lenders as a um.

Demand equation.

Because remember these are the is their behaviour that brings

down other income.

The fact that you don't want to assume all.

But there is.

The second question is, you know, the think of it

as an asset pricing equation, just as I just mentioned.

And these are implicit functions of B1.

So I can basically plot these two curves in p

e space.

This would be P11 okay as an implicit function of

b okay.

Now let's try to think about what happens if B

increases this.

If b increases and we start from the aggregate demand

equation.

That's what basically we see in uh, in uh in

the simple model because we know that E was falling.

If you remember this chart, we had actually this chart,

he was stable until we reached B1 and then E

started falling in B1.

So basically this means that when B goes up there

is a linear shift in this curve.

Fall in school incomes to fall.

Remember I have income here.

So I just remember this has an implicit notion of

B right is a function of p and e as

an implicit function.

So if b goes up aggregate demand falls and income

falls.

Now implicitly what we're doing last week was to keep

asset prices fixed.

So it's almost like having an asset pricing equation that

was flat.

And the equilibrium would have been just here.

Income exactly is in this chart here.

And we increased borrowing by one and income falls by

this much.

But now because there is an asset pricing equation, what

happens is that this equilibrium here or this allocation is

not an equilibrium anymore.

It's not consistent with the asset pricing equation.

Borrowers are not happy to hold assets at this level

of income, but they would be willing to hold it

at this price.

So you're basically travelling down this aggregate demand curve down

to this point.

Okay.

But it's not even finished here because now we have

a lower level of asset prices for which a lower

level of income, which reduces the demand of assets from

the borrowers.

You know, these guys.