Lecture 1:

Welcome to, uh, this, uh, first lecture of S4 five

three.

Um.

It's the first time we see each other that I've

been teaching this course for as long as I've been

at LSC.

So that will be, uh, ten years this year.

And, you know, I know how it goes.

So at the beginning, you are all very, very shy.

But since we have like 20 lectures together by week

1718, you will have way more at my jokes.

So this is going to get much better as we

go forward in time.

So, um, the first lecture, as always, is, uh, pretty

boring because, you know, it's going to be an introduction

lecture and it's going to be a double boring because

we're going to do some game theory.

Refresher.

Refresher?

Um, I've lost one lecture this year because the econ

department has implemented the reading week in the first term,

and I tended to do 11 lectures in the first

term.

Now I only do ten.

But in order not to lose too much content, in

fact not to lose any content for you.

I used past game theory refresher lecture for the basic

concepts in game theory, so you should have received an

email from me.

This is an even.

Yes, I did manage from before.

And so if you haven't received the email you can

find the lecture on Moodle.

If you have received the email but haven't watched the

lecture.

It's never about you you know watch this lecture.

Even if you do it at double speed.

I don't take it personally if you do it very

quickly.

But, you know, just try to, uh, go through it

so you get, uh, some of the, uh, content that

I'm skipping to be able to do this is this

is danger zone.

Like I'm having a code unless, you know, you want

to have it as well.

I'll recommend avoiding row one.

You can like the next course I'm teaching.

They cannot.

So you know this is going to be propagation of

scald.

It's neither flu nor Covid.

It's just a call.

So, uh, sorry about this.

And I know this is like, there is also an

incredible stickiness in the sense that the where you sit

in your first lecture is almost certainly where you're going

to sit for the rest of this term.

So, you know, I'm sorry you're going to be a

bit far.

But, um, so, uh, as I was saying, the lecture

is online, as I was saying to this gentleman, you

are very good, but I never want to be in

the first round.

That's perfect, I understand, so you will have to, uh,

just look at it quickly because I will go over

something.

Then next week we will finish the Game Theory refresher

and we will do at the speed of light, some

social choice theory.

Why are we doing social theory at the speed of

light?

Just because I don't like it and I'm also not

good at it.

And so I don't want to have question on it.

So we are going to just do it because we

have to.

And then, you know, we will do things that are

more up to date in political economy.

But I give you a bit of the cost structure.

So what am I?

I'm Stefan Moulton and a professor in the Department of

Government, but I do all the PhD in economics from

the University of Chicago, and you will with me to

teach you.

You will have Luiza, who will be the teaching fellow,

and we will cover all seminars that happen to be

on Wednesdays.

Lecture, as you know, are 2 to 4 on Monday.

My office hours are usually from 215 to 415 on

Wednesdays.

But there can be changes because I have a lot

of admin meeting these days.

So look at Student Hub.

If you haven't downloaded Student Hub, do it and it

will always be posted there.

What the office hours are for a given week.

So next week for example, they will not they will

not be on Wednesday.

I cannot have another meeting that Louisa's office hours.

As soon as she tells me they will be on

Student Hub and I will add them to the syllabus

that is posted on Moodle.

So one thing about this course is that, you know,

this is your option course.

And as a result, it's supposed to be, you know,

a bit less boring that your core courses.

Right.

And what I want it to be is and as

I said, this is going to get better and better

as we work together throughout the year is I want

it to be also a lot of interactions.

Right?

So don't hesitate to ask questions.

Don't hesitate to accept on social choice.

We have established this like I take no question on

social choice, but you know, don't hesitate to interrupt.

Don't hesitate to make remark, don't hesitate to make critique.

I will also, um, use, uh, surveys.

Some of them will be sent to you.

We will do a small experiment also in week three.

Also, I will email you kind of like to check

your emails about this.

And I will use something that is called Mint.com.

And if we have time, we will also do a

little bit of, of mantra.

It's just in order, you know, to get to interact

a bit more and not just me being the one

talking.

Now, when we talk about political economy, what do we

talk about?

And, you know, I'm taking this from Roni Rosen, and

I think you have to think of political economy as

being two types, right?

One is with an emphasis on economics.

So in this case, what people care about are kind

of like economic outcome that taxation grows these type of

things.

But I'll leave a comment.

Just like just before I start.

I'm perfect with that.

So Louisa here will be your teaching fellow.

You know her, I think because I think some of

you got her from AC 400.

She told me you performed very poorly in 400.

All of you know.

I'm just kidding.

Louisa, would you like to introduce yourself a little bit?

Hi, guys.

I'm Louisa.

I am a fifth year PhD in economics here.

Uh, I'll be teaching the classes or the courses once

a week.

Uh, one thing, uh, we are probably changing the time

of the classes.

I know some of you are trying to take advanced

macro, that there was a, uh, a problem with, like,

the times of the book classes.

They asked us to change.

I know already.

No, no, I know this.

Our classes are going to change, but I don't know

to what time timetables is still.

But they will take into account the course you are

already registered to.

It will fit it for everyone to be able to

take it.

So it could be like a Thursday at 7 p.m..

Now I'm just kidding.

But it could be at 6 p.m..

I've seen classes at 60.

Okay, Luisa, that's very interesting and could work actually on

the on the kind of like we call at the

intersection of public economics and political economics using Brazil mostly

as a setting.

But she will teach you the classes are game theoretical,

right.

It's like, you know, it's game theory problem set every

week for your joy.

Right.

Starting next week.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I'll see you guys next week.

Yeah.

Bye bye.

So as I said, there are two types of political

economy.

One is the economics part, which is really interested in

economic outcome, and the idea is that institutions and interest

and strategic behaviour of decision makers and also of voters

or electorate or citizen matter, and therefore, if we want

to understand economic outcome, we need to think about the

political process behind it.

Right.

Another part is more the political economy of, uh, of

political economy, right, is like the one where what is

interesting is more political outcomes.

So whether the interest of citizens are well represented, what

are kind of like the consequences for representation of different

electoral system, when do people win, etc..

In this case there is kind of an economic approach,

but usually there is no economic content.

Right?

There is no question of taxation and things like that.

Now.

Because I was too bored with this to do my

research.

That's why I went to politics, right?

I could not care too much about debt and taxation.

I was much more interested about politics as a topic,

so that's why I went.

But in the course we will do kind of like

both aspects with obviously because of my bias, maybe a

little bit more of this, but there will be quite

a bit of political economics in the sense of African.

Another thing that is important is to think about, you

know, topology of result is if you think about the

social planner problem, which is what you will do a

lot if you were to take public economics, not political

economy, and maybe a bit unfair to that, but I

would say that what they are getting are possibility results

like what will be happening if you know a decision

maker where angels and you know, with Trump potentially winning

in November, the question of decision maker.

Being Android is not necessarily a very good assumption.

So this is what could be.

I believe that what we should do as scholars personally,

is to think about what is or what will be.

So that is like what we call positive results.

So I'm going to do a lot of positive result,

some possibility but not too much.

And then there is normative result which is what should

be.

And we will do very very little about this.

But really you have to think about what we want

to understand is this.

We want to have positive result to better understand the

world we are living in and the world we are

coming from doing 40% of the 60% of this, 90%

of this.

And so this is kind of like my work.

And there's going to be in the lecture a mix

between game theory and amperex, Which, you know, at the

beginning is going to be much more game theory heavy

because I have to teach you some basic concepts of

political economy.

And then as we move forward, especially in the second

term, we will have more empirical papers to review for

certain things like media, like populism.

These are all empirically based lecture, for example.

So the goal of the course is, you know, this

course is a really unique and really special.

And it's not because I'm teaching it.

It's really just thanks to LSA, it's in part because

I'm teaching obviously.

But like it's also really because of LSC.

It's like LSC is one of the few institutions that

will give political economy a 20 weeks course everywhere you

have 12 weeks, 13 weeks, you have 20.

So we can do way more than anybody else, right?

So we are able to do it.

The other thing that make it special is that unlike

many other courses, and I'm fighting to keep it this

way with me or without me, is that there is

only one person in charge of the course, in this

case me, and that for better or worse.

But you know, if you end up liking the teaching

style, which we don't have to, you know, this also

makes like a certain coherence throughout the years, right?

There is a logic in some of the things we

are going in the order and we are going to.

The second objective is something that I think too few

people are doing, including in academia, is to think about

issues.

Right?

So it's really to be thinking, so I'm going to

there are some lectures on value.

Which one where I would trash papers and they will

present your paper.

And I will tell you everything that is wrong about

this paper.

And this paper has probably more side than I have

in my world career.

But it doesn't matter, right?

This is just like the goal is just to kind

of like, show you where all the flows that you

can find everywhere, even in very famous papers.

So this is kind of like and of course, this

applied to beyond the classroom to think about what is

going on in the world.

And then for some of you that may have to

do the essay, it's also to think about question you

could yourself generate either during your time at the LSC

or if you want to go and do a PhD

later.

Kind of like when you do this, this PhD studies.

So the structure is week one.

Week two.

Game theory refresher plus 40 minutes of social choice.

Then you know, this first part is probably the one

that is going to be the best in terms of,

you know, technical concepts.

Almost like I'll say, not all of it, but a

lot of it here is going to be kind of

like game theory.

So we're going to start with information aggregation.

Then we're going to go to the spatial model of

politics.

Then we're going to do political agency.

So that's going to be really thinking about election deeply.

Then when we do some comparative p.

So we will think about how different systems affect economic

outcome using the kind of like canonical work of Person

and Bellini.

We will think about the concept of corruption and the

concept of state capacity a bit.

Then we will have some other themes in when we

move to the next term in political economy, in democracy,

the media, social media interest groups.

So this is a empirical lecture.

This is a.

Mostly empirical lecture.

This we're going to solve the best game we are

going to solve, which is a cheap, cheap game together.

Now we're going to do populism and its consequences in

some sense thinking about discrimination.

And then we will finish with some lecture on non-democratic

politics and the lecture on democratisation to finish on a

positive note.

So that's kind of like what we have together.

So then I'll pause on and answer any questions you

might have.

You will see that there is on the syllabus.

If you have clicked on it.

There is a very, very long reading list.

You are not expected to read any paper and the

lectures are self-contained.

The problems that teach you how to use the tools

we see in the lecture, and they are sufficient for

your final exam, because you will also have like a

lot of exam prep too.

In this when you gear up for the summer term.

So really the reading is just for you.

If you want to read some of these papers because

they look interesting.

I'm very, very happy.

If you don't want to read any of this paper,

it's perfectly fine.

You're going to work.

Enough with the problem sets.

Problems that are every week there are long, and Louisa

will not be solving all of the problems that in

the seminars you won't have time.

So you know there will be answer keys that will

be posted after the seminar is done.

And if you have questions about some of the more

advanced final questions, you know you should come to officers

either mine or with us.

Right?

So this is, you know, on this and really like.

This this is of course what the problems that, you

know, not every week but some of the week will

challenge you.

And if they don't, please tell me because I'll make

them harder.

Like the goal here, you know, at this level is

really to push and some questions.

You won't solve them, but that's normal.

What else?

You won't solve them the first time you see them.

But when you start studying for your exam, you will

look exposed.

And in the end, maybe this was like I cannot

understand the logic behind this afterwards.

So for your assessment, right.

So this is what I really don't care about.

But like an Australian cares a lot about this.

So there are two ways to do it.

Kind of.

So if you are not an MSC economics student, you

have the choice to do only an exam two hour

exam in the summer time and you're done.

And this is basically a problem set based exam.

So it's like your promise that you will do every

week.

Honestly it's it's really a repetition.

It's just a matter of speed.

Right.

It's just like be able to do a problem set

fast and you get a good grade in the exam.

The exam is really constructed so that people do not

feel right, like there are 50 points that are relatively

easy, easy to grab.

So that's that's what it is with a pure MSC

on one, two, three, four.

So if you like this course, like every optional course

as an MSC econ, but it's also a part that

is open to everyone.

You can choose exam plus essay.

So you still have the two hours exam, but 50%

of your grade will be determined by an extended essay

of C southern words.

And you can choose to do individual, which means that

you can choose the topic of your essay.

Or we could choose to do a structured essay, in

which case I choose the topic of the essay for

you.

Right?

And I can tell you already that we will have

a meeting about this, but the structured essay will be

a game theoretical paper.

And so it will be kind of like creating a

model, extending a model that is and kind of like

saying or you can extend it and thinking about how

you can extend it.

All right.

So that's a good place to stop for any questions

that you might have.

Hold on.

Yeah.

Why do we have to choose between both options.

So it's change.

I think it's usually end of weeks 3 or 4.

Something like this.

Just after the course choices is finalised.

Right.

At some point I was managing to do it like

end of the autumn term for student, but the student

services like slap me on the wrist for this.

So now you are constrained to do it by by

the end of week three of.

Yeah.

And when it's a structured essay, for instance, uh, can

we, uh, discuss the type of field we're interested in

or.

No, no, no.

That was like, you know, my mind was explode already.

Uh, no.

No, this structure is, uh, is is going to be

the topic.

I actually know it because I'm it's going to be

kind of like it doesn't make sense to you right

now.

It would make much more sense as we go through

the lecture, is the difference between autocracy and democracy in

the sense of top down versus bottom up accountability.

That makes little sense.

What I'm saying it now, but already by the end

of reading week, this will make more sense.

What I mean, at least by bottom up accountability.

Right.

So and the individual I guess we can discuss with

you.

Yes.

So if you are like as a PSP student, I

will not recommend doing an individual essay because it means

that like you have PSP, you don't have to do

a dissertation of 10,000 words.

It's when you need to generate two big research ideas

in one year.

It's not obvious next year.

Oh, yes, in this case, you can hear any other.

Any other question?

There's also this annoying rule.

I tell you that anything you do in one course

cannot be reused for anything else, which I really don't

understand.

What makes sense?

How to make sense of it?

Any other question on the cost structure?

All right.

So before we, uh, get into the game theory part,

I like, you know, to give also a quick thing

about we're going to do a lot of models and

I'm myself consider me as a applied what you would

call an icon and applied theorist.

What is called in political science a formal theorist.

So someone will use kind of like models.

exactly a model from more smarter people and apply them

to political questions.

And so we have to think about and we're going

to see a lot of models.

And we have to think about what do we gain

from this right now.

One critic of models that you hear more and more

like a lot in political science, but also sadly, more

and more in econ is like, well, but, you know,

model do not represent the real world.

Yeah, sure.

That's exactly what they should not be doing, right?

They are not they are not mainstream model.

Are not the real world right model are just representation.

There is a distance between what is happening everywhere and

what the model is trying to do.

Indeed, a model, even to study one phenomenon will think

about One particular explanation for this phenomenon.

It will not be the word explanation.

It will be one particular explanation.

Indeed, in kind of like in some econ paper.

And they tend to be published very well.

Like Slifer, for example, go and say the political economy

of X, which I find absolutely crazy because, you know,

no model will be the of something.

It's one possible explanation for a phenomenon or one possible

cause that is being kind of like studied.

So what we do in model is that we are

going to isolate some variable of interest, right?

Just some of them, not the whole explanation of it.

And we have a very good kind of like seminar

series, at least in political economy, which is on Tuesday

from 2 to 333 floors up some space on the

third floor here, and sometimes not often, but sometimes you

get someone with a formal models that come to present

the paper.

And if you come to the seminar and you listen

to the discussion, you will see that the more discussion

is going to be about this, but it's going to

be about the assumption that goes into the model that

is, which is going to be about what type of

trade off is the person trying to study, and whether

this trade off makes sense, and whether this trade off

is actually modelled the appropriate way.

Right then.

That annoys a lot of empirical people that say, but

like, oh, can we move on?

Can we move on?

But once we have discussed the model, there is nothing

else to discuss in that theory.

Right?

Everything comes from the model.

Everything comes from the assumptions.

Something I'll come back a little bit at the end

of this set of introduction slides.

So what is a model is going to have three

components.

There's going to have a set of assumption, a solution

concept and the results that come from it.

And importantly, I repeat myself, this is not all the

way working.

What is the current analogies and probably was not heard?

This analogy before is that models are like maps.

Everybody has heard about this.

Now, for example, you know this map.

Anyone knows why this is a very important map?

Besides the fact that, of course it's a map of

London Tube.

But why is it a very important map?

Because it's not geographically.

That's.

That's true.

But every tube map is not geographically accurate.

Why is this two map particularly important?

Is the first map of subway that was not geographically

accurate.

Why was it the case?

Is because as long as the tube was concentrated to

the centre.

It was easy to keep the distance, but as the

line started to basically go further, it was like if

you wanted to keep the distance accurate, you will have

kind of like this part of the tube map will

have become completely unreadable.

So what happened is that the genius person whose name

I didn't remember kind of like, of course, names.

I'm terrible with names, so I will not remember your

name until we are 21.

And if so, right.

But I do remember phrase very well.

So, you know, I will say hi if I meet

you on campus.

And sometimes the student doesn't remember me.

So this is like this.

Get to know that.

So the point is like, you know, that has created

distance that very much are not accurate, but it's a

perfect map to basically go in the tube.

Right.

So this map is fantastic Because for the purpose it

has been created for getting you to be able to

navigate the tube.

It's working perfectly.

Something for a mother.

A model has a purpose.

Explaining some phenomenon and a great model will be able

to do so, even if it means distorting realities, right?

So to see the distortion, you can see like for

example, like these are the station, these are where they

are really located.

This is the Thames.

Like you know, this is the River Thames and this

is the Thames on the map.

If you follow the map at some point you will

drown.

So this is not a very good idea and stuff

like this.

Right.

So this is kind of this.

And if you click on this link there's a nice

um, page with all the distortion of tube map that

is kind of like animated.

So you can see for example, the margin tube map

is distorted relative to the Real Madrid geography.

But this is a common way to think about a

model.

And indeed, there is this beautiful, kind of like long

coat that I'm not going to read and just say

that there were some, you know, cartographers that became obsessed

of having a map that were perfectly accurate.

And the only way you have a map that is

perfectly accurate, it's a map that is one on one

to reality in terms of size.

And of course, what the point of this bloody map.

Right.

And so there have been abandoned to the desert afterwards.

Right.

This is really the vast map was useless if you

start to put more information on the map, this is

what it looks like.

So this is another map that tries to also give

you some sense of the distance that you have to

cover, right?

Unless you're on LSD, this map is not really going

to be very useful for you.

Fiona is there?

I'm pretty sure it's perfectly fine.

Now, there is another way.

I think that that model is working right.

If you think about especially nowadays with, you know, the

TikTok or whatever would be new to Snapchat, whatever would

be new in the future or the 24 hours news,

or the fact, for example, that every online newspaper, you

know, have a live feed.

They are very good at creating a live feed, like

the live feed of the American election of the Israeli

war against the neighbours, etc. we are really, really, really

bombarded by information, right?

And therefore it becomes very, very hard to make sense

of what is happening.

This is kind of like this, this blurry thing.

However, if you take kind of like, you know, a

model, what a model is meant to do is to

give you perspective.

And so to let you to be able to see

what is kind of like behind everything that is happening.

This is again a very important painting in the history

of, you know, uh, art.

Anyone knows which witch painting this is?

And.

I would have said a French impressionist, but I can't.

Say which one.

So it's actually not a French.

You will have been very offended as a painter if

you call him an impressionist, but indeed, it is one

of the source of inspiration for the French and British.

So this is a slab of money, and it's one

of the kind of like painting that, you know, generated

the Impressionist invasion after if you want.

It's very important because it has an enormous scale.

And this enormous scale was, you know, reserved for kind

of antiquity or religious theme.

And it puts something very, very banal in the in,

in the painting with in fact, is also, you know,

socially questionable because there are debate about who are the

ladies and what is kind of like the occupations.

It's also a painting that broke a lot of rules

of painting of the time in terms of distortion and

things like this.

And it's, of course, a painting that created a huge

scandal in when it was first shown.

However, fast forward a few years, and it's a painting

that completely changed the perspective of people.

That is, 15 years later, while people were walking in

the woods next to London and seeing some gentlemen having

lunch with some young, younger or some age ladies, people

would say, oh, that's exactly like a slab of money.

So they will reinterpret a social situation according to the

painting.

Right.

The painting becomes the way to interpret a social situation.

And, you know, I hope that in this course or

in any course you take, but especially in this course,

I hope that once or twice there will be an

epiphany moment where you see a model and you tell

yourself, wow, that changed my perspective on the topic.

I am now reinterpreting a social fog based on a

model that I've seen in that course in that lecture.

Right.

If this happens, you know, that's kind of like what

we aim for.

Us applied theories of of any breed.

So.

So a few things more is.

One thing is former model is just one way is

to build theories.

In fact, everyone works with theories, even the most applied

empiricist in economics.

As a theory, in the back of his mind, it's

just not put it on paper and not realised sometime

that he has.

It is like Mr. Jordan who doesn't know that he's

doing prose when he's talking.

So theories are everywhere and all theories are the basis

of causal investigation.

All theories of representation and all theories sometimes implicitly have

the three components of assumption certain logic and prediction.

You will find it everywhere.

But this is not about model in economics.

Former model.

So if you want to call it, it's everywhere.

It's basically, you know, an experiment.

It's basically in political theory, right.

You can find it wherever you go.

If you pay attention to what you are reading, if

you pay attention to a purely empirical paper, and now

they are building the literature review or the introduction or

the context, they will be behind it.

The same element of assumption, a certain logic and some

result that come off of it, like building a narrative

to make you believe that the results are absolutely natural

and make sense.

So what is specific about models?

You know, the one is the clarity of assumptions.

That is really, you know, most of the time, unfortunately,

most of the time the assumption will be stated very,

very clearly And in no lecture will, you will see

that we are always going to present the model the

same way.

So model are going to be a set of players,

a set of actions, an order of move information that

players have when they basically act, and the payoff.

These are the five components of every model we are

going to see.

And we're going to see many models.

And every lecture where we see a model, there are

going to be three 1 to 5 slide which will

have these five elements together.

So let's keep this.

One thing I want to say is and I already

said it, but I will repeat it is like the

assumptions are everything in the model.

And there is in some sense a paradox of applied

Theory, which is the following.

You can think about the human beings in any model

as being the absolute human being, able to make complex

calculations about equilibrium behaviour.

They're able to make complex calculations about what different information,

different signals reveal to them.

They're able to do all these complicated things.

But in the end.

Any player in our model is a slave of the

assumption we are putting.

So every action, every equilibrium, everything is fully determined by

the assumptions we are putting into it.

Put the assumption and the rest is automaton.

So you have at the same time, the most perfect

human being that you can find, and we are not

able to meet the standards of, you know, the model

we are going to see.

And on the other hand, the people are just robots.

They are slave of the assumption that we are put

into the model.

And I think this is a kind of like a

sort of paradox, because we are at the same time

looking at the perfect human being, and the perfect human

being is just a robot.

And, you know, there's no room for emotion and stuff

like this or thing.

Another thing is that we are only looking, you know,

at just one part of the phenomenon.

And in some sense, you can think of it as,

you know, let's think about a doomsday, maybe not a

doomsday scenario for everyone, but, you know, a doomsday scenario

for many people, which would be the re-election of Trump

in the United States, right?

No model will be able to explain the election of

Trump in the United States.

That's not possible.

No formal model, no amperex.

Nothing.

Right.

What a model can do is whether to explain to

you why populist candidate can be attractive.

That's what a model can do.

Tell you what are the forces that play behind the

attractiveness of populist candidates in general?

And my model could say, you know, lack of trust.

Another model could say corruption.

Another one could say a social media bubble, whatever you

want.

But you never know which one would be responsible for

a particular phenomenon.

It's just a set of explanation, and we try to

explain why this set of possible explanation makes sense, to

explain the success of populist candidates in general.

We never explain one particular phenomenon.

We always try to explain phenomenon on average.

We always try to explain why is one why is

why more likely in this particular set of circumstances and

the why is important, right.

So and you know, this is also related to ambiguities.

If you think about ambiguities, what is X doing.

And X is also thinking about trying to explain part

of what cause y you have never have an empirical

paper where the effect on y is, you know, 75%,

and then nobody will believe some kind of like causal

mechanism where changing X expense 75% of like why that's

not possible.

We always try to explain tiny little bits of a

y And why we try to do is not just

to look at x and y.

Even in the most beautifully identified empirical model, when we

try to also understand is why is it the case

that X occurs?

All right.

So that's kind of like one thing.

So in econometrics you know the the the basic issue

is what would we like to do is to have

two words.

One where people are treated and one where people see

the election of Trump and one where people are not

treated, and one where Kamala Harris wins the election.

And then to compare these two words, right.

But of course, that's the fundamental problem.

The fundamental problem is that we never get to observe

these two words simultaneously.

And so what we do is either we observe the

same person At two different point in time.

Before or after receiving a vaccine, for example, or receiving

some information, or we observe different borders at the same

time.

Some will receive the information, some without.

And what great empiricists have been doing, and we will

see some of these research design during the course is

to find ways to approximate as much as possible.

This and using.

Of course we could use experiment.

But experiment in social science and in political economy are

not for important.

Questions are not always easy.

And what they do is that they try to find

settings for this work using difference and difference design.

All the research discussion is regression, discontinuity design and the

under icon.

So what are we doing in both cases Why we

try.

What we are doing in androids and in mother is

to say is I want to understand why x equals

y, and I really want to isolate the effect of

x on y.

Right.

That's really what is common to both types.

However, there is one difference is that in model we

are creating a world where only x can cause y.

That is, we are only kind of isolating the effect

of x and y.

And the question then is is it really important this

x?

And is it really the right way to model the

effect of, for example, in appearance, they are to convince

us, the audience, that they indeed have isolated the effect

of x and y.

So it's a different problem in one case is why

didn't you add element to your mother.

All right.

Why didn't you add some extra man to your model?

That would make more sense that just your X in

upper X is.

Are you sure that you don't have an X prime

that is correlated with your x and your Y?

That is biasing your estimate.

It's not the same question that we are asking.

In practice, there are three ways we can connect them,

right?

One is basically just to tell you your model that

say that, you know, unemployment benefit properly.

So I want to extend the benefit success.

So I'm going to control for unemployment.

So that's that's one thing.

Another thing is here is a model that says when

unemployment increases, there is a decrease of trust in mainstream

politician.

And there's going to be an increase in populist vodka.

And here you basically have the model that tells you

what to look for.

First of all is telling you unemployment is causing an

increase in populist voters.

So I'm going to try to find kind of like

exogenous variation.

And good luck with this.

And, you know, looking at populism, but it's also telling

you the causal chain.

So it's also telling you you should also not only

look at unemployment and populism, but unemployment and trust in

mainstream politicians.

So it will tell you also the statistics.

So that is the empirical implication of theoretical models.

We'll do a bit of this.

And another things that will be kind of saying is

uh, like here is an estimate of some estimate.

Right.

But the question is what is the estimate.

What is inside the things you are trying to estimate.

and not be a good person will tell you, for

example, the big questions both in economics and political science,

especially in political sciences, what is called the incumbency advantage.

So the government's the advantage is the vote gain that

one politician gets just for the fact of being the

incumbent in an invasion.

So that's that's what it is.

And if you want to know the number that we

can offer, like I think relatively seriously, it's 6%.

So when you're like, you're running in an open base

or you're running as the incumbent, open means there's no

incumbent.

It's six percentage points more for you.

And this is this is what it is.

And this incumbency advantage has been kind of like fun

using a technique that we will see in a few

ways called regression discontinuity design.

And and so there has been many, many papers using

regression discontinuity design.

Right.

And the question is, is it really true that a

regression discontinuity design just measure the effect of incumbency, just

measure this little thing, the little benefit that you get

from being the incumbent.

And you have a very beautiful paper by Argus 2016.

That has been published in the Journal of Politics.

And it's also, uh, the basics was kind of like

a bit of an inspiration for question two of your

first week problem set.

And what this paper show is that, in fact, regression

discontinuity design using close election do not capture just like

incumbency advantage.

Right.

It's showing Kind of like the estimate is not what

empirical people have started is it's revisiting the estimate.

This paper has 15 sites.

You know, it's like.

Completely ignored.

But it's a beautiful paper.

All right.

So last slide before we do a break and then

we do some game theory.

So one thing and it's also true in this course

right.

So in this course you're not going to see political

economy.

You're going to see a particular way of thinking about

political economy.

You're going to see my way of thinking about political

economy.

Right.

And it doesn't mean that this is the only way.

It might not even be the best way.

It's probably not even the best way that you can

find out there.

But only I try to.

Tell you something about.

I see things so that you can also develop your

own way to engage with this thing.

And that's the goal.

And, you know, the problem is, like everybody else sometimes

might be a bit contrarian, but that's my French nature.

But sometimes I will also follow the flow.

And the flow is there's no perfection in academia.

The notion that I can give you big truths and

stuff like this, in my view, is complete bollocks.

What is more true is that we get some fog,

we learn some things, but what becomes very popular, what

becomes major that's socially constructed, right?

That is, there is a consensus on what is important.

But this consensus is not telling you that this is

important.

It's just a socially constructed consensus on what are good

papers, what are not good papers and think You have

a beautiful paper in the air that says that science

advance one funeral at a time and show how when

you bring them in for the art science, they were

not going to criticise the economy.

So when a demon dies in the arts and suddenly

you get different type of people publishing on the topic,

the big name was a specialist.

I nearly retweeted this one.

Allison dies, but I thought it was like kind of

a bad test.

You don't know where that one is.

And I said, no, this joke fell flat.

It's okay.

It's one of many that.

Yeah.

And again, you know, to repeat myself, you're going to

see most of the most of the model.

You're going to see I like this thing.

I don't like almost empirical papers.

You do not have to like them.

You can criticise them.

You can even hate them.

Right.

What I hope is that, you know, what we will

do is that if you don't like a model, you

will build a reasonable argument for why you don't like

it.

Not just a gut reaction, but something that will make

sense to you.

Why did you have this reaction toward that model?

You might also love them, but you need also to

understand why you love this model, right?

Some empirical paper.

Some empirical paper.

You might like them.

I may also dislike them and you might like them,

or vice versa.

And what is mattering is not that we come to

an agreement, right?

I'm not there to brainwash you.

But the more what I care about is that when

you express either positive or negative about any paper, any

model anyone predicts, we will see in this course you

have the tools to make your argument logically consistent, right?

That it makes sense for you and that so You

grow as a thinker is by building your ability to

understand why you like and why you don't like something.

And that's the goal.

And that's what we will do.

And to do this, the first thing we will have

to do is to do some game theory refresher.

Right.

So let's do the game theory, uh, refresher part.

So.

Game theory is incredibly nutritionally intensive.

One year I taught a PhD sequence game theory.

And really, my hands was hurting so much at the

right location on the book.

Right.

And then I told myself, I'm never doing this again.

And indeed, I never teach game theory course only teach

applied course.

Now here we're going to review the notation.

But what is important is that most of what we

we're going to do is going to be thinking about,

you know, finding equilibrium, which we are going to express

in words, is going to be about finding that something

is not in equilibrium, using proof by contradiction that we

are also going to express in words we are not

going to use.

We are going to try to avoid using so much

of this notation.

It's not because I think this notation is unimportant.

It is in some sense.

And that's why I want you to see it at

least once.

But it's mostly because I think at this level, this

is not the first order concept.

I don't really care if you're writing, you know, with

the appropriate notation and the equilibrium.

That's for my PhD students, right.

At this level, I'm much more interested that you're having

the good logic on how to solve for existence or

to prove non-existence of particular equilibrium, right?

So that's what we're going to do about the a

condition for existence are trying to search for an amazing

state.

So what are the notation that we are going to

use?

And as I said.

Again and again we are going to see it.

But rather than expressing it in notational term, I am

going to express it a lot in words.

So again is going to have a set of player

N and one player is going to be I, I

belonging to N.

So n you can think of it both as the

number of players or the cardinality of the set and

the set itself.

Sometimes in practice is this crazy thing which is game

of two players.

It's kind of fun.

It's very I mean, it's not easy.

It will become easier as the game go to solve

the game of player that become quite a mess.

And you know, sometime we make sure that one player

has some behavioural features in order to solve a game

of four players and players, except in specific case.

It's very, very complicated actually.

So what we are going to do a lot is

we're going to solve a lot of game with two

players, a few games with three, and then we will

go to what is called a continuum of play, where

every player is an atom.

And as a result, we don't really care about what

the other players are doing.

So that's kind of like the type of game readiness

study.

So instead of action is we can express it in

pure strategy.

Right.

So think about yourself right.

Think about us.

We are how many we are.

Minus four 811 1213.

We are starting players in this game.

Right there is I the lecture on the player.

And all of you students are not the type of

player where we can think about our strategy.

So my strategy is, you know how much effort I

put into the lecture, for example, and your strategy is

could be like different.

It could be whether or not you pay attention to

what I'm saying, whether or not you are taking this

course, for example.

Right.

And the strategy space is going to be defined by

the interaction of all of strategies, right.

So what is specific about game theory is like unlike

decision making problem like decision theoretic problem might pay off

and your payoff depends on everybody else actions.

So for example, my value of putting effort into the

lecture is increasing with the number of students.

Maybe it's actually inverse U-shape when there are too many

students become less interesting, but there is kind of like

a relationship between for you, it might be more interesting

to take a course that on many studio and then

across the last few studios.

So we can think about this sort of kind of

like interaction going on.

And then what we are going on is multiple stage

right.

And information.

And one, we both all of them together.

We're going to go to perfect Bayesian equilibrium, which is

the solution concept and the type of game associated with

it.

Now we're going to study the most in this course.

So strategy profile.

We can express them as mixed strategies.

Right.

So it's basically what probably you put into different action.

It could be degenerate mixed strategy.

Degenerate mix strategy is basically a pure strategy equilibrium right.

So a strategy profile is going to be what is

the probability that I put on action k.

And the property is that, of course, the sum of

probabilities has to be equal to one.

Other players, if one player are all the players, is

usually denoted by minus sign.

So if you see minus I, that means you are

looking at other players.

So what is a Nash equilibrium?

What it's saying that for any strategies in my mixed

strategy set right.

Given what you are doing, I cannot do better.

Right.

And the same is true.

The other reward that is, given what I'm doing, you

cannot do better than what the strategy you have been

choosing.

Right?

So it's basically a fixed point problem and are my

best response to your strategy.

Then you are doing the best response to my best

response of Sponsor your choosing the best possible things to

do.

Given what I'm doing, then I'm choosing the best possible

thing to do, given the best possible thing to do.

You are doing to the best possible thing are the

infinite.

That's called a fixed work.

And what is a fixed point is when my best

response to your strategy.

Given this, you are still maintaining the same strategy and

given what you are doing and still maintaining the same

strategy.

That's the fixed point.

It's just basically, you know, thinking about given what you

are doing, I cannot do better.

Given what I'm doing, you cannot do better.

Okay.

You and everybody else.

Right.

So that's kind of like the double thing.

So it's a fixed point problem.

And you know we know quite a bit about fixed

point problem in economics and of course in mathematics.

And the type of problem we have is that we

know, for example, that existence is guaranteed infinite in game

with any number of players and finite number of options.

We also have this property because it's a fixed point

that there is usually a node number of equilibrium, so

that is that if you find two equilibria in pure

strategies, there's probably a third one in mixed strategies.

And that's that's all.

Sometimes there are game that will be degenerate that have

infinite number of equilibria.

But you know this is kind of like one way.

So from this we can build an expensive form game.

Right.

So these games are basically the normal form game of

the game.

You usually think about when you think about the matrix

game.

Right.

Like so, you know, the prisoner's dilemma is betray silence,

betray silence.

That's kind of like the game we have just said

now two actions for each player to betray or to

remain silent.

The payoff that would be in the case of the

matrixes.

And we find the Nash equilibrium of this.

Now, well, it's not going to do many, many games

because in politics it doesn't make so much sense where

there is simultaneous move.

We're going to do a few like information aggregation is

one of them, for example.

But we are not going to do many of them.

Most of the time players are going to, you know,

act one after the other.

So I'm giving the lecture.

You are choosing the course after seeing the lecture, right?

It's not at the same time that we are doing

this.

So this is kind of like the extensive form game

politics.

Politicians make a policy or propose a platform.

The voters decide to elect that politician or re-elected depending

on the set.

So the item Um, move.

So what we're going to add is an order of

move.

So sometimes you have seen this as a tree.

A gantry gantry is like social choice.

I hate them, but I can answer a question about

gantry.

So you will very, very rarely see gantry.

Usually the way I'm going to describe the move to

you is with a timing.

I'm going to say one blah blah, do x decide

x, then this other player is going to make this

decision and things like this.

So one of the first, kind of like the extensive

form game we're going to see is the spatial model

of politics in a spatial model of politics.

The candidates propose a platform move one.

The voters decide which candidate they will vote for.

Move to move three.

The winner of the election is determined to implement its

platform.

So that's kind of like an extensive but the first

extensive form game we're going to see.

So in this case you have the order.

Then you have the strategies as a function of history.

And that's very important though sometimes we do it implicitly.

But what is very important is that when we define

an equilibrium, we need to define the strategy for each

possible actions of the player that play before us.

Right.

So let's try that.

And equilibrium is not just what is happening on task,

which is what we observe.

It's also what will have happened if one player will

have deviated, what will have been the consequence down the

line of this deviation.

So think about, you know, the spatial model of politics.

One thing we will see in the basic version is

that there's going to be conversions to the median borders

of your points, and borders are going to randomly select

between the two candidates.

That is what we observe in equilibrium.

But what we need to do is what would have

to do if we were to observe one platform that

is not the median borders of your points compared to

the median border.

So we need to define what voters are doing for

any pairs of platform that the voter could observe.

And so that's kind of fun one way.

Another thing is there can be prior information as a

function of history.

So stick a border game continuing with our electoral game.

Or we say okay, let's suppose there is a candidate

that is there.

The first option is whether another candidate entered the election

to compete.

Then the two candidates propose a platform.

Then they decide the voter decides to vote if they

are meeting.

Otherwise the one candidate is just elected, right?

So in this game, the choice of, you know, the

competitor, whether the challenger, whether to enter or not, will

change the information available to the vote on the line.

Because if the challenger doesn't enter, there is no platform.

Therefore there is no there is not even election, right?

They change the information and it change also the voting,

the action that someone can do.

And they can also be probability distribution over an exogenous

event.

So let's think again about this game with an entry.

There is a cost of entry that can be high

or low and that is determined by nature.

So you have this probability what happen when the cost

is low.

What happens when the cost is high, etc..

So how do we know this.

So we are going to have a set of history

for again, as I said, only time we really see

this notation in full, then we are going to do

it in a way that is more intuitive, but you

need to see it at least once.

So we're going to have a set of histories right.

Previous move what can be observed.

And we're going to get a set of action which

is over all possible history.

Right.

As I said in our entry game, if the challenger

does not enter, there is no chance of voting.

So the action that you can do depend on whether

the challenger is entering.

If, you know, I kind of like decide not to

withdraw the course, which I cannot do at this point

in time.

I just think about you can never decide whether or

not to take it, because you will never be given

this option.

If your strategy has to be defined for all these

stories, right?

It's important that you define the strategy for all possible

history, not just the history that you see.

And that's really a very, very good thing to remember,

even though we do in notation and intensity.

But here really, this is why it matters.

And equilibrium is always across all possible things.

You could have observed, not just the thing you observe.

Right.

Or is kind of this you have a strategic space,

right?

Which is kind of again, the cross-product of all this

and a mixed strategy is basically, you know, the, the

some definition of before, but the definition of a Nash

equilibrium does not change, except that we know an extensive

form game.

The Nash equilibrium can be problematic, right?

We know that in extensive form game Nash equilibrium leads

to strange equilibria often linked to the issue of non

credible site, which is something like Putin saying if Ukraine

were to use a Western missile to bombard Russia, we

will use the atomic bomb.

That if you understand game theory as you do already,

you you understand that this is an anti threat because

the moment Ukraine has fired the missing missile into Russian

territory, it's for sure not a best response for Russia

to use the nuclear bomb, because otherwise the US will

use the nuclear bomb.

And you know the world will have.

So this is not going to happen.

So this is kind of like just a way to

just like, you know, make a threat.

But they are not credible.

And so Nash equilibrium does not rule ruled this type

of kind of like possibility.

So you can think about Biden maybe is advisable this

day because Biden, we don't need too much for this

one.

Thinking if instead thinking.

Biden listen to Putin saying this and doesn't understand the

concept of so-called perfect Nash equilibrium and said, oh my

God, I'm not letting Ukraine use Western missile to bombard

Russia, which is indeed what we have observed.

Right?

This is like what has happened is like the one

the Linsky has said, let me bombard Russia with Western

missile.

Putin said, if you do this, I'm going to use

the nuclear weapon.

And Biden said, whoa, whoa, whoa whoa whoa whoa.

We don't let you bombard Russian, right?

This.

But this was an empty threat.

Biden and his advisors thought they were playing a Nash

equilibrium.

But if they were playing the right equilibrium concept, which

is subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.

Before I go to imperfect, you can also see that

Doctor Strange.

Have you watched Doctor Strangelove?

It's a very famous film by Stanley Kubrick, and it's

about the nuclear threat, and it's all about the concept

of empty threats.

And the Russian comes up with a solution to this,

which is a commitment device that is exactly the same.

If this happened, we are committed absolutely to use the

nuclear bomb.

It's like, you know, become automatic and that we move

the concept of and this is the whole story of

Doctor Strange.

You should see it is basically Nash equilibrium with anticipated

and not resolved.

That's what it is.

Kind of.

Maybe not.

I'm from my perspective, I should say, and you will

see more in this movie than I did.

So the way we deal with this issue with Nash

Equilibrium was the way the Wiseman people dealt with this

issue with Nash equilibrium is to come up with another

solution concept, which you awfully all know, which is called

subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.

Right.

So subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.

While subgame is a very again, incredibly complicated sentence.

So let me just say what is a subgame.

A subgame is basically if you are a player and

you know where you stand in the game three that's

to think about.

And this is to.

Think about game theory.

Actually let me do it on the.

Ah, yes.

But this is going to be.

This is because I didn't install this, so I cannot

do it.

So I need to install a driver because the computer

is under.

So think about a game through.

A sub game a you know where you start right.

This is player one.

This is player two.

Player one choose between two options.

Player to choose after this action and after this action.

What is a sub game?

A submarine is here.

Player two knows what is in the gantry.

So that's the subject here to knows why is that

a sub game?

And then the wall game is always a sub game.

So that's basically what are the difference.

And what is the perfect Nash equilibrium I'm saying is

saying if you know you're here as player two you

should take the best possible action at this point.

So Ukraine a son missile into Russian territory with Western

kind of like equipment.

Russia has the choice between nuclear weapon and non-nuclear weapon.

The best response in this case is non-nuclear weapon.

And so the only thing that can be true is

that if Ukraine where to bombard Russia.

Russia will not use nuclear weapon.

Right.

So that's kind of like.

If player two doesn't know where player two is, we

usually represent this with Dot.

And in this case we will have only once again.

And that will be the world game.

So let's think about you know.

And again, the case of our candidate entry.

Right.

We could think about it the following ways.

The challenger.

Oh, yes.

You're also going to enjoy many, many weeks of my

beautiful handwriting.

You know, the Japanese are asking me to do become

a calligraphy master.

So beautiful.

My writing is.

So the challenge will decide whether to enter or not.

Enter.

If it doesn't enter, you know we end up with

something and then hear.

The incumbent choose a platform.

If it's a continuum, we represent it like this.

The challenger.

Look at platform.

And then we are the voter.

We decide between the incumbent and the challenger, for example.

That will be this type of things.

And so in this case you will know whether the

challenger hasn't or not.

Right.

Otherwise it would be kind of very strange as again.

You will also know the platform that had been offered

by the two candidates.

Otherwise it will also be very strange.

Okay.

So there are many things that kind of like we

know where we stand.

And so we think about the best response, which is

okay, now in the platform, who do I choose from

knowing what is going to be the choice, what do

I choose, etc., going off the tree.

And so that's that's the way we, we do it.

So we try to think about all the time.

Given that I know where I am, what is my

best choice at this particular point of time?

But it does not matter whether we end up on

this track.

We could be on the case of the challenger.

Never enter, but still we will have to define what

happened there as if it were to happen.

So we are always defining the equilibrium, both the equilibrium

that we see, which we say on the equilibrium path

and the equilibrium we do not see which remains, we

say out of equilibrium.

Right.

And it's important to do both.

And so what is this subgame perfect Nash equilibrium is

saying for every possible subgame.

So each time a player knows where he is, this

player will take the best possible action, anticipating what other

people are going to do on the trip.

And so this is kind of fun.

And the way it looks complicated, but the very, very

famous way to solve this is by background injection.

We start from the bottom and we go.

All right.

So this is kind of like the easy game.

Now we're going to start introducing more interesting features into

a game.

One is the game of incomplete information.

So we're going to suppose that players are some private

information.

So the prior information could be about themself.

So I have private information about whether or not I'm

a good lecture.

What is I believe are private information about this.

We will also see game where there is symmetric uncertainty.

When we do the political agency game we will see

a game where.

Moreira boss.

The voter doesn't know about the type of a politician

and the politician doesn't know their own type.

So that's kind of like when it's about your own

payoff, which is about my quality of life as a

lecturer, the honesty of a politician, the competence.

We call this a type.

And what I will use the term type, the type

of a politician is corrupt and uncovered.

It means it's about the private payoff of the product

characteristic of this particular article.

Another type of private information is about a variable that

affect everybody's bills.

And this variable is generally called.

And I will try to be consistent throughout the course.

The state of the world type will usually be denoted.

This is except this time by tau, except if we

look at taxation state of the world, which is usually

been to be denoted by theta as a The volume.

Right?

So one type of game where we will have and

we will see it quite fast, where we will have

this type of uncertainty and in a game of incomplete

information is information aggregation and information aggregation.

There is a current state of the world and every

voters, including you in the little experiment that will run,

will have a signal about the state of the world.

And with this signal, you're going to have to think

about which who do you what do you vote for?

So think about Brexit.

There is a state of the world where Brexit is

a good thing for the UK.

Kind of.

Maybe not, and is a state of the world where

it's a bad thing for the UK.

People receive a signal that is informative about which state

we are here, and then they decide whether to vote

for Brexit on this type.

Of game.

We're going to see them in week three.

That game of information aggregation.

The set of type is going to be denoted by

by this.

But you know for example in all cases Brexit is

good Brexit.

But it's a binary type.

The types are drawn from probability with a certain prior.

The type could be independent from each other, and most

of the time we are going to see a model

where types are independent with each other.

Right.

So for example you can think about voters can be

moderate or extremist.

But the chances that, you know, nature draws a border

that is moderate is kind of like independent of the

number of moderators already in the population.

It's, as we say, idea that's most of our model

will have these features.

We will rarely work with model where we want more

information.

That means something about your time, for example.

However, when we think about information aggregation, on the other

hand, the signal that I get can tell me something

about the signal that you got.

And we will see a very beautiful result when it

comes to information aggregation.

So without loss of generality, we can assume that all

type of positive probability.

That's really not important because we can always rewrite this

set of type.

And so what is a Bayesian equilibrium.

While the Bayesian equilibrium is an extension of the Nash

equilibrium.

This time instead of thinking about biogenic as your strategy,

as just one thing, you need to think about your

strategy for every possible time.

And in fact, sometimes this type of game are solved

thinking not about player, but player types.

So there will be as many as a combination of

the two.

Right.

In the video there is an example of a riddle

which is quite famous, but which we transform into a

Bayesian game as well.

So that will give you an example in the problem

set that you saw from next week's seminar.

There is an example of Bayesian game with a kind

of war, and the country has more or less benefit

from war.

That's a Bayesian game that you're going to solve.

Now, very importantly, you again ask for subgame perfect Nash

equilibrium where you need to define the equilibrium strategy for

all possible histories, whether or not you observe them.

Why do you come to Bayesian game?

You need to define the strategy for every possible path.

And since we see many, many games like this, I

can tell you that even in the final exam, many

times students, when I tell them, show that blabla is

an equilibrium if and only if we forget to define

the strategy of all possible types for the equilibrium to

exist, and they will only focus on one thing.

So it's very important to define the equilibrium for all

possible time.

All right.

So let's think about okay I can be a good

or bad lecturer.

And let's say you are just all good students I'm

sure of this.

Right.

And I need to define this all a bad lecture

will be a bad lecture of me.

Will behave and also buy a good lecture on me

will be the equilibrium.

I am basically schizophrenic.

I need to define myself for two types the good

type me and the bad type.

Right.

That's that's.

How do we define it?

Well, it has to be that my strategy in pure

strategy.

Maximise my utility.

Given everybody else is doing, given their type, and there

needs to be as many strategies of other people as

there are other people, but also as there are type

of other people.

So you can see this blow up very quickly.

So if you are right.

Given the strategy of other people, given that the type

can affect my payoff.

So for example, to think about re-electing a corrupt politician,

you do not get the same payoff as re-electing an

honest politician.

And how do you compute this kind of like utility?

What it has to be expected given what you expect

of all the people, given what you learn about yourself.

So that's that's why, again, it's very complicated when we

do not only When we do it again and again

and again and again and again over 20 weeks.

Don't worry about it.

It's going to become very, very clear what we mean

by this.

Right.

But so you basically say, what did I learn about

other people taught?

Because I may have learned something about them learning about

myself.

And then I'm going to compute what I expect them

to do.

And then I have to find what is my best

strategy, given what I expect them to do.

Given the probability that this particular set of people arise.

This particular type combination of dice.

That's a conditional probability.

That's a conditional probability indeed.

Right.

And of course for this we're going to use Bayes

rule.

But I'm coming for this here.

It's like what did I learn about all that.

As I said, most of the time we're going to

think that thoughts are independent.

So the conditional is basically just going to be the

prior, I guess, not an addition.

So the main I do think that like after information

aggregation, I'm not even sure we are really going to

use Bayesian equilibrium so much.

Okay, Margaret, I'm going to do mostly.

Is we're going to move to perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

Right.

One issue, again with Bayesian equilibrium is that it requires

simultaneous play, an information aggregation model of connections.

You all receive a signal simultaneously, and you all cast

a vote simultaneously.

There are two separate parties.

It is a Bayesian.

Okay, so that's that's what it is.

Most of the time in politics, again, the action are

more kind of like one after the other and then

combine in power takes a certain decision to dissolve the

National Assembly.

You know, just not to talk about real world events.

Voters might learn something about what type of politician this

incumbent is given the decision that this politician has taken.

Right.

So what is different is that the action of one

player is informative for the other player.

And indeed, in our relationship at the beginning, these first

lectures that we are before you get stuck are informative

about the quality of this course for you.

So here this become more involved because we have to

think about what does it mean.

What does an action mean for the other players.

Right.

And to do this, the equilibrium concept, we're going to

use this perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

So what is perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

Usually we use it in signalling game of expression.

So when I think about two players player one takes

the first action which is observed by player two before

player two itself of ourself or themselves back in action.

Right.

So my point is, on the National Assembly, the voter

observes this before deciding whether to vote for Macron's policy.

So of course, Player one has some private information right

about this type.

Or it could be about the state of the world.

There is a common knowledge prior that we can also

work with more uncertainty there.

And player two, after observing player one, action is going

to form what we call a posterior.

What is the probability of the realisation of a particular

time given the action that has been taken?

What is the probability that Macron is actually a rightwing

politician, given that he has nominated the right wing government?

And this, this double thing, the notation for this sort

of posterior is going to be this conditional probability mu

of theta conditional on A1.

And the strategies are going to be for player one.

We need to define the strategies according to the different

type again.

So we're going to have one strategy for macro as

a right wing politician one strategy for macro the centrist

politician.

One strategy for the left wing politician.

Right.

This is going to be we're going to have three

strategies for macro according to the realisation of the type

For player two.

We need to think about what she should do.

Given all possible actions of Macron forming a unity national

government, a right wing government and left wing government, etc..

So that's kind of like what it is.

And in most of course, be consistent with each other.

So what is the equilibrium in this case where the

equilibrium are three steps.

Am I going to go backward because we also solve

this type of backward induction.

And will be just after player two for every possible

action that has been taken by player one, for every

possible action needs to find the action and maximise the

expected utility given players one action.

This is I had also given what they believe about

theta given player one action right again.

Should I vote for Macron's party?

So my action is voting or not for Macron's party?

Given that Macron has nominated a right wing government, given

what I learn about Macron's type, given that it has

nominated the right wing government.

But that's what it is now for player one for

every possible type of player one.

So in our case, for the three, Macron's the left

wing, while the centrist guy, the the right wing guy,

the right wing Macron.

We need to think about what is the best strategy

given what player two is going to do given the

action.

Right.

So there's this sense of going backwards.

And the last thing is this subject.

The subject is, what did I learn from player one's

action?

Right?

What did he tell me about theta one?

Why?

We're going to say is that mu of theta, given

A1 must satisfy Bayes rule on the equilibrium path.

So, you know, Bayes rule is one of the most

beautiful things there is in the world.

Despite one day the Guardian calling it this very obscure

theorem that drives the pandemic response.

It was very offended at that.

And despite, you know, the boat like thinking next to

the Bayesian, why does this guy call the boat Bayesian

searching now?

Did you see this story of the boat sinking in

Sicily?

Do you ever watch the news?

You're like, anyway, this is kind of like a very

beautiful thing that we're going to use a lot.

But what is important here is on the equilibrium path.

Indeed, Caltech Bayesian equilibrium actually suffers from the same flow

in some sense as subgame as games with extended form

and Nash equilibrium, when an action is not to be

observed in equilibrium.

You can define the belief however you want.

Right.

So think about and it can be completely crazy.

You could say if Macron would love form a left

wing government, then I would believe with probability one that

Macron is right.

And the right to do this because our equilibrium past

we only observed Macron forming a right wing government.

So everything that is not happening, I can define my

belief for everybody.

I have complete freedom over it, even if it's completely

counterintuitive.

Now, great minds have tried very, very hard to kind

of like progress and make like restriction on this.

And that is indeed some this was in the 1980s.

There was a ton of paper that created a different

criteria to refine perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

My favourite is called the intuitive criterion.

But there's also universal divinity, universal universal super divinity, blah

blah.

There are many, many criteria.

This literature ended in a failure.

There was no bullet proof criterion.

So most of the time we are not going to

bother too much with this and we are going to

define most of the time out of equilibrium belief in

a very natural way.

But they will not be the unique way to define

that.

Right.

We would say should Shouldn't.

Macron are former left wing government.

We will believe with high probability that Macron is left

right, something that makes more sense than the one I

told you just before that we will believe that he

is grappling with probability why we will do this type

of things.

We will not spend too much time, and often the

posterior out of equilibrium that I will tell you to

use is one that satisfies the intuitive criteria.

So you will see the restriction without saying.

All right.

So that's kind of like what we have now.

The last thing is next week before social choice we

will do one example of a Bayesian game of a

perfect Bayesian game with an interest group and a decision

maker, which will also introduce you to cheap talk and

costly signalling.

Not today.

To finish the lecture, I would rather kind of like

spend just a little bit of a reminder on Bayes

rule, right?

The most beautiful thing that you know you can do

is with probabilities.

So Bayes rule is basically telling us, what do I

learn after observing an event?

Right.

Like what is it that I learn after observing something?

What is the best use of this event from an

information perspective?

So what we're gonna have is, for example, a sample

space, which is a collection of all possible outcomes.

Right.

So typically you can think about the number on a

dice.

It could be other type of things.

So you know the solving or not the National Assembly

and things like this.

Then we are going to basically take this sample space

and slice it.

So think about a cake and you slice the cake,

right?

And so each piece of this sample space has been

sliced.

And we're going to call it B1, B2 etc..

So I've done a m slices of this cake.

And we're going to say that if you put back

all these slides together you get back your cake.

So you get back the sample space.

But there is also, you know, if you look at

the intersection of two slice of pie, they are basically

empty.

Like each slice of pie is unique in some sense.

Now that's what it says.

Partitions are important because they tell us.

Kind of like something about how we split.

So for example, think about the dice 123456.

You can partition it in very many different ways, right.

For example we could say 123 and four five.

This is a partition.

We could take each number member separately.

We could take the even number together and the odd

number together.

Also a partition.

We could take one, two, three, four, five.

That's another partition.

There's many different ways to partition a space, but what

is important is when you take the slice that you

have made, putting it back together, you get the full

dice one, two, three, four, five, six, and each element

the intersection is empty.

So then what we are going to think about is

we're going to take an event of an A, and

we're going to think about the what is called the

law of total probability.

We're going to say that we can actually say that

the probability that these seven happen is equal to the

probability that A happen with at the same time as

one of our slice, which is also equal to this

thing.

So for example, the roll dice number is even think

about a partition of 123456.

So even numbers is rolled.

Here we are 123456.

So we know that the probability of getting an even

number and one is equal to zero.

The probability of getting an even number and two is

equal to one six even number and three zero even

number and 416, etc..

And the probability of getting an even number is one.

And that's kind of like another.

And so what is Bayes rule?

While Bayes rule we ask ourselves what is the probability

of getting slice j given that of observed event?

What is the probability are that the number is one.

Given that I observe an even number.

This case is going to be zero, right?

And so using the formula this is going to be

this.

And most of the time we are going to use

two events.

And this is something like two actions two events two

states.

And we're going to think about what is the probability

of getting B1 given an A as happen is the

probability of getting A given b1 times the probability of

B1.

Same thing plus the probability of getting a given b2

times the probability of B2.

I swear to you that one comes the final exam.

You'll be dreaming about Bayes rule or nightmare in.

Baseball, you're going to become like it's going to be

like this.

going to become very, very, very, very quick, very good.

In fact, by the end of the term, there really

is your passion.

I mean, the like, you know, close to it in

any case.

So really baseball, we're going to see it so many

times you're going to be like mastering basic.

But let's see already when you master Bayes rule with

a few examples.

Here is a typical example.

So Bayes rule actually you know before I let you

Basil.

Nobody in real life is basically not nothing, right.

It's too complicated for people to use basically.

Why do we use baseball in our model?

Because it's actually, you know, we know that people change

our belief in a way that is consistent with baseball,

at least in direction.

So baseball is not such a bad Vaccination, but you

know more in terms of direction and actually being pointing

things in particular.

There is one set of people that should know Bayes

rule way more and are atrocious.

These are doctors.

Doctors are stupid at best.

When a doctor tells you something very, very careful, remember

that a doctor does not understand that.

Indeed, this little exercise here.

A doctor will get it completely wrong.

And let's see if you manage to get it right.

Right.

So what is it?

It's kind of like a case where maybe I should

do something like different.

So let's think about some people that can have cancer

or not.

Cancer.

Right.

And they can do tests for cancer that can be

positive or negative.

The test correctly detect cancer 90% of the time.

That is, the test has only a 10% false negative.

When you think about it, false negative is basically giving

you a negative test.

On the true test should be positive.

However, the test has also a 10% false positive that

is 10% of the time.

It should give you a positive and negative test will

give you a positive.

Now we suppose that in the population it's known that

10% of people should get cancer.

And and let's say that, you know, someone might just

see the doctor.

And unfortunately the person came back with a positive test.

What are the chances that this person actually has cancer?

So to do this you can come and Montcalm.

Right.

If you come and Dotcom.

And you follow.

No no, no.

Go back, go back.

No no no no no no no no.

Oh yes.

Something went wrong.

You went wrong.

Yeah.

You look at of course a new code.

So this is great.

This is you use this code 64558837.

Okay.

So the test are 10% false negative and 10% false

positive.

And 10% of the population will have cancer.

I and the mantra is not optional.

Don't try cheating by doing stuff on a piece of

paper.

What is the fun of this?

Oh, very nice.

Look at all this beautiful character that you have.

All right.

Are we ready?

Fastest answer gets most points.

So what is the chance that you have cancer after

a positive test?

I.

Indeed, most doctor will believe this.

Is it because there is 90% chance that a person

who has cancer that is positive, but in fact, in

truth, it's only 50%, right?

So before we do the the Bayes rule, let's think

about the the other case.

What is the chance that you have cancer if you

test negative.

All right.

Is everybody.

And then it's going to be less than 1%.

In fact, it's slightly more than 1%.

Okay.

So why is it the case that we have this.

And I'm just like doing the positive test.

We will stop after this and we'll do two more

examples.

Uh, beginning of next lecture before we do an example

of a Bayesian.

So we can think about what are the chances of

someone getting a cancer after a positive test.

Okay.

So using Bayes rule is one of the.

Lecture 2:

Not so bad.

Of course.

Unfortunately, we will not do a break where we will

go straight until the end of the lecture.

Today we are going to finish the bottom game theory,

doing a little bit of Bayes rule and an example

of a perfect Bayesian type of game game that used

perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

And then with the time we have, I will walk

you through social choice and in some sense y in

my perspective, which will insult many people that still work

on the social choice turning out to be a complete

kind of like a failure.

We still learn some stuff out of it, but we

learn mostly that it was not working right.

So.

What did we do last time?

Well, we went through a different type of game.

But in particular we start of game that are of

a form of a signalling game.

Right.

So signalling game where games that were combining the Bayesian

game, that is, games where there is private information around

and sequential game where players are one after the other,

right.

Sequential.

And in particular, what is very important is that in

this type of signalling game, that we will see many

of them, the action of the first player acting reveal

some information about underlying kind of like variable, right.

So it could be revealing some information about the type

of an actor.

So whether this is a good or bad lecture, whether

a politician is corrupt or not.

But it could.

So it could also be revealing some information about an

underlying state of the world, such as, you know, the

economy's doing well.

This is a good time to study political economy and

the like.

So in this case, we're going to say that we

have a player that has private information, either a type

of or a state of the world, this kind of

like variable theta that can be drawn from the state

that said theta capital.

And there is a common knowledge prior about this theta.

Right now this theta could be continuous.

And we're going to see some case where we're going

to have continuous theta.

But it could also be just binary good by corrupt

non corrupt.

And we will also work quite a bit with cases

where it's binary player two after.

So after that player one is going to act I'm

going to take some actions and play your two after

observing player ones.

Action is going to form a posterior belief about what

the theta is given, what player to observe, which is

the action of player.

Right.

So strategy in this case is going to be for

each type, you need to define an action needed to

find an action for the good and the bad type

for the current and the non corrupt type.

And if we have a continuous we need to define

a strategy for a function, basically a correspondence for each

possible element of the type set.

So this is kind of like very important.

It's like in after that what we have is that

3 or 2 we need to define a strategy for

each possible action that player one could take, whether or

not this action has been taken in equilibrium.

Right.

So we need to define like in a sequential game,

we need to define a best response to action that

will happen and the best response to action that will

not happen in equilibrium.

So that we say this happened in equilibrium.

We said that they are on path right on the

equilibrium path.

Those that are not happening in equilibrium, we say that

are out of equilibrium path.

Right.

So we need always to have this type of strategy.

And it's important because too many times students define strategies

only for in path action, forgetting to define what happen

out of path right.

What would have happened if player one would have acted

differently?

A perfect Bayesian equilibrium in a signalling game, as this

kind of strategy profile where starting with player two, player

two needs to take the best possible action given.

Why For expected utility, right?

As a function of player one and player two action,

and possibly the underlying variable that she doesn't know about.

And in this expected utility, she makes the best use

of the information she has received from player one action

in the form of this posterior.

And this posterior, we say, has to satisfy Bayes rule

on the equilibrium path.

Right.

So as what I briefly said last week, is that

out of equilibrium the posterior is much freer.

Right.

We can do what we want.

And I've completely crazy posterior.

I also said that there were some attempts in the

literature to deal with this.

And that's another wonderful failure, right?

It didn't settle.

You don't have to worry much about this in your

kind of like problem set and anything you do, because

implicitly you will not use crazy out of equilibrium belief,

right?

You will have beliefs that are sensible, which is for

example, if you are suppose to see no corruption in

equilibrium and suddenly you see a scandal of corruption, you're

going to assume if you were to see a scandal

of corruption, you will assume that it's a corrupt politician

that has engaged in corruption, not the honest one.

But you could have an equilibrium belief where you say,

no, no, only the honest politician engage in corrupt talk,

which is kind of like a stupid type of thing

as well.

But this is not constrained.

So you are the thing that's different prior to action.

And then we have to think about going backward, right.

What is player one action.

What should you do.

Anticipating what player do is going to do right.

So player one is anticipating the best response of player

to do any type of action that player one can

take.

And that's why it's very important to think about the

best response for all possible actions that player one can

take by player two, right?

So that's so that's basically what was perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

It's it's a very handful.

But you know, we see so many of them that

it's much more natural again when we do them then

when we teach like them in terms of formula.

But before going this, let's remind ourselves about Bayes rule.

And I screwed this.

Remove the slide.

But like if you remember what we are, we had

to be said like first thing in Bayes rule, we

have to think about we have a set of possible

events, right?

And we're going to like a cake and we're going

to slice it like we slice the cake into different,

you know, And slice its own pieces of cake.

And what is a partition is basically a way to

slice the side of heaven, such that if you put

back all the slice together, you get back this type

of flavour and all this kind of different slice.

They have nothing in common.

Which is to say the intersection of two subset of

the partition is empty.

And then we said, What is Bayes rule?

What Bayes rule is about thinking about what do I

learn about one particular event after observing another event.

And so.

Let's think about this.

The thing that we can think about.

Aha.

Week two of fallacy already.

It's not working I knew that week one working planning

week one was like Saturday night, you know, was already

unexpected.

But all being for the pain to work and work

to this would be unheard of at LSC.

So.

What we have is you can think about this is.

The world set of effort.

And let's say we have to partition b1, b2 right.

We have this word cake.

And we slice this into two and then we observe

another event.

Let's call it a.

And what we ask ourselves is given that we have

observed a right?

What are the chances that we are also observing D1?

So this is basically what Bayes rule is doing.

Right.

And the formula for this is with two events, which

is again not always because you will learn about doing

Bayes rule with continuous variable.

Right.

We will see this in a few weeks.

But most of the time we will use two events

and the Bayes rule formula for two events.

What is the chance that B1 is occurring, given that

A is occurring, and is the probability that A is

occurring given B1 times the probability of B1.

Probability of A given b1 times probability of B1 plus

probability of a given b2 times probability of B2.

So this is kind of like the Bayes rule formula

for two possible.

A partition of cardinality two where there are two possibilities

and we can extend it.

We can do it for continuous variable.

We will see it for continuous variable set.

Aren't you feeling constrained?

I'm feeling constrained for you to be sliced between the

two.

No.

You're good, you're good.

All right, so let's see about some answers to this.

I have no idea what you're supposed to.

If there's a fireplace, it's easier to go out.

If it's open and if it's closed, there will be

a bit more panic.

It seems like the natural way, and I think I'm

going to put it at the end of our lecture.

I'm throwing it outside of this room for estate to

take care of, but I'll call.

I'll give them a call together.

All right.

So let's think about something.

That is the last week we've done with, you know,

cancer.

And I told you, don't trust your doctor when you

come to test because they understand nothing about Bayes rule.

Right here, we're going to do it with something that

is closer to the type of game we're going to

study, which is, you know, game with politicians.

So we're going to take that voters.

They want to select competent politician.

They lack competence, which is an assumption we do a

lot in political agency type of model.

And the other They don't know the competence of a

politician.

Ex-ante, they have a prior.

And the prior is that there are 50% chance that

the officeholder is competent to begin with, and now 50%

chance that the challenger is competent.

What they do observe, and what they make inference from

is the state of the economy.

And what they get is that they know that if

the incumbent is competent, there is a 70% chance that

the economy is going to do well and 30% chance

that the economy is going to do poorly.

If they keep and is non competent, there is 60%

chance the economy is going to do poorly and 40%

chance that the economy is going to do well.

Now.

You can think about the economy as you know, good

news and bad economy has bad news.

And the question for you is if you are a

voter, right?

Knowing that there's a 50% chance that the officeholder and

the challenger is competent, you kind of like observe the

economy.

And the question for you is when will you re-elect

the incumbent?

Will you be like the incumbent all the time?

Will you never be like the incumbent no matter what

the state's economy is?

Or will you be like the incumbent?

Only after you observed good news, which is a good

economy, right?

So to answer this, if you come and menti the

code is 819923451.

Nine.

Is it working?

It says the quiz is not open.

So.

Yeah.

It's just like it's going to change the code at

the same time.

Now the things you know.

Yeah.

You should be back on it.

Don't you have this thing where, you know, things are

working, and then they're like, oh, we want to make

more money.

So we're going to change things.

And everything that was working is in the works.

And you feel this thing like PDF, it's like, this

was a great thing.

Now it's awful because they want to force you to

buy the, you know, the pro version.

I'm like, I'm less likely to buy the pro version

given like a bad year.

Service has become all right.

How many are we for eight, 11 out of 13

with with missing to the court.

It's okay.

You're hiding.

That's.

Good for you.

All right, so you have to answer for us to

get the most point, right.

Why do you relate the incumbent all the times never

are only of the observing good economy.

After.

Good, indeed.

Yes.

Very good sir.

Here is a case where actually we don't even need

to do any calculation.

And we can just use logic, right?

And remember I said Basil is probably an exaggerated way

to think about how voters operate, but it tells us

something about the direction where they move their opinion as

a function of news, and really just the direction matters.

So let's think about it.

Which is more likely to produce good economy, the competent

type or the non competent type?

The competent right.

Because a non non-combatant produces a good economy.

Only 40% of the time a non-combatant produce a good

economy 70% of the time.

Right.

So the most likely officer, the type of officer to

produce good economy is the competent type.

As a result, if you see a good economy shoot

your opinion of the officers increases or decrease.

It should increase because you know you know the competent

is more likely to produce good economy.

Therefore, after observing good economy, here's one.

It's more likely now than before that the officeholder is

competent.

Okay.

So think about how we start.

You start with the incumbent politician and the challenger politician

having the same reputation, right?

It's 5050 chances of the incumbent.

now our thoughts having good economy.

Your reputation of the anchor brand is going up.

Your challenger reputation is not moving.

Was the ice reputation?

The incumbent.

And who do you seek?

You see people that are competent.

So you really like the one that has distribution.

And in this case, an expectation.

That's the competence.

So after good news you will be like the anchor.

But now let's think about the other case with more

likely to produce a bad economy.

The incompetent one.

Because after an incompetent produce a bad economy 60% of

the time a competent one only 30% of the time.

So what happened to the reputation of the anchor brand

of the bad economy?

It falls.

It goes down.

Right?

Because you're like, oh, I've seen bad economy.

It's more likely that this is due to an incompetent

politician.

Therefore, my reputation of being the politician goes down.

You start with the same opinion.

To begin with, the reputation of the incumbent goes down.

Was the IRS reputation for competence now?

The the one is now the challenger.

Yeah, yeah, you will see you don't worry.

The challenger.

This is going to be entering in your mind so

much.

You never forget this word for the rest of your

life.

I swear to you.

So the challenger politician has the highest reputation.

And as a result, as a voter, you should vote

for the challenger.

Right.

So this is kind of the logic.

Now let's think about a second case.

And in this case, it's the same thing, except that

the reputation of the incumbent to begin with is one

third.

There is only you believe that there is only one

third chances that the incumbent is competent, and I still

want our chances that the challenger is coming.

You can think of it as what happened in the

last British election.

The Tory party has exhausted the pool of prime minister.

Right.

You know, after the salad, they got Rishi Sunak.

So this was really like they went all the way.

And at this point the water when they see Rishi

Sunak arriving that I might really it's really more likely

this guy is incompetent.

But the people from Labour.

Right.

So this is a bit but let's say that Rishi

Sunak were able to produce a good economy or bad

economy.

When will you be elected?

Right.

So that's the question for you now.

Same thing 70% chance of good economy with a competent

40% chance of good economy with an incompetent.

But the incumbent politician start with a lower reputation.

Okay.

So why do you re-elect the politician in this case?

Never.

Only after good news.

Or always.

Where is my 11th player?

I need a quorum here.

No, I didn't say go out.

I say go in.

What I think are.

Look, this is someone that really wants to talk about

partition.

All right?

Indeed, the correct answer is never right.

So.

Again, let us first proceed by logic and then we

do the math.

Always try to eliminate cases by pure logic that will

save you time, especially for your final exam where honestly,

the final exam is just a notion of doing things

fast, right?

This is things you have done many, many times.

You are just asked to do it in a short

period of time, intensely.

But there's nothing special before this and more than this

in some sense.

So we know this time that we have a challenge

here and we have our incumbent politician this year.

What do we know about bad economy?

We know that bad economy is going to further reduce

the reputation of the incumbent.

So the incumbent is already trailing, right, in terms of

reputation.

You are further reducing it after bad economy, for sure.

You're never going to vote for the incumbent after a

bad economy, right?

You will not vote for the incumbent.

Outside information.

You are receiving bad news about its competence or competence.

You are not voting for the incumbent of the party,

right?

So that is kind of like obvious.

To do it, we don't even need to do the

math to do this.

Now, the other case is that we know that after

a good economy, the reputation of the incumbent goes up.

But here we have a question because we start from

below and we go, but do we got enough to

catch up with the challenger?

Or do we go up?

Not enough.

And with the incumbent, we might be an attorney.

And to answer this question, in this case, we cannot

not do base work, but we have to do base

rule to be able to do this.

Right.

Because when it comes to direction, we don't need to

do all the calculation.

But when it comes to thinking about the cardinality of

reputation, then we need to be able.

We need to do some calculation.

We need to do some basics.

So let's try to do it.

I got it.

So what we want to know is what is the

probability that the politician is competent after good economy is

going to be high base with the probability of good

economy.

Given that the politician is competent, then the probability that

the politician is competent.

Probability of good economy.

Same thing.

And then the next one.

Why do I write?

Good economy is incompetent.

Yes.

Times the probability of incompetence.

Remember when you write this, always start with what you

observe.

And that's that's the key.

And what you observe is good economy.

So that's what we observed.

So probability I will say and see.

And here we know all the values here.

What is the probability of good economy given competent.

So 70%.

What is the probability that the incumbent politician is competent

in this case?

One third.

Here 0.7 is one third.

What is the probability of good economy given that the

politician is not competent?

40% indeed.

And there is two thirds chance that is not competent,

since there are only two possibilities.

Your competent or not competent.

So we are 0.7 times one third.

Now I'm going to get rid of the zeros.

Right.

There are everywhere.

So I can do this.

And I'm going to get rid of the three.

Again.

Now everywhere.

So I can do this.

And so what we have is seven divided by 15.

And this is strictly less than one half.

So even after a good economy, the reputation of the

ink band is lower than the reputation of the challenger.

Not very much, but lower.

Now, what is going on?

Basically, what is going on is that there are two

forces going in some sense in opposite direction.

One, we have a prior that is biased if you

want Against the right because we have this one third

relative to one.

Second we have a signal, but the signal has a

certain informativeness.

Which is how much do we learn from this?

How much does it move our posterior away from our

prior?

The informativeness of a signal.

And, you know, I'm just putting it here.

But we will also see it next week when we

do information aggregation in elections.

Right.

So it's just to see the first time the informativeness.

Is the probability of saying good economy by a competent

divided by the probability of saying good economy by a

non competent.

Non-confidence.

The higher is this ratio, the more informative it is

about competence.

Indeed, suppose a case where a non-combatant were never to

produce good economy.

That is, this will be zero.

This will mean that good economy fully revealed that a

person is competent because the non competent one can never

do it.

So if you see a good economy, you know that

this person is competent and that measure.

In this case this would be zero.

That ratio would be infinite.

So infinite ratio will be the most informative signal.

And when the ratio is equal to one it's basically

a completely uninformative mean.

The probability of producing an event is the same for

both.

So this ratio is really the informativeness of the signal.

And so we have these two forces.

We have the informativeness of the signal versus the bias

in against the incumbent if you want.

And what is happening is that the bias is stronger

than the informativeness of the signal.

Data.

If you think about it, the informativeness of the signal

is seven divided by four, and the bias which is

one third divided by two thirds of the same order,

is like two divided by one third, that's equal to

two, right?

This is basically how much your bias in favour of

the guy being incompetent.

This is Informativeness.

It's below two.

So it's below the bias and therefore your posterior doesn't

move enough.

I'm saying this we see it again next week.

It's just to plant the seed.

From next week it's not, you know something that you

have to fully understand today.

We go again over signal informativeness relative to biases.

Something we'll see again and again when we do better.

All right.

So that's it for Bayes rule.

Let's now think about one signalling game.

And you know anticipating our lecture that we will have

next time on special interest group politics.

This signalling game will be the relationship between a policymaker

and a special interest group.

Now, I created this game when I was Teaching and

Teaching Fellow in Chicago for ESP students.

All right.

So that's like 2012.

And I was very much inspired by Obamacare.

But it's great because healthcare is like, you know, in

this country it's a constant topic.

So you can really recycle it now.

And we can think about think about the Liberal government

wanting to know how much money to put into the

NHS.

And the special interest group is, if you want.

The administration of the NHS, doesn't have to be private,

can also be a bureaucracy that act in term of

this.

Right.

So we have this relationship going so the policymaker can

choose between two options, either to put a high level

of expenditure into the health system or to put a

low level of expenditure into the system.

Now there are two state of the world.

H l instead h.

The efficient level of spending is H instead L the

efficient method of spending is f.

So that's kind of like in this case, we can

think of it as a state of the world.

The policymaker doesn't know this optimal level of spending, but

the special interest group does.

What is common knowledge is that there is a probability

pi that the state of the world is h.

So that's what you know.

If you're the policymaker, you know there is a Pi

chances that the state is H.

If you're the special interest group, you know the state

of them.

The bill for the policy maker is going to be

a function of the policy and the state, and also

for the special interest groups in this tense.

Well, this is we are going to assume crazy assumption

that the policy maker wants efficiency.

And that is the policy maker wants a level of

spending in state H and wants low level of spending

in state aid.

So that's what it says.

That's what they prefer.

Before the policy makers choose the level of spending this

patient is good is going to make an announcement here.

And in this case in this type of game, we

say that the special price group is the sender and

the policy maker is the receiver.

The solutions will send the message, the policy maker receive

the message before acting.

So the strategy for the special interest group is basically

what do you say instead?

And what do you say instead?

L right.

We say that a strategy is truthful.

If basically the special will say h instead h and

l instead n.

And so that's the kind of the obvious natural language

for the policymaker is the choice between a channel for

any possible message by the special interest, whether or not

this message of an impasse.

Right.

And then we define them as missing strategies.

Right.

So we could also look at pure strategies.

And in fact this is a pure strategy.

The timing is nature is going to draw the state

with probability p.

The state is h Special group of the state makes

an announcement.

S o n, the policymaker observed.

The announcement shows a policy of all governments and pay

for their lives.

Here we have this nice sequential nature, so we are

going to use the perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

The one question we ask is, is it possible for

the policymaker to recover the patient with good information?

That is, can there be communication, truthful communication, or at

least partially truthful communication between the special interest group and

the policymaker?

Now this type of game, because there is no cost

of line, they are referred to as sheet of game,

right?

You can lie as much as you want without any

cost.

So that's cheap.

Down here we see cheap talk with a binary message

space when we go and do this special interest group

lecture.

Next we will shift talk the more general model.

And this is the most beautiful model we will say

in the year together.

All right.

So here is not the most beautiful one.

The most beautiful one is for us next time when

we see the full sheep talk model.

It's really beautiful.

The beauty with capital D like, you know, the type

of beauty.

But for now, let's work with this kind of, like,

simplified model.

Now let's first suppose one thing I haven't given to

you is what is?

What are the preferences of this patient is good.

So one possibility is that the special interest group has

the same ordinal preferences as the policymaker.

What do I mean by ordinal?

They prefer h over and instead h they prefer L

over agency L they don't have to have the same

intensity.

Yeah, they can be like, much less kind of like.

Yeah, different in the truth and the policymaker and small.

But that's what they prefer.

In this case it's easy to see that we can

construct a truthful equilibrium.

The specialist will tell the truth.

The policymaker follow the recommendation of this patient.

Let's go.

And this patient group has no interest to ever lie

because they have the same preferences.

Right.

That's kind of like, you know, at the beginning of

a relationship that is going very, very well.

You and your kind of partner, everything is good.

You tell each other the truth, you have the same

preference and it's perfect.

Truth telling is an equilibrium, right?

If you want to build on it.

It is not the unique equilibrium.

We can have an equilibrium with no information transmission, right?

So there are multiple equilibria in this case.

But one of them is true static.

So even you know, when you have the sun reference,

as you know, your partner, sometimes you end up in

a bad equilibrium or you don't communicate.

But hopefully at that point you are in the path

where you know, truth telling and everything is working.

But, you know, relationships, especially in politics, are never and

rarely of this form.

It's rarely the case that the special interest group perfectly

share the preference of a politician, especially a business group

in health care.

It's not clear that the NHS direction is going to

say, you know what?

It's really inefficient to throw money at the NHS.

Don't give us money when you see a public administration

or an interest group saying to the policymaker, don't give

us money, please ring me, because I've still not seen

this.

It's like me going to my head of department saying,

don't give me a pay rise.

I don't deserve it.

I don't need it, right?

We'll never see this happen.

Nobody will act like this.

If you act like this in your workplace, you're in

trouble, believe me.

So more likely, it is the case that we end

up in a set of preference.

Where are the special interest groups?

Of course, prefer a level of spending.

When the studies age, but also prefer a level of

spending when the studies they always want more money.

In this case.

The unique equilibrium.

It is not that are magical.

They are only.

What is the unique equilibrium outcome?

There are many ways to get there, but all the

roads lead to the same outcome is one where there

is no information transmission.

There is a complete collapse of the relationship.

Right?

So why do you know bad news for your relationship

in the future when you start to kind of like

a divergent preference, no more communication with your partner, however,

at least in this type of model.

So.

What we're going to do is we are going to

prove that that does not exist.

A truthful equilibrium.

And the logic for which that does not exist at

equilibrium is going to be basically the reason why they

can never be information transmission.

How do we prove that an equilibrium does not exist?

Again, there are different ways to proceed.

But the way that I find the most intuitive and

the kind of like the easiest to teach at least

is approved by contradiction.

So what we are going to do is that we're

going to say, let's suppose that the special interest group

were to play a truthful strategy.

This will be the consequence of this strategy given the

consequence of the strategy.

The special interest group does not want to play a

truthful strategy.

The special group wants as a profitable deviation and therefore

Truthfulness cannot be an equality, right?

So the way to think about an equilibrium.

Is when we work and we define an equilibrium, we

always work in a silo.

Right?

So we are going to postulate a strategy by the

first player in our case this patient Russell.

And by this we say that when the state is

H the special interest group says H.

And when the state is L the special interest group

says L.

Now we're going to think about the other beta belief.

Then we're going to think about the other players decision.

When we had this, we reached the bottom of our

silo, when we reached the bottom of our silo.

We go back to the top and we ask ourself,

given.

The policy makers decision, is it a best strategy, the

optimal strategy for the situation with the best response to

tell the truth?

If the answer to this is yes, we have closed

the loop and we have an equilibrium, right?

Because an equilibrium is a loop.

My best response to your best response is, you know,

etc..

I'm responding to your best respond and your best responding

to my best response.

It's a loop.

I think if the answer to this question is no,

then that means this is not an equilibrium.

And you take the word silo.

You do a piece of paper and you throw it

away very, very far away, and then you restart from

the top.

But once you are going down in the silo, the

other player believe the special interest group strategies, right?

The other player believe it.

If there is a profitable deviation, Then the other player

is not stupid and you throw it over.

Once you are working within the silo, you keep that

strategy constant when you think about what the other player

is doing.

That's very important.

And that's a mistake that I see many, many times.

All right.

So.

Let's think about this different step.

Call it one.

123.

So step one posterior.

What is the posterior.

That is that is H.

After a message H in this silo.

It has to be one, right?

Is it very clear that it has to be one?

It has to be one because the specialist group is

assumed to be truthful.

So if the special group says H the policy maker,

taking the decisions to be truthful belief, which probably we

believe the message and say are this then must be

H.

Now what is the probability that the state is L?

After a message L?

It has to be.

I'm the special interest group.

You believe I'm truthful?

I tell you, al.

What do you believe the state to be?

And so your posterior is one.

Now, given this posterior.

What is the decision of the policymaker after signal H.

Huh?

Yeah.

Yeah h indeed.

Yes, y remember that for the policymaker.

He prefers I spending when the state is H.

After the police, the special group says n what is

the best response of our policymaker?

It's n right because she believes that the state is

n and she wants to march the state, so she

chooses L.

So now we have reached the end of our silo.

We have to think about the special interest, but not

to prove that at least that strategy is not an

equilibrium strategy.

How many profitable deviation do we need to find?

Just one.

You do not need to check everything.

If you find a profitable deviation, you are done.

Done and dusted.

Okay, so again, to save time, we can start to

think about when is it more likely that the specialist

group wants to lie?

Is it going to be when the stat is age,

or is it going to be when the state is

a.

What is kind of like the incentive to lie the

highest when the study said right.

Because when the state is H if she told the

truth, she's going to get H.

That's great.

She's very happy you're interested.

But when the study says it can be an incentive

to lie.

So let's think about our special interest group now.

So we have two choices to think.

One is she plays a strategy, which is to say

the stat is L.

Once the decision of the policymaker in this case.

Low spending.

And did we just find this.

And so she's gonna get.

You as of L.

Now let's suppose instead that our mission lies deviate.

So the deviation.

Take the form up with a heart here of saying

I.

What's the decision of the policymaker then is to do

H right?

Remember, we work within a silo and within our silo.

The policy maker believes that the specialist group is telling

the truth.

It's only after proving there is a profitable deviation and

we get rid of our silo.

Not before.

Right now we are within our silo and the specialist

group, the policy maker, believe S is telling the truth.

So when the policy maker c h she chooses h.

How do you spell sign?

It doesn't matter.

Probably not this way.

In this case, our special interest group will get us

off h l I spending in the low state.

Which of the two she prefers?

I spent the second one in high spending in the

last state.

And so what are we found?

This is what you eat was supposed to do.

This is the deviation.

What is better, the deviation or what it's supposed to

do.

The deviation.

So we have found a profitable deviation.

And if we have found a profitable deviation can it

be an equilibrium.

Now we can see.

Why?

There cannot be information transmission.

Because for information transmission to occur, it must be that

some message leads to high spending with higher probability than

some other message.

It has to be.

There has to be information.

When I tell you something, it has to have an

impact.

And I mean that in some cases or something that

I tell you, the policymaker is more likely to choose

a level of spending than in other cases.

But what will the specialist who has to do in

this case?

He will always choose the message that maximise the chance

of high spending.

So as soon as there is a message that leads

to high spending with high probability, it's always used by

the special interest group.

And of course that means there is a profitable deviation.

And the world kind of like castle of card collapse.

So they can never be information transmission, which means the

policy maker is always going to choose according to a

prior Pi that the study says.

And so what is going to happen if pi is

very high?

What is the policy makers going to choose.

If she believes that the is, that is very likely.

What is the policymaker going to choose?

She's going to choose either of spending.

If she believed that A is that is not likely.

If Pie is low, she's going to choose low spending,

right?

So that's as a result.

You can see that the lack of information and what

is IE and what is low, the exact formula is

in the slide.

But in the interest of time I'm going to skip

to the calculation.

But what it means is that this collapse of information

transmission, for sure it's hurting the policymaker.

It's hurting the policymaker because the policymaker does mistake.

She would like to get the information to be efficient

and get the right policy to be in place.

But it is also hurting the specialist group in some

cases because when pi is low, when there's little chance

that these studies are the policymakers choosing the low level

of spending, which is bad for the special interest group.

This is really the worst possible policy.

So what this business group would like to do is

to go in front of the policy maker and say,

I swear to you, on my five children and 12

grandchildren that the state is, you know, H.

But of course, this sort of swearing is not credible

always because of the same thing.

And so that creates a lot of inefficiency for both

parties.

And I mean that, you know, especially when there's a

lot of money involved, there are ways to do better.

We should find they should find ways to get.

And so one way they can do so is by

augmenting the gap, which is what we're going to do

now.

What can happen is that what you can do is

rather than just making it a cheap game or lying

is cost less, we can introduce cost savings.

And in particular, we are going to introduce the cost

of writing a report.

So now what the special interest group can do is

to send a report to the policy maker.

And this report is going to be costly.

That's going to impose a cost.

So it doesn't really matter what's in the report.

So a long time ago after I finished my master

in Paris, the Paris School of Economics.

Wonder where they got the idea for this acronym PSC.

But maybe there was an inspiration somewhere.

I went and I was working in a in a

consultancy in London, actually before the PhD.

And indeed my role, one of the first talk that

was given to me, I still remember to this day,

was to write a report to the UK government to

convince them not to increase taxes on alcohol.

Right.

And basically the report I think the report in itself

was in a I mean, like this was like dirty

tricks.

You've never seen this.

Parking was even worse than parking.

It was co-efficient out here like they wanted to find

a certain elasticity and price.

Like this was like, you know, expose justification of all

control.

Beautiful.

It's exactly like how I love to do social sciences.

But more seriously, the goal of the report was I

don't think was the content that was important, though.

Everybody pretended it was.

I think it was really the cost of writing a

report that was involved, and in this case, it didn't

matter.

The UK government did increase the tax on alcohol, so

maybe there was not such a good report after all.

But you know, here we're going to think that really

one matter is the cost of writing a report.

So not the content.

The act of writing a report is what matters because

it imposes a cost on this patient.

Now if you are the special interest group.

When should you write the report to make the report?

The act of writing the report informative?

Should you write the report when the studies age or

when the studies are?

And we think we are.

Where is the grain that it should be when the

citizen.

Come on.

I should have put a squeeze on this.

This is really a good one for a quiz.

Who is?

The report?

Should be written when the study self.

Who is in favour of this?

There is no abstention.

You know, it's like compulsory voting.

Three.

Four.

Five.

Six.

You know, this is called snowballing of information, you know.

It's like when you walk and you're in a foreign

city and you see, oh, this restaurant, how many people?

It must be very, very good.

But in fact, it's just because you work the same

day and it's a restaurant on the other side of

the street that has very many people.

You realise this is called information cascade.

Now about this, this is actually a very nice type

of model.

We think that the report should be written, one that

studies age.

Julia.

I see no abstention.

I see you those who are abstaining.

Oh my God, no!

I have to raise my hand.

What do you vote?

H I n h h h h.

Okay.

It's good.

You should not follow her.

She has done this lecture before, one year ago.

So she does remember a bit.

She's cheating.

Indeed.

She was the one that I should start compulsory abstention

rather than compulsory voting.

And it is going to be when the state is

h right now.

Why?

Remember what I told you.

If I go to my head of department, I will.

If it's cheap talk, I will never go and say,

you know, keep your money.

I don't need a raise.

I'm all good.

It's all fine.

You know?

I'm having all the fun.

But why would I need more money?

Never gonna happen, right?

So, you know, saying, hell, if someone is telling you

the state is hell, that's really mind blowing.

You're like, well, it must be.

What is my difficulty?

My difficulty when I talk to my difficulty as a

specialist is to convince the decision maker that the spell

is indeed h that are indeed need this money.

That's a special interest group.

Or you know that I really need this pay rise.

If I'm the professor talking to my management.

Right.

And how am I going to do this?

I'm going to impose the cost on myself to credibly

convince you that indeed this research.

So the costs create the credibility of the statement and

the credible the statement you have to kind of create

credibility for is that's the one you want to create.

Kind of like some credibility.

That's why you have a problem.

Why?

Because you have an incentive to always lie on stage.

So you need to basically because to convince the other.

Then when you say edge it's really right.

So that's why am I going to get information.

So let's think about the conditions for an equilibrium where

a report is written.

If the state is H and is not written if

the study set right.

So that's kind of like.

What we want is special interest groups cuz.

If the studies h I'm writing a report.

If the state is l I am not writing a

report.

Reported the state is h.

No reporter.

Then we're going to have to think about people.

Stare.

After.

Ah.

And from this, we have to think about P's decision.

And once we are at the end of the silo,

we go back and we ask ourselves, given what P

is doing, when is it indeed optimal for the special

interest group to follow this strategy?

In the case of cheap talk, it was never ever

say it's a bit different.

So again we're going to do another.

It's always the same thing 123.

Given what we assume about the spatial strategy, what is

the belief of the policymaker that the studies age after

observing?

A report are equal one means a report has been

written.

What should this policy maker believe?

What's the strategy of the special interest group?

At this stage?

Yes.

The politicians will believe that and do his bidding.

Yes.

First, let's do the belief.

But you're right.

You're absolutely right.

You're absolutely right.

Yes.

The politician would say I've seen a report.

And the strategy of the specialist group is to write

the report only if the studies age.

Therefore, it must be that the studies age.

On the other hand, if the politician doesn't see a

report.

Right.

What is the specialist group not writing a report?

When the study said only if the study said and

therefore after seeing the report, it He has to believe,

she has to believe that, the study said.

Now we can think about.

Once the decision of the politician after observing a report.

But after observing a report, she believed that the studies

age and therefore the optimal decision for the politician is

precise pending.

Yet, on the other hand, after Lozano report, she believed

that the studies n and what is the optimal decision

of the politician then low spending.

And now we can think about step three.

And in this case, because we want to see the

condition for equilibrium, we will have to look at both

possible case studies L and studies H.

Because here we want to see when is this an

equilibrium.

We don't want to eliminate it in which case we

just need to find one profitable deviation.

We want to see the condition for existence.

So let's suppose that the state is L.

And let's think about our spatial and rescue.

On the one hand we can play what we call

the prescribed strategy, the strategy that we are telling him

to play.

Turning it into play.

What is the strategy that we are telling it to

play?

In the study.

We are saying if the study said you should write

or not write a report.

You should not write a report.

In which case we know what is going to be

the decision of the policy maker.

The policy maker is going to choose.

Low spending.

And the utility of our special interest group is going

to be low here.

Do you have a question or problem with the writing?

No.

Sorry.

I'm just confused about the writing.

Then I see types too.

Yes yes yes.

If you are confused about the writing, there is not

going to be the only time.

Don't hesitate to ask.

Maybe by week 21 or Well, 20 together, your boy.

And that's that's clear.

This is like this clearly thing is to see obviously.

But until then.

But is it it.

Yeah.

It's like well and so.

But if you also have all the questions about all

the logic, do not hesitate to ask.

Right.

If, if you are not, it's most likely somebody else

as adult as well in the classroom.

Right.

You're always creating a public good by asking question.

It's never bad.

So on the other end, right.

We can think about the deviation.

What's the deviation for special interest group.

In this case it's to write the report.

Indeed.

Right.

This is no no.

In which case the special interest the Policy makers.

So I will choose which policy I spending.

And the special will get.

Minus send it right.

There is a minus C here.

And this minus C.

Come from the fact that there has been a report

that has been written.

And we say that the cost of a report has

to be saved.

So what is the specialist group willing to abide by

the prescribed strategy?

I prescribe, being the one we postulates we prescribe to

the special interest group, is when the utility from L

is at least greater, at least equal to the utility

from getting agents that l minus the cost of a

report.

This equation has a name.

That's called the incentive compatibility constraint.

Yes.

Why don't we subtract the cost in the first case?

Because in the first case you have not written a

report.

And as a result, you don't pay this cost.

Indeed.

Very important.

No, no, it's very good.

Now we can do the same instead.

Again, we can think about on past.

The strategy of this business group is to write a

report.

Which will lead to a high level of spending, which

will lead to the utility of getting.

H h minus c minus c.

Because a report has to be written.

The deviation is not to write a report, in which

case you get a lower level of spending.

And the utility is l h.

And so sorry.

And what we want.

Of course this is wrong.

Is that the utility of writing the report that is

to get H instead of H, but to bear the

cost of writing the report is greater than the utility

of not writing a report to state to get L

instead H, but not pay the cost of writing a

report.

And that's the IC Incentive compatibility constraint in stage.

Paper is incentive compatibility.

And so why do we get.

An equilibrium with.

Reported state L and no reporting state zero.

Well we need.

These two condition.

Which I can be right as.

This is the same thing.

Putting everything together.

What is it telling us?

It's telling us that if this business decision would always

prefer H.

Right?

We know the speechwriters will always prefer H over.

However, what we want is that how much the special

interest group like H over N is greater in state

H when I spending is efficient that instead L when

I spending is inefficient.

Right?

So the gain for the special interest group to move

from low to high level of spending is higher when

our spending is efficient than when I spend in is

inefficient.

That's what it says, right?

But this is the gain from moving from L to

H instead h.

This is the gain from moving from L to H

instead, when we say we want Dungannon State L to

be less than that gain in stage.

And if this is satisfied, we can find a C

such that information transmission will occur in equilibrium.

Notice that it is a much less restrictive condition than

for the cheap talk.

In the cheap talk.

To get information, the specialist group needed to prefer h

instead h and add instead n.

Here the summation can always prefer h.

What matters is that she prefers it prefers h more

instead of h relative to l, then it prefers it

instead L.

That's basically what it says.

It's a much less stringent condition.

And so what have we done here?

Well, what we have done is that we have shown

that by introducing money into politics, lobbying money in the

form of reports.

Right?

It could be also in the form of contribution by

introducing money into politics, private money into politics, we get

better information transmission and more efficient policies.

So what we have done is that we have found

the normative justification for the presence of private money into

politics.

So when you see all the newspapers saying private money

to politics is bad, it's awful, blah, blah.

Remember that some of it might be bad and awful,

but some of it may be.

Luck in this model can be very useful to basically

permit information transmission and liquidity.

To basically improve policymaking by increasing the credibility of information

transmitted by special interest.

So all money in politics may not be that bad

after that.

So just something to think about that even this simple

model can provide some food for thought.

When we think about real political questions.

But rather than thinking about real political question in the

20 minutes, 22 minutes that we still have together, let

me think about fake political questions in the form of

social choice.

Right?

We are done with this.

We have done everything I wanted.

Now let's go and do some very briefly, some truth

social.

So.

What was the third choice?

So.

One thing that was I mean a very, very important

an incredible achievement.

Theoretical achievement.

It's not like a practical one, but from a theoretical

perspective, it is something that really is incredible is basically,

you know, the marginal evolution.

So prior to the marginal revolution, people were thinking in

lovers.

They were thinking to balance, like, how do you balance

a market?

You basically are, on the one hand, what is produced

and the one on what is consumed, etc., etc..

Now this is for example, what you find in Ricardo's

model.

This is what you find copypasta by what is supposedly

the greatest thinker of the 19th century.

That is Karl Marx.

It's just like basically a plagiarism of the greatest extent.

And all these models of the economy in volume.

At one problem, the economy will not close.

You could not close the production size with the wages,

and the consumption size is the price.

With the prices, it was impossible to close the economy,

right.

This was like in fact, in Marx you have like

gold coming out of the colony.

Out of nowhere am I to do six machina to

close the economy that was supposed to be living in

autarky.

So it's always the same come the marginal revolution.

Like, you know, what is the price?

The price is going to be the ratio of the

marginal utilities of the consumers and things like this.

And the crazy thing about this, where prices are defined

not in love but in margins, is that once you

define the price in margin, the economy is closing in

love.

Not, you know, is basically all you got that some

of you are going to do in economics, in micro

economy is basically closing an economy in love.

And nothing by solving everything in margin.

I don't know if you realise the genius of someone

would think that by looking at marginal utilities, ratio of

marginal utility is defined in price ratio of marginal production

as having to equal price equal to market ratio of

marginal utility.

You are closing an economy in love.

That's unbelievable.

But it's working.

And all of this we get of course the two

first one first theorem of economics, which is, you know,

by doing not efficient but by the optimal allocation and

things like this, you know, give me a ratio like

a distribution to begin with, we will end up with

a distribution at the end.

And this distribution will be optimal, which is you could

not change it without hurting someone.

That's like if you want in terms of theoretical achievement.

It's another case of beauty with capital.

Does it have personalities?

Economists are like, yeah, but this general equilibrium model is

not really working in life.

Bla bla bla bla.

Sure.

But theoretically it's beautiful and it's really changed all the

way.

We understand economics because they manage to close the economy,

something nobody were able to do.

So before now of course economists are greedy and they

said what if it works in the market?

It has to work in politics.

And so the idea of social choice was to recover

the same type of general equilibrium result.

But for the case of politics, that is, we are

going to come with a bunch of actions.

We are going to find a decision function.

We are going to plug preferences in this decision function.

And we're going to get a great decision for society.

That was the idea.

Right.

You you plug in preferences.

And, you know, I prefer a apple of a banana

of a cranberries.

He prefers banana over apple over cranberries, etc., etc. you

put them into a system with a certain level of

action that you like, some kind of a properties of

the decision that you like, and I will split you

out the optimal ordering for the society.

And then who will give a damn about politics?

We will have to solve, you know, the political question

that has bothered that people for millenniums.

We economists will have done it.

You can see a bit of the jay-zs complex coming

into this.

And indeed, you know, so basically what you do.

Right?

You just like and it's really like this, right?

You you set an ordering of preference.

And you say, give me the ultimate decision for the

society, like the optimal ordering for the society.

So here it is, very simple.

Three bottles.

Two alternative A and B, a banana.

And they have different kind of preferences.

And you know if you do majority rule you get

aid to each other.

Now things become complicated for the social choice theorists.

The moment you put three alternatives, when you put three

alternative.

Something can happen, which is called a cycle, right?

And a psychological.

When you know, basically what you have in the majority

is if you look at A versus B is winning.

And because one prefer A and three prefer A, if

you look at A again c, C is winning.

To prefer CMS, we prefer C.

If you look at b against C?

B is winning.

And therefore what do you have?

You have A wins against B and B wins against

C, C wins against A everything.

And B you basically have for a second and it's

impossible to.

This day.

So we are trapped in the case of fire.

So and you are basically impossible to make a collective

decision.

Now this is for one particular rule and that's majority

rule.

And as I said that you don't really care about

majority rule.

What they care about is a rule that has kind

of like more general properties and the general properties and

the cat also, you know about more alternative, maybe more

individuals for what matters is that there are two things.

It's one there was and the right ordering of alternative.

And second, there was kind of like a welfare function,

a decision made by society that would satisfy a certain

number of principles.

And a number of principles that they wanted to satisfy

where one they wanted to satisfy unanimity, which, you know,

is if A is preferred by everyone over B, then

A should be ranked above B in society.

They wanted to satisfy completeness, which is there should be

an ordering over all possible alternatives.

That's very kind of right.

Not just the top one, but all possible alternative transitivity,

which was if a is preferred b and b to

C, then A is preferred to C, and all cycle

was violating transitivity.

If you think right, we had this thing where A

was preferred to B, B was preferred to C, but

C was preferred to it, for example, or.

Re independent from irrelevant alternative, which is to say that

the two alternative that you have A and B, if

I put a third one in the mix, you should

not change your ranking.

And the last one was non dictatorship, which is to

say that.

The final ordering of society is the ordering of an

individual.

So you pick me as the dictator and are basically

all ordering in.

The model is basically my order and this is a

dictatorship.

This is for five things.

And so what our rules show in a very, very

famous theorem is that if you have three or more

alternative and also actors, the only function that will satisfy

unanimity complete natural Objectivity and independence of your relevance.

Authority violate known dictatorship.

So either you have a dictator and you can have

all these properties, or if you don't want to have

a dictator, you have to abandon one of these properties.

Now, one thing about Aras impossibility theorem.

It is not say.

For all preference profiles.

There is a problem, right?

What they wanted was much bigger than this.

What they wanted is that for all preference profile, they

will be able to give a societal ranking.

That's what they wanted.

That was their objective.

Give me a preference profile.

That is your preference your preference, your preference, etcetera.

I would split you out.

A preference for society, whatever this kind of like preference

profiles.

There are many preference profiles where we can have all

five together.

There are many cases where we can have all five

together.

The problem is there are some cases, some distribution of

preferences where this is impossible and all those have something

in common.

Basically all these distribution of preferences have a cycle within

it.

And you know, remember what the cycle is, is some

sort of preference where something like this is going to

happen across three voters and three alternatives.

And then, you know, the question then becomes what if

it's about some problematic profiles.

Those were something like this at this.

Is it really a problem.

You will not be satisfied that we are able to

at least give a ranking for every other preference profiles.

Well, the problem is, if you were to draw preference

at random and look at what is the preference profile,

you will have 60% chance of getting a cycle with

three borders and five alternative, and almost one third with

seven borders and seven alternatives.

So you know, let's think about five and ten and

a, b, c, d, e.

It's never been very good at all.

It took me the ages to learn the Greek alphabet.

So you're also going to be suffering.

So you know your a b c d e.

You are like very straight forward.

You are controlling and I can see this in your

heart.

So you are more like a ed CBA, right?

You are a b c d Who said, you know,

all these type of things, right?

You can do all and we can draw this like

this, and we're going to get a preference for five

for the society.

And I can do this many, many times.

And there are a set of possibilities of preference profiles

out of this set of possibility of preference profile, 16%

of them have a cycle with it.

So it's quite big.

It's only three voters, five alternative.

So it's quite so.

That's why it's kind of like the the thing.

So after this there were two ways for our social

scientists to move forward.

I mean there was three ways.

One, they could have stopped this program and they should

have.

One was like to put restriction on preferences.

Another one was to basically introduce institutions.

So the first thing they did is to put restriction

in preferences.

So one thing is that with single click preferences.

So one of the single big preferences is something where

you have an ideal policy.

For example, an ideal tax rate to do something that

we will do in two weeks 30%.

And as I move, you know, the policy move away

from your ideal tax rate.

You are losing in terms of utility.

And so this is the 20% as you move away

to one lower tax rate or two above tax rate,

20%, you are losing in terms of utility.

Right.

This is kind of like the single pick preference because

there is one thing you don't have to be symmetric.

One side you can you know, if you are more

left wing, maybe you know you your last income of

utility as you go above your 30%.

It's flatter than when you go below your 30% doesn't

have to be symmetric.

But what matters is that there is one.

Pick one if you want global maximum in your utility

of indirect utility function.

When you have single peak preference, we get the median

voters theorem.

So the true median border theorem works into power.

First it introduces the notion of Condorcet winner.

Because the winner is a policy that beats every other

policy in pairwise alternative.

So you might take a policy.

Take another one who beats it.

This one I discard.

Take another one or this one is better.

I discard this one.

And you keep on doing this.

And you know, once you have done all this permutation

of 1 to 1, you know, it's like a heavyweight

for champion type of things.

The one that remain, the one that gets the crown

is going to Condorcet.

And we know that that's what it is after.

Now say whom we will also meet next week.

And the median voter theorem says if all voters have

a single pick preference over another set of alternative, the

contested winner exists.

That's great.

And further, it coincides with the median voter's ideal point

to coincide with the one that you can place in

the middle as being, you know, half of the electorate

is to the right, half of the electorate is to

the left.

That's your median voter.

So for example here you have 1234, five, six seven

voters.

You can think about single pick preference utilities.

And you can think about, you know, looking at Q4

versus Q2 in terms of policies.

Who will vote for Q4?

In this case?

Okay, so you have single tape, right?

Yes.

No, I will not touch because of course I don't

have it.

Right.

So you can think about the utility being like this.

This is the ideal point of player five.

The further you are away from the ideal point of

player five, the worst player five years or voter five.

So which policy is furthest away from voter five?

It's Q two.

Yeah.

So between Q2 and Q4, what is what are five

preferring?

Q4.

What is Q6 preferring between Q4 and Q2?

Q4 what is Q7 preferring Q4 and what is Q4

preferring?

So we have that movement for for at least Q4,

Q5, Q6, Q7.

That's four votes out of seven.

Which policy wins in the majority vote?

Less policy and you can do for every other possible

policy.

It's always this policy that is going to win since

it wins against every possible policy.

That's your policy.

Now after this, they said one maybe maybe this kind

of like restriction on preferences, single pick preferences.

Maybe that's a little bit too strong.

So maybe we do need.

This time instead of.

Firing because I want it to be.

So now I'm making it harder for you to make.

So maybe that's too strong as a restriction.

Can we do something else?

And what they came up with is.

So this is an example.

This is actually an example we will see many, many

times the that's called the quadratic loss function.

And that's probably one of the function we will use

the most is saying the loss between my ideal point

and the policy is quadratic right.

There's a minus.

So the further I'm away the worse I am.

And I'm I'm at a rate that is to the

power two.

So the last kind of like you know and I

will finish on this, I will finish on this.

And then one more things.

Then you know what they said is one maybe single

crochet.

This single peak is too strong.

Let's find something else.

Let's find single crossing.

And single crossing has the following property.

Think about a tax rate.

And let's say that, you know, in this case have

been the most left wing of this.

Right.

And that say that all the left wing person I

prefer a tax rate of 30% and the most left

wing, and I prefer a tax rate of 30% of

our tax rate of 40%.

So I prefer a lower 30% tax rate of a

tax rate of 40%, as you prefer, and satisfy single

crossing you with more right wing than me.

Just for this example, we will know more in the

future.

That's also a true statement.

You is more right wing than me.

Should also prefer 30 to 40.

You are more writing than him.

You should prefer 34.

You are like very far to the right.

You should also prefer 30 to 40.

Right.

So basically, when the most likely person prefer low tax

rate of the high tax rate.

Everyone who is right should serve the same thing virtually.

Versus if this is true in the future.

Now I'm the most right wing person of this group,

right?

And let's say I prefer a tax rate of 20

over tax rate of ten.

So I prefer higher tax rate 20 of our tax

rate of ten.

You are more leftwing than me.

You should also prefer ten over 20 as a 20

over ten.

So you are more leftwing.

The name you should also prefer 20 over ten, 20

over ten, 20 over ten.

Right.

So that's the idea is that when you know the

one that should be the most opposed to something like

it better than something else, then everybody that should be

least opposed also like it.

And what we have when we have a single crossing,

we also get the same result, which is we get

the extended median border theory.

Now if you look at the slide, you will see

two examples that show that single crossing and single peak

are not the same thing.

So they capture different space of possible utility representation.

But one thing that is important is that everything I

told you was with one dimension, a single one.

You know, just like tax rate on the line from

this region border there.

There's a very annoying guy called McKelvie and he's saying,

wait a minute, what if we have multiple dimensions?

Why is it having one dimension?

We have two, three, four, five.

Can we recover the same result?

And what Michael V's are shown is that it's called

the Chaos theorem, which is when you have multiple dimension.

Start from one point.

And knowing that the two dimensional space, if you want,

think about another point here.

You can always create a sequence of alternative where you

know one bit the order that the order, the order

by measure and you end up at this point.

Take any starting point, any end point, you can get

there.

And in some sense it means that like it will

never end.

Because of course when I'm here and I can go

here and when I'm here, I can go here.

And again, we proceed for another time.

By Kelvin's theorem, people said, I'm done with.

This structure is so boring.

Now, maybe that's only if we said this, but you

know, let's just imagine all the people say, this is

so boring.

What we're going to do is that we are going

to introduce institutions where introduce things that makes things much

more, you know, structured in terms of thinking about politics.

And we're going to forget about this hubris to create

a general equilibrium theory for politics.

And so what we will do in the coming weeks,

and we will work more and more with institutions, except

for next week, where we do work with just elect

a simple majority rule.

And next week we are doing this in a common

value environment where we share the same preferences.

And to do so we we run two experiment during

the classroom.

So be aware that you're going to receive an email

from Sunday.

So check your mailbox Sunday for an email from me

that will serve for the experiment that we're going to

run in the classroom on Monday next week.

All right.

Sorry for being late and sorry for our running slightly

off.

Lecture 3:

I, for most of you, should apologise for this.

We didn't.

If you planned to attend a lecture but you are

not registered.

Send me an email.

Because for some activities.

Um.

I used the registration analysis for you.

So some of you are not registered, which is perfectly

fine, but you know, you're not going to be able

to participate in the two experiments that we have.

So although the weekend you should have received an email

from me, for those of you that are not registered

for the course with some information on it, information that

I told you not to share with anyone.

So even if someone decide to talk to you to

get this information and keep it for yourself, I am

counting on you.

And this information will be useful for two experiments.

The first one is the one we are going to

do now.

So imagine that there are two possible virtual urns.

One blue and one red arm.

Right.

The nature is going to select one of these two

urns.

So nature is going to draw either the blue or

the red earth in the blue.

When you are six blue balls and four red balls.

Your hands are very full.

No no no no.

In the red urns you have two blue balls and

a red balls, right?

And one of them has been picked by nature to

be, you know, the correct the urn that exists in

the world.

Sorry, I should have said 11, but third, 13 registered

voters.

You want to You basically as a group you want

to select the right arm.

That is, you want as you vote to choose the

correct arm to be on the majority of the correct.

Now, what is very important is that you, if you

are wrong personally, but the group is correct, you still

get a payoff of all right.

It doesn't matter that your vote is correct.

What matters is that you as a group are correct.

Okay.

Is it clear that there's this distinction between the two?

Right.

But your problem, obviously, is that you do not know

which one of the two arm has been selected by

the correct right.

The prior probability that you have is that is a

half percent chance, a 50% chance that this is the

blue.

That is correct, of 50% that this is the red

is discourse.

So and you're going to make your vote by simple

majority rule.

Now.

In your mailbox you receive the signal.

Right.

And this signal is basically drawn from one of the

two or the character, the one that has been selected.

And it is actually really drawn from this where there

is an Excel spreadsheet where I do kind of like

generate random signals.

There is no cheating here.

You really did receive a random signal, right?

So the signals are based on you know, what the

words are.

So they are drawn from each bowl with replacement.

Which means what?

Which means that if the blue urn has been selected

by nature.

Right.

Then the 60% chance of receiving a blue signal, 40%

chance of receiving a red signal.

If the red zone has been selected by nature, then

it's 20% chance of receiving a blue signal, 80% chance

of receiving a red signal.

Right.

So what do you know?

You you know, the prior that I just given to

you, which is there is 50% chance that the red

or the blue urn is the correct one.

And you know your signal and you know the probability

distribution of signal, right?

What is the probability of a blue signal conditional on

the blue Earth.

That's 60%.

What is the probability of a blue signal conditional on

the red urn.

That's 20%.

So that that's what you know.

And what I'm asking you is to go and 90

to, you know, I think they should be the cause

of Cod.

If Monte doesn't start changing things at the last minute

and to cast a vote.

That's okay.

Here we are.

We do have the right code.

Let me know if you have a problem accessing it.

No, I don't think so.

Because somebody has already voted.

Right.

You should vote for blue or for red.

Remember, you vote does not matter for your payoff, right?

It doesn't matter if you vote red and the iron

is blue, or you've got blue and the red is

red, right?

What matters is that the group is correct, right?

If the group is correct, you get one no matter

you voted right.

So certain people should receive receive a signal, which is

this turnout of 100% is pretty impressive.

But you know, and we have some random voters.

If random voters want to just like, you know, start

messing up with stuff, you can always go and.

Nice voters, huh?

Nice isn't it?

They are very important for something, actually.

But while you are voting, have you seen that political

economy got its.

Maybe we could say its first Nobel Prize today.

For better, we will trash, but that's okay.

Oh, yeah, that one got it is not.

Huh?

Not yet.

Yeah, maybe you're right.

The second I was also thinking about Allison and the

tragedy of comments that you would think is also a

political economist for the economics professor, maybe you could say

so.

Third, being generous with yourself.

All right.

Huh?

They want to see people.

Right?

So, yeah, so far as.

I need this number to go to 13, because I'm

pretty sure all the people will receive a signal.

God, are in the room.

Okay.

Why people finish voting.

Is representative of something.

No.

These were getting closer and closer to elections.

No no no no no.

No no no no.

They are not.

I think this is more the common colours of.

No, no, they were not meant to be.

Otherwise I'm priming you on something ideological that's really terrible

compared to what the election is about in this lecture.

All right, well, you know, maybe the last person can

vote.

Reporter.

Truthfully, this is not like, just tell me what was

the signal.

Right.

Like, what is the signal that you have received?

Just report it.

I know personally I have, you know, I send you

email so I know who you're receiving, but, like, it's

going to be hard to go back to everyone.

So just say tell me which signal you have received.

And then we see the result of this first experiment.

Are you looking at this signal?

No, no.

Okay, so that's fine because otherwise, you know, this would

be like, uh, be careful now, because when we go

to autocracy, you will understand violence is a very good

tool of accountability.

All right.

When people finish, let's go back here.

Where is my 13th voters?

Oh, it's not so bad to have a odd number

in this in this race.

Where are you?

Okay, this is disappearing.

Okay.

So what happened here?

Interesting.

So just so you know, the correct option is blue.

And for the first really congratulations.

For the first time ever, a group of students didn't

get the right answer.

It was very impressive.

Like this is a very good performance you should be

very proud of.

I'm really impressed.

How did you vote then?

Can you everybody else report that signal?

Here we have only eight people.

It'd be good to know for the 12th quarter.

This does the trick, but it doesn't.

I mean, where is the 12th one?

Well.

I really like to know that it should be a

blues singer, that more blues singer.

That there are red signals for sure.

But it must be that the election was swayed by

probably two people with blue signal voting red, right?

It's quite interesting because, you know.

Most of most people.

Wanted to what I would say by sincere voting.

Right.

Most people sincere voting.

Just follow the signal.

Right.

And two people decided to be, you know, a bit

like now maybe I'm going to kind of like vote

red when I receive Signal Blue.

And we'll say that they try to be a bit

more strategic.

The problem is the strategic voter in this case got

it completely wrong.

This is exactly the opposite.

You should have been doing.

It's like would have been much better to what blew

afterwards than right after blew.

And we will see why this is the case right

during this lecture.

So this is kind of like someone is hiding.

You have seven but six years.

Some somebody got blue and voted red and it's like

not me.

No, no I haven't done this.

This is the only logical explanation.

There were not six red signal.

I'm pretty sure of this.

All right, so what are we doing here?

We are looking in this lecture in might look like

this is a lot of it is going to be

a very theoretical exercise.

And there is a notion, I will argue, that this

way of thinking about election is probably missing the spot,

which you know, you are making a point about the

election coming up, and indeed the one I wanted to

avoid talking about red Republican versus blue Democrat is because

there is a notion in that sort of election that

is not really about finding the right option.

We do think that there is an element of ideology

into it.

And I think this is kind of like not what

we are going to see.

But, you know, despite this, it is important to see

that one of the ways people are defending democracies is

through this type of environment that we are going to

study, right.

So there is many scholars around in political theory and

political science who think that democracy is really about finding

the correct policy right in the world.

There is one correct policy.

And the electorate as a whole is going to try

to find it.

Now, strangely speaking, for most scholars who believe in this

notion, but the right policy is correspond pretty much to

their ideological preferences.

But that is for sure just a coincidence, right?

So here there is no question of fighting about what

is in our primary interest.

Having different perspective on, you know, tax rate, having different

perspective on moral issues.

It's really we are all wanting to find the correct

policies.

Right.

And we will go back a little bit to this

when we go to political agency.

Because there's a flavour of this in particular.

So this is called common value election because all of

us want the same thing.

We have common values.

We want to pick the correct policy.

Right.

Like the red or the blue.

Now nobody knows what the correct policy is, but anyone

has some ideas of what it might be.

And the idea is that we are election.

We are voting.

We can aggregate all this information that we have dispersed

in the electorate and kind of like maybe find the

right policy.

And indeed we have a theorem which is called the

conversation theorem that says two points.

First points is that citizen can almost certainly pick the

right policy.

If you know the size of the electorate goes to

infinity, we will basically the probability of mistakes in majoritarian

election goes to zero.

And that's what we mean by information aggregation.

This is basically the probability of Mr. goes to zero.

And the other thing is that the electorate although all

overperform a few experts.

So if you have n voters for any n greater

than one in expectation, you do better than one voter.

And if you think an expert is better informed than

many voters, you will always find a sufficiently large electorate

so that as a whole, the electorate is better than

an expert.

So this is a very strong defence of democracy versus

autocratic oligarchic monarchies regime, because it says that if I

delegate the decision powers to the vote to the citizen,

they will make the correct policy and they will basically

make less mistakes than experts.

So the corner surgery theorem, it's you know, it's a

very important result.

I'll just give you what it is.

And there's the proof in the appendix.

But there is a story as a way to, you

know, always give you some ironic twist in some sense.

So cannot say we'll probably produce one of the strongest

defence of democracies.

Through this form of epistemic defence of democracy, we call

was living at the time of the French Revolution and

ended up being guillotined during the Revolution.

The.

Opposition made it.

In any case, it basically got killed by the revolution.

That it was like that.

It has done so much to create.

The story about guillotine is much better.

Let me have my fake news.

All right.

So what is the condensation theorem?

It's basically saying there are two alternative in our case

will have been red and blue.

But it's A and B one is correct.

There are n borders.

Each one has a probability p of being correct.

Decision by majority will be sincere voter.

And then we basically have the probability that a society

of size n and with probability p that anyone in

this society is correct as a world, the true majority

will choose the correct alternative.

And what the conversation is, is saying is that if

voters are more likely to be correct or not.

But nobody is certain about what the correct policy is,

then the group of voters do better than one voter.

And as you increase the size of the voter to

infinity, the chances that you find the correct policy goes

to one.

If you want, the risk of mistake goes to zero.

So that's kind of like what?

So the point about the theorem, right, is that it

is actually not a game theoretical result.

It is actually just a statistical result.

It's just using statistical properties indeed.

The second point we use the central limit theorem, which

is a theorem that you see a lot in econometrics.

This is just a statistical result, not a game theoretic.

So what we are going to do is we are

going to go into a game with strategic voters, and

we are going to think about whether one main strategic

voter, the theorem, is working.

So this is what we do okay.

So I'm going to show you we're going to spend

most of the time on a very kind of like

C stylised version of information aggregation.

And that's going to be because we want to think

about strategies.

And our objective here is not going to be to

determine information aggregation.

Right.

Our objective is going to be more limited than this

is going to be to say, suppose that every voter

in the electorate has three right to vote.

Sincerely.

And I will define what sincere voting means.

Would it be a best response for you to also

vote sincerely?

Right.

So we are going to think about what are the

chances and what are the conditions under which sincere voting

is an equilibrium strategy.

Right.

And you know, by the end of this lecture you

will understand why of this limited objective one, we will

go over what I hope will be one of the,

you know, most thought provoking results we have during this

course.

Right?

So we have to do some work, but at the

end there is some nice light at the end of

the tunnel.

So let's think about only three bottles.

It's really enough to give all the intuition behind this

model, right?

A water basically they get, you know, they have to

choose between B and R, and they get the utility

of what is the correct alternative and zero otherwise alternative

B is correct in state B, alternative R is correct

instead r right.

So this is our blue urn and our rider.

The state theta is unknown.

There is a common prior that the state is blue

with probability one half.

We will like this in the full model and before

casting their vote, each voter receives a signal which is

either 0 or 1.

Zero is in blue and one is in red, because

it's going to be connected to the zero and the

blue and red signal you got as well, right?

So signal zero when the statistic will be apparent is

strictly greater than one RF signal, one minus that is

r upon this probability q r strictly greater than one.

Right.

So basically if you want s equals zero is a

signal that is that is blue that the correct URL

is blue s equal one is a signal that the

studies are that the correct urn that the urn picked

by nature is.

All right.

So that's kind of what it is.

So the timing is nature determined, the state of the

world and the signal received by everybody.

Signals are what we call independent conditional on the state

of the world.

So once you have the condition on the state of

the world that determine the probability with which you receive

s equal to zero or s equal one, but it

does not, it's not because one person receive s equals

zero, that the next is more likely to receive s

equal to zero the signal are independent in this.

That's what we mean.

Independent conditional on the state of the the world.

The state of the world.

Determine the distribution of signal.

Once this is set, signals are independent.

Everyone has a chance of receiving signal zero in state

theta B.

Everybody's vote simultaneously for B or for the alternative that

wins a majority of the vote is implemented.

Pay off are realised.

Right?

And here, since there is basically simultaneous voting, the equilibrium

we're going to use is Bayesian equilibrium.

That's fantastic.

So.

This is your who is really excited.

You can see as I was on site okay.

So since your So voting is going to be a

strategy in this case, which is going to be to

follow your signal.

Right.

That is, you're going to vote for me after I

scored zero, and you're going to vote for R after

s equal one, right?

I wrote this, you know, over the weekend, trying to

always make this lecture more attractive for students before you

cast your vote for the experiment.

But as you can see, I was already anticipating as

by experience every year.

But almost all voters adopt a single voting strategy in

the experiment.

This is kind of like it's it's it's kind of

like nervous.

And you will see that consciously or unconsciously, you made

the best use of your private information.

Indeed, since voting doesn't always mean voting your signal, we

will see this, but in this case it is the

case.

So let's see that.

Computing the posterior.

Huh?

So what do we have?

So what you can think about is still.

Still one is still hiding.

You can think that you have, you know, this prior

which which you start.

And you know the signal structure.

So the first thing you should do.

Is you're going to look like this.

Is to compute.

Basically, what are the chances that a star is blue

After signal zero.

What are the chances that the study is blue after

signal zero?

Well, by Bayes rule.

Is going to be the probability that you receive signal

zero conditioned on the state being blue time.

The probability that the study is blue.

Then the product plus the probability that the state is

z, that the signal is zero.

Conditioned on getting conditioned on the state being red times

the probability that the study is right.

Importantly, always with Bayes rule, you always start with the

information you observe.

And what you have observed in this case is that

the signal is zero.

Right.

Remember it's always like that.

Now, what is the probability that the signal is blue?

Conditional zero.

Conditional on the state being blue.

It's equal to.

This QB indeed.

What's the probability that the state is blue?

It's one half.

What's the probability of getting signal zero when the state

is red?

One minus q one minus q r.

Indeed.

And then one half the one half are going to

drop.

So QB plus one minus cube divided by cube plus

one minus cube.

Now we can do the same thing for what are

the chances?

That the state is red after signal one and it's

going to be q r.

Q r plus one minus q.

Now, as a sincere voter who only basically use the

information.

You will follow your signal.

If you believe that it's more likely that the state

is blue, you will vote blue.

Basically, if you believe that the state is more likely

to be blue than red after signal zero and you

will vote right.

If you think that the state is more likely to

be blue, red and blue after signal equal one.

This is kind of like what essentially what I would

do is saying sincere.

Strategy.

Would be vote for b.

After s equals zero.

If the probability that the state is blue given an

s equal to zero is greater than one.

And.

You're going to say I'm going to compare the chances

that the state is blue versus the chances that the

state is red after my signal.

And if I believe it's more likely that the state

is blue after signal zero, I'm going to vote for

blue.

If I believe it's more likely that the state is

red after signal S equals zero.

I will vote for it.

So if we do this, it's cube.

Cube plus one minus q r is greater than one

half.

And so it's you know two cube is greater than

cube plus one minus q r.

Just like putting this this way and this that way.

So it's cube greater than one minus q r.

And since it's going to help is going to be

cube divided by one minus q r is greater than

one.

Similarly.

You're going to get that vote for the alternative rate

after s equal one.

If.

Probability that the state is red, given the signal is

equal, one is greater than one else.

If you believe that after signal, one is more likely

to be red than blue, you would read.

If you believe that this is equal, one is more

likely to be blue than red.

You should put blue as a sensor of water, and

doing the same sort of computation is going to be

q r divided by one minus q be greater than

one.

So that's kind of like our two conditions.

And because we know that Q strictly greater than one

of Q are strictly greater than one.

This is satisfied and this is satisfied.

Right.

So this is kind of like we know this condition

are satisfied.

So indeed, following your signal is making the best use

of your information right?

You are really kind of like making the best use

of the information that you directly receive.

Yes, but wait.

This inequality, right has two components.

This part is the informativeness of your signal.

This part is the informativeness of your prior.

In this particular example, because the prior is one half.

Basically the prior has no informativeness.

But if you want there's no bias in your prior,

right?

What is the informativeness of your signal?

Let me do it for.

Here.

For this condition, it will be the probability.

Of receiving signal one.

Given that the state is ah divided by the probability

of receiving signal one given that the state is blue.

That ratio defined the informativeness of a signal.

So the higher is this ratio.

The more informative is your signal, the closer is to

one, the less informative it is to think.

For example, a case where you have exactly the same

probability of receiving signal one after theta equal, where when

theta is equal to r and one when it is

equal to b.

This is the same probability In this particular case, this

ratio will be one.

So you will learn nothing from signals equal one, because

it's as likely to occur when the studies are and

when the study is built.

And so there is nothing to be learned.

Think inversely to the case where the probability to receive

signal equal one one that is blue is zero.

There is no chance on earth that you will see

signal equal one after when the state is blue.

So after receiving signal equal one, what do you know

about the state?

That's not a trick question itself.

It's not blue.

It must be it's red.

Right.

You know for sure that the studies are which mean

that the signal fully within signal is equal.

One fully revealed at the steady state.

What is the value of a ratio here?

This is zero.

This has to be positive.

Obviously, you know, this is a not defined ratio, but

we can think of taking the limit.

The limit of this as this goes to zero is

infinity right.

So what we have is when the ratio is one

is completely uninformative.

When the ratio is infinite, it's fully informative.

Right.

And so everything in between is in between perfectly informative

and perfectly and informative and informative and perfectly informative.

And as you increase this ratio, the informativeness of your

signal is higher.

This means the signal is equal.

One creates a greater separation between state ah and state

b.

And of course we have the same for signal zero

right.

So that's a very important piece of information when we

do posterior.

What is the format of a signal.

Now.

Under the condition that we have.

Is sincere voting always optimal in the sense of, you

know, is it the strategy you should adopt under this

particular condition?

Is everyone agreeing that it's.

Yes.

I'm not agreeing that it's.

Yes.

No.

Is there anyone else, like thinking to disagree with the

lecturer?

So what's the question?

If if it's really what you should do as a

voter to follow your signal under when these conditions are

satisfied.

Which they are.

In our case.

We are exploiting.

Our own signal?

Yes.

So for example.

So I should also think that other people are receiving

signal.

And so somehow I should condition my vote on other

people modes.

Isn't that this thing that are very complicated?

You are contradicting me.

Basically.

I don't like this.

Anybody else wants to contradict me.

If I knew the probability that other people are getting

a signal such as before, if you get like a

50% with the learners, then you should condition your votes

for more of.

The signal than other.

People I really like.

You're really like this.

There's a lot of rebellion in this class.

I don't like this.

I do like this.

The answer is no.

And indeed, exactly for the reason that have been stated

is that If you want to be your best response.

And again, remember what we want, right?

It's like we are just looking.

And there's a pedagogic reason behind this.

We are just looking for conditions under which if everybody

votes sincerely, that is, follow the signal.

In this case, should you yourself vote sincerely and that

that's that's the objective, right?

So a rational voter must also use information from other

voters action, which is we need to look at strategic

voting, right?

Yes.

No question is if it's um, if everyone works simultaneously.

So it's to you all simultaneously.

But remember that what we think are is that we

are going to postulate a strategy for the players, and

we're going to see whether all strategy or best respond

to that strategy is to also vote sincerely in the

sense of following your signal.

And again, as always for an equilibrium, if the answer

is no for you, it's also not for everybody else.

And that means that that equilibrium is not in equilibrium.

Now we are not going to characterise the equilibrium because

as a good statistic.

Last lecture I make you do this in your problem

set right.

Slightly different game but like same idea right.

We are just going to see under which condition.

And since the voting strategy is in equilibrium and that's

what we are going to do.

And we're going to see why it's important to think

even just about this more limited question.

Right.

Then again, as I said, if for you not being

sincere than other and sincere, of course it's also true

for them.

And that means that the whole idea that people are

voting sincerely is not an equilibrium.

You take it and you throw it away, All right,

this is kind of nice.

And then you start again.

All right.

So here is probably, I'll say with a pun intended,

the pivotal moment of the lecture.

Right.

How should you think strategically in this case.

Right now there is something very important is that you

do not know the signal that other people has received.

You do not know this?

That's not an information that you have.

Right.

However, we are postulating something about them is that we

are postulating that they are voting sincerely.

That is, that they are following the signal that we

postulate.

Right.

So let's think about Water Street and say you are

water three separately on your own right.

And you have to think about what you should do

right and what you anticipate is a voter.

One and two are voting sincerely right.

So that's that's your postulate you work with.

So the first thing to realise is that if one

and two are voting for alternative B, you will not

influence the outcome of the election because B will be

chosen no matter what you do.

It doesn't matter what you vote, it's b the outcome

of the election.

If both of them are choosing alternative R, then it

doesn't matter what you do, you do not influence the

outcome of the election.

Right?

So there is only one case where your vote matters

is when one voters voted B and the other voters

voted are in any other case, you don't care, right?

So if you are to compute and so it's not

yet in the appendix, I'll put it.

But it's a lot.

I'll edit the slide and put this appendix.

If you were to compute your expected utility from voting

read right.

It will be basically.

Yes.

Very enthusiastically.

All right.

Let's think about your expected.

And to do this I'm going to call the final.

The policy implemented the one that is implemented.

I'm going to call it P with capital P, so

you can think about the expected utility is going to

be one.

It's going to be the expected utility that policy B

is implemented if there are two votes for B.

One for R which is your vote.

Right.

Because the other two are voted for B, you are

voting for her.

Given as voter three that you have received signal one.

Time.

You know probability of.

That there's going to be the probability that red is

chosen if there are two votes for B are.

And you vote.

For are conditional on your signal.

Then the probability of two votes for R.

Are you going to share these with us?

Yes.

It's always on the Moodle.

Yes.

Okay.

So you can exercise your talent in calligraphy on top

of learning about game theory.

You know I should we should charge you double at

this.

So buddy speaking, there are three things that can happen.

There is too much for me already.

Remember here we think about you voting for R, you

vote for R, but in this case, because there are

two vote for B, B is being chosen.

So this is the utility from being chosen.

That's the probability table.

There are two votes for are already you.

As voters we vote for R then R is chosen.

Right.

Because there are three vote for all probability this upper.

There is one vote for one vote for B you

vote for R.

In this case there is two votes for R, one

vote for B.

So utility from being chosen from the probability of having

one vote for R and one vote for it.

So this is the three possibilities.

Either everybody but who has voted for blue?

Blue is chosen even everybody.

But you are Waiting for R, a new word for

r r is chosen or there is a split in

among the voters.

Your vote is decisive and R is chosen.

Now we can think about the expected utility.

Of voting for blue.

Something which is going to help.

And we're going to have three things we are going

to gonna have.

So you vote for blue in this case?

Now, both voted for blue.

You vote for blue.

You be chosen.

They have both voted for R.

You vote for B, R It's chosen.

Right.

One I voted for one of our FOB.

You vote for blue.

Blue is chosen.

Right.

This and this are the same.

This and this are the same.

So they do not matter when you compare it, right?

So what are you going to do?

You're going to vote for.

For R if and only if basically that side is

beautiful.

Ah, this is going to be a beautiful bit.

If R is greater than B, right.

This is greater than this.

This term cancel with this one.

This term cancel with this one.

So the only thing that matter is this.

And this this probability and this probability is the same.

So the only thing you care about.

Is.

So when you make your decision, the only thing that

matters is this thing.

That is the only event that matter.

When one has voted for blue and the other has

voted for.

And that's the only thing that matters.

Every other event do not matter.

But think about the difference, right?

When you compute the utility function.

You look at all possible events and we have three

voters.

But you can think about, you know, extending this idea

to many more.

You compute all possible events.

But you when you compare the benefit of choosing that

strategy versus that strategy, the only event that matters is

when the electorate is the other voters are split when

the other voters are So even though you do not

know whether you are going to be the decisive voter,

what we mean in the formal language, whether you are

going to be pivotal, you do not know this, right?

This is one of the three possible event that we

have here.

However, when you decide whether or not to vote for

or to vote for blue, you are going to only

look at the expected utility you get conditional on being

the pivotal voter.

The only thing that matters to you is what happened,

conditional on being the pivotal voters, right?

You can do the expected utility can be very, very

long if there are many voters.

But in the end, the only thing that is going

to enter your decision.

Is that particular moment right?

Is everybody clear on this?

Everything else does not matter.

You do not need to take it into account for

your decision.

Right?

So you're only going to think about okay.

The only thing I care about is what happens if

I'm decisive.

If I'm pivotal.

And I'm pivotal.

If one vote has been cast for all and one

word has been cast, that's what I'm pivotal.

Now, if you believe other are playing a sincere voting

strategy, what does it mean that one vote has been

cast for the.

President as equals zero?

Remind me that one vote has been cast for a.

This has equal one ended.

And therefore in that particular moment for your decision, you

actually anticipate the information that has been received for the

other player.

What does it mean?

That means that when you compute your posterior, you should

use your own information, but also the information that comes

from you being pivotal.

Now, the information that comes from you being pivotal will

always depend on the strategy that is being played by

the other player.

So if they play a more complicated strategy, you will

also have to play, you know, make a different computation.

Here we only look at the case where all the

players are voting since the strategy.

So being pivotal means one player's receive signal is equal

to one, one player's receive signal is equal to zero.

And then you have also your answer.

So when you vote as a strategic voter, you do

not just use your information.

You also use other people information conditional on you being

pivotal.

And your post has become much more complicated to compute,

but also it can affect the way you decide your

strategy.

So you will be as if you were strategically always

assuming that there is a situation which happened that we

would receive the signal as well.

So yeah.

Yeah.

So so you know, no.

Yeah.

In this particular case.

Right.

If for example, they were to play a random strategy,

you will assume that they played random strategy.

And being pivotal will have all the information and what

we are.

And that's what you do in the problem set in

some advanced questions.

Right.

So this is just like it's specific to here the

fact that you create an equivalence between vote for B

and vote for R is due to the fact that

we and signal S equals zero.

Signal S equals one is due to the flag that

we assume since the voting, which is already enough for

the lecture.

And so that's that that's condition right.

And what is important is that again the probability that

you count pivotal can be extremely small.

As you increase the number of voter, that probability is

going to decrease very quickly towards zero.

But it does not matter how small this probability is.

Right.

Because every other term is cancelling out.

And therefore the only thing that remain is this.

So even if this has 0.001 chances to happen, that

still the only thing that you will consider in your

decision The only.

Right?

Yeah.

If you need proof of the fact of the downturn

model.

It doesn't really.

So not really, because the Thomson will already assume we'll

go very far away from this now, which we see

next week.

We'll go very far away from this.

And we'll say there is common value.

Reflection makes no sense.

We need to have, um, ideology in it.

So even like we go very far away from, from,

from this world and the don't sell model.

So that's kind of like the key things.

Right.

So.

What we have is.

As I said, the only thing that matter in the

decision, the only thing you're going to condition on is

that your pivotal is the two other words sincerely.

Then you learn the signal from being pivotal.

We think they are putting you perfectly learn the signal

from being pivotal with all the strategy you might learn.

That's right.

But that's like what you are.

So this is kind of like the key thing right

after this.

After this.

It's boring mathematics.

Right.

This is not interesting.

We're going to go through it after the short break.

But it's boring.

Mathematics, right.

The mathematics is very simple.

It's practice.

So maybe you won't get it when I go through

it.

Just review the notes and, you know, you will kind

of like get through it.

The logic is what is important, right?

So before we do a break, just want to be

sure that everyone has the logic, right.

So why do you do your decision.

You're going to compute your expected utility.

And her expected utility is going to have a lot

of possibilities like if you have a lot of quarters,

However, many, many terms are going to cancel out because

what you do is not going to affect the election,

right with voters.

We've seen if two have already voted for blue or

if two have already voted for are what you do

doesn't matter.

So you're not even going to consider this.

What you're going to consider to make your decision is

the moment where you are pivotal.

Even if this happened with probability 000001, you are going

to consider this.

At this only the seven and the seventh.

All right.

Once you consider this event, in the case of sensor

voting, for example, which is the easiest one to get

through, you're going to say, oh, if the electorate is

split, if there is one vote for blue, one vote

for red, and these people are voting sincerely, that mean

one person got the signal as equals zero, 1% of

the signal is equal one.

And I use my signal and that information that I

get from being able to compute what I'm going to

do.

What we're going to do next, after five minutes break,

is to compute what you're going to do.

In this case, that's the boring mathematics part.

That's the part that you can review.

The logic is important.

If you get the logic, you get the math, even

if you don't get it in this lecture.

So everybody is good on the logic behind this.

Right.

So let's do really a five minutes break because we

have quite a bit to see after that.

Today we are a bit pressed on time.

So now as I said, we are going to do

the boring math, right.

This is not deep in the sense that this is

just algebra.

So if you do not get it as we go

through this, do not worry that much, right?

This is something that you will get by looking again

at your notes or by practising in other programs.

I like the most important thing.

As I said, the pivotal moment was this slide.

If you get this slide, you have basically the lecture.

Right?

So that's like what matters the math.

I'm always confident that people get it afterwards.

So we're going to think about.

The posterior.

So now you're going to vote for an alternative.

Or in this case if the probability that the studies

are conditional on one getting signal one, one getting signal

zero.

And what are three.

Getting signal one is greater than 1 or 2.

Possibility.

The studies are the study is blue.

So if one is greater than one or the other

is less than one.

Right.

And that and that I let you think about it.

But these are actually equivalent.

Or because you get one if you're correct Zero the

wise.

What is your chance of being correct?

Is this is the centre right.

So.

And you see if you don't there are officers on

Wednesday.

You see all slots are empty.

So as always this option okay.

So there is these things.

So we are going to do you know.

Bayes rule in a simple way we're going to think

about.

What is the probability that one got.

The same thing class.

Now we know that the prior is one alpha and

alpha nought.

So we know that these priors are going to drop.

Right.

So we have to think about what is this thing.

Right.

This is the object that is.

Now if you remember.

I said that signal are independent conditional on the state

of the world.

So I can separate my signal as both the three

from V7 here.

You know that there is no information about who is

movement is just one signal equal one.

One signal equals zero.

But I can zip out mine relative to the order?

No, we are basically still, it's slightly better because now

we have reduced our uncertainty about this.

All right.

So let's think about.

What are the possibility.

For this to happen for one to get signal s

equal one and one to get signal as equal zero.

Right.

So what can happen one case is.

For a one get signal 1 or Wanted to get

signal zero.

Another case is what?

One gets signal zero.

Vertical signal one.

This is like the two possibilities for one to get

and the other to get.

So we can think of it as there are two

possibilities.

One is one is getting one and two is getting

zero.

The other possibility is one is getting zero, and voter

two is getting one conditional on the third of all

being bid.

Right.

Is everybody clear that this is what we can do?

Can we do better?

And that's helpful to go to the general model.

So I want to try to see if we can

do think about it more generally.

Right.

In order to.

Build some intuition for the general model that we will

cover.

Just to give you some intuition about it, I would

not do the full math for the general model.

Think about it.

Think about, for example, signal one as success, right?

And so here I am changing.

Yeah.

Nice.

Okay.

Let's say signal one is success, right?

Just just for simplicity.

How many draws do we have here?

We have two draws, right?

We have two possibilities.

How many successes do we have?

So it's not a half.

So what?

We.

Not necessarily.

What we want to know is what are the chances

of two success of one success as of two draw.

Is that a distribution that is like this?

Distribution?

I would say, you know, I have an draws and

I want to think about what is the probability of

getting k success, which distribution give us that.

It's a binomial distribution.

Right.

So basically that event comes also can be thought of

as a binomial distribution.

So let's do it this way.

And let's look at what the binomial will tell us.

And then we will see that it indeed is equivalent.

Right.

So we have the binomial is take an independent draws.

And you can compute what is the probability of success

out of an independent trials.

And it's a bit the same thing here.

So to think about it like here.

Now we can separate because we know that signal.

Independent.

Conditional on the state of the world.

What is the probability that S1 equals one conditional on

the state of the world?

It's a long time ago.

So it's not that cube is this one.

This is.

One.

Yeah.

This is cube.

Cube.

This is equal to two.

Cube.

One of mine is cute.

Now let's think about it now as a binomial.

Is.

One success.

Over two independent draws.

This is a binomial.

And so what do we think about is we can

think of s as being distributed as a binomial With

the probability of success, which we define as.

The probability of getting a signal S equal one condition

on the state of the world being blue.

Right.

This is our number of draws.

This is our probability of success.

And just you know, success has been defined as s

equal one.

Of course I could have done it with s equals

zero.

Right.

What you choose as success does not matter.

This is a convention right.

So what is the probability of this is like distribution.

Of successes.

What is the probability of getting one success when instead

of the word is blue?

What is the probability of out of two draws?

I get one success.

Right.

This is the combinatorial.

Probability of success ten to the power one.

Probability of failure to the power one.

This is the formula of a binomial, right.

If I want k success, I have n is n

k.

Probability of success to the power k.

Probability of failure to the power n minus k.

Right.

But in our case n equal to 262 draws success

k equal one.

So that's what we define.

If you're not familiar with the binomial I'll recommend even

just Wikipedia.

might just like to familiarise.

So the combinatorial two one is two.

The probability of success is q one minus q.

In our case the probability of failure is QB, which

is exactly the same thing as this one.

So now we can rule for any number of voters.

We can do it for any number of waters and

any rules possible.

Because you can change the rule.

You can not necessarily be majority.

And indeed this is what the general model is doing.

So we will see it in the general model.

But for the moment right.

Why did we have we had this thing.

Probability of one guy getting one, one guy getting zero

water, three getting one condition on the state being blue.

And we said this was the probability of getting one.

One guy getting zero.

Condition on this.

That is blue time probability.

That S3 is equal to one condition on this.

That is blue.

This we know is two QB one minus QB.

This we know is one minus QB.

And now we have a formula here.

Of course we can do the same thing.

For when the state is red.

Which is going to be 2QR1 minus q r times

you are.

Replacing the probability appropriately.

So now we do have a posterior.

Posterior that the state is red after when we anticipate

one signal red, one signal blue as we get a

red is equal to 2QR1 minus q r q r

divided by the same thing.

Time or prior.

Sorry.

So one off.

This drop this drop this drop this drop.

This drop this drop.

And so the question is.

Is my posterior.

Greater than one half.

Now we're going to rearrange this.

In the interest of time, I'm not going to do

it right.

But after we are arranging it.

You are getting this inequality, right.

So one, are you going to vote for R after

your signal s equal one?

Thinking strategically, that is, thinking about when your pivotal is

when this condition is satisfied.

And this condition has two components.

Components.

Number one is the information that comes from your signal.

And indeed if you remember.

This is this one.

That's the one that comes from your signal, right?

So that's the information that come from this signal.

The second component is the information that comes from other

people's signal.

Given that you are thinking about the event when you

are pivotal, right.

So there is your information, the information you infer from

being pivotal.

Another player strategy.

And in this there is one signal right.

So the same as yours and one signal.

And so the formula is different.

But it has also a nice flavour that is similar

which is your signal, your own indirect information the information

you infer.

And what do you infer.

There is one signal.

Blue does this one.

And there is one signal right from the other borders,

which is what we have discussed.

Right?

So this is the pivotal thing.

This is your own information.

So let me just go there.

Now let's say for the moment that we have the

same thing, but we have n voters, right?

An n plus one vote for R to pass.

Right.

Just to see the logic of this formula in general.

What do we have?

Well, since you're voting right for after signal s equal

one, we are going to have the same formula, right?

I'm going to show you the general model, but I

introduce you and you will see the logic is the

same.

What does it mean to be pivotal in this case.

Right.

What does it mean.

That means that there is n minus one divided by

two voters that are casting a ballot for R and

n minus one divided by two voters that are casting

a ballot for blue, right.

And if you sum them, it's n minus one voter

right.

Among the n minus one voters are for them are

casting a ballot for are off of them are casting

a ballot for you.

Right.

So if they vote sincerely, that mean that n minus

one of them divided by two single blue and minus

one divided by two for signal r n minus one

of them divided by two good signal blue and minus

one divided by two will signal all the information coming

from others is the same as before, except now we

have to think about the number of voters that receive

this information.

And then what do you have?

You have your own information as well.

So the formula is always the same.

Is your information the information coming from other which is

basically information coming from n minus one.

If I do signals blue n minus one divided by

two signal r, we can look at also for what

happened when after signal s equals zero.

Your information coming from you in this case is QB

probability.

You receive signal zero in state blue divided by prior

to your system or zero state all your information the

information coming from others right?

And again n minus one of them got the signal

blue and minus one of them got the signal.

And if this is bigger than the informativeness of your

prior, the bias in your prior, you vote sincerely.

That is, even after being strategic, you vote following your

signal.

So we can do this right.

And we can think about your experiment.

Right.

So in your experiment the prior was also one up

And the signal probability where for qubit was three five,

right, 60% chances that you receive signal zero when the

state is b, q r was for 580% chances that

you receive the signal one or red when the state

is one.

So we can do the computation in particular for signal

s equal one.

Right.

This is this formula.

Now m minus one divided by two.

In our case if everybody will have voted this was

six and six.

Right.

Because it's what is the value of this is 0.18.

It's strictly less than one.

Therefore after signal S equal one conditional on everybody being

strategic or being sincere, your best response was not to

be sincere.

You can do the same computation for signal Blue and

you will say that after signal blue, conditional on everybody

being sincere, your best response is to be sincere.

So everybody that voted red of the blue got it

wrong.

Okay.

So before the question briefly yes.

Yes 5 to.

1 of them.

So in the beginning if QB plus q r is

less than one, would we just go against our signal

each time we are sincere?

So you mean less than one half.

E plus.

Q r cube plus q r can be less than

one as well.

Now they cannot be less than one.

Sorry.

If it was, what would we do?

Just since you're working with this was your signal.

So usually you always ask to set one signal with

one state.

So.

But I could do it.

But this is a convention that zero is with blue

or blue is with blue and red is with red.

It's just like if there is a signal that is

always indicative of one state and makes no.

Sense for that formula.

It wasn't like q over one minus q are larger

than one.

So it doesn't matter that you have a one off

that is greater than one.

What matters is that that's not a problem, is that

one is more informative than the other about one state.

So you can interpret the other way.

So that's point two.

It means about 80%.

But even you could not think that a less than

one half, as long as you know one is more

indicative of some of one state than the other.

One model for informativeness is not the value of this

probability, but the ratios, so the two could be less

than one.

But you know, importantly, the ratio that matters that indicates

something.

Although it's a good question.

Now I would just add so Do you need that?

Does this mean that that's sincere about not being, uh.

An equilibrium?

A best response to sincere voting.

Means that we actually need even less voters.

No no no no no, it just means no no

no no.

It just means that you take away your sense of

voting and you have to identify another candidate strategy for

equilibrium.

Right?

That's what you do.

And in this case I want to go through this.

But in this case what is the candidate strategy is

going to be that after signal red, people will start

mixing between blue and red.

And then it does the equilibrium strategy.

Okay.

But now let's think about something here.

Because there is something there's a reason why.

Those who wanted to play strategically got it wrong.

That's the reason why it makes perfect sense to get

it wrong, actually.

Right.

Because this is actually very tricky.

As equal one conditional on theta equal r is 0.8

x equals zero.

Conditional on theta is equal to b is 0.6.

Right.

So in some sense it looks like signal one is

more informative than signal blue.

Right.

Because you have a 0.8 here and a 0.6 here.

But remember something to be really important to think about

informally.

It's not the value of this probability that matter is

the ratio here.

Right.

So for example right.

What is our ratio here Q all divided by one

minus q b.

It's two.

That is because it's 40% chance of getting signals equal.

One on the side is blue and 80% chance of

getting it when the state is also 80 divided by

40.

That's just so it's informative, but it's, you know, just

a ratio of two.

On the other hand QB divided by one minus Q

or is three.

It is actually very informative.

And there is something very specific about Informativeness right.

Is that what is actually very informative is not often

the probability that you get the signal in the right

state.

That is, it's not the probability of true positive, right?

What you need to look at is the probability of

false positive.

If you what is the probability that you get the

signal in the wrong state?

The lower is the probability that you get a signal

in the wrong state.

In fact, more often than not, the more informative is

that particular signal.

Right.

So really when we think about informativeness, it's important to

think about why we say our true positive.

What's the probability of getting signal zero when the studies

are blue?

But it's also even sometimes more important to think about

the probability of false positive.

What is the probability of getting signal zero when the

studies are right.

When that is very small, in fact, signal becomes very

informative.

What you want to avoid is false positive right.

Which is nice because it's a little bit like him

afterwards.

All right.

What is statistically significant statistical significance.

The value of statistical significance.

That's your false positive probability.

And what do we want to do.

We want to minimise false positive also in baseball.

That's also why you have Bayesian econometrics sometimes.

So what we want to do is learning about false

positive rates which is an important quantity like statistical significance

in empiric.

That's false positive rate right.

What does your chance of getting a number as big

as this one.

If the true value is zero that's a false positive

rate.

And that's also a value we really care about in

Basel.

So that's kind of this here we can think about

the general model changing it a little bit.

What is happening in the general model.

I just walk you through it and you know we

can have like I would never give you something as

hard as the other thing.

I think, you know, this be like, I don't like

you, but it's the again type of thing.

The general like model.

This is like never going to happen in an exam

question, right?

This is way too hard.

I could give it to a PhD student, but I

don't teach this year in general.

So that's kind of like so what is the difference?

It has the same flavour of you get one if

the correct alternative is chosen.

Now there are two differences, like one.

This prior for the set of the world is pi.

So it's not just one half.

Right.

So we have to think about this.

And I better than three quarters we have.

And what is the other thing.

We have the same type of signal.

That signal zero after omega B is QB.

And also the state is omega not theta.

The second you are, etc..

And the thing is, they also look at every possible

institutional world.

And every possible institutional world is.

Which means that you think about a threshold could be

qualified majority.

You need two thirds of the vote for alternative B

to pass.

Right.

And you think about what are the number of votes

relative to this threshold.

So the one we have been working on with is

basically majority is just n plus n minus one divided

by two.

That would be the threshold.

But it could be any threshold where they work with

any threshold.

So they work in two ways.

Before I go to this, let me tell you a

little.

What they work on is first they basically establish.

Given some probability that the signals are correct, what is

the optimal institutional rules of.

Give me this numbers q and Cuban QR in our

case was 60% and 80%.

And Supercuts in our social planner that get all your

signals.

And the idea is, what is the institutional route that

I should implement to make sure that the correct decision

is, you know, we maximise the chance of the correct

decision.

So that's that's what they do, right?

So they basically assume that every voter, which makes sense

in a common value environment, go to the social planner

and say I got signal zero, I got signal one,

etc. and they ask us if we were in this

setting where everybody communicate to someone.

What would be the structure of decision of that person?

How many signal one would that social player need to

choose policy, or how many signal zero would it need

to choose policy zero?

Right.

So this is the idea.

So this is the optimal decision rule because it basically

says if I receive this amount of signal one, I

will always choose policy one.

If I receive this amount of signal zero, I will

always choose policy zero.

You know, this is the rule apply.

I ask you, what is your signal?

And you all give me your signal because you know

I'm doing the best possible route to minimise the risk

of mistakes, right?

Is there very clear on this?

This is the idea.

So we have to think about what is the posterior

of our social planner.

My, what I can have is now going to think

about here is the prior that I get.

And there is the probability of getting.

So this is for the state is blue is my

probability of getting n minus k.

Forget about the s signal zero And k singular is

equal one.

And you see, what do we say with your binomial

appearing.

K successes has equal one out of n voters.

What are the chances of getting k success out of

n voters is out of Andrew's k success.

The combinatorial probability of getting n minus k s failure

n minus k s signal s equals zero k success

k c known as equal one.

We recover in the posterior or binomial over here, we

recover here, we recover here.

And so what is the decision is going to look

something like this which is very very consistent with what

we are.

The only difference is here we are pi equal one

half.

And so this was becoming one.

But here it's more general because.

But you can see that even if we expand it,

we recover the same type of formula.

And so that's kind of like what is the optimal

rule for the policymaker.

And then they ask, let's suppose everybody is voting sincerely

right.

What are the conditions for this set of strategy.

Everybody voting sincerely to be in equilibrium.

They do the same type of computation that we have

been doing right.

And our main result is that you will have a

sincere voting equilibrium if and only if the institutional rule

is equal to the optimal rule.

And that's kind of like the ISM.

Which is exactly what we had.

This is the same type of formula that we had,

except that rather than having n minus one divided by

two, we put our threshold curve.

And so what they show is.

Informative voting.

Or since your voting is rational after C not zero

if and only if they can have the odd say,

node if and only if the institutional world is equal

to the optimal rule that a social planner would take

if it were to get access to all signals, that's

the result.

So that sounds like a strong result, but it's actually

a very weak result for sincere voting.

Why?

Because institutions are set of rules that are decided before

we know the informativeness of signal.

Optimal rules are a set of rules that are decided

given the informativeness of signal.

So if we were to think about, you know, whether

we have since the voting, we will have to think

about the fact that for every single vote that we

will take, we should have we should have different institutional

votes, which is, of course, a very impractical risk.

Right?

So what in fact, they are showing Austin Smith and

Banks is that since voting is not generally an equilibrium

strategy, right.

This is a knife edge type of result.

In general, and we have already seen it in a

simpler example.

Now.

What does it mean.

Do we in some sense care about it?

Do we really care in this type of world?

If we go back to our friend Condorcet, we got

supposedly poisoned as much, right?

But in fact, in truth, decapitated.

Much nicer story, right?

If we go back to work and don't give a

damn about the strategy that voters are playing, this is

something they're going to say we really care about.

No, no, no, don't say we like.

We'll be like, I don't care.

What is Condorcet?

Gonna say cares about the probability that the correct decision

is taken by an electorate that's really in truth.

What Condorcet is taking is saying the point of control

is to say give the power to the people.

Because as a mass, they are almost certainly making the

mistake.

Individually, they are making mistakes.

But Asimov's, they are not making mistakes.

So what we really care as an outcome is do

we get this information aggregation even with strategic voters.

And the answer to this question when we have majority

rule is yes, right?

We do.

In fact, many times strategic voters are going to do

better.

That is the probability of fixing the size of the

electorate.

The probability of making the wrong decision is lower with

strategic voter than with you knows the sincere voters and

the people, right.

The only case is, of course, in this room where,

you know, for the first time ever, people didn't make

the correct decision.

Right.

So in order for this to work, we still have

to assume that now the probability of getting a good

signal is like this.

So the.

Condorcet theorem relies on you are more likely to be

correct.

And wrong.

Yeah that's an absolute thing.

But you could be very close 55%, 52%.

But that would work.

It's not a problem.

The more likely you are to be incorrect, the more

borders you need.

But you know, you just need.

Yeah.

Of course.

And this is an assumption.

When we work all the time, there's no model where

people make a mistake right in our world.

So this is kind of like, you know, one, one

thing.

And, you know, in some sense, if we were to

stop the lecture right now, 15 minutes before the end

of the lecture.

Right, you should go out of this lecture saying, what

the heck?

I'm stuck with this course of this crazy lecture that

give me all this bloody math just to tell me

at the end that it doesn't matter what the hell

is going on.

This is like a really political economy, like unbelievable, right?

But I think that before we reach this conclusion, as

I said, common value for elections, you know, that we

see in the world It's really, you know, it's not

something that we see often, but I will postulate that

there are other environments and in particular one where indeed

all the people casting a vote.

Think about it in a common value way.

What will be an environment where this notion of everybody

wants to get it right makes more sense that, you

know, this general election where anyone can have an idea

about all the environment.

There are not elections, but where people vote.

And really, we all are the same preferences.

Right.

The other thing that juries, you can think about, the

other thing that juries, we can think about central bank

voting sometimes can be considered in this case European Commission,

European Commission, you know, when you have all that I'm

not sure that like, hiring committees could be a thing

in this case.

But you have not done many academic academic committees to

say that they do have a certain notion of common

value when we do a hiring.

But in particular, yes, one big element of the word

where we hope that people have common values are judicial

juries.

Right now, judicial juries have a long history.

Jury, by their right, is one of the most important

democratic innovation that has happened around, like, you know, the

17 18th century.

It was not like this before, right?

This was really a demand of the people.

And indeed, when we think about juries in, you know,

liberal system, what are we afraid of?

What is the thing that we are afraid?

Right.

As always, you can think that there are two types

of error that people can make.

One is false negative, which would be you are finding

innocent a person that is actually guilty.

One is false positive, which is that you are finding

guilty of person that is actually innocent.

And of these two.

Which one do we find the most troublesome in liberal

system?

Do we care more about finding it like we find

it more problematic to find guilty innocent, or to find

innocent guilty?

Doesn't it depend on the guilt?

It doesn't depend on the guilt and legal system at

all.

It's innocent.

Guilty, right?

Which is a country.

For example, if you want to think about autocratic regimes

where Stalin was very much famous to say, it doesn't

matter if we kill 1000 innocent, as long as we

find one guilty in the courts.

Right?

This is a true I think you might have seen

more than one, but this is a kind of like,

you know, the type of perspective that that there was

in, in, in liberal system who are really worried, really

worried about finding innocent people guilty.

We are so worried about finding innocent people guilty.

Now we have set up a special decision rule for

tribunals.

What is the decision rule that we are in?

Many juries simplified.

Of course, the basic idea of the decision we have

like yeah, we will say unanimity will mean we have

unanimity unless everyone finds the defendant guilty.

Simplifying the defendant will be found.

You know, innocent will be judged innocent.

It's not exactly true of the time, but we can

think that the broad spirit of this rule is unanimity.

Right?

And this is because we want was so afraid Of

finding an innocent person guilty, that we say we are

going to put a lot of weight.

You know, a lot of like expression is extremely high

for this to happen.

And indeed, in the world, right in the world where

you have this thing automatic, the probability that you know

anyone is found guilty.

As the number of orders goes to infinity is actually

zero, right?

Everybody will be acquitted in the, in the, in the

Kardashian world.

Right.

Why?

Because.

All right.

If you have any members of the jury, what is

the probability of getting a guilty verdict?

Well, you need all of them to receive the signal.

Guilty.

Right.

Because they need all to find guilty.

P is equal to one.

As you increase the number of voters to infinity, this

goes to zero, right?

If you put the n to the power infinite on

any number less than one.

This is going to zero.

So this is going to zero.

As n goes to infinity right.

So even the guilty all the guilty will work for

it.

As you increase the number of voters like in the

true.

Right.

So that's why you.

Don't want also.

To have jury that are too big.

Because otherwise like you basically find nobody.

Okay.

So that's kind of like you know.

What we have done in liberal system.

What liberals the constitution is attorneys.

We are going to be very, very worried about the

probability of finding an innocent guilty.

And to basically minimise that risk, we are going to

put an extremely high threshold on guilty verdicts.

That is, we are going to use unanimity.

But you see in the world they have not encountered

game theory before.

Now you are kind of like, you know, in your

way of becoming a theorist.

So what are you going to do?

You will strategic people.

And I want you to put yourself in the role

of a strategic person, right in the world of a

jury, because, you know, if you remember, there's a certain

signal that I sent you by email, and that's going

to be the second experiment that we are going to

run.

Right.

So we're going to assume that, you know, you sit

in a large array of trees.

Not bad.

There are certain buffers.

It's not so bad.

And you have the decision whether to find the accused

guilty or innocent.

Decision rule is unanimity in the following sense.

The accused is convicted if and only if you all

vote guilty.

Otherwise, the accused is going to walk free, right?

Prior probability is that the accused is guilty with probability

0.5, which is, I think, very favourable to the judicial

system to the police.

My prior will be much lower than this, and you're

going to get zero if you make the correct decision,

minus one if you make the wrong decision.

Now you have received another signal in your mailbox about

innocent versus guilty, right?

And the signal distribution depends on the status of the

accused.

So if the accused is guilty, if the truth is

good, you have 70% chance of having received a signal

guilty.

If the accused is innocent, then you have 70% chance

of having received a signal.

Innocent?

Right now it's decision time.

Go to Manti.

Right.

So the colour coding doesn't correspond to the one you

are, but.

And you have to vote whether the person is innocent

or guilty.

And remember to be strategic.

You will be judged on your ability to be strategic.

When you'll be judged anonymously on judge.

Sincerely.

Okay, then, while you go as well, report your signal

again.

Truthfully.

All right.

We have even went from 12 to 11.

It's supposed to be.

There's someone hiding here.

If I find it is, Nothing will happen.

But it's all right.

Let's see.

Well, the last two here.

Come on.

Don't hide.

Answer the question.

Don't worry.

This is just for illustration purposes.

So what happened here?

Okay, so good thing is you did, you know.

It's, you know, limited.

So, you know, the moment one person wanted to know

something was done.

What about your signals?

So.

Stop moving.

You.

All right, so what is happening?

Most people were found not guilty about guilty.

Except one exception.

Some people were found innocent of the guilty.

didn't do it.

That's the right strategy.

So let's think about it as strategic voters.

Right.

What is happening?

Well, once more, you have to think that vitality.

When are you pivotal?

You are pivotal.

If everybody else bought a gift.

So imagine for one second that people are sincere.

Right.

What does it mean?

That everybody was a guilty in a room of 12

people?

This means, like, 11 other people receive signal guilty if

they are sincere.

And you are the only one receiving the signal.

Innocent 11 signal guilty are going to try to signal

innocent.

And you should vote guilty.

Right.

So obviously sincere voting is not an equilibrium strategy.

But we have to think about the strategy.

So the strategy is in mixed strategies again where people

are randomising between guilty and innocent after receiving signal innocence.

So that's the optimal strategy to be played.

If you receive a signal guilty, you plead guilty to

receive signal innocent you randomise.

What is the outcome in the aggregate, which is what

we care about?

The outcome in aggregate is that the probability that an

innocent person is wrongly convicted, the probability of mistake for

an innocent person is strictly greater than zero, and it

is strictly increasing with the number of voters.

Right?

So what does it mean?

Its mean the probability that you basically wrongly convict an

innocent is strictly positive, and it's increasing with the size

of the jury.

What does it mean in practice?

This means that the one institution that was meant to

protect the innocent is actually creating that.

So why don't you think about something that are strategic?

Think about not just the intention of an institution, but

think about how people will adjust to it.

Otherwise you will kind of like I've said, we're not

done yet.

Oh, sorry.

Sorry.

Since it's my class, so.

Right.

You have to think about this.

And in particular, institutions that are meant to protect people

in a liberal system can dramatically backfire with strategic importance.

And that's the difference between thinking in terms of a

game theorist and think team in terms of a statistician.

And with this, I see you next week for the

model of election and prospective voting.

To do that, we will even.

More know if it was majority vote.

You will do less mistakes because you will know with

majority rule that indeed you get the correct policy with

probability one as the size of the jury increases.

It's the unanimity that was put in place to protect

the innocent that is the cause of their downfall.

That's the beauty of this result.

According to me, according to you, it's another matter.

But that's the beauty of this result.

I'm not sure.

The power of 2845.

Huh?

What is 45?

You require 45%.

So?

It's something.

And.

If you decrease the rule to find someone guilty, you're

actually protecting more and more innocent by the usual logic.

Because in people, alternatives means more people got the innocent

signal.

Yeah.

Think of the more people got the innocent signal that

reinforced their willingness to also cast an innocent ballot.

So if you want.

Lecture 4:

I think that's a lie.

In this lecture it should be called electron computations or

this is the name.

But in this lecture and in the next one we

will go over electron competition in the centre we will

go over the model or rather models of spatial politics.

And all these models belong to the same family, which

is basically what we call a real line model, where

people are going to be placed in a real line

and candidates are in the composite platform on this sphere.

After the break, we will.

So this week we are going to look at the

non zero model.

We are going to look at one of the main

application of the dozen model, one of the most famous

paper that we have in political economy called the method

Richard's mother of taxation.

And if there is a little town, I will start

introducing the problem of a probabilistic model.

But I don't think that would be the case.

And I think this is something we'll go next week,

and next week will go probabilistic voting models.

And in particular, you know, probabilistic model is one of

the type of models that with probability 90% will be

at the final exam and there will be a probabilistic

voting model question in your mind.

This is kind of like, you know, very hard that

there is it's possible.

I think there are some years where I have not,

um, prudence about the voting model, but let's say it's

not the exception in the room.

Right?

So we should really expect one of those to come

This probabilistic voting model will be useful because we will

return to it twice, at least during the rest of

the year.

One would be after reading week when we do comparative

institution, which is one of the hardest lecture we do

and one at the very end.

When we do democratisation, we will also use in the

context of the democratisation probabilistic voting model.

So it's a very, very useful tool to think about

the way electoral process work.

And I try to insist on what are the key

forces behind this type of model.

And then, you know, after reading, we will also look

at another type of electoral model that would be very

useful, which are political agency model.

So but before we get there, we have to go

through the most common, slightly boring spatial model of the

dungeon form.

All right.

So.

So far in all our lectures, we have omitted one

very important strategic actor which are candidates.

Right?

And when we are, for example, thinking about social science

that we have done in the speed of light.

We were thinking about a world where there is not

even a need for any form of institution, and therefore

not a need for more.

We are looking at the human body and mind as

we did last week.

We thought that the options that were presented to voters

were.

There are obviously completely exogenous given to the voter, which

again, is not really how the system works.

Today we are going and for the foreseeable future we

are going to think about the role of candidate of

politician or people who want to be loved.

So.

And we're going to do this, as I said, in

the world of special politics.

Now, before going there, a slight reminder of the results

that we saw very, very briefly at the end of

the Social Translator.

And this result is the further support that voters of

indirect utility that are characterised by single business.

What does it mean single business again?

It means all of us have one preferred policy.

All of us have one preferred policy.

Let's say one preferred tax rate.

To take an innocuous example, not related to anything that

I've been sending you in your mailbox and you know

us as you move away, as the policy Move away

from the preferred tax when you become worse off.

So let's say the preferred tax rate is 20%.

If you move away from 20% to now, if you

go, for example, 21 is worse than 20, 22 is

worse than 21, 23 is more than 22.

On the other hand, 19 is worse than 2018 is

worse than 19, 17 is worse than 18.

It doesn't have to be symmetric.

It has, for example, if you are more like on

the conservative side, probably you would rather the tax rate

to be lower than your ideal tax rate than above

your ideal tax rate.

If you're more on the left wing side, probably you're

lesser by tax rates that are kind of like over

your preferred tax rate than under in all the models

that we will see.

We will have kind of like symmetric, uh, type of

losses.

But you know, the important thing is there is one

thing that is your preferred pathway, that as you move

away from it, the policy move away from you are

getting worse.

So this is kind of like what is sensible.

Now the when we are single reference and we are

a single dimension, we are this kind of like result.

That said that first, if all voters are single, pick

preferences, if you know there is a set of alternative,

then a Condorcet winner exist and coincide with the median

voter ideal.

So we rank people according to their preferred tax rate,

you know, from you know, instead I'll put myself as

being the lowest, which is not true.

I know from the answer that you give all the

way to the IRS is how many hours on Tuesday

I have lost somewhere here.

Let's say you're the median.

Your 20% tax rate.

Also a number that is not innocuous, right?

So 20% is the median voter's preferred tax rate and

20% is the Condorcet winner.

That is, if we were to pick any alternative, right,

10% against 20%, 20% would win 30% again, 20%, 20%

away.

In this type of pairwise comparison, we will kind of

like get uh, the winner being the median voters preferred

factor.

Now, of course, the problem with this is imagine the

number of comparisons that we are to do before reaching

a policy decision.

If we go like this.

Right.

It's like they would still be discussing the tax rate

of 1910 if today, if we were kind of doing

all this pairwise comparison.

Right, especially with tax rates that are continuous number, it

would never end this type of comparison.

So that's why we have also kind of candidate as

a way to shorten the process.

And so that's what we are going to see in

the context of electoral competition.

So we're going to take apart a continuum of voters

on the unit interval.

The interval is just for simplicity.

You can put, you know, whatever line you could give

from minus infinity to plus infinity, it doesn't matter.

All voters are single pick preference with the ideal point

Q I and we're going to get two of these

motivated candidates, A and B, who really just want us

talking about participating.

They just care about winning office and that's what they

care about.

They don't give a damn about policy.

I don't care what it is instrumental of me getting

into office.

Why do they want to be in office?

Because they want to enjoy the grants from being an

offence, right?

So if you are in the UK, not so much

because actually, you know, prime ministers in the UK are

less spared, the less well paid at international source.

So it's not so much the brands are necessarily material

darlings.

It also, if you look at it right now, it's

not amazing.

Right.

But let's do France much better than France, much better

about this.

And what do they are.

They are the Elysee Palace as like much classier servants

districts.

Very very nice.

You can take this little scooter to go and see

all over France.

So it's really, really nice.

It's much nicer, so much nicer place.

And you have access to really big grants in the,

in this country that the concept of champagne socialist, which

I think is an example of, if you look at

them and all the gifts that you'd like to receive

in France, we don't call them champagne socialism because champagne

is cheap.

So we call them caviar.

Caviar socialists, right?

And you know, the funny thing about caviar is that

that actually fits very well.

An anecdote about a French president.

The first Socialist president elected in France was named was

Francois Land was elected in 1981.

And even I was not born at that time, if

you can believe it.

And so, first of all, I'm sorry for some serious

socialist concerns.

So Francois Mitterrand invite, you know, the people from the

Socialist Party to the Belgian palace for a work dinner

or work dinner, and they are kind of like us,

like it's a palace, right.

And things in French are not like introducing properly.

There is a chef, you know, good chef that cook

for the people and you know, they are the starter.

And in the middle of the table there is a

big pot of caviar, a Persian caviar, you know, big

like this and all the kind of like socialists that

I invited.

Take the little spoon and I take a little bit

like 3 or 4 pair of caviar and put it

in a plane.

What are you doing?

Here, you take caviar with a big spoon.

And so this is kind of like the rats that

were coming from being enough.

So this is kind of like we are going to

assume a lot that there is a dichotomy between office

motivated and we will select a policy motivated candidate.

Obviously that's not true.

Politicians are probably motivated by both, but we are going

to start really with the idea that candidates are office

motivated.

They really care about, you know, being in office, smoking

the cigar, eating the caviar with the big spoon and

nothing else.

So that's what they care about.

So what is the timing politician going to announce the

platform.

Each one is going to be in the interval.

Voters are going to observe the platform.

Vote for one of the two politicians.

The elected politician implement is platform and payoff.

Fabulous right.

So this is what the timing is.

What the candidate.

What?

Well, the candidate is going to choose a platform so

as to maximise the probability they are elected to win

the run are taking into account the strategy of the

other player, something politician B to the platform to maximise

the chance that they are elected, taking into account the

other candidate platform and the equilibrium concept is subgame perfect

Nash equilibrium.

We are going to assume throughout that if a voters

indifferent, they are going to toss a coin, a fair

coin, right?

So it's 5050 chances of being elected if of others,

and if so, the result, which is called Johnson Convergence,

is that both candidates in this case will choose the

same platform.

And that platform is going to coincide with the median

voter ideal point.

So it's a kind of lag.

It's a double result right.

It's a double result into one.

First result is candidates converged.

They converge to the same platform.

Platform.

They propose the same thing on top of this.

That thing that they propose happen to be the million

voters preferred policy.

Right.

So this is kind of like this double.

Now this is a result that actually we are from

Ottolenghis Ice Cream Cellars model of 1929.

Right.

This is kind of like the ice cream seller model

to ice cream seller.

Not only did they look at themselves, we locate themselves

in the middle of the beach.

It's exactly the same idea.

Indeed, you're telling us a footnote about this, but it's

a very ordinary person.

Started with dance, 1957.

Dance was a student of foretelling.

So the rumour is that something will get done.

The result, dance 1957, was a very important book, and

in that book is actually wrongly asserting that there is

not convergence in certain case.

So the dance and convergence model is associated with someone

who mistakenly doesn't see that there's always convergence.

This is, you know, like the Nobel Prize in the

US.

So let's not get at it.

That's only for the last week of term.

All right.

So this is kind of like I think this book

on the other hand, is a great book.

If you want to read about rational ignorance, the concept

that voters may choose to remain in any form when

it comes to the electoral competition does has incredible insight

on this.

And probably, though we have made a lot of progress

in modelling this insight, we have not moved away from

dance insight.

So dance book is great for the thing is not

famous, but.

It's not the only one in this case, but it's

okay.

So let's assume that voters are uniformly distributed across the

beer line between 0 and 1, so uniformly mean by

the same number of voters everywhere.

Right.

That doesn't have to be the case, right?

It could be that you have a book here and

then a second pick here, and you will get the

same result.

And this is where don't get it wrong.

Don't believe that if you have a trick here and

another two here, you could have divergence between the two

politicians.

But that's not true even no matter the distribution of

voters preferences in the case of office motivated politician.

You will get convergence to it.

Okay, so let's suppose that these are the platform choices

and both platform.

Let's suppose that the single thickness is symmetric.

As I said we will only work on thumb of

symmetric right.

So same loss on the left is on the right.

And both platform are predisposed to a middle point.

In this case what are the chances that a win

the election.

Of my life indeed.

Because you know M is indifferent between A and B,

everybody to the left of M is the number for

everybody to the right of M of is going to

the right of M is going to vote for me.

And so therefore I am is going to be a

pivotal voter.

And she's going to randomise between the two right now.

What is it that he can do?

He can move to the right, let's say move to

the median voters.

Move to the right.

What happened in this case, while you know all these

voters up to hear more or less are voting for

a now, which means that you know this content the

median.

So this contains more than 50% of voters a is

winning the election.

A only cares about winning the election.

Therefore this is a profitable deviation.

That's what this is.

So now let's suppose the proposed platform of this.

Who is winning the election in this case.

Who has an incentive to deviate.

What should be the I mean median and dead end

here.

Now.

So far, if you were to stop here, right, we

will only have proven that the only candidate for equilibrium,

or the only possible assessment that can be in equilibrium

in pure strategies, is that both candidates propose the median.

What we need to do as well is to prove

that this is indeed an equilibrium.

Right.

So to do this, it's relatively easy.

In this case.

What happened?

Why is PB not having an incentive to deviate?

Well, in this case B is winning with probability.

One half everybody is kind of like Randomising what happened

to the left or to the right?

You will lose for sure.

And since B only cares about, you know, Right from

office.

They will never want to deviate from this position and

therefore this is an equilibrium.

Something that is important is if you are asked to

show that the equilibrium is X is not enough to

show that all the things cannot be in equilibrium.

You also need to show that that thing is in

equilibrium, right?

Especially if the question has a trick question in examining

the last one.

Show that lambda is the unique equilibrium.

You have to show two things that that thing is

in equilibrium, and that no other thing is in equilibrium.

Right?

And often student to one or the other, they forget

to do both right and they lose half of the

market.

Last question for this.

But this is kind of like a more or last

type of question.

If we have single crossing, the same thing is happening.

Right?

We still have convergence.

What is single crossing?

Remember this idea that I'm going to be the most

socialist, which I also know is not true.

Based on your answer, though, you are relatively reasonable when

you are someone with 80% of the preferred category.

That person has not worked much in his life first.

Then when you start working or she's not working now,

it wasn't then when she started or he start working.

This will be kind of like a completely change of

preferences.

So let's have the most left wing right.

And if I prefer 30% tax rate is 35%.

So I prefer a lower, relatively low tax rate 30%

to after the high tax rate is 35.

Everybody to my right will also prefer 30 to 35%.

Right.

That's the idea.

If I'm the most.

Right wing person and I prefer 10% tax rate over

five.

So a relatively high tax rate, ten of a relatively

low tax rate five.

Right then everybody to my left should also prefer ten

over five.

Right.

So that's the notion of of single crossing.

And if we have single crossing.

But remember we didn't know proceeded so quick that I'm

not sure you remember.

But what we saw really, really, really, really quickly was

that we would get also convert like the median borders

ideal policy being a window.

So quite logically, the same forces that are playing every

single day applied to the case of single crossing preferences,

that's not how it is.

So that's kind of like the model.

And one of the first model to take this seriously

from an economics perspective is the method which model of

1983.

And this is a very important model because really it's

one of the first cases, maybe not to do it,

but to make it stick, that someone used the tool

of political economy to try to understand economic outcomes and

in this case, the level of taxation and how it

varies with fundamentals of the economy.

Right now, the method Richard's model.

Is quite complicated.

Right.

So what I've done is I give you a simplified

version which has all the spirit of the mixture model.

Okay, since we are in the I decided that we

mocking some Nobel Prize winner, one of the top three

Nobel prize winners.

So what makes the movements of your model very complicated

is that some people in the model will choose not

to put any effort into labour, not to put any

effort into work.

And that kind of like zero bond constraint creates some

complications in terms of calculating total revenues and preferred tax

rate and things like this.

You make things over complicated.

You can make the same point without having the problem

that, you know, there is some people putting no effort

into the labour market or putting no time in the

labour market.

One of the three Nobel Prize winner teach the method

and model and teach it kind of like the natural

form, but just decided that it would not care about

the zero bound constraints.

And so he has a negative amount of effort on

the labour market.

I will not mention which one of the three Nobel

Prize winners in this.

Okay, so the model here is getting away with this

in a way because it's been conserved throughout this.

So what do we have?

We have that a continuum of voters and each voters

is going to be characterised by a different cost of

effort, or if you want a different level of productivity.

So you're going to have some voters that are going

to be very productive, that are going to be a

very high figure, which is they are going to have

a lower cost of benefits.

And then all the voters that are going to be

quite productive, they're going to have a lot of data

and therefore a higher cost of effort.

So that's when.

They put some effort right.

They don't like it.

Effort is not good.

Right.

This is like the they don't like to put effort

in the labour market.

What they like is to consume and what the voters

income is going to depend on the effort that almost

are going to make is going to be we are

going to assume exactly equal to the effort, right?

So if there is a 1 to 1 mapping between

how much effort you put into the economy and how

much you get out of the economy in terms of

service.

Voters tax and the tax rate down.

And this tax rate is going to be used for

distributive transfers.

So 2030 students are going to be all the taxation

rate is to be uniformly to every voters.

The budget constraint is going to be that the consumption

of the water has to be equal, because it is

going to be, of course, an equal constraint to the

net income plus average transfers.

Why do we have.

That a person is getting tea, right?

Which is kind of like a weird thing, but that's

that's the case.

Are we a unique mouse?

Yes.

But still, I still find it always very, you know,

incredible that this was all told.

But it's true mathematically, right?

So what we need to have is that all voters

together, what they get should be exactly equal to the

revenues.

This is revenues.

And this is basically social transfers.

Now what we have here is because t doesn't depend.

On AI.

Every voter is getting the same amount right.

We can take T out of the integral.

And this thing is equal to one.

So this equality is true.

So this is kind of like one.

Another way to say it right if you want will

be to say it's related to your point.

Let's suppose that.

This is the transfer to voter I.

We know that we have to have uniform transfer.

So t is equal to t for all I.

And so we are that t oid is equal to

t.

And therefore t is equal to total transfer.

Right.

It always blew my mind because it's like the total

is equal to the sum that everybody received.

But it works mathematically is incredible.

So what's the timing?

The timing is going to look very much like our

kind of like equilibrium game, in the sense that two

of these motivated politicians proposed tax rate each better.

But sincerely, for one of the two politicians, any good

prediction tax is implemented.

Now is the new thing.

Each voter choose productive effort, right?

So they choose productivity in a productive effort before after

the tax credit has been implemented.

Transfer and payoff, I realise.

Right.

Equilibrium consists of a perfect Nash equilibrium.

Right?

Why do we need the tax rate to be implemented

prior to the effort that voters put in?

Because.

Everyone's deciding how much I put forward depending on the

tax rate.

Sure.

And therefore that would be answered the other way around.

You will just anticipate the tax rate and put a

default accordingly.

But you know we don't have the budget for the

Labour government.

They've been talking about it for six months.

Maybe in six years they will have it.

But everybody anticipates that taxes are going to increase.

But we don't know very much and we are all

still putting effort.

But it's not like I'm just waiting for you to

decide how much I'm going to pay in order to,

you know, choose my friend.

Because they know how much they want to consume.

So, like, um, pay for that consumption is what the

tax rate is.

And how much of a I'm, I'm assuming.

But they still they could have the consumption after the,

um, after the tax rate is implemented, but the effort

before the tax rate is implemented.

Is this already like this being perfect.

So somehow there are some maybe some deviations that are

profitable for competitions.

So still provide a bit of a flavour of.

Okay, so we are getting we are getting somewhere.

Yeah.

So in fact the way to think about it is

what will happen.

So let's for the sake of argument, suppose that the

median is poor And no less than the average right

in terms of productivity, which is something that we will

assume in an experiment.

This is a good assumption, right?

But let's suppose for an instant this is the case.

Why?

What would happen if efforts were to be decided prior

to the tax rate?

What will happen?

What would the median want as a tax rate as

a result?

So if you decide the A for the election after

the efforts, what happened for the effort related to taxes?

The default is.

As a word in economics.

Not really because I still anticipate the tax rate.

Right.

But we say that the idea for is sunk.

But it's already it has already happened.

So it's sound from the perspective of tax rate choices,

but it's already there and it's not going to be

affected by the tax rate.

So if you're the medium and you are relatively poor

right and afford has been sunk, what is the tax

rate you would like to put in?

You would like to put 100%.

You would like to do full expropriation of revenues right

now.

But that's because the effort is such that there's this

pot of money, your war and survival.

But of course, you know, people have to anticipate correctly

that the tax rate is going to be 100%.

What would be the equilibrium level of efforts?

It would be zero.

I mean, for all the rich people will be zero.

And then, you know, it will collapse to zero.

So the reason why we need the tax rate to

be implemented before eventually is to avoid that the model

completely collapse, right?

Is it a crazy assumption?

I don't think so, because of course, this one shot

model can be thought as a reduced form of a

repeated one or repeated one.

If you cannot afford to show them first and then

the tax rate after.

But if suddenly a politician were trying to fully expropriate

you, you will move to the zero effort equilibrium down

the line sort of grim trigger strategy, and I will

suspend my entire tax rate.

So we are cheating in some sense.

We are assuming a one shot model having this assumption

rather than doing an infinitely repeated one.

And we complicate things, but we do nothing for the

analysis, right?

This is in some sense, if you want an example

of a 12 year bad assumption in terms of realistic,

this tax rate can be changed all the time, but

it is a good assumption if we think that all

single shot model is in fact a representation of a

much more integrated process will sustain this type of behaviour.

Okay.

So.

We're going to start by backward induction.

We're going to start with the first consumer problem right.

We're going to think about the voters electoral problem.

And now we're going to think about the candidate's performance.

So this is the three step we are going to

do.

I will style it to be thicker.

Is it easier for you if it's thicker, or is

it better when it's thinner?

Thicker is better.

That's also right.

All right.

So let's think about our voters.

Our voters.

Six to max consumption.

An effort such that the level of consumption is equal

to.

Such that the budget constraint is satisfied.

I don't know if I can put the TV.

I'm sorry.

This was not a smart move at all.

Sorry.

All right, so, of course, most of the time.

Right.

What we are going to do is we could set

up a language.

We could be fancy.

It could be like, I'm an economist.

I'm going to set up, like Jan and stuff.

We're not going to do this most of the time.

I'm not going to use like graduates.

Rather, I think it's much easier for most of our

problem to actually do substitution.

It's obvious that we should use substitution.

But there are indicators where it's less obvious.

But you will say that doing substitution is still going

to be the best way to go.

So what we're going to do is that the thing

about this maximisation problem was choosing effort.

Given the cost, given whatever gives me time of consumption

and the cost of effort.

Notice that the tax transfers are taken as given here.

I'm not hitting them as a function of effort.

Why is it the case?

That they are not a function of effort of any

individual?

Here the answer differ.

It's the same answer.

But exactly.

So every voter's right is negligible.

Think about are not you yet soon you put enough.

You think about.

Are the income that I bring to the level of

overall state?

Level of taxation is really painless.

But it's nothing.

It's nothing.

In fact, sometimes there are tax cuts and you're like,

why are they doing this tax work?

It's really, really nothing like I think like the last

tax cut.

But the Tories in the incredible hope they will win

the election.

It was like you know they cut like for ten

billions but everybody's got like 50 squeeze.

And you're like just give the ten billions and give

them to the NHS.

It's going to be much better.

So everyone is really negligible, right.

While I bring to the total revenue of the UK

state is absolutely not right.

So this is kind of like I can ignore my

contribution to social transfers as a result.

In practice, this is kind of like, you know, we

shouldn't need to consider it, but this is so small

that we can do an approximation and ignore it.

Basically, we are treating these fields.

Nurses were like trying to solve like a partial model,

something like this.

It's more like, you know, the, the direct effect here

that we are.

This is like really like what we call all out,

right?

This is like nothing.

So it's true that if you want, we are doing

an approximation of appropriate approximation at the hundredth decimal of

the equilibrium.

And I think we can we can live with this.

But yeah, it's, it's not a.

The true equilibrium effort is probably slightly higher than what

we are characterising it.

Slightly really by your paper call.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But you know that's what I said.

Usually we are going to work with most of the

times three players in fact two, and our hands are

going to be full enough with this.

But if we go to more than 2 or 3.

We're going to go to a continuum because we have

this very nice tool that we can ignore a lot

of things as a continuum, and that's going to help

us dramatically.

So first order condition is.

Basically one minus tau minus e divided by theta I

for zero.

So.

The level of effort is going to be this.

And you can see why associated with productivity.

Someone with a higher theta.

Is going to put more effort like a more productive

person.

So with this we can compute the indirect utilities.

So what is the indirect utility?

What is it?

What is an indirect utility engine?

What's the difference between utility and indirect utility?

What do we refer to when we do indirect utilities.

So we take the utility and we start from the

utility.

that?

We should start from the utility.

Why do we plug in into the the utility to

get the indirect.

You want to remember us from the microeconomics process?

We don't know.

Plug in the constraints and not really.

The policy.

Why do you go to the policy function?

Why not.

Dependent variable in this case is your choice.

Variable is what.

Yes C which we reduce to E right.

The only choice now thanks to the budget constraint that

has eliminated c f.

Right.

So what is the indirect utility is the utility where

you put your equilibrium choices right.

So in our case It's the utility of putting the

equilibrium choices of effort for every individual, right?

So they interact with it.

They are citizen I is the utility with the equilibrium

choices.

So it's going to be.

So each star is one minus tau theta.

So that becomes one minister square.

I square square.

One square.

Disappear.

Minus six.

Are we done with our interactivity?

It's a trick question.

Who do you think we are?

Done.

It's really a trick question.

For some.

Quiz show, we would be done, right?

That would be sufficient.

But in our case, it's not going to be sufficient.

What else would we like to do?

We would like to know what it would like to

know.

What is a transfer.

That is person receive.

So what do we know about T?

T is the tax.

That you get on the income of individuals.

All right.

So this and.

These are the same thing.

So when you see integral for some reason people introduce

you integral of this form.

You of theta I f cti d theta I.

That will be the usual way of doing it.

But you can also do it of this form, right.

This is the same thing.

So again we know what is the income that they

receive, the gross income they receive.

Is equal to the effort, and the effort is one

minus tau theta I.

Now we can take the tax rate.

Out of the integral because it does not depend.

On C to I.

And what is this quantity.

The CDF is it's over there.

You don't see it because of this thing.

But I move this here.

That's the clear.

What is this thing is.

So let's think about it.

This is remember this thing which is called the probability

density function, right.

Can be interpreted this not correct mathematically, but it's useful

intuitively can be interpreted as the probability that theta I

is occurring.

Right.

It's not a correct mathematical statement, but this is a

good thing to kind of like have in mind a

way to understand what it is, right?

An integral is just basically a sum of our very,

very small intervals.

Right?

Indeed.

That's the way integral to define how do we define

integral mathematically is going to be this way.

Right.

So it's a sum each of theta times the probability

that theta I ish occurs.

What is the sum of the value of a random

variable times the probability that this value occurs?

Thanks.

That's the expectation.

Right.

So that's the formula of expectation for a continuous random

variable.

And now we have our indirect.

Which I'm going to call.

That thing come, that come from yourself.

That they come, that come from the trenches.

Meaning come minus cost, putting effort.

Now, when we think about moving further into the game,

right, which is using this to think about the electoral

competition.

What is the.

Important.

Variables here.

It's not a variable that of order control.

Because we have put the equilibrium choice by a voter

into the system.

Right.

This is only the sun if you want.

This is already taken care of.

So what is the variable that we should need to

consider as we move up the country toward the electoral

competition?

It's TAA right?

It's a tax rate in this case.

Right.

So because now what we're going to think about is

given what I expect to get, that is given how

much effort I'm going to put.

And how much money I'm going to get through the

labour market and through transfer.

What is my preferred tax rate?

Me a voter with which characteristic?

With theta I right.

And so conditional.

So for each theta I know, but I wish I

all much.

I'm going to get I'm going to get this.

And that's what I'm not going to give me a

thought.

Sorry.

Give me a thought.

I can calculate my utility given my theta and given

the average positivity in the society right now, it's kind

of like this.

Now, the question I'm going to ask myself is, among

all these possible tax rates, what is the tax rate

that I prefer?

I mean, depending on your data, you can take the

derivative with respect to and get the maximising.

Exactly.

Exactly.

So let's take the first derivative with respect to.

The second derivative.

Is this.

So here we have two cases to consider this.

First case is that my productivity my title is less

than even put.

Equal to two etc..

Right.

Because this case what is the shape of my integration

with respect to theta.

So.

It's concave.

Right?

It's concave.

And if a function is concave.

Why do we know.

That it has the maximum.

Yeah.

You will see why I put the equal working.

Because.

This maximum is given by this.

Which is.

Given.

Would be given by this by then I.

Think.

Now, if theta is greater than e of theta.

This is.

Negative.

Right.

Can attack should be negative.

Well technically yes.

But.

In our case.

In our case can it be negative.

No it cannot be negative.

Right side zero.

So this means that.

All those who will have a productivity greater than average.

The preferred tax rate is zero.

And that's why I included this special case here, because

it would still be zero for a person which has

this.

Everybody is clear on this.

So if your function is concave there's going to be

a maximum.

This maximum is going to be given to you.

This unconstrained maximum which is important your preferred tax rate

can be, you know, anything.

I'm concerned maximum is going to be given to you

by the first order condition, which is the indirect utility

first derivative with respect to time, which is going to

be equal to this, which is going to be equal

to this.

Now the problem is your unconstrained maximum.

The one you might prefer yourself is a negative tax

rate.

You might prefer actually, you know, to receive money on

your income rather than to give money on your income.

Obviously that's impossible, right?

In our model, it's impossible to get your tax rate.

So for all those who would rather have a negative

tax rate, we are going to put the preferred tax

rate to zero.

For all those who are kind of like a productivity

strictly less than the average.

They do like a positive tax rate, and they're unconstrained

with their tax strategies.

Kind of like the default which is E of theta.

And if you try to E of theta minus theta.

That's kind of like what it is.

So let me do the second case.

And then we do have five minutes work.

So yeah Stefan.

Stefan we are assuming also like theta bar is still

greater than zero.

Yes.

We are assuming that it was strictly greater than yes.

Yeah.

It's important.

Otherwise, as I said I want to avoid the zero

effort boundary.

Another case is that theta I.

Is strictly greater than two of theta, which can be

the case for very, very positive people.

Like, you know.

The result probably is on productivity or income if you

want is more than twice the average.

In fact, many people in this building up an income

that is twice the average income in the UK, less

in other building across Elysee beside the Marshall.

But in this building, probably almost everyone that you meet

in, you know, the third, fourth floor, they are satisfying

this condition.

In this case the function is.

O v theta The veto.

Phi is strictly convex because I.

And if it's strictly convex.

What can be the maximum in this case.

What is the maximum of a strictly convex function.

It's on the boundaries.

Exactly right.

The maximum in this case are going to be on

the boundary.

It's either zero or it's one.

And these are the boundaries.

Now these people.

Right.

These are the very rich.

Do we think intuitively that their preferred tax rate is

going to be 100%?

Well, if you were to meet some of these people

in this building, you might start to doubt about it.

But in practice, in the world of this model, now

that's kind of like stupid, right?

Like the richest people, they're all going to want a

100% tax rate in this particular setting, or they don't

care about income.

Right.

So obviously what we want to show is that they

prefer zero over one.

We're going to show it.

But when you go into a result try to kind

of like tell yourself, what is it that I should

find here?

We should not find that one is preferred to zero.

It should be zero.

Which is a strictly preferred tax rate.

So V of zero theta I.

Is going to be equal to.

You can see it is theta I.

Right.

Because so if I divide it by two I would

put it this is zero.

So this becomes pi divided by two.

This is zero.

So this disappear.

And we have one theta I is equal to.

If there's 100% taxation why do people get zero.

That's like perfect communism.

That's what you know, the rate method was saying to

the people of Cambodia, communism is very simple.

It's zero 04004 meal.

And even then they were they were lying, which is

kind of incredible.

It's a true story that zero for you, zero for

me is a true quote.

It's not an invented one.

Okay.

That's obviously worse.

So this also is equal to zero.

So when we put together what do we have.

We have that the preferred tax rate of an individual

I is going to be.

That's what we are going to get.

What are we going to do with this big suspense

that we will resolve in five minutes after a shock,

right.

Just take a five minute breather.

We have this preferred tax rate.

And we also have this the other way around to

be consistent.

In direct utility.

One of the properties of the indirect utility.

Property we should care about based on what we have

seen at the beginning of the lecture.

So let's go back a little bit at the beginning

of the lecture.

What do we know?

We know that if voters are much older preferences.

Single baked or single crossing preferences.

Right.

The platform proposed by office motivated candidates converge to the

medium's preferred platform.

So what we would like to know is.

Why are these preferences single pick?

The answer is yes.

It's obvious for concave.

Function.

So if you have a concave function, you have a

strict or strictly concave function.

Technically you have a global maximum.

And as you move away from the global maximum, you

are getting worse off.

It's also true for theta I.

Because.

Everyone who has a convex injury utility preferred tax rate

of zero, and as you move away from zero, you

are making everybody worse.

So they have a single peak, and this single peak

is zero, basically.

And then everything else is worse.

So in both cases we have single pick right.

So what do we know.

We can use the Johnson convergence result.

The equilibrium tax rate which I'm going to do is

equal to the median voter preferred tax rate and the

median citizen preferred tax rate.

Now we are basically which means that it's equal to.

This.

What is this?

If the median is less than the average of the

median productivity is less than the average.

We have this and we have zero otherwise.

Now we know that the median income.

Is going to be this.

The average income is going to be this.

So we can say that the equilibrium tax rate is

this.

If the median income is strictly less than the average

income, and zero if the median income is strictly greater

than the average income right now.

Right.

Because there's a 1 to 1 mapping between the productivity

and the income per person.

Now, in every society, except of course, a very nice

society or everybody gets zero.

In every society, the median income is going to be

strictly less than the average income.

And that's because income is a less skewed variable.

That is, you cannot go below zero income.

So you are kind of a constant at zero.

But you can go towards an infinite amount of income.

Right.

Like people, the new rubber barons that we have in

the US.

They have income that are like extreme.

They don't know what to do with it.

In the 19th century, there was Martha.

They created the university.

They built building.

Right.

Like we remember that Rockefeller was one of like the

business of the time.

Vanderbilt was one of the business of them.

But what do you remember of them?

One is a tower in New York, and the other

one is a university.

Right.

So that's what they should do.

Man should create a new university and then give him

$1 million to bribe voter to vote for Trump.

Right.

So all income is going to be like one of

these features that the median income in the data always

is strictly less than the average income.

So what we have is the equilibrium tax rate.

Which we can rewrite as.

This quantity just divided by theta.

And here is the maidservant Richard.

Result which is the equilibrium tax rate is increasing with

inequality in all case measure hours median income divided by

average income.

And thus the method which are the results That makes

this paper famous.

Right.

It's saying what made this famous is the prediction that

the tax rate will be increasing with inequality.

In no case different model.

If you actually all models give you the same prediction,

different model gives you different way of measuring inequality.

The way we have it, given the way I've built

it, is that it's the median divided by the average

income that matters, right?

There are some other things up here.

So median income divided by average income.

That's a measure of inequality.

As inequality increases so does the tax rate one of

the most tested prediction of political economy model ever.

So one medicine, which I did, is really to relay

an outcome and an economic outcome.

Tax rates to economic fundamentals of a society.

Inequality.

Now.

There has been many, many deaths.

Most of them have been done, you know, in the

1990s.

So this is like amperex that we that have not

really passed very well the passage of time.

So you know.

I'll stop.

I'm being cheeky to the action and be so cheeky.

So this is not something that we would say very,

very you know, one session.

But I don't think that, like, I've never seen anyone

even do any kind of, like, carefully, empirically documented things.

Able to do much better than this cross country is

regression, right?

Wherever you go, it's kind of like always the same

thing.

So what Verity is doing is going to look at

the average marginal tax rate, and he's going to not

use the same, um, inequality measure as ours because everybody

uses different measures.

He's going to use that the share of the third

and fourth quartile.

So he's going to look at the share of people

that are more than the median income.

So it's not exactly what we do.

But again, given that we can get this prediction with

very different measure of inequality, that's not really important.

And what he finds basically is that.

As inequality increases.

As this share earned by the wage increases, the average

tax rate marginal tax rate decreases.

And so exactly the reverse of what we should find

in the data.

Right.

And you know it's not significant.

But if it were it'd be kind of like problematic.

Indeed if you look at all the people who have

tried to test for this.

You know, there are many, many, many.

And this is just a small amount out of like,

you know, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,

nine, ten, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16.

Now only three.

That comes out like, you know, according to the prediction.

Right.

Season of 16.

That's not a great rate for statistical significance.

But if you were to do a Bayesian Conditional on

this being true, what is the probability of getting through

the system working now will give you, like, you know,

the very bad result.

So this is kind of like telling us that that

model.

Is probably missing some aspect of the problem.

Right.

Still, it's being taught again and again across kind of

like many, many different courses.

However, this does not necessarily invalidate what we started with,

which is the Dalton model spatial model.

Right.

The goal prediction of the doctor doesn't model per se

has nothing to say about partition measure, in which I

put a model of taxation on top of it, but

it doesn't model has nothing to say about it.

What it does in model size is about this table

result.

One is that there should be convergence.

Secondly, that there should be convergence on the median voter.

Now, we cannot as empirical people as they cannot really

know what the median voter is.

It's very hard to determine who is the median voter.

Candidates have a much better idea on the ground of

what they think is the median voter.

So however, that doesn't matter for us because we don't

really care, since we are this other aspect of the

empirical result, which is that there should be convergence, there

should be convergence on the same platform.

So do we have convergence on the same platform.

So it's kind of like at the national level this

is just like one thing.

This is looking at forget about this median button.

This is looking if you want an airline, you can

think about creating lights.

While the Republican Party is relative to where the Democratic

Party's right on the left right dimension.

And here you have Labour versus the conservative.

What should we why should we say if there were

to be convergence?

Not, in fact, not like this, but they should be

every year.

They should be very close to each other, not necessarily

equal, because this is a measure that is called the

Platform Manifesto project.

So what the Platform Manifesto project is doing is they

are collecting all the manifestos of all parties, and they

are categorising what they talk about National security.

And there are some very complicated colleagues came that nobody

understand.

But everybody uses this database to know.

Why?

But it is still useful in terms of like, you

know, giving us an approximation.

So it is an approximation.

There is noise in this measure.

So we should not believe that it should be exactly

coinciding.

But we can see that there is quite a bit

of distance between Democrat and Republican.

The only case where there might be some case for

convergence is 2008, between McCain and Obama.

And if you see the campaign of McCain and Obama,

I liked, like, you know, putting each other in the

right now in which they neither of McCain of Obama

and the campaign of Cameron and Gordon Brown in 2010,

which ended up in a hung parliament with the Lib

Dems.

So there is very little evidence in favour of convergence.

Yet this is not a great evidence in favour or

against the quantum model, because one in the United States

this is not a true plurality election.

It's this bizarre electoral process that they are, and the

parties might be looking at maximising their vote share across

different and different states, rather than toward the same state

also.

Nobody listened to the manifestos in the US.

If you can tell me what is in the manifesto

of Donald Trump, I say congratulations.

You can't tell me what Donald Trump says, that rightly,

probably.

But you know what is in the manifest?

In fact, people should have paid more attention to what

was in the manifesto.

The manifesto was, I will put it, another conservative judge

in the judiciary.

That was the manifesto of Trump still.

And guess what he did?

He put the conservative church in the judiciary.

Not surprising that the Republican loves enough to write.

They don't care about the right.

You really did what he said he would.

One of the few cases of promises involved.

But like, you know, nobody really knows about what they

are doing except like, also in the U.K. it's also,

you know, something.

They are not necessarily competing for the same constituencies.

It's a parliamentary system, not a large election at the

national level.

So what we can do instead is to look at

the congressional districts in the United States.

So rather than looking at precedent, we are going to

look at members of Congress like representative.

The difficulty here is how do we measure position.

Right?

How do we measure candidate position?

Now I've been a few attempts to do so.

One way is this paper that is using the Vote

Smart project.

So the word smart project, there are other countries doing

it.

So if you want our very good data in Finland

of the same type.

So if someone of you have decided to become a

big fan of Finland, you have great data on on

the centre of things, you know.

Don't thank me for this.

You basically send a survey to people and you ask

them, what is the position on abortion?

What is your position on tax, what's your position on

subsidies, etc., etc..

All of these kind of like questions, right?

You compute a single measure of conservatism right from the

left to the right.

You just say you're going to project people on a

single dimension.

And indeed, we know that in American politics, a single

dimension is usually enough to represent the preference of politicians.

Right?

And put them in a single unit.

You have a question now, sir?

You have a question?

No, neither.

So it's very confusing.

What is like you was always like, all right, come

on.

Like this is.

Like.

Very hard not to be confused.

So the project is on a single dimension.

And the three question that we can think about is

either conversions at the national level, either conversion at the

district level is like that.

They go to the district meeting, and the last one

is that candidate positioning values with voters preferences.

Right.

How do we measure voters preference in this case?

Usually the wisdom is you look at the vote share

of the Republican Party in the last presidential election.

So in our case will be 92 and not 1226.

Right.

So you say country districts that vote more for the

Republican Party are more conservative than district, that vote more

for the Democrats.

This is the way.

So here's what it looks like.

Here.

You have basically the vote share for the Republican Party

in 1992.

And this is Clinton against Bush senior.

And here you have this candidate position according to the

votes map measure.

Right.

So from left to right each dot represent the position

As a candidate.

All men that are in a district, which is basically

a 5050 district.

And here will be the position of the Democratic here

in the district that are basically 25% vote share for

the Republican Party.

That's the district.

Here is the average position of Democrat according to the

district conservatism.

Here is the average position of Republican according to the

district conservatism.

So each dot is one candidate.

This is the average.

If we were to ask convergence, how should the two

line look like?

No.

They should all be almost overlapping.

Well, we should have the average position of a Democrat

and the average position of the Republican on the.

Right.

Is they're very clear on that.

They should be overlapping.

Do we see overlapping?

Now?

Clearly.

Right.

We clearly see that there is a big distance between

the two.

So when you say the furthest.

Yes.

Does.

That mean that it's the Democrats in the 75% plus

Republican district?

Yes.

And this position is still still pretty conservative.

Right.

I will not interpret these numbers really like, you know,

fully, but I will interpret the other.

This is someone that is very liberal positioning.

Despite being in a very conservative district.

So we really do not see convergence.

However, there is one thing I want you to remember

for next week, right?

I'll show you this graph again.

Don't worry, the turmoil matters, right?

There's one thing you should remember for next week.

What do we see as the district become more conservative

for the Democrats?

More open to the average Democrat platform.

So that they also become more conservative.

What happened to Republican?

The district they compete in become more liberal.

They become themselves more liberal.

Right.

So there is something going on.

They just say there is something going right.

So there is no convergence, but there is a sense

that candidates are reacting to the district they are in,

that they are adjusting their platform to the district.

They compete.

All right.

So this is kind of like something.

Another thing which is kind of like not interesting, not

perfect, but like the distance between the two doesn't change

that much.

Maybe it's reduced it because Democrats are more sensitive.

But you can see that it's not like there is

no really like these are things.

They still are.

You can see that this distance is relatively similar across

these things.

Also something I want you to remember from this.

So I don't know.

So this is like our sample space.

Uh, maybe I should look for Recover from the.

Bag.

Give this kid this song about going back, not swing

state, but you know we are going there.

All right.

So.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So that's kind of like a useful exercise that gave

us an idea.

It's also one of these case, I think, where.

Simple data are going to give us exactly the same

result as very complicated data.

Often you do something very, very complicated.

And in the end, we could have gone with very

simple like researchers.

You don't know before trying, but you know, usually if

you have a good theory for why doing a very

careful causal blah blah isn't going to give you much

if you know, this is grounded in theory.

But, you know, so this is how bad can it

market themselves?

We don't know to whom the market themself because this

was just a survey.

Maybe the market themselves, the people that were looking at

this project, but small, which may be a very different

population than the median border and the district.

Another problem is that in that survey, those would turn

into response, where the challenges the incumbents who tend to

lead were very sudden.

That's actually a general property of politics, is that if

you are ahead, say nothing.

And everything you know is a bit like when you

are arrested, everything you say will be a lot easier.

So say nothing.

Be very right.

I do have a paper that rationalises one of those

I like.

Very complicated to teach.

One of the few papers are, but I like that's

what I'm not.

I like more papers than my own.

But although this is one I So.

What we would.

Like to do, right is also because we have, you

know, in our spatial model of things where what we

call commitments.

So we have kind of like a 1 to 1

mapping between platform and behaviour in office, which we are

going to maintain.

Right.

But we would like to know is there behaviour in

office fully controlling for district characteristic, what we would like

to see, like a district and ideally even a competitive

district.

Right.

And not just Randomise where is an office between a

Republican and Democrat?

Would these two be at the same?

They face the same people and the same electorate.

There have been selected to be in office by chance.

Do they behave the same way in the sense of

do they appear to the photos.

Do they converge to the median?

Voter of this particular district?

Now, this is very hard to do, but there is

a way to do it.

And that's regression discontinuity design, right?

Regression discontinuity design is a very useful tool to act

with the inference problem.

And it's used a lot in many essays and dissertation

and paper.

In many cases, if you look for an idea of

what you're going to do in your essays or whatever,

my dissertation, look at what I call bad policies.

But policies are policies that are stupidly designed.

Example of a policy that is stupidly designed.

The tax structure in every country.

You earn 40,000.

You know your marginal tax rate is 30%.

40,000 won from the marginal tax rate increased by 15%.

It makes no sense.

Things should be smoother.

Although very example of bad policies are often what is

called, um, geographical or mobile.

The population threshold.

If you are below 3000 inhabitants, you elect your mayor

with a plurality vote.

If you are above, you elect your mayor by proportional

vote.

There are many examples.

Democratic countries have stupid policies.

Um, other countries are stupid.

Another very stupid policy is procurement rules.

If your procurement, your contract is less than 44,000, you

do not have to make Euro tender.

You can just attribute the contract to whoever you are.

If it's above 44,000, then you have to do the

work process.

Guess what?

There is bunching of 43,099 999.

99.

Oh, God is different, you know, so they have a

lot of bad policies, stupid policies.

And you should try to exploit this type of thing.

But this type of discontinuity can also arise naturally.

And the electoral system is one of these way where

we get this short discontinuity.

So what do we how do we use it?

So researchers want to know the impact of a treatment

on an outcome.

While not everyone received the treatment and in particular the

treatment is not random, right?

Your access to the treatment is going to be determined

by an underlying variable x that we call the running

variable.

Right.

So in our case it's very easy to see how

it maps into election.

We want to know what is the effect of having

a Republican in office compared to a Democrat.

That's our treatment, right?

How do you someone get into office while you need

to get 50% of the vote?

So the running variable is basically the vote share of

the Republicans, minus the virtue of the Democrat.

When is positive, the Republican movement is negative.

The Democrats win.

Right.

So this is kind of funny.

So we have two outcome variable.

What we observe for the treated what the Republicans are

doing in office.

What we observe for the non treated what the Democrats

are doing in office.

And so ideally what we would like to do right

is to see this case of getting violent.

You can really think about the vote share of Republicans

versus the vote share of Democrats.

Right.

And here you have like basically what Democrats will have

done, what Republicans will have done, And now what we

would like to do.

And we would like just to compare these two.

Unfortunately, obviously we cannot do this because getting the treatment

will be happening at zero.

So what we observe instead is something like this for

everybody below zero.

We observed the Democrat in office for everybody above zero.

We observe the Republican in office.

So what people have been saying is if we are

this sharp discontinuity, if we don't, we can do other

stuff.

This is called physiology.

This doesn't belong here.

If we have this sharp discontinuity.

And we believe.

That the treatment of injuries is continuous, but that there

is not also discontinuity in the why.

The only discontinuity is who gets the treatment.

Ah, the threshold for x not what happen for the

outcome variable that you can see.

And it's smooth.

If we have this, then what we can do is

we can believe that as x goes to zero.

Okay, the exact of the treatment for the treated for

the control is the same for those who are just

below zero, which we observe, and those who are just

above zero that we don't observe for the treatment.

The effect is the same for those who are just

below zero, which we do not observe because we do

not see Republican elected with less than 50% of the

two party vote.

And then for just above the threshold, which we do

observe.

And if we have this, then to look at the

effect of the treatment, what we can do, we can

do this quantity minus one.

And both of them are observed.

Now that will give us the causal local effect of

having a Democrat.

So following a Republican in office.

Versus a Democrat in office.

Right.

It is no call because it only out.

Very, very close to the threshold.

No needles.

Right.

So when you see another day.

Sometime people are the more on the same political side

even in economics.

But they will do an audit and they will make

big influence.

Far away from the threshold.

And if you see this, you should be like, you

cannot do this.

You cannot do this.

It's only telling us something at the threshold.

Sometimes the threshold.

You can do it.

Probably.

Think again.

You know, the population threshold.

Probably.

That tells us something a bit more general than.

What happened.

Exactly.

As we saw it.

In the case of election.

Now will tell us something only for competitive election, only

for those who are really.

The vote has been determined really by very few.

Now, of course, in practice we cannot do this.

We do not have observation.

Right at the threshold.

Right.

So what I've been doing is to use a small

interval around zero.

Right.

So we take those who are interested.

We take the running variable very close to zero.

Usually it's around 2.5%.

Voucher those.

And we are assuming that it's the same as those

who are just would have been just above is 2.5.

So there are many, many ways to construct what is

called the bandwidth of an oddity.

There are like robust bandwidth Greece, etc. but in general,

what you can think about a 2.5% vote share as

being even what is coming out of all these programs.

So what is it telling us?

It's telling us that if you have an election that

is decided by, you know, something like 48 to 52,

this is really by like that example.

If it's it's just like, you know, mobilising a few

more voters.

One of the person who was supposed to bring voters

to the poll, which is a big thing to do,

got sick on the day of the poll, couldn't drive

the the person who was supposed to take people from

the church.

And this can get us 200 votes and these 200

votes, you know, call this person the election.

And this is kind of like the idea that I

do work with local election in the UK.

You cannot imagine the number of ten divided by ten

votes.

I tend to I mean, this is a very small

thing is like 2000 voters away from the 1500, and

all of them are determined by ten.

Right.

So you are and of course, one of the most

famous.

Close election is the 2000 presidential election between Bush and,

uh, Unger at the time, which was determined by, I

think, you know, 175 votes across 250 million so far.

So this is really telling you this, this is really,

by and large, that it happens, right?

So yes.

I like the percentage, uh, I mean that we've been

through the okay.

So that's a very good question.

So the there is a trade off right.

The closer and it's also always a trade off between

false positive and false negative between bias and power, right?

So the smaller is your spatial difference.

What is the colour of the less biased you are,

so the better it is for estimating the true effect.

But the worse is your power and the robust packages

which have no idea what they are doing and never

look at the formula they are using.

They are supposed to balance bias and power in a

system, right?

I will not be able to tell you how they

do it.

In my view, they do it a little bit like

Mickey Mouse or Fantasia style.

My experience will be that, you know, there is a

paper that try to explain what they are doing it

and this balancing this.

But again, most of the time, if you look, what

the auditor is trying to do is to have something

like 100 observation on each part of this threshold.

So it's usually based on 200 observations.

And what do we have.

All right.

So then it already is going to be our treatment

of interest is going to be winning at the.

And so what we are going to do is we

are going to compare the behaviour in office of Democrats

and Republican.

Right.

The only reason a Democrat is in office in an

old is going to be by luck.

So we are going to suppose that the election is

run on treatment.

And if done well, the treated and control groups are

ballots.

And by this it's very important to understand what is

it that you balance and analytic.

We are not biasing candidate characteristic because we are not

randomising the candidates.

We are randomising the district in this case.

So what is balance is actually the district characteristic.

So for example, many look at what is the effect

of getting a male versus a female in office.

And they use a nobody to do this.

That does not capture the effect of female and men.

And indeed, there is a paper that showed this.

You only control for the characteristic of the district, not

the characteristic of the candidate.

If there is discrimination against women, then see this.

A close election with a woman.

The woman has to be better on average than the

man.

We'll go back to this when we do discrimination against

women.

Is that right?

So the districts are the same and other, which is

all we care about, right?

And we want to understand conditional on basically the district

being the state is a Democrat and Republican behaving this

term in office.

Right.

Again, it's a local effect, but it's a local effect

for the competitive election.

Right?

The one that are really determined by a few percentage

points, which is where we should expect the incentive to

converge to be the strongest.

And this is where there should be the strongest incentive

to converge.

And this is what they find, right?

This is kind of like the Democrats.

I saw it because it's inverted compared to what I

said.

On this side, you have a Republican in office.

On this side, you have a Democrat in office.

And you can see that at the threshold, there is

still a huge difference between Democrat and Republican, right.

You should not compare this with this.

You can only compare at the threshold.

And at the threshold we see a huge difference between

Republican and Democrat.

That measure is a special interest good measure that just

take a few votes and determine did you vote with

me?

This is a conservative.

So this is a liberal result.

And this says measure how many times a politician voted

the way they recommended.

So that's kind of what Iosco means our liberal values.

This is a very simple way to measure the position

of candidates is the simplest.

You take one special notebook.

You look, you compare like that will give you the

scores.

There have been very, very complicated way to do it.

Like using contribution correlation with this measure 90%.

All right.

So again just to say that often simple things do

give you more of the information you want, right?

So according to this picture.

But you could take any measure of ideology.

One you have a sharp and all this content.

So what does it tell us.

And this is where we will stop that.

Tell us that election do not produce convergence.

Election do not produce convergence.

Her mother you will look at it.

You will not find convergence by politicians.

So that mean that the basic spatial model of politics

we have seen is wrong, that it mean we should

throw it.

Not necessary before doing this.

Let me think about what happened as we relax some

of the assumptions of the moment.

What we have assumed is that candidates are always motivated.

They only care about the rank from office.

What will happen if they are policy motivated and they

care about what happens, what is implemented as a policy?

We have also assumed that candidates have perfect information about

the electorate.

What will happen if there is imperfect information on how

people vote for that?

There is also the assumption of commitment.

Candidate can commit to a platform.

What happened when we were like commitment does.

We will not see in the lecture, but that will

be in the update.

What we do next week we do one and we

do two, and we will see whether we can manage

to create divergence between candidates as we realise this assumption.

Lecture 5:

The of last week.

Last week we introduced the model of special politics, where

voters are on the linear line and we've done the

dancing version, which has candidates that are just office motivated.

We saw that the key prediction of this model was

that candidates converge to the same platform.

Proposing the same platform, and the platform they propose happens

to be the median voter's preferred policy.

And so that was kind of like the members are

that we have seen.

We then saw an application that is the Metal Richard's

model of politics, that using this model connected the model

of taxation with the degree of inequality in society.

And we saw that one.

This relationship between inequality and redistribution was not actually the

one we were observing in the data.

We also saw that, however, we were kind of like

looking at it.

There was no convergence.

So we kind of like had a problem, which is

we have a theory that predicts something and that produces

something else.

So what we want to do now is to think

about what do we need to change in the theories

to match the empirical evidence that we are right?

And there are three important assumptions within the model of

spatial politics and add ons.

One is that candidates are office motivated so they do

not care about policies.

They just care about winning office Two.

There are basically perfect information about what voters want.

Three they have commitments.

That is whatever they propose, they will implement.

What we are going to do in this lecture is

that we are going to first relax this assumption and

see if it is sufficient to generate divergence.

Then we are going to relax also that one sieve

is sufficient to generate divergence.

And for that one you have some slides in appendix

that go over the citizen candidate model.

That is kind of like the main mode, that relaxing

the assumption of commitment so that I will not go

over what we are going to do in this, these

two things.

So from now on, we are going to work with

the idea that politicians lag voters of ideal points, and

that is like voters.

They have some policies that they prefer.

Now, I am very cynical about politicians, but I do

think that at least they put some weight on policies.

I don't think that someone like Jeremy Corbyn is really

just an office motivated person, or they do put at

least a little bit in the idea that they want

the policy to match the preferences.

So we are going to assume that they also have

a single peak preference in direct utility relative to the

platform and relative to the ideal point.

Now, is that enough to generate divergence?

The answer is no, right?

Even if we have policy motivated candidates, if everyone has

single pick preferences, both party or both candidates are going

to converge.

They are going to propose the same platform.

And that platform is going to be the median voter's

ideal point.

Right.

So this is kind of like not enough.

So why is this this okay.

So let's go back here to a continuous distribution of

voters.

Ideal point platform choice.

Let's say we start with the idea that the candidates

are proposing the preferred policies QA and cube.

They are equidistant from the median.

And in this case, because they are equidistant from the

median, the each is elected with probability one half.

Right.

That's kind of like what is happening.

Why is this configuration or assessment as we would say.

Why is this not a position equilibrium.

Let's think about candidate A.

Of course we could take candidate B but let's just

think about candidate it.

What could Candidate Ed do?

In this case.

Just move slightly towards the median.

Yeah.

So what candidate could do is to say, you know

what?

What I'm going to do is that I'm going to

move a peppercorn toward the median.

Right.

Rather than proposing a 10% tax rate.

The median is at 20, B is at 30.

Our candidate A is going to propose 10.0000000001%.

Right.

Just like a tiny peppercorn toward the median.

What about in this case?

He wins the election for sure, or she wins the

election for sure, because the candidate is closer to the

median voters, so there's less distance.

Now, what is happening is rather than getting a 50%

chance of getting the preferred policy and a 50% chance

of getting the other guy policy, now they have 100%

chance of getting a policy that is very, very close

to the preferred policy.

And that's obviously kind of like a better things for

candidates here.

So this is kind of like what we have here.

And so now for example we can do all the

cases.

And one of the ways we can consider.

Will be something like this, for example.

Let's suppose that candidate A is at the median voter's

ideal point.

But candidate B for simplicity doesn't have to be there.

But can that be is at the preferred policy?

Why is this not an equilibrium?

What could be a profitable deviation for one of the

two candidates?

Even if even slightly to the left.

Uh, they'll still win and they will be closer to

their preferred policy.

They don't have to be at the median workers.

Exactly.

So what I could do is to move a bit

to the left.

In this case, it would still be closer to the

median than be.

They would still win with probability one, and they will

get a policy closer to the preferred policy.

So that cannot be an equilibrium, right.

Now we can think also.

So doing so we have seen that The only candidate,

the only possibility for an equilibrium in pure strategy.

Right?

Is that p a is equal to p, b is

equal to the median.

Right.

Because all the logic we have done will apply to

any of the platform choices.

So we need to show still that this is an

equilibrium right.

So why is this an equilibrium.

So to do so we need to consider a deviation.

Right.

That's like and we need to show that it's not

profitable.

So let's suppose the following deviation by a.

Why is PA.

Hutt not profitable.

Why is it not a profitable deviation?

Because we will win the election.

Yes.

But.

Yes.

But can we say a little bit more?

Because you're right, there's this, this aspect.

But I like us to say a little bit more

because it's going to be important as we move forward.

Right.

So it's true that we pay.

So let's think about candidate A that has two choices.

One is to choose PA equal PB.

Equal QM in which case A wins with probability.

What are the chances that A wins in this case?

One half.

And the policy.

Which is going to be implemented is going to be.

Yeah.

This is a sham indeed.

Yes.

Now let's think about the deviation.

What are the chances that A wins.

As you said rightly.

Smaller than.

Even.

You can even give me an absolute number here.

0% in it.

Yes.

What is the policy implemented?

It's come again, right?

Because it's B with winning and B is proposing she

might be is not.

We are always looking at the deviation of one player

keeping the other player strategy constant.

So how do the two options compare for a.

Difference in difference indeed.

Right.

This is exactly the same thing.

Remember I only cares about policies in what we are

doing is getting come.

If you follow the strategy existing Q deviates.

So this is equal.

Equality means no profitable deviation.

So we get back the same result.

But doing so we started to learn something about the

model.

In fact, I would argue that we learn at least

two important things about the model.

What are these two important things?

Right.

There could be more things that are important, but there

is like, you know, two things that I would like

us to mention.

Reflecting on the model.

First of all, let's think about the convergence equilibrium.

How do we sustain this convergence equilibrium?

As we have just said.

What did we just see at the end of this

reasoning?

Why were there no profitable deviation.

The same outcome in both cases.

We basically exactly we get the same outcome in both

cases.

So the only way we sustain the convergence equilibrium is

basically by having indifference.

Right.

But indifference are always kind of like, you know, fragile.

If you put a little bit of noise like let's

say candidate B, you could make mistakes and propose their

preferred policy with some probability very, very small, you will

break the indifference.

So indifference means that the convergence result is relatively fragile.

This was not the case with policy motivated candidates, with

policy with office motivated candidate.

With office motivated candidate.

We were sustaining the convergence equilibrium with strict preferences, but

it was strictly better to propose the median if your

opponent propose the median than to propose any other policies.

Here is basically the set.

If the other guy proposed the median, you are indifferent

between any policy that suggests that there is something that

is not working the sermon.

There is a tiny bit of a kind of like

weakness in the convergence result.

There is another thing that, you know, we've done is

when we thought about that Dad guess right.

And I said what can candidate A do that would

be a profitable deviation.

And we said, well yes, a candidate A could move

just a tiny bit away from the ideal point, just

a tiny bit a peppercorn.

Right.

And what would be the outcome of the election in

this case.

So here we have a 5050.

And if you move just the paper gone away, what

is the outcome of the election exactly.

A is winning with probability one.

Right.

So it's just the case that if you propose 10.0000000000,

etc., or 1%, right, just moving just a tiny bit,

your chance of winning jump from 50% to 100%.

And that, you know, doesn't sound Correct.

Like it doesn't make sense.

Sure, you could say.

Of course, if a candidate moves a little bit toward

the median, they should increase their chance of winning by

a little bit.

But in this model, if they move a little bit

toward the median right, they continuously increase their chance of

winning it.

Really jump right away from 50 to 100%.

So that suggests that there is something in the modern

that is not, you know, theoretically satisfying.

There is something that is not working right.

Both the fact that we need indifference to sustain the

equilibrium and the fact that, you know, tiny little move,

as I said, that with enormous jumps in your chance

of winning.

So what we would like to do is that tiny

little moves Associated with tiny increase in your chance of

winning.

Whether there is a much smoother way of thinking about

the problem.

And so that's kind of like what we are going

to do in this.

So what we're going to do in what follows is

to think about probabilistic voting models, right.

Probabilistic voting model are going to be model where candidates,

when they cast, when they propose a platform, are not

certain about the way voters are going to cast their

ballots.

We're going to have some uncertainty about the way voters

are going to cast their ballot.

Voters, on the other hand, when they do cast their

ballot, will know exactly what to do.

But it's a candidate are going to face a probabilistic

problem, right?

So it's the candidate that are gonna have some doubt

about their chance of winning.

They are going to be able to form some conjecture.

They are going to be able to say, if I

do this platform and my opponent do this platform, I

have 30% chance of winning, right?

But they are not going to be able to say,

I'm going to win.

For sure.

It's going to be 50% or things like this, right?

Things are going to be really much more smoother.

Now there are two ways we can.

Introduce, yes, uncertainty about borders.

So one of them is by putting uncertainty about the

identity or the preference of the median voter.

So that's for example a paper by Bernard and co-author

that was the case in the survey.

You've done right.

If you think remember ten days ago.

I told you a little bit and ask you three

question.

What's your favourite?

What is your preferred average tax rate?

That's your cue.

In the notation we used.

What do you think is the median tax rate of

the people in four, five, three?

That's the Qn.

And you know what is your platform.

What would be your platform if you wanted to win

the election?

In a world where the voters are your classmates in

four five?

Right.

So you were basically doing a candidate problem with uncertainty

about the median.

And why is the uncertainty about the median?

Because if there was no uncertainty about the median, you

will all say the median voters preference will be X.

And all of you will converge to this X.

And we will see that's not the case.

Right.

So there was uncertainty about the problem set that you

have for after reading week is a problem set where

there is also uncertainty.

But this case is uncertainty about the identity of the

media and voter based on probabilistic turnout.

Right.

So there are going to be uncertainty about who is

going to turn out from different groups and as a

result is going to influence who the median can be.

And this is similar idea what exam question of last

year exam which you will have in the summer prep.

When we are all done you will get the exam

question with the solution.

Was uncertainty about the median voters preferred policy.

Right.

So this is kind of like a and as I

said, the likelihood that you get a probabilistic voting question

in your exam is extremely high, right?

Like way above 50%.

Right.

So this is kind of like something to do.

Another way we can do uncertainty is having uncertainty over

voters perception of candidates.

And this is what we're going to do in this

lecture.

Right.

And this is going to use the concept of valence

shock.

Right.

And that's the one we're going to use.

And that concept, we're going to see it again in

weeks nine when we go over the comparison of different

electoral institutions.

All right.

So your survey right.

This is the distribution of your preferences.

So you can see there's a big divide here.

Like there's a bit of polarisation between all of you

that are here when you start working and you're going

to move here.

But that's okay.

Uh, 20% is actually, you know, it's quite low for

an easy four 453 19%.

So it's quite low for honesty for five three, cause

usually you tend to be interestingly slightly more to the

left.

And the undergrad, the undergraduate is amazing that always at

20%.

I do the same thing with my undergraduate course, always

at 20%.

Now you can see also your distribution over.

What do you think the median preference is right?

And you can see there is uncertainty right.

Because you are kind of like you know, some people

think at 15 many people think it's 20 and you

know, 30.

Some people think it's 35.

And the median belief is 20% very, very close to

actually the median preferences.

Right.

So it works pretty well.

That's also a common thing that the two are actually

quite conceding.

And it's because there is kind of a rule that

like those who are actually below you usually put plus

five.

Those who are three above you put minus five.

And so this can sell out pretty well.

And so on average you get it kind of right.

And this is also a constant.

And this is your platform.

And this is kind of like we can see that,

you know if I were to take two candidates, two

people at random here, right, there will be quite a

significant chances that there will be divergence.

Right.

Because if you know, you will have to be either

two from here to, from here to here, but there

will be some divergence with quite significant probability, though I

must say.

You have been much better than most people who have

done this, uh, survey, because I have some people will

say my preferred tax rate is 20%.

I believe that the median voter in the class is

20%, but I'm going to propose 10%, and I'm like.

that makes no sense.

But you have also played a very conservative strategy, right?

Most of you are basically played the median voter's preferred

policy.

And then we can see it in regression term.

Right.

So I regressed your platform on your own preference and

your belief about, you know, the the preference of the

median voters.

And you put 95% of your weight on belief.

Right.

And in most of you simply put, preference of the

median voter, that's what I'm going to propose doing.

So it's not bad.

But you actually were not perfectly rational as a as

a candidate.

Right.

So we will see even but in this case, given

that there is uncertainty about the median, even by playing

the median voters preferred policies, you are generating with high

probability some divergence, right?

If I pick at random to people, they will be

kind of like probably diverging in their platform.

So already when we introduce this we have.

So this is kind of this.

If you go at the bottom of the new slide,

the one that I've been posted for this lecture, you

will see the I think I'm not my mistake.

There is kind of like where I put all the

years together.

Right.

And this is a bit more balanced.

But still there is like something like 65% weight on

the be the preference and 35 on the sorry on

the belief and 35% on the preference.

All right.

So the way we are going to do it, which

I find to be slightly easier than the other way,

which is the one when there is uncertainty about the

median, is that we are going to suppose that the

shock on voters preference comes from an additive term, like

something that is on top of the policy payoff, and

this is called as a violent shock.

So what a violent shock.

These are basically shock that are related to charisma of

a candidate on the campaign trail.

Ability the look, whether they are funny or not.

You can also if you think about local election it

can be due to national waves.

Right.

So if you have a local elections at the same

time as a national election where the Tories are going

to be wiped out, Tories, local candidates are going to

suffer from this.

So this is kind of like another way dampen the

violent shock.

The way we're going to do is in fact we're

going to do is one voter.

The median could be just common to everyone, or it

could be for every voter separately.

And when we go back to this model in week

nine, we will have both type of shocks and we'll

see what it matters.

And what is very important is that the violent shock

is going to be realised after candidates make the platform

choice, so the candidates do not know the value of

the violent shock.

They have to kind of think about what would be

their chance of being elected on the different possible realisation

of this violent shock.

But before voters are casting their ballot.

So voters, on the other hand, when they go to

the booth and they decide between A and B, they

know exactly what is the violent shock of candidate or

candidate.

And so this is on it.

So here is an example of what I think is

the most impressive violent shock during a campaign, or at

least the most impressive that I know, right?

This is kind of like the election in 2017, in

the UK and this is after Brexit.

You know, Cameron has resigned.

Theresa may is the new prime minister.

She has a majority in parliament.

But this is a majority that has been elected prior

to the referendum.

And she says I need my own majority.

And once you decide to do the election, things look

pretty well because she is being very favourably viewed by

the electorate.

Right.

If you think about most candidates, they actually tend to

have negative favorability ratings.

That is like the people who, for example, don't trust

them is higher than the people who do trust them

or like them, dislike them, is dislike them that dominate.

So getting a positive rating is quite, you know, it's

pretty good indeed.

She was polling very highly compared to the Labour candidate,

which has the time is my own MP, Jeremy Corbyn.

I'm not being beaten as an independent.

And so thanks goes well pretty well.

The polls are like really, really good.

And Theresa may goes on and put kind of like

a manifesto and one slogan anyone, anyone is British.

There is no British in this room.

No.

Is there a single British person here?

I mean, beside me, but like, you know, not the

true one, which is by naturalisation.

Now there's no British.

Okay, so you will not remember it.

That's.

That's fine.

But you do not remember it.

But she went to the electorate with the slogan strong

and stable leadership.

Of course, this was the contrast with Jeremy Corbyn that

was supposed to be weak and unstable.

So this was like to show her strength.

So she put up our manifesto, which is also a

very short manifesto.

Okay.

And in this manifesto she puts a few.

Pledges that are related to kind of like changing the

pensions of a few people.

But of course, these few people are very unhappy with

the idea that their pensions are going to be changed.

They kind of like, you know, make some noise about

it.

What does Theresa may do?

She does a U-turn and she cancelled this pledge.

Then there is another group that is unhappy with some

pledge in the manifesto.

What does she do?

A U-turn and she cancelled the pledge.

And then the third time it happens as well.

On top of this, when she's on the campaign trail,

she's very robotic as a candidate.

And she really doesn't look like a leadership at all.

Like, this is not us.

She doesn't have much charisma.

So what is happening is that she's basically making a

lot of decisions during the campaign that go opposite to

the brain that she has put forward to the electorate

and the brand that she has put forward to that.

There was strong and stable leadership.

In fact, she is anything but.

She's not a leader.

She's not strong, and she's definitely not stable because she

keeps on turning, you know, every other day, every 44,

eight hours, she was making a U-turn.

And that's what happened during the campaign.

And so someone who started with, you know, a positive

rating and up with basically a -34 favorability rating, and

she loses the majority that the Tories are during that

time.

And then all the mess of Brexit that happened is

encapsulated in this election.

This is like then it becomes like the all Brexit,

kind of like all the gone to a head.

And this is kind of like the very fun time

to study elections.

Probably not a very fun time to be in Parliament.

Another case of a nice violent shark is but not

so nice for the candidate and not so nice for

the police.

During the German election last time, there were massive floods

and, you know, there were a ceremony to a memorial

to the victims of the floods and also to the

communities that have been affected by the destruction related to

the floods.

Right.

And so there is someone, a governor of the state

that is affected, making, you know, a very serious speech

about, you know, things have been catastrophic for our community.

We have lost many lives.

And you have the conservative candidate.

And, you know, if you're a conservative, you're supposed, you

know, to be a little bit of like, you know,

uptight and you're not supposed to be kind of like,

you know, the person and you say, well, I'm going

to have like a nice dinner with this guy.

No, it's better that the guy looks more like a

priest, like a Calvinist priest, prayers, then you know a

joke, right?

This is more the type of guy.

And this guy think it's the right moment to start

making jokes with his neighbour while the camera rolling.

And obviously this is a huge scandal.

And you know something?

Favorability rating goes down.

Now there is a general lesson that is not in

the model we see.

But I think that matters when you also look at

electoral company, if you have a shock or an event

that affect the candidate, it's very important to think whether

that event is going against the candidate's brand or is

aligned with the candidate's brand, right?

In the case of Theresa may, she put her brand

forward, and all she did was to destroy the brand

in the city of candidates.

Same thing.

All they did was to destroy the brand of conservative

being serious.

A bit austere, but at least, you know, respectful of

people.

If you think about Donald Trump, you can put as

many sex scandals on Donald Trump.

It's not going to matter a bit because everybody knows

that Donald Trump, you know, is not like a feminist,

to say the least.

And so it doesn't matter.

This is not going to affect the brand of Donald

Trump.

People are going to say, you know that.

Didn't you hear the sexist comment that he put on

tape and blah, blah?

And I say, yeah, but that's Donald Trump.

We didn't know this.

We know that he's like this type of guy.

That doesn't really matter.

And indeed it doesn't matter.

It is within the the brand of Donald Trump.

Right.

What a conservative candidate goes.

And you know that he's like pro family goes and

have sex with male prostitute, which happened quite often actually

in Washington DC.

Surprisingly.

That's really bad.

But if the conservative candidate, you know, says something bad

against women and things like this, that's that's fine.

You need the men's sentences, you know, I didn't care

about sexism until I got a daughter.

And I'm always like, and your wife doesn't count.

Anyway, so this is kind of like, it's really a

general lesson very important to think about.

If there is an event, is it going out opposite

the candidate, or is it like something that is around

the brain?

If it's around the brain, you can know that maybe

there's going to be a small dip in the pool,

but it's never going to last because that's not something

that people are going to think is important.

It's not going to learn from it anyway.

So what happened when we put probabilistic voting models of

any kind in a policy, motivated models, candidates of special

politics, then we have this theorem that says that full

convergence cannot be an equilibrium.

You cannot have an equilibrium with full convergence.

We is not even stronger than what we need it,

because it's not even saying where the convergence could happen.

It's just saying you cannot have an equilibrium with full

convergence.

Now, some assumption which we are going to make is

that the probability of winning is always continuous.

In the platform we are going to assume it's also

always interior.

That's going to be implicit in all the calculation we

do.

And so we're going to see kind of like this

result.

So let's see.

So.

Let's call.

This is by a of function of platform a of

A, the platform of b.

Thus, the probability that A wins when there is p,

a and b, and as I said, this object is

going to be assumed to be continuous in PA and

always integer.

And we're going to assume it's always there's no corner

problem.

So to show that something is not an equilibrium, how

do we do so.

What's the way we show that something cannot be in

equilibrium.

What is our proof strategy?

Yes, but that's not.

That's true.

But what's the proof strategy?

There is no yes work.

How do we start?

We assume that it is an equilibrium.

And then we go profitable deviation which is approved by

contradiction.

So you are saying it kind of like, you know,

you are not added in.

Man, I just needed all the pieces to be put

together.

Right.

So let's suppose.

That PA is equal to PB is equal to some

policy.

And it doesn't have to be the median voter's preferred

policy.

And we are just taking any policy.

and we call it say.

For just then, the only thing we're going to do

is we're going to assume that this policy is greater

than a is preferred policy, where you remember, we have

QA to the left of QB.

And so this is a policy that is preferred just

to make things simple.

It doesn't have to be.

We can show it for any policy.

But I'm just going to show this case right.

This is like a general statement.

So let's think about is expected utility.

If PA is equal to Z.

And so the expected utility is going to be always

the probability that A wins time the payoff.

If a win's plus the probability that B wins.

Come the payoff.

If B wins.

So the probability that A wins is going to be

pi a z is.

The utility that A wins is going to be what

we call the the indirect utility.

Which we said some slide ago.

So that's why take this for w z.

This is the policy implemented.

This is the ideal point.

This is the indirect utility.

The probability that.

Be wind is one minus this quantity, right?

Because there are only two possible events.

What will be the payoff for A it B with.

The same.

It's exactly the same.

Right.

Because B is proposing Z as well.

Now let's think about A deviates.

And propose PA.

Which is strictly less than Z and Ackermann.

I assume it's also greater than QA.

Not can do a bit better, but they will.

We'll see why this would be stupid to go below

QA later.

Right.

So this is saying take a policy that is strictly

less than Z, but at least weakly greater than QA,

right?

That's what it says.

Now what is as expected payoff.

Is going to be the probability that a win which

is known.

By a the new policy of a B is still

doing the.

Because you know, we always look at deviation by one

strategic actor, not two at the same time.

So we keep the strategy of B constant as the

the payoff is a win in this case.

Is going to be what.

Is going to be W of.

Q exactly p hat.

QA.

Plus.

The probability that B wins.

What's going to be the payoff if B wins for

A.

Said exactly why?

Because B is proposing Z, right?

So if B wins B implement policy z.

So the payoff is going to be.

So let's call the first one.

V of a.

The second one where I call it the out of

a.

Now if you do.

The out of a minus this.

You're going to get.

Basically.

This thing.

This I said was strictly positive.

We have assumed that the probability of winning is always

strictly positive.

This thing is of which sign.

So the preference in this case are.

We have said that the preference are single picked, right?

Which means that the further away you are from your

ideal point, the worse you are.

Which of these two policy is closest to an ideal

point?

So.

Which policy is closest to a saddle point?

This is equivalent to saying that.

This this thing and this inequality are the same.

So that means that, you know, PA is closer to

a saddle point than Z.

So this is also strictly positive.

And so the world difference is positive which means that

we have found a profitable.

Aviation.

Now what is happening specifically.

We can look at it here to make some intuition

for what is going on.

Right.

Yes.

What we are seeing looks like something.

In this case.

Why do I have hearts?

Because these were the strategies they are supposed to do.

So I'm just trying to find one profitable deviation.

And I'm going to say that they are going to

move closer to the ideal point than if they were

to do this.

They would not be deviating.

Z is supposed to be.

This is the strategy they are prescribed to do, right?

I'm going to show that by moving away from the

toward the ideal point, they can do better, right?

So that's why it cannot be Z.

Does it make sense?

What's going on?

We can compare the two expected utility and we can

see what's going on.

Right.

If A is proposing Z like PB if they are

both proposing the same policy, what happens if he wins?

He is getting or she is getting policy if she

if they lose.

It's getting easier again.

Right?

So it's basically getting the all the time.

What happens if you deviate?

What if we lose.

What is it getting.

Z.

So there is no cost of losing between this and

this.

You can lose way more fun.

It doesn't matter because before you are getting Z, if

you win, Z.

If you lose here, you are still getting Z if

you lose something.

But what happens if you win?

You get a policy that is better for you, right?

And remember what I said.

What was the getting convergence holding together in the policy

motivated candidates where everything was like perfectly known was indifference.

Here we have introduced some noise.

And what is the noise allowing a to do its

allowing.

A to win sometimes with a policy closer to the

ideal point.

And so it's breaking the indifference right.

So that's how you break the convergence in this thing.

So we know there's not going to be convergence in

equilibrium.

What we want to know is how do the platform

are going to look like.

What we're going to do is we're going to impose

a bit more structure on this.

This is what I call a general model.

I just impose, like, you know, that the probability of

winning was continuous and always interior.

But even this could be relaxed.

What we're going to do is we're going to impose

more structure to be able to say something.

We're going to put more structuring on the probability of

winning, more structure on the indirect utility.

And we are going to pin down the winning strategies

of, um, the candidates, right?

They are not winning, but these are the equilibrium strategies.

And then we're going to compare this with.

The strategies with kind of like some of the empirical

results we've seen last week that I will remind you

about, about, and we will see whether the probabilistic voting

model at least validate some of the empirical patterns that

we know exist in the data.

And we will do this after.

This is a good time to stop.

So we'll do this after five minutes break.

Let's move to the probabilistic voting model with more structure.

So we are going to start by assuming that there

are going to be the three players, The median border

that will serve as our representative voter.

We are going to have candidate A and candidate B,

and so we are going to assume that the median

voter's preferences are going to take the form.

Of an absolute value function.

Plus a violent shock.

Equal to delta.

If A is elected.

So this.

Notation.

For those of you who are not familiar it's an

indicator function could be also done with a one.

It usually has two trays like this to indicate an

indicator.

So what does it mean.

It would be the same as writing.

This thing.

So it's basically the delta is going to be experienced

in the utility function only if f win and zero

if B wins, right.

So these two are the same notation.

Yes.

Absolute value for the loss function.

Not like um the quadratic form.

Because I wanted to do the math simpler for this.

Because this leads to, uh, easier math than the quadratic

form.

That's why.

Thank you.

But you could do the quadratic form if you want.

It's just a bit more painful to, to solve, uh,

some of the equations.

So the candidate, on the other hand, are going to

have.

Just a policy payoff, right?

They are not at all of his motivated charges policy.

I'll just tell you a bit what happened to the

result when we introduce a policy of his motivation into

it.

Now the violent shock the delta right is going to

be realised after the candidate proposed the platform, but before

the voter decide for whom to vote, right?

Either the candidate are not going to be completely ignorant

about the Delta.

They are going to have some prior right?

And the prior if you want to believe, because it's

here we don't have really the notion of is that

delta is uniformly distributed.

And here I know that some of you are not

up here with the UN writing.

And this is going to get very, very worse at

this point I can tell you.

Okay.

So.

Hold on.

You know, get yourself seated like a strongly like this

is going to be a bit of a roller coaster

with the with the writing.

What does it mean.

This is when there is a tilde that's going to

be a random variable, right.

When there is no tilde like here, care.

That's going to be the realisation of a random variable.

That's the difference between the two.

This is saying that the random variable delta the violent

shock.

These things means distributed according to.

Okay.

That's like a mathematical notation a uniform distribution.

And that's basically what the uniform distribution is.

Let me just write already this that's distributed.

If you want to know how to make it in

LaTeX is slash sim.

And this means uniform.

After the break we will see random variable distributed according

to the normal distribution.

Right.

But this is kind of we'll have the same same

thing.

Okay.

So this is uniform.

This is the interval.

And that is not a for.

This is the British will subside.

The Greek will get very upset.

And they will say this is si si.

Don't hesitate to correct me if I say at any

moment in the lecture, I might get tired towards the

end of the lecture.

And then I start to sip silver and try to

sip, see.

Right.

So this is this later.

Here is see, we will all be very tolerant.

We will all be very tolerant.

And if you say squiggly thing I will understand because

this we will not see again.

But if you say this squiggly thing, I will understand

that it say that you mean you cannot say see,

but it's obscene, right?

So is distributed between minus one over two C and

one over two C.

Right.

Why do I have this notation.

Because that's the notation we see in week nine as

well.

Kind of related.

And I want it to have it consistently across.

I think we do have a C.

Hopefully it's not all me accountable for it.

All right.

So one thing about the uniform distribution right.

It's like.

If you take minus one over 2C0.

One over to see the uniform distribution.

But if you want it's not exactly correct.

But from an intuitive perspective that's a nice way to

think about it.

The mathematician will hate me for it.

But you know you can say that the probability.

The probability of any value coming in the interval is

the same.

I say probability because with the continuous there is no

probability of a value occurring, but it's a good way

to think about it.

That's that's what it means right.

So one thing about this C variable.

Is that.

So I'm trying to see if I can do some

other colour.

It doesn't seem so.

No I've heard that.

What happens if I do.

Red is not going to let me.

Know.

Okay.

So sorry about this.

I know, I know what I want.

I want this here.

I say.

So let's say now I take an autopsy that is

strictly greater than our original.

See?

So I'm going to start it by CI to mean

strictly greater.

What is it going to mean to this fraction.

Right.

Now I'm going to shrink.

Right.

This is going to go towards zero.

This is going to go towards zero.

What happened to this is going to go something like

this.

All right.

So any values here is going to get basically a

higher probability of occurring.

But are going to be less possible values.

Right.

It's going to become it's going to shrink in terms

of values.

See, as we will see, is going to be the

silence.

Of the policy.

Dimension when C is very low.

This is spreading out which means that the violent shock

can take a lot of values.

And in particular the volunteer can take very large values

here and here.

What does it mean?

Mean that the valence shock is likely to determine the

election.

If the valence shock is likely to determine the election.

That means that the what the candidates are putting forward

as a policy doesn't matter much.

And therefore we will say that the policy, See the

science of policy is law.

On the other hand, is.

See is very large like here.

The violent shock is not going to take very large

value.

What does it mean?

It means that it's very likely that the policy choices

are going to determine the election.

And if this is the case, that means that, you

know, I'm going to wait much more in the voters

decision.

And if this is the case, that means that the

candidates phase of an election where policy platforms are very

silent in the eyes of the electorate, and we will

see that this silence is going to appear in our

calculation.

Now.

At the level of the master, I do expect you

to know the formula of the uniform distribution.

right?

You will not be given the formula of the uniform

distribution is an exam.

You need to know it, right?

So what do we are?

Let's say that x is uniformly distributed between a and

b.

Then the probability that x is less than some values

is going to be.

X minus a b minus a.

That is called f of x.

And this is what is referred to as the cumulative.

Distribution.

Function.

The probability that x is greater than some x is

b minus x b minus a that is equal to

one minus f of x.

And then what do we have.

We have the derivative of x which we call small

f of x is one of a b minus a.

And that's called the probability.

Density.

Function.

So this is cdf and this is pdf.

Did I expect you to know the normal?

Not really.

But at least the uniform is better if you do.

The uniform?

I do expect you to know.

So what is the timing of our game?

So one.

The candidates.

Simultaneously.

Propose PA and PB.

Two of four observes.

Serves PA, PB, and the valence shock.

Then.

She's going to have like A or B.

And then you know.

Winner implements.

Policy game and spare for realise etc. etc..

And we are still looking for subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.

In this case it would be only one set of

game.

So again, very importantly.

Right.

The voters which we are going to start with, right.

Going backward knows Delta when she cast a ballot.

Right.

So the voter knows.

Right.

So the voter is going to have a deterministic role.

And there is no uncertainty from the part of the

voter.

The voter knows what's going to happen.

The voter is going to elect a if and only

if.

I don't know if I've already introduced you to this,

but.

To me, if and only if I'm going to use

the if.

Right.

If the payoff she gets for me, which is the

policy payoff, plus the violent shock is greater than the

payoff that she gets from B, which is just the

policy payoff in this case.

So that's the voters decision, right?

Now we have to think about the candidates problem, and

we're going to focus on candidate A because there's a

lot of symmetry into the into the model.

And the problem of candidate A is that A does

not know.

Delta A doesn't know the realisation of the volunteer.

When A propose a platform A has to think, given

what my opponent is doing right, given what the other

guy is doing.

What are the chances that this inequality is satisfied given

what my opponent is doing, given what I choose, what

are the chances that inequality one is satisfied?

Right.

So for A is thinking about the probability that A

wins conditional on its platform and PB, which is going

to be what?

Which is going to be the probability that this is

satisfied.

right?

Which is equal to the probability.

And what is the one thing that A does not

know in inequality one delta.

Right.

And so because it doesn't know it is going to

treat delta as a random variable.

And so that's the one thing.

So the probability I'm going to remove the conditional because

I don't think this is going to be too confusing

is the probability that.

Here that we can apply the formula.

And remember that.

That's our formula in general, right.

What is X in our case.

And so we have.

If x is distributed uniformly over a b the probability

that x is greater than some value x is b

minus x b minus a right.

What is what is the equivalent of x in our

formula?

Exactly.

This is going to be this thing.

What is the equivalent of being a formula?

What do we know about Delta?

Delta is uniformly distributed between.

These.

So what is the equivalent of or b.

One over two c.

Be careful.

Be careful.

We never know what can happen.

One over 2C1 over two c and a is minus

one over two c.

So what do we get.

We get one over two C minus.

This is minus minus plus.

So two divided by two C is one over.

C what happened to this C given that it's like

you know we have a fraction in the denominator.

We basically flip it right.

So it's as if we are multiplying this by C

which is going to get one over two.

C multiplied by c is one half minus c of

the rest.

Just to.

I'm just inverting this minus here just to make the

formula easier.

And here it's important to stop just a little bit.

Right.

Because when you do algebra you want to be sure

that you get your formula right.

Which, you know, I solved this last week with the

undergraduate and I kind of got it wrong.

So it's even double time.

More important not.

Of course, the likelihood I make the same mistake again

is relatively low in one week time, but we never

know.

So we are thinking about the probability that A wins.

And let's suppose that B gets to go further away

from the median.

Right?

B go moved away from the meeting.

What should happen without doing any math?

What should happen to A's probability of winning if you

should increase?

It should increase.

Right.

And we want to recover this in the formula.

Right.

We have a logic.

If B become less attractive to the median by moving

away from the median.

And it should see that chance of winning increasing.

That's basically the distance between p b and the median.

So this when this is increasing this is going up.

The probability of winning is increasing as well.

So we are seeing what happen when A is moving

away from the median.

What should happen to A's chance of winning.

He should go down right.

If he become less attractive to the median, he should

have less chance of winning.

This is kind of like the distance between A and

the median, the platform of and the median as it

increases, there is a minus.

Indeed, the chance of winning are decreasing.

With this we can go and compute.

As expected.

Utility.

And remember the expected utility is going to be probability

A wins payoff.

If A wins.

Plus the probability that B wins turns payoff.

If B wins.

The probability that A wins.

We just calculated its.

Was the payoff of a if A wins.

What is he gonna get if he wins?

Minus T.

Minus.

It's going to get exactly the distance between the policies

that he implements, because he has won and is ideal

point.

Probability that b wind is one minus probability that a

wind.

Can shake that.

This is this.

What is going to be the payoff if B wins

for A.

Which is the distance between p and q?

Exactly.

It's going to be the distance between p and q,

because now is B that has won and implement this

policy.

Sorry one minus.

One minus.

This is this.

One minus one half is one half minus this term,

which is just a minus a.

I.

That's good.

We have made a lot of progress.

But we have one problem here.

We have one problem, which means that we cannot right

away think about findings is preferred policy.

What is the problem that we have in this formula?

There is one function in this formula that is actually

a nasty object for doing first order conditions.

The absolute.

The absolute value is a nasty object because the absolute

value function is not differentiable at zero, right?

So that's not something.

So we'd have to get rid of the absolute value

function.

There's the trade off between.

But in fact the trade off is also pedagogically very

good because you know it's going to introduce something very

important right.

So by logic not doing any math, just by logic,

we are going to actually exclude some possible platform for

a right.

We're going to exclude that for a.

Any platform.

That is strictly less.

And just for a remembered that We have this ordering.

Sorry, I should have been clear that QA is to

the left of Q and Q is to the left

of QA is to the left of QM, and Q

is to the right of QM.

Right.

It's always the same that we had throughout the lecture.

Just so we're very clear, choosing a PA that is

strictly less than QA, we can see that this is

a dominated strategy, but it's dominated by what?

Right.

There are many possibilities, but there is one that is.

What could be better than choosing something that is to

the left of QA?

Choosing to choosing Q sorry, are you choosing QA?

Indeed, it's strictly dominated by QA.

Why is it strictly dominated by QA?

What is all the chance of a winning with this

P compared to QA?

When is a winning more fun?

Is winning is winning more often with its pay or

with Q it.

With the QA, right.

Is everybody clear?

Because as you move from PA to QA, you are

getting closer to the median.

And being closer to the median is good for your

electoral chances, right?

So what do we have?

We have that a electoral chances a winning probability if

you want.

A higher.

With QA and PR.

And that's because QA is closer.

To QA.

What about a policy payoff when A wins the election?

What is it higher.

Is it higher with PR?

With Q?

With what is A's preferred policy?

So can you do better than QA if you propose?

Q right, so it's indeed higher with QA.

So if you move from PR to QA, you improve

your odds of winning and you improve your payoff when

you win.

It's a double win.

There is not.

There is no cost there.

Right.

It's always better.

It's improve your chance of winning it.

Improve your payoff when you win.

Double benefit.

It's obviously better than than pay, right.

This of course we can do.

You can also do that for any for a any

platform.

PA strictly greater than QM is dominated.

By QM by the same reasoning.

Increasing your electoral chance of winning.

Increasing your payoff.

Conditional on winning.

Because no p above than q n.

Right.

So if you go to QM, you necessarily increase your

chance of winning because you are basically going toward the

median.

And now you are getting a policy that is closer

to your ideal point than PA.

So this is again the same thing.

So what does it tell us?

It tells us that the equilibrium platform must involve a

trade-off.

It must involve.

And that's really important.

It must involve a trade off between your chance of

winning and the payoff if you win.

Right.

There has to be a trade off between the two

and the one thing, one you understand, is that there

has to be a trade off between the two.

You're going to see that this trade off is going

to emerge from the first order condition, right?

This is the fundamental trade off of spatial models of

politics.

The trade off between improving your electoral chances are the

costs of having a worse payoff once you are in

office.

This is the fundamental trade-off of spatial politics.

If there's a spatial politics question at the exam that

trade off, you will have to recite it.

There should be this should belong to the EC 453

gospel with Bayes rule, right?

You should dream of that.

Trade off the day before the exam Bayes rule and

this should dream of one and the other.

Even better, you should dream of both together, you know?

But like, think about it.

All right?

So what we know is that we can think about

the equilibrium platform is going to be between a is

preferred policy and the median voter's preferred policy.

So what does it mean?

Of course, the same logic is going to apply for

B, which is going to be that the equilibrium platform

is going to be between the median.

And B's preferred policy.

Right.

The two of them.

So what does it mean for absolute value here.

B b has to be weakly greater than QM.

So how is the remember the absolute value.

What is it doing.

It's give the absolute value of positive number the absolute

value.

Just spit it out.

Again give the absolute value a negative number.

The absolute value gives you the positive of that number,

right?

If you give minus two, the absolute value gives you

two.

Right.

So PB is greater than QM.

So what's going to be what is going to happen

to this absolute value.

Exactly.

You get the same thing here.

Sorry there's a typo.

Apologies.

It should be QM.

Here we know that PA is less than q n

because P is between QA and QM.

What is going to happen to the absolute value?

What is going to have absolute value give you?

So what's the sign of this thing.

Is going to be negative right.

So therefore the absolute value is going to flip it.

PA we know is going to be.

Greater than QA.

So what is inside here is positive.

Okay.

So this we know this is.

Positive.

This window is negative.

This window is positive.

So this absolute value is going to be PA.

Minus QA.

Same thing here.

PB is also going to be greater than QA because

PB is greater than QM.

QM is greater than Cuba.

And so this is going to give us PB minus

QA.

And now we have got rid of all the absolute

values.

And on top of this, we have learned where the

fundamental trade off is.

And that is going to be between electoral chances, improving

your odds of winning, and improving your payoff conditional on

winning.

So now we can think about AI's maximisation problem.

And AI's maximisation program is going to be to choose

a PA between QA.

And QM to maximise.

This expected?

This thing?

Well, I've just removed the absolute values.

This, we can see is equal to PA plus PB

minus two.

QM.

Something a p a plus b b minus two QM.

Now here we have a constraint maximisation problem right?

We have a constraint maximisation problem because PA must take

values in this range.

There are many ways to go for this right.

One of them would be to be very fancy, very

economist and just do a Lagrangian.

We're not going to do this.

What we are going to do is that we are

going to do a two step.

Solving of this maximisation problem.

We are first going to look at the unconstrained problem.

That is why I'm not going to consider this constraint

at all.

And just take the first order condition.

And then we would check whether the solution eats one

of the constraints.

Right?

And if it is one of the concern, we know

that this constraint is binding.

So that's when you have simple constraint optimisation problem.

It's always the simplest way to go.

You first ignore the constraint, do the unconstrained problem and

then check whether the constraint are satisfied or not.

If they are satisfied, you're done and very happy.

If they are not, you know that the constraint that

is not satisfied is binding, and that's the one that

is going to determine the equilibrium right here is going

to be very simple.

What is going to happen.

But in general this is the way to do it.

Okay.

So we're going to look at the unconstrained problem.

That is we ignore.

That has to be between these two values.

And then we take the first order condition and we

can see that we have happening three times.

In this probability, in the payoff here, and also in

that probability there should be a three nodes here.

The first pair here is going to be C plus

the derivative multiplying this term.

So that's why it's going to come from.

C times minus.

The second one.

Is going to be this one.

So it's going to be minus one coming from this

function.

So in this world things.

The third one is going to be here.

It's going to be minus C some this thing.

And here I can put equal to zero because I'm

just constraining looking at the unconstrained problem.

I'm just going to rearrange a little bit this thing.

And we are going to rewrite it this way.

That's your first order condition.

And that first order condition.

Contains the fundamental trade-off of spatial politics.

What is the fundamental trade-off of spatial politics?

It has to be gospel.

Yes.

You don't have to raise your hands.

You just have to say Amen.

Thank you.

Thank you for your chance of winning and winning.

Exactly.

Could the payoff conditional on winning?

Yes, exactly.

So that's the fundamental trade-off, right?

So let's think about it.

You know, as P.R. goes up, right.

We think about pushing peers up as we push push

up is is going towards what?

Towards the median or toward this preferred policy.

As we increase pay on the line towards the median,

right.

As you increase pay, you are going towards the median.

Right.

So as you increase play, what should happen to your

chance of winning should go up.

Right.

But as you increase pay you are going away from

your ideal policy.

So what happened to your payoff from winning?

It goes down.

So what is going to be at the margin.

The margin is basically the marginal gain in your winning

probability.

And what you get from winning a bit more often

has to be equal to the marginal loss from moving

away from your preferred policy, conditional on winning.

This is in the first order condition.

Julia doesn't have the right to answer anything that comes

next due to our exposure to previous courses.

What is here?

The marginal cost and the marginal gain.

In these days, the marginal cost.

And there is the marginal gain.

There I put it also in a certain way that,

you know, marginal cost is usually of which sign, even

if you don't know, you should like say okay, marginal

cost must be negative, right?

Okay.

It's a bit tricky, but you know, there's one that

I put really the negative first.

Which one.

Which one is negative first.

First one.

First one.

What is this?

That's your marginal cost of moving away from QA.

And you, each time you move a little bit away,

you are losing minus one in the margin, right.

Because we have this linear function that's p m minus

q s minus p minus q.

So that's your marginal cost of moving away from here.

What is this thing.

This word parentheses.

Sorry.

How much you moved away.

No, no this this word thing is not how much

you move away.

What is this thing?

What does it come from?

The probability of a win.

That's a probability.

Marginal cost conditional on winning.

Marginal payoffs from being.

Moving away from your.

Preferred policy conditional on winning times.

The probability of winning.

This is the marginal policy cost conditional on winning.

So therefore that has to be your marginal gain.

Your marginal gain is composed of two things.

One is as you move closer to the media and

you're going to win more often.

How much time often are you going to win?

You can look at it from here.

What is multiplying PA?

You see, that's basically your marginal increase in your chance

of winning it.

See, it's how reactive is your probability of winning from

you moving toward the median.

Right.

This is here.

So that's your marginal.

Increase in winning.

Probability.

And what happen when you win a bit more often.

What if you don't win?

What is happening?

What is happening if you don't win?

You know, trick question are two possibilities.

Either you will know if your A or B wins

one upon it B wins.

What did they do?

Yeah.

To the point.

They implement the platform.

What happens if you win?

As a what will you do.

You implement PA so when you win what do you

gain?

You gain to implement PA and stay and get PA

minus P minus K great.

Instead of getting beat to win and implement PB, that's

basically what it gets you to win.

This is the policy gain from winning.

From a winning instead.

Of B.

Right.

So why do we have we have exactly everything we

have.

What is this is the fundamental trade-off.

As I move toward the media and away from my

ideal point, I get a lower payoff.

Marginal payoff conditional on winning.

However, I get to increase my chance of winning a

marginal increase in my chance of winning, which gets me

to implement B instead of the other guy implementing PB.

Everything.

The world trade off is contained in the first order

condition.

The world trade off is contained in the first order

condition.

Now, if you do some algebra and you know we

don't have much time.

So I'm just going to write the formula.

The solution to this problem is.

Q m.

Minus four one over four c.

So it's four.

It's not 44 it's four.

This is where it really gets really bad.

It's four C here.

Let me write it for.

C right.

Just so we clear what it is.

This is for C right now.

Of course, this is the solution to the unconstrained problem,

right?

And there are two possible constraints.

We want PA to be less than QM.

That's fine.

We're going to get this right automatically.

And we want PA to be greater than QA.

That's not obvious.

So now we have to think about the constraint.

And what we're going to get.

We're going to get that the equilibrium platform is the

marks of.

Q and what we have fun.

And Q which one is greater for PB.

Is going to be the marks of the mean.

Sorry.

Of QM.

Plus one over four Z cube.

Now let's suppose for just one second that the constraint

are not binding.

Let's suppose we have this.

As you can see, we have created divergence, right?

The divergence is there.

They are not proposing the same platform.

We finally managed to do it.

Another thing is you can see that as the median

goes to what be what is happening to the platform.

They are both moving as well with the median.

Right.

So we have kind of like a relationship between the

median and the border and the platform proposed by the

candidate.

Almost a linear relationship.

And last week, what did we see?

We basically saw that as the district was moving.

So were the candidates, and the distance between the two

parties were remaining kind of constant.

What do we find in the equation?

We find basically the same thing.

So we do merge this empirical evidence pretty well.

Well it's pretty good.

So we should be very, very happy because we have

generated divergence.

And we recover this kind of like, you know, relationship

between the district's ideology and the candidate's platform.

So all is good in the world Except that, you

know, we can think about one more result.

And just like in one minute late, we can think

about the divergence between B.

And A and that is going to be equal to

one over two C.

That's the level of divergence between the two okay.

And you can see that as C is increasing as

the silence of policy is increasing as your marginal gain

in term of winning probability from moving toward the median

is increasing.

Right.

This is what it was.

The two candidates are going to become closer and closer

from each other.

So the more important of policies in the decision of

the voter, the more candidates are going to converge toward

the mean.

Lecture 6:

Hope you all are the relaxing weeding week getting a

bit of energy for, you know, the second half of

this term where it's getting darker, colder and you know

it's at the end of it are often like, uh,

a bit tired.

That's why I put hard lecture, you know, just at

the end of the term, just like, okay, not here.

That's better.

So in the next two weeks, we will finish our

investigations of the mentals of political economy.

Right.

So we've done information aggregation that led us to think

about pivotal events and using Bayes rule.

We have done an electoral competition where we started with

the dominant model changing it, adding probabilistic voting models to

generate divergence between candidates.

Platform.

And we saw that this new way of looking at

it was generating some empirical patterns, some empirical prediction that

we are matching empirical pattern in terms of candidates reacting

to the medians while being far from each other.

But although that were not in the data, and now

what we are going to do here is that we

are going to change our perspective on elections, which I

think is a fruitful way to understand recent electoral events.

Right.

And we are going to look at a model where

we are going to not have two candidates competing for

office, but an officeholder vis-a-vis a challenger, right?

And we are going to do this over the next

two weeks.

This week we are going to start with what is

called more or less out of politics, where the goal

of election is to control politicians and to get them

to act in the voters interests.

And then we're going to move to model of election

selection, and we'll see how this interacts with the ability

to all politicians control politicians.

So this is kind of like the plan.

And once we have done this at the end of

next week, we will start using the tools that we

have learned again in order to look at political questions.

Some of them will be looked at from a more

theoretical ways.

Some of them will be looked at from a more

empirical way, but in the background they will always be

the the theoretical forces that I've explained to you during

this kind of like introductory weeks, if you want, on

political economy.

So.

Political agency, if you want to think about it, is

in some sense a little bit of a return to

information aggregation, a little bit not completely right, in which

sense it is a little bit of return.

It's a little bit of a return in the sense

that there are things that politicians do in office that

most of the voters like.

Right.

So there is a sense of there is something, a

common value in what politicians do.

So most voters want a good economy and they don't

really care what you get.

It is good, right?

If it's by decreasing taxes on the rich or more

redistribution.

Most investment really most people on the side don't give

a damn What they care about is that you produce

good outcomes for them and also for society at large,

probably because they understand if the society is doing well,

they are more likely to do well as well.

So this is kind of like something.

So there's this sense that like what voters care about

is the outcome basically, but not the recipe to produce

outcomes.

And this in this sense that this is not a

view that is ideological per se, but is more kind

of like common value in an outcome oriented, if you

want.

And this is probably best stated by a former mayor

of New York that is like, you know, one of

the worst airports you can have in the United States

nowadays.

And there is no Republican or Democratic way of picking

up garbage.

And I swear to you, this is not related to

Biden's quote.

This is a quote I've been using, you know, many,

many times.

You remember what Biden says one week before the election,

right?

They only garbage out the supporters of Donald Trump.

That that quote is, has been on this slide for

many years before this.

So what we're going to do is we're going to

change perspective, right.

Rather than thinking about election, we are going to think

about the re-election.

That is, we are going to have someone in office

and the voters are going to decide whether to re-elect

this person or go for the outside option.

That is going to be the challenger.

And and indeed, we are going to change vocabulary rather

than talking about candidates.

I'm going to try to always talk about the politicians,

and especially I'm going to talk about the incumbent or

officeholder and challenger Everybody's going to be the one in

office at the beginning of the game.

Challenger is the outside option.

It's often passive, the challenger in most modern.

Rather than thinking about perspective voting, which is thinking about

what politician promises and what they are going to do,

what candidate promise and what they are going to do

is going to take a view that is retrospective.

What candidates have done and what should I do about

that?

Should I reward them or should I punish them?

What politicians have done this is like, I don't know

why I still have this on the slide.

So, you know, this is kind of like rather than

a promise.

Okay, this is the referendum.

That was the promise of using this money essentially used

to fund the NHS.

Still waiting for this.

We are going to look at it kind of like

the judgement on the performance of the people in office

with this poster, which is one of the, most successful

and striking electoral posts by the Tories in the 1979,

which, you know, of course, the play of word which

Labour isn't working so people are not working, but the

Labour Party is also not doing right.

And, you know, this line of this also, this aesthetic

is so powerful that when Farage and the referendum campaign

wanted to make a point about immigration, he used a

picture that at the same kind of like a kind

of like movement in it.

And this was not by mistake.

Farage is a very smart politician.

And, you know, unconsciously it was to remind them of

this, because this is Thatcher and, you know, this is

an error in of many of the British voters.

So.

If you were, if you would have chosen a course

that is quite a bit related to political economy, but

it's thought like three, three doors down, which is contract

theory.

You will also have learned about agency problems like both

political economy and contract theory.

Work on agency problems.

And the idea is the following.

You can think about two agents.

And in fact we're going to change it a bit

of a cover.

We can also think about an agent and a principal.

So one agent has an obligation to act on behalf

of another agent, the principal.

And that principal is empowered by institutions to reward or

punish the agent.

So this is a central idea of a democratic theory,

but it's also an idea that you find everywhere.

So for example, in this classroom.

We are in an agency relationship.

That is, we are in a case where there is

or there are agents and there is or they are

principals.

So what is the relationship that we have?

We know case is the agent agent A and who

is the principal agent B in the relationship that we

have.

Anyone want to venture a guess.

So what is an obligation to act on behalf of

the other.

And this order is empowered by institution to reward or

punish.

Representative.

Okay.

So let's think about it this way.

So student representative will be the principal and we will

be the agent.

I will be the agent.

Are.

We the.

Right?

No.

Let's say so.

Let's suppose, for example, that even let's say students are

the principal and I am the agent, right?

It is true that I have an obligation to act

on behalf of you.

I have an obligation to, at minimum, come and give

you a lecture.

Right.

Doesn't even have to be good.

But I have to give it right.

But do.

Ah, you are empowered to reward and sanction me.

By institutions.

What do you think?

I always collect.

Sorry.

Okay, you do performance evaluation, but how much do you

think they can't?

I not know that.

Even less so.

But like they would have counted in the past towards

my promotion.

I don't know.

So we are not.

You are not the the principal because you are not

empowered by institution to reward and punishment, right?

Most people in universities are promoted based on not afraid

to be promoted based on their research.

Like teaching only matters for those who are borderline in

research cases, right?

But let's reverse the brain of the thing, right?

Do you have an obligation to act on my behalf?

Do you have an obligation to learn the material that

I present to you.

I think you do.

Maybe it's a moral obligation, right?

But, you know, there is a form of obligation there.

And am I empowered by an institution to reward or

punish you?

Yes.

How do I do this?

Exactly.

Exams and essays.

Right.

So even if it's anonymous.

So I cannot, like, individually reward or punish you.

I do have the power with migrating to reward or

punishes.

Indeed, we are the principal agent relationship.

But I'm the principal.

You are the agent, right?

You can also think that the principal agent relationship is

even more complicated.

Okay.

Because there is another principle in the pipeline.

Most of your margin is the people who is paying

for you.

An atrociously elevated tuition fees.

And I think that for most of you would be

your parents, or if you're lucky enough, some institution that

gave you kind of like, you know, uh, a fellowship,

right?

And you have an obligation to do kind of like,

you know, to learn and to succeed in your degree.

Right?

And for some organisation, if you do not get a

degree as a positive, you repay all the money they

have given to you.

Right?

And your borrowers, if you do not get your degree,

you know, say goodbye to your inheritance.

So there also you know the power to reward.

And if you do get your degree, then you get

to be treated in a nice restaurant.

So the you have another principal agent relationship over there.

You will have plenty of them in you in your

workplace.

You will have plenty of them in your, you know,

some time you can even think about as I showed

you.

Personal life.

Family matters can be understood as principal agent relationship, right?

Indeed, one of the greatest contribution of Gary Becker and

one of the reasons he got the Nobel Prize is

not for the quality of his models that are pretty

bad, but it is really for the insight that you

can apply the tools of economics to study questions that

are way, you know, different than what economics is usually

studying.

Prices market directly.

The concept of price is bigger than what happens in

a shop, for example.

And that's the contribution of Becker.

That's the insight that he got.

Right.

And so you can apply this to many, many different

settings.

Any question is puzzlement questions.

So what we want to try to understand right is

if we think about the system that we have that

I will call, in fact, representative democracy, a representative system

as a problem of political agency.

Now we want to ask whether the.

So so in the case of democracy rights.

Just to finish I apologise for going, but what we

are is a politician has an obligation to act on

behalf of voters, and voters are empowered by institutions.

That is the white vote to reward and punish the

politician.

Right?

And for those of you who will take the extended

essays structured essay, you will say that this will be

comparing the democracy where this accountability work this way, where

voters are the principal with autocracy, where accountability will be

under way, where it's usually the autocrat that will be

the principal.

So that will be the goal of of the essay.

So voters ideally are the principal and they are the

tools of the vote to reward or punish the incumbent.

But that doesn't mean that in practice voters are effectively.

Holding politicians accountable, that is, effectively managing to get politicians

to act on their behalf.

Right.

For this to happen, we need to think about two

questions.

The first question is do voters reward and sanction incumbent

based on performance?

Right.

Is it the case that the performance of a politician

will lead to reward or punishment.

Good performance reward.

Bad performance sanction.

And is it also the case that politician officeholders actually

react to this sort of rewards and sanction?

Why do they condition their behaviour on what the voters

is putting to them as a contract?

So that's kind of like the question that we want

to ask here.

So what we're going to do is we are first

going to look at a very simple model that will

have two variables that will introduce the concept of moral

hazard in accountability.

Then we are going to see how this model can

be extended to an infinite number of variables.

And after this what we will do.

Is we will introduce new elements into this month.

We're going to go back to this new variable, that

introducing new element that will introduce the I will create

the ID of election as a selection device, not a

device for control.

Right.

So this is kind of like the theoretical plan.

And then after we have done this we'll see a

bit of empiric time depending next week okay.

So here is our basic model.

We're going to have two billiards.

And three players.

They are the increment which is going to be denoted

by capital I.

The challenger, capital C and the voter.

Now the challenger as always, as in most of these

models that we study, is a passive player, at least

at the beginning.

Each period.

The person who is in office or the office holder.

Chooses effort.

E t right.

So what the office holder is doing is how much

effort I'm putting.

For.

a politician.

The utility from putting effort.

On this.

If the politician is in office, he gets the run

from being in office, are minus the effort that he's

putting.

And if he's not in office, he gets nothing.

In fact, he's not putting effort or anything.

For the voter.

What they lack is effort, right?

So we have a representative voter that likes this.

What's the timing?

One the incumbent decides the level of effort in period

one.

Two.

We observes.

The level of effort.

Right.

So.

In our case, it could be we observe our utility.

That would be the same as observing the level of

effort because there is a 1 to 1 mapping.

So, you know, as I write it here on the

notes, I'm just going to assume that we observed the

effort.

Right.

But you could say the observe the utility.

That would be the same thing.

And what is we doing.

We decide.

Whether to re-elect AI or instead to like see.

In pair two.

The officeholder.

Chooses the level of effort.

And then the game ends.

And how could it be a concept in this case?

Is subgame perfect Nash equilibrium?

Right.

There is no uncertainty here.

So.

The only range that we have is that it's positive.

Right.

But uh.

Like that means that if they're putting an effort, they're

trying to work towards a good economy, for example.

Yeah.

Yeah.

It is on something.

The other ones.

Right.

These days, you know, it will be like, uh, reducing

immigration for some reason.

There was an interesting poll that came and uh, uh,

I'm sure that while people thought Salt reducing immigration.

31% of people thought reducing immigration was important for the

country.

Only 4% thought that reducing immigration was important for themselves.

So, you know, this is an interesting case of, uh.

It's not antithetical, right?

You can think that it's important for others, but not

for yourself and others, without even thinking that others may

not realise this.

But there's also another interpretation.

They show you some topics are wiped up smartly by

some politicians.

All right, so in this type of game, right.

No uncertainty is the perfect Nash equilibrium.

We are going to move backward right.

So we are going to start in player two.

And we're going to think about what is the level

of effort that an increment I notice under one point

imperative?

How much effort will a politician put into your team?

So you are in office.

You are a great politician.

We should really like to.

You should run for office.

So you're in office, right?

And what is happening after payout to.

The gay man's right.

Do you like to put effort when you do that?

Actually.

Personally, yes.

You know that's great.

That's why I think it's fantastic.

So do you like to do effort?

No.

So therefore, how much effort should you put in there?

Think about it this way.

If I were to not have an exam at the

end of the year.

And I'll tell you, don't worry, I give you a

distinction to all of you.

How many of you, honestly, in the bottom of your

heart, how many of you would work on the problem

set right?

Just think about it.

And you know, yours is.

I mean, I'm joking with you, but like, it's actually

a big problem in academia because we have this thing

called tenure, which means that after award you are not.

Punish are rewarded for anything your unfavourable.

And how do you guarantee that people who have tenure

continue to put work in it, right?

Like, sure they can maybe come on to become professors.

Let's say once they are professor, do you guarantee that

they keep on working?

And I can tell you that this is an actual

real problem, both in the Department of Economics and in

the Department of Government.

Right.

Feel it.

Sometime the timespan that can happen between the time you

send an event and the time the person respond.

You know, this can go to infinite sometimes, right?

So that is despite no reward, no effort unless you

are intrinsically motivated.

And now there are these people that are intrinsically motivated

and that this model of intrinsic motivation and you know

what intrinsically motivated people tend to be screwed in terms

of salaries, quite honestly, like academics in general.

So we have this level of effort.

So whoever is in office.

This person will put no effort whatsoever.

Right.

So when it comes to the election right.

So we go back here, one comes the time of

the elections.

What's happening for the voter is the voter caring about

who is in office.

Right.

The voter doesn't care about who is in office, whether

it's the incumbent that is re-elected or the challenger that

is elected.

She will get zero effort.

because whoever is in office in power to put zero.

So the voter is perfectly indifferent between the incumbent and

the challenger at the time of election.

So if the voter is indifferent, What can we do?

In general?

I'm not asking you in particular, but what can I

do in general?

The voter could just set some conditions for re-election.

Someone set an implicit contract with the officeholder.

If you do X something in set X, I will

re-elect you.

If you do something outside of state X, I will

not violate you.

Right?

It could be if you put any effort.

I will not violate you.

If you put zero thought I re-elected, that's like, you

know, that's that's a stupid contract.

But that's kind of something the voter can do because

she's indifferent, right?

So the voter can decide On any variation.

And a rejection.

Really?

I will let you incubate.

If you meet these conditions.

I do not like you if you do not mean

this condition.

Right.

Now.

Maybe I was.

I was too, uh.

Optimistic in my capacity of doing a quite a calligraphic

c, so I'm just going to say condition A.

And so the idea is you can put any contract

that you want and a contract in our case in

the form of a variation.

Now what we want to choose is not any relegation

rule, but it's the best election rule for the voter.

What form?

Should this real action will take?

Right.

So what I will mention the term pre-election rule.

It's always in this thing, right?

It always is something of the form.

If you meet condition A you're re-elected.

If you don't, you're not re-elected.

Right.

That's that's the word.

Right.

That could be very, very complicated.

It doesn't have to be a simple condition, right?

But we want to work with simple conditions that are

optimal for the vertex.

So what would be a reflection world that seems to

be.

A good one for the.

Inputs in effort.

Okay, so indeed we have to say since the borders

like effort, it has to be the case that there

is the condition is going to be related to putting

effort.

Right.

But how can we and not being related otherwise.

Right.

So but how will you state it.

Right.

So we're going to look at the selection world.

It's also the optimal one at least in terms of

outcome.

It's not.

So I is going to be re-elected if and only

if right effort is what?

Okay.

We could do greater than zero.

Very good.

So that's that could be one.

And if you put greater than zero.

What effort?

That's what everybody should do.

How exactly?

You should make a comma.

First you will create a huge mess because you will

have like, you know, this is going to be like

the correspondence is not going to be closed.

So this is going to be messy.

But let's say I will put basically epsilon with epsilon

going to zero.

That's not amazing.

But you have the good idea right.

So we're not going to put zero but we're going

to say you're related if and only if your level

of effort is above a certain threshold.

And all go then is going to find the threshold

that works.

And among the threshold that works the best threshold for

the filter.

And so the reduction rule is.

If and only if the level of effort is greater

than some threshold.

And our goal are twofold.

One is finding.

All thresholds that.

Induce effort.

And two is finding.

The optimal thresholds for the I the one that what's

the optimal threshold for the incubation is really obvious.

It's zero right.

It's basically saying I'm always re-elected.

Right.

So this is notice that to avoid the problem with

greater or equal right.

Because obviously the incumbent is never going to do more

effort than Underneath it.

Okay.

So this is what we work with, right?

This is our goal.

Now let's think about the incubation best responses.

What can be the incubation best response.

So suppose the incubation is faced by with this real

action will.

Take him.

And he's going to choose one of two level of

efforts.

Every other level of effort is going to be dominated.

for the engagement.

What are the two level of effort that the Cuban

can will choose between?

Exactly a zero and a lower bar.

Right.

So it's either going to be zero.

Or the minimum to get re-elected.

So let's see the suppose that.

The level of effort is strictly greater than zero and

strictly less than one.

That's what this is.

This is like open this up.

This is not a square bracket.

So this is kind of like not zero, not strictly

in between.

Why would it be a profitable deviation in this case?

Why would it be better than choosing a level of

effort strictly between zero and above?

For sure, there can be other things that are better,

but one is for sure.

Hmm.

Zero, indeed.

Why is zero better?

Maximum.

You get the same electoral chances.

And you get.

A higher first period payoff.

So the same electoral chances.

You are not re-elected as an incumbent, but you get

a higher first period payoff because you get R minus

E one half is R, which is greater than R

minus what you're supposed to do.

Right.

Is.

We have seen this before.

What is the fundamental problem when we look at the

spatial model of politics?

Is the trade off between.

As you move toward the medium, what is happening to

you, to you as a candidate.

You increase the chance of winning, but less power in

the policy.

Right.

The policy where there is kind of going to be

an equilibrium is why always in the fundamental trade-off between

improving our electoral chances but decreasing your payoff, you recover

in a slightly different way, but with the same spirit.

This trade off in particular, in particular, we know that

the policy is dominated.

If it will only kind of like move you in

one dimension.

Positively.

Right.

Particularly alien policies that do not change your electoral chances

but improve your policy.

Pale is dominate another one.

Which is exactly what we have here, right?

We have no chance in your electoral chances.

Likelihood of being elected, but higher first by any policy.

And indeed, when we're going to compare this and this,

we are going to see that the trade off is

going to be there.

Now let's see that there is also an absence of

this fundamental trade off.

When we look at any policies that is strictly greater

than the lower bar, then this is going to be

dominated by.

Why would it be better than doing something strictly greater

than a lower bar?

Lower?

Yes.

Why is that so?

Because you don't improve your electoral chances by putting more

effort than you know about.

And you know that's one.

And then the second thing is exactly, exactly this.

Like there's an absence of trade off.

So again we have some electoral chances.

Which is to be re-elected.

Higher.

First period.

payoff, which is R minus.

So always you can always eliminate some options from consideration

by realising that there is no trade off for the

politician there.

For candidates, if there is no trade-off between improving electoral

chances, improving policy when you are elected, there is a

dominant strategy in political agency.

If you do not improve your odds of re-election, right,

but you manage to improve your payoff, not trade off.

That is the dominant strategy, right?

So you will always have this trade.

This is the fundamental trade-off of all model of democratic

politics.

It's always there.

So if you remember one thing about democratic politics when

it comes to politician or candidate.

It's really this trade off between electoral benefit and policy

benefits or policy gains for the candidate or the politician.

So now we can think about what is the payoff.

For EI if E1 is equal to zero.

What is going to get in the first period.

R minus e1 which is equal to zero.

And then what is happening to his electoral chances.

If he has chosen zero.

Is not re-elected.

So in bear two is getting a payoff of zero.

If you choose a lower bar.

In the first period is getting R minus E lower

bar.

Then what happened to is chance of re-election.

Is re-elected.

Right.

Then is going to put the equilibrium level of effort

in player two, which we know is equal to zero.

And I should have said this before, but we are

going to assume that it is the future with discount

factor delta.

Right.

So it's not important in order to play a game,

but it would be important when we do infinitely repeated

game to have the discount factor.

So it's just.

So what do the voter want.

Why does the voter want the politician to do between

these two options?

So the second one right.

The voter wants the politician to exert an effort rather

than 2 to 0.

So.

This sort of condition.

All the gold.

Does anyone remember?

It's a tough question.

We've seen it in week two of the term, so.

Pretty good.

It's good.

It's not inequality but it's it did it does not

within.

So it's very good.

It's called incentive constraint.

That's the incentive constraint Of the incumbent.

What we call also I see.

So if I do, I see the incentive constraint.

So what do we are.

We are delta r must be greater than L0 above.

So as long as this is satisfied the Ethiopian would

exert effort.

Right.

So.

As long as this ratio.

Is less than delta.

Are r exerts effect.

Among those what is obviously the best for the voter.

What is this ratio that will be the best for

the voter?

Does the voter like more or less effort?

More effort.

Right.

So why is it a threshold for the voter?

If you put R you will not get effort.

It's delta R right.

The best is to push the incentive compatibility constraint to

the maximum.

So every contract that has a IBA weekly greater than

Delta work.

So it could be, you know, half of our for

example that would work but only does the best for

the border is to basically get the airport as high

as possible while satisfying this and the compatibility constraint of

the politician.

When E0 equals delta.

So in this world, the more you pay politician, The

more runs you give to politician, the better it is

for the electorate, right?

Because part of these rights are actually grabbed by the

voter through incentivising effort.

And so the notion that politician should not be paid

much.

It's kind of strange if you think about it as

kind of like rewarding effort.

The fact that the Prime Minister in the UK is

paid less than you know, some professor of economics at

LSC is bizarre a little bit.

Right, like it's doesn't seem optimal.

And I'm not saying which one is not optimal.

Right.

Because this could go both ways.

Right.

So this is kind of like this is this is

one thing.

All right.

So what am I going to do is this is

in a two period game.

And one thing we are going to ask us is

like how much of this is driven by the to

pay, right.

If we were to have multiple payer with politician being

in office for multiple time.

All right.

So going forward.

Would it be possible to do better than this or

in fact will lead to the voters doing worse than

this?

Right.

So what we're going to do after a little break

until 3 or 5 is that we're going to study

the same model, but infinitely repeated.

What we do now is we simply.

Consider the same game.

But infinitely repeated.

So each player.

We have an incumbent chooses a level of effort.

The water observes it.

Decides.

Whether to re-elect or to replace with a challenger.

We are going to assume, but it's without loss of

generality.

That if an officeholder.

Loses an election.

He leaves politics forever.

If only.

We know.

By last week that that's not true.

But, you know, this is this is not mattering that

much in this, in this modern day.

And so we have the same period repeated all the

time.

There is the problem though.

What is the problem with infinity.

When.

You come back on induction.

So that's that's one problem.

But what is another problem.

Especially if we want to, you know, be able to

say something.

We want to respond to.

So we need a discount.

Otherwise we the game explodes.

Yeah.

but what is the set of equilibria of an infinitely

repeated game?

It's very large, right?

There is kind of like we we know that we

can sustain a very large number of equilibrium.

Right?

That's kind of like the focus here.

So what we want is to discipline the equilibrium that

we have.

We want to discipline them.

And so what we're going to choose as an equilibrium

concept.

Is stationary.

Subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.

Now we're going to assume that the equilibrium is stationary.

What does it mean.

It means that every period.

The players of our game are going to play the

same strategy, and every period they are going to play

the central strategy.

That's what it is.

It is.

We don't do many infinitely repeated game.

Of this type because I used to do the legislature

lecture, but I dropped it because it was too boring.

So we don't do many stationary game of this time,

but we will see infinitely repeated game later on in

the course when we look at autocracies, and also when

we look at democratisation.

And while we will not use stationary subgame perfect Nash

equilibrium, then we will use a Variant of it, or

if you want a modification of it, which is called

Markov perfect equilibrium.

So if you have ever heard of Markov perfect equilibria,

it's very close in spirit and stationary subgame perfect Nash

equilibrium.

But of course when we get there we'll talk more

about what the Markov perfect equilibrium hits.

But you know we will see this again just in

a slightly different form, and you will have to work

through it.

One in your problem set, which is quite long, but

it's hopefully you will find it interesting, more interesting than

this baseline model.

You will also use a form of stationary.

So the imperfect Nash equilibrium, though the way it works

it's constructed is a bit more involve and I think

more amusing than this one.

This one is pretty boring.

Okay, so what we want to do is we are

going to look at the centre of electoral roll, right.

And the type of electoral world that we use is.

The incumbent or if you want, the officeholder.

Is re-elected if and only if is a foreign player.

T is greater than a threshold.

So we're going to think about a one shot deviation.

Right.

Which is going to be again between doing which shot

of a for a given this relation.

What are always the type of efforts that any given

world should do is under which.

In this case.

What level of effort will you put in a period

T in this case?

Exactly as before.

It will be zero or a lower bar, right?

That's between putting no fault or putting just the minimum

effort so that you're re-elected.

Anything else is dominated by the exact same logic as

before.

You will not change.

Your chance of being re-elected, but you will hurt your

payoff during the period.

Let's suppose I is in office in Beirut.

If the this equipment shows zero level of effort, what's

going to be his payoff?

So that backyard is going to get.

And then in the future how much is he going

to get?

Zero indeed.

Because he's not re-elected and he's booted out of.

On the other hand.

If I can choose the minimum level of effort to

be re-elected is going to get R minus E lower

bar is valued and then is going to get a

future payoff, right is going to get a future payoff,

which is the continuation value that it will generate from

being in office.

So before the continuation value was just getting all because

there was one period more and then the game were

ending.

Now, because we have an infinitely repeated game, we need

to think about the payoff going further in the future,

which is exactly what you are saying about the problem

of not being able to go backward.

Right?

So this continuation value capture all the future payoffs that

the incubate is going to accrue by, you know, being

re-elected today.

So that that's what it is.

So that's kind of like moving forward.

This is what I'm going to get from next period

on.

What did you do.

It for the engineers?

However.

Let's don't go too fast now.

So we can say that I prefers.

Doing the same thing.

Bank Iban would prefer to exert the minimum level of

effort over doing nothing If and only if this is

satisfied.

Now we don't hear.

Some kind of like.

Give us.

Give us a hint.

Maybe.

Is it over?

Are we?

Are we solved the model?

Indeed.

When has a question like this, the answer is more

likely to be no than being yes.

But sometimes I do trick student and the answer is

actually everyone.

What is missing?

We need to calculate the value of v, right?

So what we need to do now is to calculate

the value of v.

Because this is kind of like endogenous.

This is not an exogenous parameter.

It's endogenous.

Okay.

There are two ways to calculate the value of v,

right?

One is.

Slightly longer and one is very fast.

We are going to do it both right.

So and we're going to go with your insight.

Right.

So what is going to be v.

So v is stored in a pair.

And I think about what is going to be my

payoff of this pair.

Then might be the next value.

When I get the pair and accept that I accept

it right.

So what is going to be V right.

Notice that it doesn't have an index because we are

looking at stationary.

So it should be everywhere every time the same right.

So why is it going to be so it's going

to be what do I do this coming period if

I'm in office.

Maximum.

Maximum.

By doing much.

Assuming that this is satisfied.

Are you doing zero effort?

Are doing you know what you are doing?

You know about this is satisfying.

You are going to do you know about.

That's your best response.

And this is a local because you said that this

is plus one, right?

Then what is happening to you?

You are going to get you get re-elected.

Right.

And then you do.

How much effort in two plus two.

What's your best response again?

It should be lower bar right.

But then you're going to get re-elected again and what

you're going to do.

Same thing.

Again and again and again and again until the end

of time.

Indeed.

In this game, the incumbent is never losing power.

Right.

Which, you know, I don't know if I told you

that, but I know this was with the undergird.

I was saying the example of Botswana, where the party,

since independence had won all elections, all election.

But recently, Botswana's incumbent party lost an election and actually

said that they will step down from office.

And this is the first peaceful transition of power in

Botswana.

And by having this transition of power, they actually become

formerly a democracy because you cannot have democracy without a

peaceful transition of power.

So if we write this as a sum, this is

the sum from k equals zero to infinity of delta

k r minus a lower bar.

I said this is first zero, then one, then two,

then three, then four, etc..

And so it is equal to.

And what is this doesn't depend on delta.

So I can take it out.

What is the value of this object.

Exactly.

So that was the relatively long version.

Like this one.

And let's do the short version.

Okay.

Now today I'm going to do r minus e right.

And then tomorrow what is happening.

Well tomorrow it's a little bit like Gronk day right.

You know this movie where the guy is always reliving

the same day of his life as there's something for

tomorrow.

Next period we will restart again.

The game on you is the same idea.

So what is going to happen?

Well tomorrow are my continuation value for the future, which

is always the sun because we are doing stationary equilibrium.

So my continuation value is myself in period t plus

the same thing.

We are starting tomorrow.

That's what the stationarity is giving us.

And then solving for v.

We get to something.

In that way.

You are going to do.

In the problem set I recommend you go this way

trying to identify.

Sometimes there is more than one value function and then

it's just a matter of solving system of two equation

linear system of two equation and two or maybe three

equations.

But never to complicate it.

So this is a one.

It is.

Okay.

So now we have the continuation value.

And so what do we know.

We know that e chooses to exert effort.

If and only if a lower bar is less than

delta v which is r minus E lower bar one

minus delta.

By putting this on the other side.

This on this side.

We get this.

And how does this condition compare to the previous one

that we found?

It's exactly the same.

So whether you look at it in a two period

game on an infinitely repeated game, you get exactly the

same outcome.

And indeed, that's the maximum run that the R is,

the maximum run that the voter can extract from politicians.

Forever and ever.

So what did we learn?

Some of you.

Could say nothing.

I will argue we did learn something besides the comparative

statics and are in this sort of model.

Democracy is working extremely well.

Extremely well.

We have.

A voter that set up a contract that set up

an incentive scheme regulation.

And this religion rule Depends on the performance of the

incumbent and if this contract is well designed.

So these contracts satisfy this.

And in particular if overbuy is equal to delta r,

what is happening is that the incumbent is indeed reacting

to this contract in the sense of putting the level

of effort that the voters expect of politicians, despite the

absence of electoral turnover.

Here we have that formal accountability.

The the ability to impose reward and sanction on politician

translate perfectly into defacto accountability or real accountability.

Politician do exert effort for the voters.

And there's a high level of effort that are determined

by the rank of office and almost much to discount

the future.

So, you know, democracy here works extremely well.

But there is a slight problem with this sort of

model.

What is a key assumption that we need for this

sort of real accountability to function perfectly?

So that's that's a good point.

This is a lot about an assumption.

And what we know is that there is noise in

what the model observed.

You can still get some extraction of effort, right.

It's more complicated.

And stationarity is not necessarily the best thing the model

can do.

As recent papers have shown, but there are no big

will remain a little bit the same.

So it's not really the problem of.

Observability of agents.

There's actually something a deeper problem with this type of

models.

What was the key assumption that was allowing us to

set such a great feeling when we started a great

revolution, like an amazing army said, like, I'm going to

re-elect you if and only in the past you have

exerted that level of effort at least.

What was the key assumption that allowed us to do

this reflection, this great contract?

Then we put in front of politician.

Voters can only observe that utility and utility just depends

on effort.

So they can just set the selection rule or.

Okay the work.

Yes.

So now you one in particular, how do they feel?

You know, even in this game here we have an

infinity again.

How do they look at the engagement.

Well I think that the challenger at each election.

Now you need that right now indifferent between 1 and

0.

They don't care what they're like.

If they weren't getting to the challenger why would open

the challenger would be more about this to satisfy forever.

Every year the voters indifferent between the challenger and the

increment I don't know.

Why this term.

But you know, it's magic of fallacy.

Huh.

Very interesting.

Mhm.

Okay.

So that's kind of like an issue for the vote

for the model.

So suppose we were to introduce some form of shock

given just the top of probabilistic voting shocks, right.

Something like the of the valence payoff we have introduced

in the weeks before reading week.

Right.

What will determine the choice of the voters come the

election, given that in term of effort, the voter is

indifferent, what would determine the voters choice?

Would she base a decision on the effort that will

be made, or will she base a decision only on

the violent shock?

She's going to get, you know, whatever it is.

So whatever the value, for instance.

So she should be getting the same thing from the

man on the challenger, right?

The only thing that is going to matter in the

voters electoral decision is the violence.

And that's that's the only thing that is going to

matter in the voters decision.

But if it's the violent shock that determines the decision

of the voter, is the election will step up by

the voter credible anymore?

It's not credible because it's not true that the voters

will be lying to you if and only if you

put a sufficient level of effort, right?

It's not true anymore.

The voter, which is where like based on the violence,

what would be the optimal level of effort for politicians

as a result?

Yeah, it's no problem at all.

Why?

Because the only the election prospect is fully determined by

the values.

So this sort of accountability model.

They are great because they show us a democracy could

function perfectly, but they are very fragile.

Because if you introduce a little bit of noise into

the system, they kind of collapse.

Now there are ways to actually make them to sustain

their equilibrium.

In this case, if the shock is sufficiently small.

But there will always be a sufficiently large show so

that these games are collapsing.

Right.

And the galaxy in the following way, which is basically

the only thing the water is going to do, is

based on an electoral decision on factors outside of the

politicians do.

And the only thing politicians, the opposition are going to

reply is to say, now I'm going to say I

don't care anymore.

I'm just going to enjoy my caviar and my seagull

in the Elysium box.

Impulse.

So they completely collapsed, like, you know, a cod castles.

So what we want to understand is what happens when

politicians are not strictly important.

Right.

And we are not going to do this with a

violent shock because, you know, it's not really what we're

interested about, but what we are going to do is

about once important politicians are actually characterised by some idiosyncratic

characteristic that the voters care.

And in all models, in many models, not all, but

in many models we're going to see moving forward.

Politicians are going to be characterised by your time.

Right.

So this style can be competence.

This part can be being more or less corruptible.

This style can be being at the same preference as

the voters.

So in your problem set not for all the men

for this evening.

Next week you will see how we combine a vertical

agency model with probabilistic voting model, where the type of

the prediction is a concurrent or non concurrent type.

All right.

So this is kind of a graph.

This got the stick of prediction.

And what we want as voters.

There is a good type that we like and the

type that we don't like.

Or there are always kind of a sense of cardinality

or the reality between types.

Right.

So usually we are going to do them in a

way that is natural.

That is, voters prefer a competent politician of our incompetent

one I ability of a low ability more nice of

a more current congruent of a non-combatant.

Right.

So we are going to have this notion that the

there is something about that some politicians, at least some

type of politician that we like better than others.

And now we're going to ask ourselves in this world

where there they are.

Type of.

Politician.

Define that type.

Define the characteristic of elections working and elections are going

to be a selection tool.

Now I'm not going to be a tool for control.

There are going to be a tool for selection.

But will they have a spill-over effect and control?

The answer is going to be yes.

And sometimes it's going to be for good.

Sometimes it's going to be for bad.

And in the game we are going to start saying

no is going to be for good.

This kind of like, um, spill-over so are we going

to do this?

Okay.

So before I go there, let me skip this, but

let me tell you a real story to show you

that the concept of selection of some form of selection

and selection is as old as politics itself, or at

least politics.

I'm pretty sure if we were to go in, you

know, Chinese, Korean or Japanese history, we would see exactly

the same thing happening.

I just don't know about it because that's not my

speciality.

So we are in 216 before Christ at the top

of the not Roman Empire, Roman Republic, but, you know,

growing in Italy.

And we are in the city of Capua and, you

know, every city in the Roman sphere of influence on

the same structure.

You have the people of the plebs that are and

you have the patricians or senators, right?

Is SPQR, the Senate and the people of Rome.

And this is always the separation.

And indeed it's probably the inspiration for the system we

have today.

Right?

So the people, the plans of the city of carbonara,

they cannot stand the senators, then we really cannot stand

the senators while the Thunder has no real election.

So what happens when the people cannot stand.

They did the riot, a riot, they do mayhem.

And the senators are basically secluded within the Senate.

So what they do is they call someone from Rome

that is very respected by everybody.

And his name is back of use.

Nobody remember his name in history.

But, you know, imagine that this guy has made it

from 2016 BC to 2024.

It's kind of like, you know, kind of impressive, right?

In terms of it's a story you find three times,

I think you find it in Italy, you find it

in Machiavelli, and you find it in Monti.

So it's really a story that is that has been

taken.

And now you find it in Stefan Bolton, right?

You know, it's I feel very important to be associated

with these people.

So they bring these kind of like senators, this Roman

elite that is very respected by everyone.

everybody knows is is kind of like an audit.

And it goes to the senators and he says, you

know, I have a plan.

You're not going to like it.

But I have a plan.

The senator says, well, you know, whatever happened, it can

only be good.

We can only gamble on success.

Like if it doesn't work.

We are.

Then if it works, maybe we are celebrating nothing, but

we are dead.

So, you know, the concept of gambling on reservation or

gambling on success is a very also important phenomenon in

politics.

You will see it many times.

Actually.

You saw it recently in Germany, where the Prime Minister

of Germany, that is in big difficulty, just didn't gamble

on success, like firing the finance minister.

That's exactly right.

It's like I'm going to lose the election if I

do nothing.

Might as well do something crazy.

Let's see what happens.

Because in any case, you know, love and loss for

loss okay.

So let's say let's say, you know, okay, maybe we

don't like it, but what we have to do is

probably nothing.

Let's listen to it.

And he said, what we're going to do is I'm

going to take you one by one, and I am

going to bring you in front of the the cry

of the mob, the vocabulary, the centre of that.

This guy is completely nuts.

He has really lost it.

We really.

But we said we will go along with it, but

let's go along with it.

So you bring the first person in front of the

mob and he says, Senator Fabius in front of you.

And the the blood is really you know, you can

imagine the insult of God with every words, you know.

He's like, I'm not I'm not going to say because

I will be fired from Elysee if I say, you

know, the type of adjective that you are treating this

person that you can imagine.

And part back of you said, I understand, I understand

this guy is a scoundrel.

And imagine Senator Fabius sweating.

Or you can imagine it is basically what it is.

I forgive you, sir.

It's very simple, very simple.

If you find someone that is better than Senators Fabius,

you can kill him.

That's it.

That's the rule, right?

And then, you know, the crowd gets silence and you

can see people are thinking and suddenly say, oh, what

about Maximus?

And then, you know, 40% of the crowd.

Are you kidding me?

This guy is a dumbass.

Sorry.

Normally, like, this is a complete idiot.

How is this guy?

Better than Fabius, you know.

A few names are thrown here and there.

And nobody gets the vote to replace Senator Fabius.

And so, after a while back, would you say, you

see, he might be a scoundrel controlled by the pest

control.

You are so he can go free and he's going

to go away.

Then the second and third camps and so forth.

And after a while the quarantine is done.

But there's nobody better than these people and therefore, you

know, the dispersed Pacific Pacific name.

So what is this lesson of this?

If we think about it as a model of control,

Fabius or senator will have been killed.

He was an awful person.

He was doing very poorly.

Right.

Like in terms of pure accountability, control.

He should have been dead.

He was a scoundrel.

But the way backfires put the problem to the people

was that it's not about control, it's about selection.

It's about whether you can find someone that is better

that Senator Fabius.

And to the answer to this question, the answer was

not.

right.

So think about elections.

Even if you don't have the incumbent running, you often

have politicians that are associated with the incumbent.

Sometimes it's not because one candidate is good that these

candidates are better than it is.

They trump, you know, at random.

It might not be because candidate Trump is good that

Trump wins the election.

In fact, it could be that most voters in the

US think that Trump is bad.

Again.

Name really chosen at random here.

Right.

But it could just be that in the eyes of

the most American voters, or most American voters in the

state that matter so much, just not as bad as

the alternative.

Elections are not an absolute judgement on a politician.

They are always a relative judgement of one registered versus

the other, a one wondrous of the many of you.

If we think about all the political system.

So if you think about election in this way, you

can think about, you know, choice of Bora in, in

my view, in ways that makes much more sense than,

you know, just judging about the politician being elected is

the politician elected relative to what could have been, what

was presented to the voter.

And that's the notion of election as selection.

It's never, ever an absolute judgement.

It's always a relative one.

And so what we're going to think about is how

do we formalise this.

And there are many ways that this has been done.

But we're going to try to build on the models

that we have seen.

I will present the model grow a bit through some

things, and then we will continue this model next week.

Okay.

So what we're going to think about is again a

to back again.

So I just go over the slide today, and next

week I will do the whiteboard.

We starting from that point.

So I will write the model again.

So it's going to be very related to the model

that we have seen in the first part of the

course.

Right this lecture.

So we're going to have a two player game with

a water and equipment.

And the challenger bottles are going to care about performance.

And politician are going to be office motivated and are

not lacking effort.

Right.

Now what's going to be different is that performance is

not going to be just due to ever, but it's

going to be composed of three elements.

The first element here is the if it's still there,

we still have that.

If a politician exerts more effort Then there will be

better performance.

So efforts correlate with performance.

But it's not enough.

You need two other things to produce good performance.

One.

This epsilon here is you need to have luck.

So think about.

The great Recession that happened after 2008.

You could be the best politician ever, right?

You're not going to produce great economic performance.

It's just not possible.

You don't have the right.

Now, the Great Recession is not the best example because

that's observed.

And we are going to assume that voters do not

observe the element of luck that a politician.

So there's a windfall to the voters.

Do not observe this and things like that.

The last element that is important is that the performance

is going to depend on the type of the politician.

so we can think about this type as ability.

Higher theta.

Higher ability.

So why we are going to assume is that I

couldn't comprehend.

So let me higher.

Higher up.

That's what we can assume is that the competence is

going to be normally distributed.

Right.

This is distributed according to normal distribution with mean m

and variance sigma square of theta.

Log is going to be normally distributed according to normal

distribution with mean zero.

And violence is equal to sigma square.

This is kind of like the way one thing we

assume in this model is symmetric uncertainty.

That is no one knows the types.

Then Cuban doesn't know how important it is to be

in office with the principal, right?

It's like you never know how good you are at

their job until you do it yourself.

And you keep on being promoted because you're good at

the previous job until you reach a point where you're

not, you're basically incompetent as a job where you are

currently working.

This is like the I think it's called the pizza

place, right?

So this is not really important in terms of like

the basic forces at play, but it's really important in

terms of facilitating the analysis.

And the reason is that the Cubans will always like

does not condition is effort on its side because the

incumbent doesn't know its type.

Otherwise, you will have to have an effort for every

possible type of increment, which makes the model extremely complicated

to solve.

Yeah.

Why do we want competence and some of the smaller

distributions are not uniform distributions as we did with the.

Mhm.

Okay.

That's a very good question.

So again.

There are two reasons for this.

One is analytical convenience.

We will see that you know one of the the

best one of the most beautiful thing in the world

of normal distribution.

It's an amazing object and it's an amazing objective is

to do some magic that I mean, we not we

don't do it personally, but mathematicians are doing it for

us and we will see why there are more, right?

For example, if you are to this uniform distribution and

the sum of two independent uniform distribution, one knows what

the distribution this is.

That's a triangular distribution.

That's a nasty object.

But the sum of two independent normal is and normal.

But that's not even the coolest thing about the norm.

That's kind of cool.

That's cool.

Think about the normal numbers.

So that's kind of like an impossible.

There's another reason is that.

Most characteristic within a population not income because this has

like another form.

But we can think that most characteristic ability talents are

well approximated by a normal distribution, that there is a

fundamental and a large spread around it, which is basically.

And I will show you evidence that this is true,

that the normal will be a good approximation for this.

So there is kind of like an analytical equal reason

and a reason for the analytical reason.

Again, when you said that the distribution you put doesn't

matter so much in terms of the forces that are

playing this model.

So I don't feel too bad about facilitating my because

the forces that I play are bigger than the distribution

that you get.

So that's one thing.

But the substantive reason is really we will see evidence

of normally distributed thing.

And if you remember when I asked for your preference

on tax rate, as I pull more and more years

together, the preference looks more and more normally distributed around

a median of like, I don't know in your case

if it's 20 or 25% tax rate.

So that is kind of thing.

So any other question on this?

Yes I mean.

Okay so very very good point as well.

Yes.

We are going to assume that there are attentively separable.

Again, that is mostly for, uh, convenience.

One issue you will have if they are not, especially

if you use the normal, is that your effort can

be counterproductive.

So if you wanted to make them kind of and

complement with each other so multiplicative, usually when we will

use would be a log normal distribution.

So it would be always kind of like general positive

because with a normal you could have something where putting

more if not actually decreasing performance, which doesn't really make

sense right.

It could be the case that more effort by more

competent people is more efficient.

But but here we are going to just treat them

as.

But we could have the model with a multiplicative effect.

This model has been adapted many times.

Actually, it's a model of the basic model come from

old strong carrier concerned model, but that's why it has

been imported from.

So what is the pay off for the waters?

The payoff is again wanting a higher performance.

So before performance was just effort.

So we could have effort here.

Here when the voter wants is just higher level of

performance by the politician.

For the politician they want to be, you know, getting

the rank from office and they dislike effort.

The difference is before we could work with a linear

cost of effort here, we need to have a function

that is kind of like strictly concave.

And indeed, implicitly we are going to assume that it's

concave enough.

And I'll explain why we need this concavity of assumption.

And so in some sense we are doing exactly the

same as before.

The only difference being that performance is not a function

of some random variables.

Competence and luck.

And indeed the timing right is going to be major

draws.

The types that equipment is reserved for.

Observe the performance shows whether to relay the incumbent.

Then the office of those payoffs are realised at this

time, because there's going to be learning going on.

We have to use perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

There is something to that.

So in this game, right, we have a two period

game.

What is happening in period two?

What is the amount of effort that is put by

a politician in purgatory fees and office?

How much effort will you put if you were to

be in office and pay it to in this game?

How much?

Right.

And in this case you will put zero for ten,

right?

You will put zero effort.

So whoever is in office put zero effort.

Does this mean that the voter is indifferent.

Here.

And so luck doesn't play well.

In some sense, luck is in fact a noisy signal,

right?

Noise provides some noise to to the system.

But yes, competence plays a role.

And so what is the voter going to do at

the time of election?

What is going to be determining the decision of what

is going to be the decisive factor in the decision

of the voter?

How is she going to select a politician for the

next period?

But are she going to form?

What is she going to say?

She is going to say I will rear like the

incumbent if and only if I believe that the incubus.

Let's try to express it in, uh.

You're right, you're right.

I just the the logic is right.

Right.

It's just the mathematical term is a bit more different.

If I believe that the incubation hours.

Should be higher.

Something higher.

What?

If I believe that the human has higher expected competence

than the challenger.

So for the challenger, indeed, it's an for the event.

It's not necessarily.

Why is it not necessarily an.

Because what happens for the incumbent?

What do you see as the border?

Right.

And what do you do with the performance and value

of one?

You are going to update about the competence of the

incumbent based on the performance that you observed.

Right.

So what is going to happen comes election time is

that the voter is going to say, I'm going to

really like the argument.

If I expect that conditional on what I have said

about the incumbents performance is expected, competence is higher than

what I expect from the challenger, which is okay.

And that's where you see the relative judgement.

The relative judgement is higher expected comment you couldn't put.

You can believe that this is a policy that is

not working well, and aim is actually very low in

the negative like British and are really crap, right?

But still, what will matter is the relative judgement.

Is the innkeeper better in the sense of having a

higher expected competence?

On what?

I know that the crappy challenger in this world.

Right.

So it could be a bad quality, but it could

still be something like that.

And so what we will have.

Right.

Is that the voters are going to basically do something,

which is I'm going to re-elect you if you if

I believe that.

And we will see how these three election work is

going to translate into something that is actually quite similar

from what we have seen for more of the model.

And then I want you to pause on this and

finish on this and the post on this, and we

will insist on this in the morning that more than

we said, very negative.

And only eight or rather of your performance is above

a certain threshold.

Here we are going to get not the decision of

the voter is going to be re-elected if and only

if your performance in your band is above a certain

threshold.

So we are going to get the same type of

election hardware that are going to come from two different

mechanisms.

In this case, before this was the ultimate election word

from the voters in the case we have not.

And we will sort of next week that is going

to come from this election.

So whatever the mechanism you choose, there's going to be

a link between performance and re-election, and there's going to

be this thing that will recover.

And so we will do all this next week and

we will see some empirically as well.

All right.

Lecture 7:

So.

Today we, uh, finish our overview of political economy tools

with a pure model of, uh, political agency with moral

hazard and adverse selection.

And then next week, we start the application.

The next week's application is very theoretical in comparing institutions.

And for this we will return to our probabilistic voting

model.

But for now we are doing the political agencies.

So where did we start.

We did the pure moral hazard problem, which is a

problem of control where politicians are elected if they put

a sufficient amount of effort, if the level of effort

is above a certain threshold, with this threshold being the

max the voter can get without the politicians starting to

shrink.

So this is basically the rents that voters extract from

politicians with their ability to sanction politicians by booting them

out of office.

But we say that this model of control that works

very well for democracy, because we have a link between

formal accountability, the capacity to impose sanction, and we all

accountability.

The fact that politicians put effort and voters based a

decision on performance was fragile.

It was fragile because it relied dramatically on the fact

that at the time of the election, the voters were

to be indifferent between the incumbent politician and the challenger

politician, and that was what was allowing the voter to

grab on these trends.

Right.

And we said that if there were a small difference

between politicians, such as, for example, a violent shock, not

a violent shot, but a violent shock or something, then

this will kind of like break this, this type of

model.

And so we said that we want to think about

a model where actually politicians are different.

They differ in their characteristic, in their type.

And to think about how elections are functioning in this

case, where this is and what is going to happen

now, is that voters are going to look for good

politician.

And what is good politician.

Depend on the situation you consider.

As I say, it could be honest politician it could

be competent one it could be ability, could be congruent

ones.

It's really there is one type that the voter seeks

out.

And then there is kind of like what the voters

is going to do is that they are going to

use the past performance of an office holder to learn,

to try to learn something about the type of the

ability of this person and election.

Now, I'm not going to be based on indifference.

They are going to be based on a relative judgement,

which is that the voters is going to be like

the incumbent if she believe that he is better than

the alternative, and both the alternative could be very bad.

But one mother is one is better than the other.

If she believes that the challenger is better than the

alternative, then she will be like the challenger.

She would like the challenger.

So this is really a relative decision.

It's not about where do these people are good or

these people.

It's really how do I evaluate one relative to the

other?

So to do this, we are going to look at

the Gaia concert model.

And in this model we're going to have a two

period game with a voter, an incumbent and a challenger.

And as in the model we have seen last week,

the voter cares about the office or the performance.

And politicians are going to be office motivated.

They just care about getting the runs from office.

They don't like to put efforts.

It very much look like the one we had before,

but it's just slightly different.

So what is going to be performance?

So prior in the previous game we have seen performance

was just a function of effort and a 1 to

1 mapping between effort and performance.

In this game we are going to kind of enrich

performance, and we're going to say that performance is going

to be a function of three element, a fourth is

still going to be there and it's still going to

increase performance, but there's also going to be a lock

element and a competence element.

The competence of the politician.

We are going to assume that competence is unobserved at

the beginning of the game.

Nobody knows the competence of anyone.

Even a politician doesn't know how on his own competence.

And luck is also going to be unobserved, right?

What is known is that competence is going to be

normally distributed in the normal distribution of mean m and

variance.

Sigma square of theta block is going to be normally

distributed with a variance of mean zero and variance sigma

square of epsilon.

Right.

So this is kind of like the element of the

model.

Voters cares about performance.

Politician cares about right.

Dislike effort.

And we're going to assume that there is a cost

of effort and this cost of effort is sufficiently concave.

So everything is going to work well in our problem.

I'll point out where we need a sufficiently concave assumption

without giving you what it looks like.

Precisely.

So the timing is going to look very much like

what we have done before, with two exceptions.

So first, nature is going to draw the competence as

well as the luck.

The voter is going to choose the soil.

The band is going to choose an amount of effort.

And after observing the what is going to happen is

that now the water does not observe the level of

effort, but you observe the performance, which is a function

of effort, but also of competence and of luck.

So there are these three element entry and then choose

whether to be like the incumbent or like the challenger.

And whoever is a novice choose his level of effort.

And then payoff are we So now, because there is

going to be learning going on over the game at

this stage, the solution concept is going to be perfect

Bayesian equilibrium.

So we go to.

All right.

So this is kind of like the game that we

have.

Is there any question on this game.

And so let's remember that.

Pi t is equal to the competence of who is

in office the effort and the luck.

This is normally distributed.

With mean m variance sigma square of sigma.

This is normally distributed with mean zero and variance.

Sigma square of epsilon.

And we know that the voter cared about performance.

The politician won in office.

Get the rent and this lag effect.

So.

As before, we are going to start backward and we're

going to start with pay it to get right.

And we are going to ask ourselves.

What is a politician in office going to do in

period two.

And is there going to be relatively simple in this

type of games?

What is the politician doing?

Zero thought right?

There is no electron incentive and absent electron incentive, given

that if for this costly, the politician is going to

exert zero, if it.

Doesn't matter what is going on, it's always going to

be zero.

So with this we can think about the voters electoral

decision, right?

The voters electoral decision is going to be.

I'm going to vote for the I'm going to think

about what is it that I'm going to get in

period two if I like the challenge, right?

That's the question that the voter is going to ask

yourself.

She's also going to ask yourself, what is it that

I'm going to get in year two?

If I re-elect the incumbent, and then the voter is

going to say, I'm going to re-elect the incumbent, if

what I get in pair two is better with the

incumbent and with the challenger.

Okay.

So.

The voter is going to be she calculates.

Expected utility.

From electing C.

So what is going to be the expected utility is

the what is she going to get in office as

a performance if she is in office, right.

Now we have a sum of variable, right.

So we know that the expectation of a sum is

the sum of expectation.

Right.

So we know expectation is a beautiful operator because it's

a linear operator expectation of A plus B is expectation

of a plus explanation of B.

Right.

It's not true for the product, but it's true for

the sun.

So you know the expectation of.

Of this thing which is equal to the expectation.

The sum of the expectation.

Now, what is the expectation about?

Yes.

Sorry.

Why do we use the conditional?

The.

Okay.

Because I just put it here.

The rest is if you want I could do also

to be really complete.

I could do the F of the challenger, but it's

going to be the same as the effort of the

increment.

So that's why I try, but I put it here.

Thank you.

I did see the because it's the type of the

challenger, but we know nothing else except that is the

challenger.

Right.

So what is the expectation of the type?

Okay.

It's time indeed.

Because, you know, that's the best line and that's all

you know.

What is the expectation of a constant?

The constant itself indeed.

What is the expectation of the log component is zero.

What do we know about the level of effort.

Is zero.

So we know.

That if she really liked if she likes.

Sorry the challenger are expected.

Payoff is M, which is the average competence of that

politician.

No.

She has to think about.

What she will get in power if she is in

office.

But unlike the challenger.

About whom?

She knows nothing.

Because there is no occasion for the challenger to do

anything for the incumbent.

She does know something.

And what does she.

What does she know?

She doesn't observe the level of effort.

She doesn't see it.

She doesn't observe it.

The competency of sir performing the performance in the first

period.

Right.

That's correct.

But is that all?

Because what is the performance in period one?

A function of in fact, in every way.

What is the performance a function of confidence.

And so what does she need.

So what she cares about right, is from the performance

in period one to learn about what.

About the.

Competence is going to be zero.

Exactly.

So she wants to learn about the competence right.

So the problem is if she doesn't take into account

the level of effort that has been put right, she

will attribute to competence what is due to effort.

Right.

So the other thing, that's why you know, you are

not completely wrong in some sense when you said it

right.

It's not observed, but she needs to take it into

account.

She needs to say that she anticipate the incumbent to

potentially put some effort, and she doesn't want to attribute

that effort to competence.

Right.

So she also need to take into account.

Here is the anticipated.

Level of effort.

Right.

This is why there's a a it's not an equilibrium.

It's what the voter anticipated.

It can be zero.

We don't know.

It could be zero.

It could be something else.

So again it's going to be.

The some I already divided the split the the expectation

of the sum into the sum of expectation because we

can do this right.

So I skip one step now.

Is.

Going to depend on what you know from the first

quarter, or what you anticipate from the first period.

What do we know about the effort in the second

period?

It's going to be zero.

What do we know about luck?

Does it depend on the first period performance?

It's just like independent every period.

So it's just going to be basically.

Which is going to be equal to zero.

We can drop the conditional because luck doesn't depend on

these conditions.

So we are going to be left with.

This thing.

So the expected utility from rejecting the incumbent is what

is the competence of this person?

That I expect to get conditional on the first period

performance I've seen, of which I will need to remove,

therefore, that I anticipate this person aspect.

And so what do we get?

We get that V is going to reflect I if

and only if the expected utility.

From re-electing I is greater than the expected utility from.

Electing See.

Which is to say that.

The expected competence of the given.

Given what observing anticipate, has to be greater than the

expected competence of the challenger.

Hi.

This is.

And here we can say so if I see this,

why can I put greater or equal in this particular

case.

In this particular model.

Why is it not strict.

Sorry.

So.

It's not why you could.

This is not.

Why you.

Why is it.

Why can I put the equal basically.

Why not just be straight?

It's a bit of a trick question.

Sorry, but it's just because things can be different in

other models.

In this case, you can put great weakly.

Greater confidence is normally distributed.

Exactly.

And so the probability that we get to reach an

equality is.

And.

It's.

Yeah.

But what would be the chance of getting both of

them equal to M when you have a continuous variable.

We say it is a zero probability event.

So we can ignore the event where they are equal

basically.

So that's why we do in some models of this

talk of political agency you will work with two types.

So one would be a good time for nice for

whatever one would be the bad time right.

And in this case the equality can be very tricky

because it can lead to mixed strategy equilibria and stuff

like this.

So in this case, you will have to be very

careful between the strict and the equal right.

But in that particular case, the we like what the

voter will do when the voter is perfectly indifferent between

the incumbent and the challenger, can be treated in model

with discrete number of times.

In a model with a continuous number of types like

the one we are, discrete means one, two, three, four,

five, six.

Some numbers right continuous is like the normal.

Then we don't care about the equal.

I'm just pointing it out so you have heard it.

And when it gets to be problem set where you

have to solve mixed strategy equilibria, maybe you will remember

that I've like raised an alarm for this, but that's

not a problem in our model.

The other thing I want to say is that here

we see perfectly the relative nature of the judgement, right?

On the one hand, where What do I expect of

the incumbent?

On the other hand, what do I expect of the

challenger?

Right.

So we have this.

Relative evaluation of one versus the other.

Right.

It's not about what have they done?

It's about what do I expect in the future conditional

on what I know for both.

Right.

And I compare what I expect for one and what

I expect for the other.

So you see the relative judgement and this relative judgement

important.

It's all about the type.

I want to remember you do remember this.

It's not about the type.

It's all about what is the level of competence I

expect.

Now the problem that we have.

Right.

Now we need to think about what is this object?

What is the value of this thing.

And in itself with continuous variable.

It's not, you know, very easy to define a posterior

if we do it with, you know, binary signals, binary

type, as we have practised at the beginning of the

term, or even as we have practised doing the information

aggregation lecture, it's relatively easy to calculate Bayes rule to

do it with continuous variable, it's much harder.

It's feasible.

There is a formula for it, but it's much harder,

right?

However, there are few distributions and they are the exception,

not the rule, where if we know the distribution of

the prior and we choose appropriately the distribution of the

signal, right, then we get to know What is the

distribution of the posterior?

So give me a prior distribution and not of all

of them work.

Pick the appropriate signal distribution.

Right.

And then I can tell you what the posterior distribution

will look like.

Right.

So that's called conjugate prior.

It's the few cases where with a continuous variable we

can actually determine what the distribution of the posterior is.

Rather than having to basically work with the complicated objects.

So there are again if you look at if you

go on Wikipedia and you type conjugate prior, it can

happen also for discrete but it's more useful for continuous.

You will see that there are actually very, very few

of them.

It's not many distribution for which we can do this.

However, if you remember last week I told you One

of the most beautiful mathematical objects in the history of

the world is the normal distribution, right?

I tell you, one of the first reason is because

the sum of two independent normal is normal.

This is kind of cool.

But what is really, really, really cool is that if

your prior is normally distributed, if your signal is normally

distributed, then your posterior is normally distributed.

And that is the only distribution that is this property.

Now you don't have to believe me in words.

You can also check it by yourself because on the

website of the course I put, a problem set will

make you prove that if the signal prior is normal.

The signal is normal.

The posterior is normal, right?

It's.

It's on this.

Right.

It's.

Of course it's for you to do it.

It's not going to be solved in the seminar.

The solution is already posted online.

So if you want to, you know, see it and

learn what to do.

Bayes rule with continuous distribution.

That's why it is.

All right.

So not only wait, wait wait because this gets even

cooler.

Right?

Now, not only it is the case that if the

prior is normal, the signal is normal and the posterior

the posterior is normal, right?

Which is already really, really cool.

On top of it, the formula is incredibly intuitive in

a way that is like mind blowing.

It's mind blowing that we get at something so intuitive,

right?

So let's get to it this way.

So what do we know about this?

Right.

What we know.

Is that this is normally distributed.

But we want to understand is what is the signal?

The signal is.

The performance.

Right.

To which I should subtract the effort that I anticipate.

Because I don't want the effort to be put on

competence when it's actually, you know, just a politician increasing

performance by putting effort conditional on one particular Realisation of

theta.

Right.

That's that's what is a signal.

That's how we compute signal.

We said what was the probability of getting a good

economy conditioned on the politician being competent.

If you remember in the beginning of the day, what

was the probability of getting signal one or signal red

condition on the state of the world being red, which

is what we have done in information.

So we always have a signal condition or other realisation

of a state of the world or a type.

Right.

So what is it?

It's.

Right.

This is just putting the formula that we have Pi

one is what is c t plus E1A minus e

one minus E1A plus the luck conditional on a particular

value of theta.

That is.

What.

This thing and this thing is just something I'm just

conditioning on a particular realisation of theta.

Now if we condition, if we fix the value of

theta I right, we are saying suppose that I is

0.2 randomly this thing, is it a random variable or

is it a constant?

It's a constant because we are fixing it, right?

This is it a random variable or is it a

constant?

Is therefore the random variable.

Who is choosing effort?

So is it a random variable?

If it's a choice variable?

If it's a choice variable is not.

This is what the voter anticipate.

Is it a random variable?

Now this.

This is a random variable.

And what do we know about it normally distributed.

Right.

So what do we have is that.

Fixing a realisation.

Of theta I.

So if you say for example you you put a

number to theta or you say suppose it is 0.2,

this becomes a constant because we have assumed that it's

0.2.

This is the random variable.

Which is normally distributed with zero.

Sigma square of Epsilon.

Okay.

Today they are starting early.

Usually they start for the undergraduate.

But today this is not discrimination.

I also start for the student in the Master of

Economics environment.

Right.

So this is a random variable right.

So what do we have.

We have a constant plus a random variable right.

So this whole thing.

Is going to be normally distributed as.

This.

So does the distribution of the signal.

Right.

Because basically if you have a constant a plus a

random variable, the A is going to enter the mean

and the variance of the constant is zero.

So it's not going to enter in it.

It's just entering the mean.

On the condition it is only on the anticipated, like

five miles in one anticipated for the condition on the

NHS.

This this is by one minus the anticipated condition.

All conditions on site are.

If you don't like it, you can also remove the

anticipated because in fact it's just like something you carry

out.

You could also write everything as Pi one and just

remember to remove the anticipated later.

Okay.

So this is normally distributed as well right.

With this variance which is coming from the luck.

Right.

If we do not have the luck we will learn

the competence.

So the luck is important because it creates noise In

the performance, and so it makes it harder to understand

the competence of a politician.

So we have prior is normal.

Signal.

Is normal.

And if you put the two together what do you

get.

You get a posterior which is normal.

That's the conjugate prior probability.

And so what is the posterior.

Well the posterior that we want to know is what

is.

My theta I what can be my theta I conditional

on the performance that observed to which again I remove

effort not to be fooled.

And that's going to be normally distributed.

With them.

So there's going to be a variance which is going

to be this, but it's not going to play much

of a role for us.

Right.

And in particular what we care about is the mean

of this.

And the mean is going to be this.

Right.

So what we have is.

The mean of theta I conditional on effort and so

on performance and effort is.

This right.

It's going to be a weighted sum.

Of your prior men, the men that you have of

your prior.

And the value of your signal.

Is going to be a weighted sum of the mean

of the prior and the value of the signal, an

average of the two.

But weighted average is very clear that that's called a

weighted average between the two things.

You start with a prior, that's your M, you receive

a signal that's the pi one minus E1A, and what

is going to be your mean posterior is going to

be somewhere in between the two.

So it's going to be somewhere in between.

You're going to take some of your prior and you're

going to wait some of your past.

That's what it's going to be.

It's in between the two.

And that's a beautiful thing because it's telling you.

Well, you know, it's kind of almost natural.

Suppose your meeting is one and then you receive a

signal of three, while the mean of your posterior will

be somewhere between 1 and 3.

That makes sense.

This is very intuitive, right.

But what is also, as I said, very beautiful is

what the weights are.

Okay.

What are these weights.

But then think about the weight.

So this is on the prior.

Right.

And this is on the signal on what you have

observed.

Very clear that these are the two weights.

Right.

Now what is sigma?

Square of epsilon.

Here.

What is this Sigma square of epsilon.

This is the variance of.

Let's do it differently.

What is?

Sigma square of Sigma.

What is it?

The variance of.

That is the.

Confidence.

Yes.

The of your prior on competence.

Theta.

Thank you for correcting my.

Pressure.

Pressure?

We don't have great credit.

We do.

We have.

Or is it nice to get undergraduate?

I have a Greek.

And you know, when I said sigh, look at me

was like, uh.

I was scared.

I was very scared.

Right?

So yes.

Peter, what is Sigma square of Theta?

Thank you.

Truly is the variance of your the prior distribution on

competence okay.

So what does it mean that the variance increases.

Does it mean that your prior is more or less

precise, that you have more certain or more doubtful about

your prior doubt you does.

Right.

The the bigger is the variance, the more dots you

start with, right.

This is this.

So what happen if you increase sigma square of theta?

What happened to this weight and what happened to that

weight?

I increasing mass of theta.

What happened to this weight.

So it's going to become bigger or smaller.

Smaller right.

They decrease.

This is decreasing with sigma square of theta.

And so what happened to this weight.

You can look this sum to one.

So if one decrease the other one is increases.

So what does it tell us.

It tells us that as you become more uncertain about

the competence of politician to begin with in your posterior.

You're going to start to put more weight on.

On the signal that is in your posterior.

You're going to value more and more new information.

So the more uncertain you are to begin with.

The higher is the variance of your prior.

The more weight you put on your signal on new

information in your posterior.

Right.

So now what is sigma?

Square of epsilon?

Let's think about it.

This is your signal.

What is sigma square of epsilon?

It is the variance of.

Yes, but it's also the variance of.

Of the signal.

Right.

It's because of flux.

It become the variance of the signal okay.

So let's say if you have a very large variance

of your signal Basically saying that luck plays a big

role in performance, and if it is the big word

in performance, what does it mean about the informativeness of

the signal?

As it does, the performance tells you a lot about

competence.

No.

Right.

So the bigger is the variance of luck.

The bigger is the variance of your signal.

The less informative your signal is.

Right.

So higher sigma squared mean less informative signal.

So what happen when the signal become less informative.

This weight is going to go.

Up.

And this weight is going to go down.

So as your signal becomes less informative you put more

weight on your prior.

And you put less weight on the information that you

receive.

And that's like immediately seen from the normal distribution posterior.

Right immediately.

So this is increasing with sigma square of epsilon decreasing

with sigma square epsilon.

So as the signal.

Becomes less informative.

You start putting more weight.

On the prior.

And so the normal distribution has this beautiful property that

the that you get the conjugate prior posterior like the

posterior to be normal.

But on top of this there is a very simple

interpretation of the mean of this posterior, right as a

weighted sum of the information.

You begin with your prior mean and the information that

you get your signal right.

And on top of this the weight are very easily

interpretable, right.

So let me say that if in the exam you

have a problem that use normal distribution with signal and

prior, I will give you the formula for the posterior.

However, you can be almost certain with probability 99.9% that

I will ask you to interpret this posterior.

Right.

And so you will have to interpret the weighted sum

like this.

We will see this again.

We see this again when we do discrimination.

Right.

When we do the discrimination lecture, we will see again

this formula of the posterior.

And here I expect you because you are like so

fanatic about this four, five, three and you know, this

is the podcast that you listen every day going to

see to right away interpret what is going on here.

Right.

And if you don't we will do it slowly again

no more.

All right.

So this is what it is.

So what does it mean.

That means that you know we know that V.

We know we started with this relative evaluation.

Right.

We are like if and only if my evaluation of

the incubate given what I know, is greater than my

evaluation of the challenger.

Right.

But now we know what this is so we can

replace it.

By this.

Well, I just replaced this expectation by what we have

here.

Now moving this on the other side, I get.

So these two can drop.

And so I get Pi one.

And there is become slightly magic.

Because.

We start with you really liked the argument.

If you believe that the competence of the incumbent, given

what you have, is greater than the average competence of

the challenger, the mean competence of the challenger.

However, what we are not beat as a condition is

You really like the incubus.

If the performance in the first period is greater than

the threshold.

And that was exactly the condition that we had in

my last game, even though we started from a completely

different perspective about the role of elections, that is about

selection.

Even though the decision rule is based on a relative

evaluation of the incumbent and the challenger, what does it

mean in practice?

Exactly the same thing.

And in moral of the game, you will re-elect the

incumbent if and only if the performance in the first

period is higher than the threshold.

Now the threshold is different, but the logic of the

decision rule is the same.

specialist and plus anticipated effort.

Basically, what is the average performance of an incumbent?

You will realise the incumbent if the performance of the

incumbent is better than an average.

That's kind of like two things.

So what we're going to do here is we're going

to do a seven.

We have the voters decision rule, right.

And now we need to think about what the politician

is going to do, what the incumbent is going to

do in office.

Right.

So still in period one.

What about the incumbent?

So what is going to be the incumbent objective?

What the objective is going to be to choose the

level of effort so as to maximise the chance that

he wins free elections.

So that's that's what it's going to be.

Of course he's taken into account.

The cost of effort.

Right.

Because it's not like if it was cost less.

We know what the incumbent will do in term of

efforts.

They will just like, you know, go to infinity, basically.

So what they want to do is they think about

maximising the following problem, which is we elect.

Conditional on effort time invariant to.

They're going to get r.

Minus c of E to store.

Let me try to rewrite this.

Minus the cost of effort here.

Of course this we know is to to be equal

to zero.

So.

Now what is the probability that the incubation is re-elected

given his level of effort.

What is it going to be?

What is the probability?

To make the decision right.

Since the probability of getting by one greater than the

threshold given the level of effect.

Is the probability getting pi one?

Greater than the threshold.

Given the level of effect.

Now we know what by one is.

Here I'm dropping the conditional because the E1 has been

put here.

Right.

So I don't need to carry it forever.

Now I thought, is a choice variable of the equipment

and so forth.

I'm going to put it on this side.

That's not a random variable.

It's a choice right?

It's something.

Then you can decide.

What about the theta I from the perspective of the

incumbent.

Is it a random variable or is it something else?

Why do we assume in terms of information in this

type of game?

So when it's a random variable, we assume symmetric uncertainty,

right?

We assume that the incumbent does not know or is

on competence.

Right.

This is something we have a theory.

What about luck?

Does the incumbent know the luck?

Money decides the effort now.

So that's also a random variable right.

So these two are two random variables.

In fact there are more than two random variables.

There are two independent.

Are they distributed normally.

And the sum of two Independent random variable.

Normally distributed random variable is.

Normally distributed.

It's a normal.

Yes, it's a normal distribution.

I just put it.

You write it correctly.

It's a normally distributed random variable but they're called norm.

And again the beauty of the normal is that.

You just have to sum the thing.

That's right.

The mean is the sum of the two mean m

plus zero.

The variance is the sum of the two variance, which

is also incredible when you think about it.

So as an operator, because it's important.

When you read the paper, you will sometimes quite often

see this thing.

Let's take a normal distribution with a mean mu and

a variance sigma square.

Just for anything.

It's an apartheid, right?

The way you write, you want to write the CDF.

Is going to be.

Like this.

Basically what you are doing with normal is that you

always try to bring it back to the standard normal,

which is a normal distribution with mean zero and variance

of one.

And to do this is basically you express it this

way.

So often if you see an expression like this is

because the author, as we written it relative to the

normal distribution.

Standard normal distribution, right?

That's something we can always do with the normal.

So y is going to be this probability of re-elected

given effort is going to be probability theta plus epsilon

one is greater than m.

That's or x.

Now we put the mean which is equal to m.

And then we look at.

Just to help my life.

I'm going to call Z this thing so I don't

have to carry it out all the time.

So we know that now the maximisation problem.

Is equal to.

This thing.

Probability of re-election.

If I'm re-elected, I'm going to get my runs.

Are I have to consider the cost of offence?

Know I said there was the the the normal is

a beautiful object for many, many things.

But there is one annoying thing about the number.

In fact, the number is not perfect.

It's like quasi perfect.

But there's one annoying thing about the normal is that

when you have this sort of problem, the second order

condition can be messy.

And it can be messy because the PDF of a

normal.

Has this shape.

And everybody know that this is basically the shape of

the PDF, right?

This is you know, there is some curvature, there's some

concavity.

It's a bloody mess.

It's not a function that has a nice concave shape,

which means that it can be kind of like messy

to work with and calculate the second order condition for

this.

Right.

Just to point it out.

It's not perfect.

There is this kind of annoying bits.

So what do we do?

There are two ways you can do it.

One, you increase the Z sufficiently to basically make it

kind of like flatter, or you put a lot of

concavity in this function.

So that will allow you to get the second order

condition.

What we're going to assume that that function is sufficiently

concave so that the second order condition we don't have

to bother with that.

Right.

That's an assumption we put implicit.

And so we just take the first order condition.

Again do not worry.

Because if you have a problem with the normal in

your final exam I will tell you assume that the

condition for second condition are satisfied.

I will never ask you to check the second order

condition in an exam with a normal distribution, right?

So we can take the first order condition.

And so what is it going to be.

It's going to be phi of one over Z.

And so we get that.

This is PDF of standard normal.

We get this.

Now, are we done here?

Are we done?

We're happy we got the effort.

We should be fine.

Not.

Exactly.

So we still have two unknowns.

Very good.

Right.

You know, I tell you to remember your thought, right?

Here we have a problem.

Is that, in fact, what we have found is we

have found a level of effort.

For a given and dissipated effort.

Right.

Give me an anticipated effort.

I can tell you what's going to be the level

of effort as a response, right?

So in fact, we have one unknown that is remaining.

Technically, this is the anticipated effort, right.

So now what we have is for every anticipated effort,

I know that the level of effort will satisfy us.

Now one must be true in equilibrium.

What must be a property of the equilibrium?

State.

In which sense?

You're right.

You're perfectly right.

Just.

Just the the which stands.

And what should be this anticipated effort?

It should be the actual level of effort that's in

this sense is stable and stable, right?

It should be that the voter is not fooled.

But if the politician makes some effort and you guess

wrong, doesn't mean that either you are putting too much

on competence.

If your guess is higher than that, lower than the

actual effort, or you are kind of like putting too

little confidence if your guess is above the actual effect.

But that cannot happen.

You would like to decrease your guess in this part,

because what you want to learn is the competence, right?

You don't want to over put on the competence or

under put on the competence.

So one must be to an equilibrium.

We must have that the level of effort.

Is the correct one.

Basically it's a fixed point of this problem if you

were to think about it mathematically.

Right.

So what is amazing in this formula is that in

general that could be a very nasty thing.

But here we can just plug it in.

Let's just plug in it here e1 of e1 a

is equal to E1 a.

What is happening here.

That is zero.

And are we done?

Is there anything else for us to do?

What is left for us to do?

Nothing.

We are done, actually.

It is the level of effort.

Yeah.

I didn't.

Understand why.

Each one depends some.

One.

Eight.

So if.

If you were to.

That's your first order condition, right?

This is the variable you are choosing as an increment.

That's the variable that somebody else is choosing.

Right.

So when you solve for this what you will have

is you will have a solution that will depend on

that thing.

So what you are doing here is basically for each

level of anticipated effort, you have one solution.

The good thing is in equilibrium that must be true.

And so this simplifies to this.

Thank you.

Yeah this this is.

Not easy to do.

So be like you know if you do a model

of what is it not competition is in quantity.

Right.

Yes.

Which one is in quantity.

Which was in price?

I would never call that competition.

The one in quantity.

Let's call it Cornel, because I don't know how you

anymore.

It's been a while, but in kernel competition, you solve

for your quantity given the other guy quantity, and then

you solve for this.

In probabilistic voting model, depending on the functional form you

use, sometimes you will have your platform is going to

be also a function of the other platform.

And then you solve also for this.

Yeah, I think that.

Solutions like the concept is similar to the ration expectation.

It is absolutely the Russian expectation.

Absolutely.

Yeah.

Yeah.

You know people should be best responding to best responding

and dissipation should be correct.

It's exactly the concept of rational expectation.

And it absolutely related to this.

So we have this.

And we can do a few things.

For example we can think about what would happen if

Z were to increase.

See.

Remember is.

Let's suppose it is increasing, right?

What happened to the level of effort?

The nerve effort is going to go down.

Yes.

Why is it going to go down?

So what we have here is, you know, this is

a convex function.

So I should have this minus c that was sufficiently

concave.

This is a convex function.

Right.

So this is going down.

This is smaller.

The convex function made the derivative is increasing, so you

need to decrease the effort to maintain the equality.

So mathematically that.

So you get it.

But also it's intuitive right.

Why does it mean that Z is increasing.

Let's go back to the.

What does it mean that Z is increasing.

These increasing means you know, it's more and more likely

because there's bigger variance that luck and your competence are

going to produce big number.

Right.

That you're going to get big number coming from the

random variable.

Right.

So what is going to be the value of your

effort in this case in terms of improving your odds

of re-election.

Is it going to be larger or is it going

to be smaller?

It's going to be small, right?

Because what is going to happen is that it's very

likely that performance is going to be determined by by

the random variables.

And as a result, what do you do.

You put less effort.

Have we seen this before in a slightly different form.

So let me put it while you think about it.

We have seen a case where your chance of a

lack of election was whether.

This was which type of model.

Let me repeat and remember what I said about vocabulary

that we have seen model when we have discussed about

violence.

That's exactly right.

When we discuss about one.

Why do we say then we are one?

And shall we say that as the violence stop was

becoming more spread out right?

What was happening to the platform of candidates?

Were they going toward the median or what will be

going away from the median?

Yeah, they were going away from the median, right.

Why?

Because it was more likely that the violence show, not

violence.

Violent shock was I know with the French accent is

really not easy.

That the violence shock we like.

I think this was really like xenophobic from the person

who invented this word.

Right.

You could have used like, you know, the common value

shock and will happen is that the violent shock is

determining the election and as a result, right, the incentive

of the politician to go to one of the candidates

to go to war, the median was reduced.

And so they were going toward the ideal point here.

As the random element become more likely to determine the

election, the incentive of the politician to put effort goes

down and they put less effort for the voter.

Right.

So we have, again, whatever model you use, we can

see similar forces going on.

There's is another thing that is really important here.

This is the chance of re-election, right?

If we put the equilibrium values, what is the chance

that the politician, the incumbent, is re-elected?

So here anticipated for an effort would be equal to

some things.

So this would be zero.

The for the normal distribution standard.

Normal.

What is the probability of getting a number greater than

zero or lower than zero.

It's 50% right.

So it's 50%.

So this would be 50% right.

So basically the band has 50% chance of winning, 50%

chance of losing.

Right.

Now let's suppose.

That the incumbent where to commit credibly to put zero

effort, that it would be able to commit it.

It's.

I'm going to make like Musk.

He says I'm going to make all the action I

do transparent like so would you, CFO.

And I'm going to do nothing because that's bureaucratic efficiency,

right?

Somebody said rightly, it's really typical of a bureaucracy than

a department of bureaucratic efficiency will have two people at

its head, which is really inefficient when you think about

it.

But anyway, everything is transparent.

The incumbent managed to commit with zero effort.

What would be the chances of the incumbent being re-elected

in.

This case, so.

It will still be exactly right.

So what is happening?

What is happening is the incubus is trying to fool

the voter.

Cannot commit to put zero effort, so it's trying to

fool the voter entering the full voter by putting effort

to improve his odds of re-election.

But the voter, not being an idiot, discard these efforts.

And so all this effort is wasted in terms of

increasing the chance of re-election for the incumbent.

The effort is wasted.

But for the voter, it's all benefit.

So the attempt of politician to manipulate the voters, where

election actually backfire for the politician and it's all to

the benefit of the voter.

So in this sort of model electoral incentive again, allow

the border to extract rents from politicians in the form

of effect.

We will have some models who actually the electoral incentive,

create perverse incentives.

That is, rather than helping the politicians behave well, they

will actually hurt the politician they were helping and be

afraid they will hurt the voter and make outcomes worse

for the voter.

Yes.

Julian, sorry.

I just have a question why they want the politicians

to.

So suppose that the because if it were to put

effort zero.

Trust that I forgot about.

No, no it's not this either.

Suppose you were to commit.

You want to say, I swear on my children's that

I'm going to put zero effort.

I suppose that you were naive enough to believe that

this is the case, then it will put zero effect,

right?

So here the anticipated default would be zero.

And you can see that in this case the best

response of the politician is actually to put positive amount

of effort.

But of course you will be stupid and you will

have to say, but that's stupid of me.

I will never believe this promise.

So it cannot be because if the voter anticipates zero,

he wants to put effort.

But I say, what did I do?

This is stupid of me.

I should never anticipate zero.

And you know, you get to this process.

You cannot get this without a credible commitment mechanism.

All right.

So that's it for the model of I think I

have nothing else to say, but I think we said

a lot.

All right.

Why did we say I mean.

This model as I think you know, it's it's a

stylised model and you can complex ify it in various

ways.

And you have very beautiful paper using this model to

study different questions.

Right.

But even in stylised ways, especially by the high school

people, even in this town as well, I think it

tells us a lot.

Right?

We see from the reflection rule, the relative evaluation, and

you will see it in every political agency model.

Every problem set will have show that the voter will

elect the incumbent if and only if the posterior on

any given is strictly higher than the prior on the

challenger.

Typical political agency questions in problem set and in final

exams.

We see this.

And in this particular model, this relative evaluation become an

evaluation on performance.

Right.

So if we think about a moral a model of

moral or less.

Why do we get.

We get the incumbent is re-elected if and only if

he performs well.

If we get.

Think about a model of election selection, what do we

get when given is re-elected if and only if he

performs well?

However, where this is coming from is different, right?

In the more or less of them you perform poorly.

Your art in this game, even if you perform, you

could perform something that looks poorly.

If it's still increase, still better than the average politician,

but the average politician will produce.

You will be re-elected, right?

So there is a slight difference in the way we

think about what is.

The other thing we've seen is that despite the fact

that this model is about election, the voter is about

to also extract rights from this model because the politician

tried to fool the voter and failing.

The voter gets the benefit from effort without any cause

for it.

So there is also this going on with this.

But fundamentally it's about selection.

Even though we recover some element of the moral hazard

control model that we've seen.

So the question then is is there any way to

think about, you know.

Distinguishing between the two.

Right.

First of all, what we would like to see is

very simply better performance.

Does it relate to higher election rate as simple as

this.

So again we would like to see whether there is

selection or not in elections.

If there is not this one that we should think

more in terms of moral hazard.

If there is that mean, you know, we should think

more in terms of this second political agency model.

Again, it's not denying the role of election as prospective

voting.

And indeed you will see your problem set for next

week.

Try to combine both aspect together and see how they

feed one another, right?

So there is a room to have both together.

But here this is kind of like how we want

to think about it.

So.

A very simple way to think about reflection and performance

is to just, you know, go.

Basically you just ask yourself, is a governor in the

state in a given year more likely to be re-elected

when what is usually agreed as being good economic indicators

are there compared to case where bad economic indicators are

there, right?

Think about the recent presidential election.

If I were to bet there are two factors that

matters a lot.

First is partisanship.

You want to know what is the best predictor of

voting for Trump in 2024?

It's voting for Trump in 2020.

Is 2016.

Is voting for Romney in 2020.

Now partisanship is the best predictor.

But among those who can be swayed, those who like

maybe the small numbers that move in Pennsylvania, Michigan and

Wisconsin.

If I were to put my money on one factor,

it would be inflation, right?

The inflation in the US has been very high, and

the voters that can be swayed where swayed by inflation.

The other just voted the party the moderators.

Right.

So we want to know is it the case in

general that having a good economy is as having low

inflation is, I think, low unemployment?

I just simple.

Simple, just to see whether there is a correlation between

achieving good performance and getting re-elected.

Controlling for the spread the year.

And, you know, a bunch of characteristics.

And so, you know of course fixed effects.

Just want to be sure that everybody knows what a

fixed effect is doing.

Right.

Is there any doubt about fixed effects.

No.

So for the avoidance of doubt fixed effects are controlling

for fixed characteristics.

So a geographic fixed effect control for any time invariant

characteristic of a place.

Right.

A year fixed effect controlled for any Place invariant characteristic

of a year.

So, for example, if you have a national wave in

favour of one party in a given year, that will

affect the election in every state in the same way.

Your your fixed effect will take care of this, right?

So we are doing a within state comparison taking away

the effect of here.

So what do we say.

We see that.

If you increase taxes.

You are more likely to lose every election.

Good luck, Keir Starmer.

If you produce growth, you're more likely to win the

election.

However, because it's the US, if you basically spend that

has no effect on your re-election chances.

So really customer is betting on this.

If you are given any knowledge of this, you know

paper or any of his advisors knowledge of this paper

as they came to LSC rather than Oxford.

And, you know, he has to really build on this.

And.

What about action?

Right.

So this is just a broad correlation.

But there are many things that can affect the economic

performance.

Indeed, you have some political economists that argue that it's

more shock outside of the control of the governor that

affect the re-election performance, rather than shocks that are under

the control of the great government.

So what we want to do is also to look

at what happen when we can measure politicians actions.

Right now, it's not really easy to measure politician action

when it comes to the economy, but it's not easy

to think about how do we measure effort in this

case?

But there is one thing that we can measure relatively

easily.

Not so relatively easy, but we have a chance to

measure.

And that thing is going to be corruption, right?

So we can measure the amount of money that is

embezzled by politicians.

Right.

But the difficulty is, even if you have this measure,

how can you use this in a way that allows

you to identify something?

How do you measure corruption?

You.

Know it's happening.

Very good.

So how do you measure it?

So you have to be looking for government audits, right.

And luckily there is one government by Lula that has

done something that is amazing for researcher.

And it did for us.

And Finland will well two brilliant researcher made a career

out of this.

So what did you do?

Like the Luna.

And created basically a system whereby the federal government in

Brazil will send auditors in municipalities to look at the

kind of like an account and be able to find

if there are violations of public works.

Right.

So that's that.

But that's not enough to be able to say much

from a causal standpoint.

Yes.

So, you know, this is.

This is a very, very good point.

Can you can you hold this this thought for one

second?

In fact, it's a double assumption is this.

And there's another one.

But like hold it for one second.

Another thing that needs to happen is that it's not

enough to have the audit.

We need also to be able to convert this outdated

to a way that is useful to study a political

economy.

Question.

And this is where Lula was a gift of, you

know, if you believe in God, of God, if you

believe in luck, of luck for us in finance, is

that the way Lula did this audit is that he

created a lottery, right?

So there will be.

Basically luck for, you know, any lottery there will be

like something going on and someone will pick a ball,

open the ball and say, you know, this is the

municipality that will be audited.

It's a bit like Champions League football, but for corruption,

the and at the beginning of the program, this lottery

was public.

so you could go sit there and observe what was

going to happen.

Right.

So they did this every month, and then they were

assigning auditors to do a report.

And then the auditor was producing a report that was

made publicly available, which doesn't purely answer your question right

now, but it's still publicly available.

Right.

The report is publicly available.

And so what can happen is that, you know, a

municipality is drawn sufficiently in advance so that the report

will be published before an election.

Whereas a municipality could be drawn a little bit later

so that the report about the same mayor, I mean,

about a mayor that we know lost the election, but

it will be published just after the election.

Right.

So you are basically the mayor in office.

The report can be published just before the election or

could be published just after the election.

And so what you can do is that you can

compare the municipality.

What they did was released before the election with the

municipality where the audit was released after the election.

But you can do even better than this.

This is where this is very smart because as of

today, there are still people in economy and in political

science that do not do what they did like 16

years later.

So they don't just compare the average here and here

what they are going to do, because they know the

amount of corruption that there is in both municipalities, they

are going to condition on this.

So what the report was doing was saying, here is

a municipality where we have found no instance of violation

of public rule here in the municipality, where we have

found one instance of regulation of public world.

Two instances.

Three instances.

So they were giving number.

Of the number of violations.

So what they're going to do is they're going to

compare.

The electoral fortunes of the incumbent in places that are

zero violation here and here, one violation here and here,

two violations here and here and things like this.

Right.

So that's what they are going to do.

They check obviously, that the report that the lottery is

actually random, that is that, you know, you don't have

the place that are more corrupt being drawn first.

You don't have the enemy of Lula's being drawn first

and everything is good.

Then, you know, they try to make a lot to

convince us we will trust them and we will just

kind of like look at the results.

So these are the result, right?

So the triangle are places let's forget here because now

very, very few places that are with four more.

So that's where the Let's go.

Just up the street.

Right.

These are places with the triangle where the audit is

released before the election.

Right.

So that's where the voters potentially, potentially learn about corruption

in the municipalities.

These are places where the audit is not released before

the election.

What do we see?

We see that place without violation.

The incumbent gets the bonus place where there is one

instance of violation is basically the same.

More than one instances.

It gets worse.

Now let's think about this from a moral hazard perspective,

right.

The moral hazard perspective is if you behave poorly, you

are out.

That's what the moral hazard says, right?

What should it look like for the triangle in this

case?

When Basically, you behave when you are rewarded.

You behave poorly.

You should be hard.

So you should have a sharp decrease here, right?

And it's only right after one violation.

You should be there.

Model of selection will say if you are better than

the average, you will be rewarded.

If you are worse than the average, you should be

punished.

And if you are average, you should be basically 5050.

Right now, the average number of violations in the data

that they have is 1.7.

So better than the average get rewarded kind of average

is the same worse than average you get punished.

So there is a sense of this.

Now there are still I going to try go a

little bit quickly.

But I'll come back to the.

There are still two issues with this one is the

one that Julia raises.

But do the voters know about the aliens?

Do they know?

One thing is like it's released prior to the election,

but that's not enough to know whether the voters know

about it.

Because you need to think about, you know.

Was it publicised enough in the municipality for the voter

to get the information in itself?

That is actually not so much of an issue.

The reason why it's not so much of an issue

is because what you have is that you have a

treatment that happens or it is released, but you do

not know whether people get the treatment or not.

That is, you can have non-compliance among those who are

treated.

That is a problem that we code that the fact

that you are estimating is not a treatment effect.

Everyone, anyone knows what it's called.

It's called an intention to treat effect.

Right.

And if you think about an intention to treat effect

relative to a treatment effect, an average treatment effect, we

know that the intention to treat the effect will tend

to be done.

What bias relative to the average treatment effect.

Right.

So that's kind of like in some sense it's an

underestimate because there are other smart researchers.

They do something about it.

And smart researchers are people who understand where the problem

lies and find some ways to look for it.

They look at places where there is a local radio

and places where there is no local radio.

And the idea is that local radio, you should have

more reports about the audio that places on a radio.

And indeed that's why you find an indirect effect.

But there's another thing that is a bit different is

You also need to think about what is it that

the non treated the control group notes.

Because you know it's hard to imagine that voters are

completely unaware of corruption in their municipalities.

Indeed, some of the examples that are given if you

see them when they present are still working on this

data.

As I said, this is like they go, they present,

they have like presentation.

They have done probably 1 million times for the first

ten slides.

I don't even know how they do it.

I'll blow my mind before being able to do this.

But you know, they do it.

And so what is happening is that they show you

example of like a place where there is a violation.

You have a school bus, but it is like the

bus for couples and a place where there is no

violation.

You have an American school bus and you're like, that's

kind of visible.

So one thing is the borders.

We do not get to see the audit should still

have some information about corruption.

Like, it's kind of like they should still know that

the mayor was doing something.

And as such, one thing that is charges is flatline.

It's kind of very bizarre.

That place with no corruption plus with one plus with

two on average of the same voucher.

We should expect a slow, sloppier.

It's kind of like a strange thing.

It's as if the water not absolutely nothing but corruption

in the municipalities here of some treatment, and that's kind

of like that suddenly makes me believe, if a little

bit less about the result.

But if I would have seen something like this, I

would have been much more like, you know, a believer.

Yeah.

Would it not.

Be because up until now, super confirmed.

But why would you have to think about is on

you?

Is this information?

Yeah, right.

So if I tell you that again, remember we talked

about this a little bit about scandal.

If I give you a scandal about Trump and messages,

listen to music you're not going to get because you

already have this information.

Right.

And it is kind of strange that in municipalities you

don't have some ideas about the level of corruption.

More noisy than an audit, but some ideas and you

should have information that is correlated with the treatment.

And it's kind of strange that they don't see this

all right in the last five minutes.

So I'm rushing a bit through this.

But I want to introduce you to the coolest evidence

of selection in election.

So let me skip this.

This is less important than this.

Sorry about this.

There are a lot of papers you can look into

you, but this one is really cool.

Surely you know it, but the other don't.

So.

we would like to really see evidence of selection.

So we would like to know something about the politicians

that are in office.

And in particular, we would like to know something about

how do they look like relative to those who lose,

how do they look like relative to the population and

things like that?

It's very hard to do because it is hard to

measure things about politicians in most countries and to compare

them with the population or with other politicians.

But there are some countries where you can do stuff,

and that's Scandinavian countries, because in Scandinavian countries they know

everything there is to know about you.

It's very scary.

I would not like to be a citizen of this

country, but it's great if you teamed up with, you

know, people who are from this country and can get

access to this data.

And so in particular in Sweden, they have a lot

of information about everyone.

And what is happening in Sweden is that there are

three elections happening on the same days, and the elections

are for the national parliament.

350 people.

So that's the elite of the politicians.

Only the government or above for the county council members.

So that's kind of like regional level.

That's the intermediary step.

And for municipal council members you can think that's your

entry point into politics.

So that's your entry point.

Yeah.

So elite intermediary entry points into politic.

What do they know about politicians.

They know that the more graphic and social demography they

know their parents earnings, the arsenal for men, their cognitive

score at the age of 18.

And why do they know their cognitive score?

And only for male.

Because the military in Sweden was at the military when

you were to do your military and not national like

service was compulsory.

They were testing people on IQ and on leadership skills.

And so that's why you have informal extreme movement where

luckily exempt of this thing.

Right.

So this is one.

And so what they can do is that they can

basically use this to compare politician with the rest of

the politicians and with other politicians.

So what they do is they look at the leadership

score in the army, the cognitive score and the earning

score.

So the earning score is this is called mean sense.

Regression is basically what you do is that you look

at income and you regress on every possible predictor of

income.

You can get the age, the education, the municipality, the

sector, the position, etc. and you get the residual.

And the idea is that the residual of this regression

is the competence that is unexplained by, You know, your

age, your education and things like this.

So all your residual is supposed to be as a

competent and education level.

The big boss here are the leadership score for the

population.

And remember I told you a beautiful thing about the

normal distribution is if you have a very large population,

a lot of variables are not to be normally distributed.

Look at this beauty, look at this beauty.

This is like this is the normal.

This is the normal.

If you think about the normal, this is exactly this,

this bit less of the normal as this kind of.

But this is really a normal distribution.

So what you see is that the distribution of leadership,

cognitive and earning scores in the population is normally distributed

or at least toward the middle right.

Then what you have is the first little bar is

politician that I've lost.

So it's mostly council level politicians that have lost the

election, like municipal entry, because that's why you have the

most candidates.

The second one here is basically the council level politician,

the municipal level politician above all.

So that's the entry politician.

The third one is the intermediary politician.

The last one is the national politician.

So you have kind of like an order from entry

to politics to kind of like the highest level.

And what do we see?

If you look at leadership, the losers are worse than

those who won that are worse of the intermediary politician,

that are worse than the national politician every state and

they are better than the population.

So every step of the way there is selection.

Those who enter politics are better than the population that

will win the end the first election.

Lecture 8:

Okay today.

Is one of the last.

Let's say for difficult lecture that we have left.

Right.

It's probably the next time that the lecture on the

central group, where we go over the model, there is

probably the one lecture on autocratic politics, because we use

the Markov perfect equilibrium and the lecture on, uh, Parliament

in practice, because that's a very different way of thinking

of problems.

And the students suffer.

So I'll say with this, the other lecture yesterday and

all of the lecture we will go are going to

be easier than this.

All right.

So get yourself is ready.

Shoot yourself some Red bull or whatever you need.

All right.

Because, uh, it's going to be slightly intense by experience.

So.

For many reasons, both because the US and Germany, but

also because most academics that have studied political economy have

been trained in the US.

There is a very strong US bias when we think

about political economy.

And we will do also next week or away from

the US, but it's very hard to avoid this bias.

And indeed we have this idea that we have to

winner takes all elections.

The importance of executive.

But when you look at what is going on in

democracy, there is a lot of diversity.

And right.

There is diversity when it comes to election of the

minority.

We need a fix on proportionality.

Two run single transferable vote that was used recently in

the mayoral election in London, but it is used also

in Scotland.

So you have a lot of different ways that you

can manage action.

And when it comes to organising the way the regime

is working, you also have a lot of diversity.

You are within reason where you are like a president

dealing with the parliament.

You have a parliamentary system where the parliament is sovereign

and the Prime minister comes down from the parliament, or

you are elected monarchy, as I like to call it,

the French system.

When most of the time when they don't dissolve the

assembly in random, not even at the moment, but in

the middle of the president, we are kind of like

a strong control on policy making.

And all the systems that are yet to be implemented.

So Roger Myerson, for example, is a big fan of

approval voting, which is a system where you vote for

all the incentive you agree with the local ballot account.

There were some economists that say that we should deal

with quadratic voting to take care of the problem of

intensity of preferences.

So there was a little faith in economics about quadratic

voting, where you could buy votes and the price of

vote would increase, purportedly.

And it was shown that this was very good to

deal with the intensity of preferences.

People who really care about an issue will buy what's

not.

But, you know, obviously being an economist construct, this was

done in a world where everybody had equal income.

You know what can go wrong in a world where

there is large inequality with quadratic voting.

But you know, they don't want to bother with this

and this.

This third completely died.

I think nobody is interested in quadratic voting anymore, but

maybe come back.

Maybe this is a topic for you to revive if

you want to have your little moment of it.

All right.

So if you think about electoral institutions, right.

The one we kind of look at the most are

the one which are in orange juice festivals so that

the US, Canada, I think basically this is what it

is.

And but if you think about it all, the thing

is proportional representation, which is extremely used all over the

place here.

They have done things completely wrong.

They have created a presidential system with proportional representation.

It's like as if you say, what do you want

to do to really make your political system do not

work unless the proportional system with presidential.

System.

So you see, like this is the most common system

that the system used.

You have all the things like mixed media system or

you have some proportional and some plurality of Germany, Mexico,

for example.

And then you have the two system in France, and

of course, also in countries that were more than influenced

by the French.

You you can see the colonial effect in electoral rule,

but it's quite impressive when you see this when it

comes to political institutions.

And then you have like, you know, presidential system, parliamentary,

it's kind of like there's a lot of diversity.

And really we need to think about how do we

deal with this in political economy.

Right.

This that's that's the basic point.

So what we want to understand is how do political

institution affect policy.

And we're going to take this in the lecture from

a very economic standpoint.

And so we're going to think about the size of

government.

That is the amount of taxation.

And we're going to think about the distribution of the

budget between public goods transport like club good if you

want transfer to particular districts and private grants for politicians.

So the amount of corruption that there is in the

system.

And we are going to do this for preventative and

proportional voting.

We're going to do this in the lecture.

And this is hard.

When I was a young girl, a lecturer, I was

very optimistic.

And there was also teaching slides or models for the

presidential versus parliamentary regime.

But that actually is very hard.

and now you are behind.

In the evenings of trying, we can promise to give

you the intuition behind the bottle, right?

When in your problem set, you will do a more

full political agency model to study presidential versus parliamentary regime.

More from a political science standpoint.

So more from a concept of representation and taking the

right policy rather than thinking about the problem of how

do you distribute budget, which meant that maximisation problem becomes

simpler.

There's just one policy to choose, which means that will

become more doable to do it right.

So that's kind of like my job.

So we will basically we do what we have done

before elections with probabilistic voting in the lecture Moral Hazard

Game in the appendix for those of you that are

very courageous.

But really, if you want to really push yourself, that's

a very good thing to do.

And then, you know, political agents in Providence.

It's just to show you that that vision can be

also you study.

Taking all the tools we have seen so far.

So that's why there is this.

Okay.

So we are going to do an election and economic

policies and we are going to build our work on

person interviewing you.

Look, if you would have asked me.

Who do they think should get the Nobel Prize in

economics for their contribution to political economy?

I personally would love that person, and I think they

would be quite pissed off because I'm not going to

give them no, they're not going to give to numbers

in political economy, especially for works that have happened at

the same time.

So now not me getting the Nobel, but, you know,

if you had to attribute the model, the Nobel, the

Nobel to one of the team, it will have been

this team will get it and not the other two.

But you know one nobody.

So they are going to study.

As I said, the economic policies, but really economic policies

in the sense of splitting between public goods and transfers,

which are another club good size of government, the amount

of taxation and corruption.

Now what is the main difficulty as we change electoral

rules?

Why is it going to be hard for us to

do that?

What's going to be the difficulty?

And it's actually a problem that you see when you

do a lot this year.

Because this is apparent that Trump has gone both the

Electoral college, it seems that they also want the A

majority of all right.

But in previous in 2016.

So previously the elected president that won the Electoral college

without winning the majority of votes.

Right.

And people said this is a problem and we need

to change the systems so that basically the person will

get the most vote.

But to always be a Democrat gets to be elected

rather than through this strange word of like, why is

this argument a stupid argument?

I mean, I'm not saying that they are right in

terms of, but in terms of the way it is

presented.

Why is it an incomplete maybe rather than stupid?

What would happen if you were to change the electoral

vote in the US from the Electoral College to really

plurality at large?

So the candidates would respond to that.

So would be different.

Exactly.

We cannot take the actual results that you see at

the Electoral College and apply it to start to say

the electoral outcome would have changed, because it could be

that people living in member states will have mobilised way

more often than not.

And indeed, in the end, the Republican candidate would have

also won the plurality of the vote.

So the problem is, each time you change rules, each

time you change the division, what is happening is that

you change behaviours, right?

This is a very important concept.

This is called the concept of strategic adaptation.

Now you might think, you know this is obvious, but

when you talk to policy makers, they are very, very

poorly equipped to think about the problem of strategic adaptation.

Right?

They don't think that if you put a policy into

place, people are going to adjust, and sometimes the adjustment

will undo the effect of the policy.

And next week, I want our time for you to

talk about it.

But there are some stories right of this formal strategic

adoption that undo the effects of a policy and make

things worse rather than better.

It's always the idea.

It's very famously economy destroying in the second best situation,

and you are moving toward the first best.

You can actually have worse outcomes for the people, right?

For the citizen, for the economic age.

So it's kind of like a common problem in economics.

Getting closer to the first base doesn't mean getting people

better.

All right.

So.

The setup is that we're going to have two parties

and be at the continuum of voters.

Of my three that are going to be they are

going to be divided into voters in three district one

this way.

And each district is going to have a mass one.

Right?

So For your district, one must one.

District two must.

One district three must.

In the district, what is possible is going to be

a function of the amount of targeted transfer that they

get.

So you can think of it as, for example, a

hospital being built in a district, school being built in

a district.

This type of like what we could call club girls,

right?

So if you live in the district, you can access

them.

If you live in the district.

It's much harder for you to do this right now.

Targeted policy, which are tax rates, which is common to

voters in all districts.

And global public use that, for example, the budget that

is spent on the budget has been on defence, the

budget that is spent on, you know, infrastructure overall and

spread equity equally across the streets.

So now what else is going to be the income

minus the tax, the diary transfer and the public with

Medicaid, which is the amount tax on the income and

transfer that a millionaire public goods is going to be

strictly concave.

As a reminder, you have all the parameters of the

game of mood, right?

So the parties are going to propose some platform which

are going to be composed of six elements, right.

Six element the tax rate.

They are the giving up of public goods, the amount

of targeted iteration, the amount they keep for themselves, the

corruption into the system.

The platform has identified the following budget constraint, which is

the amount that you deduct is the important amount that

you spend.

And that is the probability of winning that amount of

wealth regardless of ego.

Right.

So what we want to think about.

What.

Is going to be.

How much public good is going to be offered?

How much rent is going to be taken?

How much even before taxation?

How much is required?

This week, two district three are going to get in

terms of private transfer.

And we want to think about this.

In two words plurality.

And proportional system.

So what we're going to do is we're going to

think about two maximisation problem with six and the general

variables and their two electoral systems.

That's our goal.

So when you come out of this lecture you can

say you know the macro people have done it with

six.

How many indigenous variable you have?

Three.

What are we in political economy?

We do it with six.

Endogenous five.

Right.

All right, so all these can be involved.

So a voter I mean this is a vote for

party A if and only if a the following is

true.

This is the utility they get from the party form

of a right.

So one minus tau proposed by a plus the targeted

transfer proposed by a plus H of the public proposed

by A is greater than what B is proposing, plus

two violent shocks.

One in shock is going to be common to our

voters in the middle of the Delta, and is going

to have the same uniform distribution as the one we

have done, like a few weeks back.

This is going to be uniformly distributed between one minus

one over two C.

To one over two c.

The heat was incredibly sharp on this shot, as we

call it, is going to be specific to each district

in two ways.

First, it will be minus one over two feet of

J plus sigma of J one of our water to

field J plus.

So there are two things going on.

The spread is going to be different for each district.

The fees are going to be different for existing.

The mean is also going to be different for it.

So you can think about the sigma as being the

bias in favour or against B that it is almost

on average, but they still favour part B.

So this is if you want the ideological leaning model

to call preference of the district in favour of trying

to talk about a model with office competition, but think

about it as a bias for some party for some

reasons.

Right?

He is going to be out there.

The news or Mojo news is this district.

So the greater is fee, the smaller is the range

of the uniform.

So sure the modulus is the pistol.

I remember.

There's this strange thing that because it's one over the

greater fee, the more money, the smaller I see, the

less fortunate.

So.

Why do we have we have q is equal to

tau g f g all and w of q is

equal to one minus tau plus.

J.

Plus this is the utility function.

And for.

voter I.

Votes for a.

From.

East and on the East.

WG QA.

So the wording gets from candidate A.

Is greater than what they need from me.

Plus two shots.

One shot is the test shot.

The other one is the common violent shock.

Like this.

And opposition.

They just are motivated to maximise probability of winning.

Time runs from office which is Delta Plus.

And for simplicity, we're going to assume that Delta is

more in the sense of Avoiding corner solutions.

All right.

So.

From this.

We can think about.

For every possible realisation of Delta.

We can think about what is the proportion of voters

who are going to vote for candidate A right?

From this, we can do it.

That is the proportion of voters that cast to the

ballot for candidate A is fully determined after the Delta.

And it's not random.

Why is it not random?

What is?

What do we are that are laws to fully determine

fixing delta?

What is the proportion of voters from district J casting

a ballot for candidate?

Why do we know about the size of each district?

And.

But what is it?

It's a mass of size one.

So what do we know when we have a mass

about the proportion of voters and cast a vote for

a.

If you have a mass of, what is it equal

to?

All right.

So you have two possible events that are the one

that the voter could vote for or they could not

be.

So the function of the test show.

That I'm fixing for the platform.

Right.

Here is the probability of voting for which are voting

for me.

And all of them are for this.

When you aggregate this mass of voters and all this

kind of like mass of voter, what is the proportion

that vote for a, what is it equal to?

Using the central limit theorem.

Nobody knows.

So while this is a beautiful property of working with

Masters, is that if you have a mass of voters,

of citizens or whatever the proportion of voters in your

case, the voter ID is equal to the probability that

one voters vote for it.

Right.

And that's kind of like the century theorem.

So because we have a mass of voter.

And that the gang they can anticipate.

Right.

Because they know that there's a mass.

So they know that it's going to happen, right?

So the verger and District J have candidate A.

Stem.

Is going to be equal to this chair.

With the probability.

That.

One.

O'Clock.

Which of these variable should have a tilde in the

sense of being a random variable?

Or because one is random and the other one are

realised values or choices.

What is the random variable?

Not those two shot Vegas.

The two could be right, but it's not the two

shots that are random variable.

They will be the Bible, but a different point of

the problems.

In this case, it's one of the two shots that

is a random variable.

Which one of the two?

Because.

Look at what I wrote.

So this is for every variation of delta.

I can treat the vulture.

So it's filtering delta so that the one that is

missing is the sigma I elimination right.

But what's good.

Right.

The way to proceed is to think about okay, it

has to be one of the two random shock.

Right.

That does the correct way.

But which one of the two where?

If we think about fixing the delta, this will be

my version.

Yes.

The random variable here is this one.

I know the word is probability that.

Now using the formula for the uniform.

Right.

The formula of the uniform that I remind you will

not be given to you in any examples.

It's not like the normal, the conjugate prior, the normal

that I will give to you the uniform.

You need to remember it.

And it's equal to.

In this case these terms are WJ here minus two.

Mine is Delta.

Mine is the lower bound.

Divided by the upper bound.

Mine is the lower bound.

Of the distribution.

And you need to know the formula.

One of the few.

You know things that like this.

Bayes rules cannot escape it.

If we do, the rearrangement is going to be one

half plus.

And so what do we have?

We have that.

What is the value of policy?

The value of putting into the district the ideas in

time of electoral return in terms of culture.

So this is the policy, right?

Yeah.

Think about a what is a morning departure to district.

J.

I don't want to do that.

So this is multiple.

Which means to say that when the district is.

Found, the more likely will get affected by the the

patient.

More.

Than less susceptible.

Remember because it's always.

The trick is it is always below right.

So the next is activity right.

So the more modulus is the district the more kind

of like the taste is similar the more it's worth

to counter to them.

Because the electron return on putting voltage that they like

is higher.

And it's something we have seen already.

This electron return based on like the value of the

product was seen.

Okay.

But the ideas are really the same in terms of.

All right.

So we have the vote share in each district.

Now we need to think about the electoral vote.

And the electoral rule is going to change the conditions

under which one of the candidates is going to have

the order.

Right.

So if we have the priority, one candidate needs to

win is a majority of districts, but the candidate doesn't

need to win the majority of the vote.

You just need to be in the majority of districts.

And then technically speaking, in a plurality system, one party

could win the election with 25% of the votes.

They just need to win 50% of the vote in

50% of the district to win the election.

Right.

So this is kind of like as little as you

need to win an election in a protected system.

Under proportionality, white moderates need a majority of the votes,

right?

Not a majority of these, but a majority of the

votes.

So that might change the way you think about the

problem.

Right.

But and of course, as we said, that's not all.

And that's very important, which is if you change the

electoral law, you're going to change the candidate in front

of you.

There's going to be an effect on the platform as

well.

And it's exactly what we want to think about.

We don't want to think about what does it mean

to have a reality?

What does it mean for proportionality?

We want to think about what does it mean for

policy outcomes to a plurality versus proportionality.

So what is going to be the timing.

The timing is going to be both parties propose a

platform simultaneously but also the platform, the violence and death

shock, and then the vote.

The winner is decided as a function of the electoral

rule platform.

Implemented and realised.

Pretty clear.

Now let me put to a set of important assumptions

that I really want you to keep in mind right

now.

At this point, that's kind of natural.

I always think that more is better, but play better.

And, you know, as as you have, more importantly, we

are going to assume that district two is the most

marginal and district two is the most marginal competitive district

one.

And we are also going to assume that district one

is very biased in favour of candidate A.

District two is unbiased.

This is very biased in favour of candidate B, and

then we will have this assumption every day just to

make our life easier later.

So this is less important.

This thing I will just tell you when it matters

and remind you that it was a function.

But this one is less important.

But it's really important is this picture is a swing

district.

This is basically Pennsylvania.

Right.

But it's also very important.

So it's not really Pennsylvania, but it's more like North

Dakota.

But at the same time it's the only farm mostly

potatoes.

I'm going to move my visa to the US if

this recording is okay.

Okay.

So remember this.

Yes.

The first.

Assumption is.

So it was too good to be true that because

of the.

Um, the second district is bigger than the.

No no no no no.

Remember, that's the eighth year.

Then the first one.

Yes.

Then the marks for the Jewish one.

I just couldn't be bothered.

By that.

You don't really care about the ordering of this to

this.

You care for simplicity.

But that that is really important.

Yes.

Any other question?

Okay, so before we solve it.

Let's see.

Are you if you were a candidate.

We'll do it right.

So suppose you have a budget of 100 and you

can allocate it for all the slight differences, right?

The district one district disagreed.

And personal rights.

So this is kind of like you can do this

now on mine.

I cannot force you to only use one unless you

have to make some calculation.

If you had 102, I don't bother that much.

Right?

That's okay.

But I try to be as close as possible to

a budget of 100 to allocate it.

Right.

So.

I mean, it doesn't need to be 100 again if

you are 100.5 or 1 to 1.

Don't stop bothering too much.

It doesn't matter.

Right?

So think about other priority voting where you need just

to win a majority of the district, and the assumption

that we are on the district structure.

How will you allocate the budget?

Basically the percentage of the budget.

Can you access it?

Yeah.

I see nobody voted this.

You can see your candidate A by the way.

Right.

So in case it doesn't really matter, but it's you

know.

I mean, this looks like to do a market like

these don't do the maximisation problem.

Just like we want to spend the rest of the

lecture on, uh, on this.

It's just a straight concept rather than, than really like,

you know, there's it's not a test to think about

when you think about it.

There's some collusion between candidates that are colluding like, uh.

Corruption is next week indeed.

Right.

It's like, uh, not yet, not yet.

Okay.

So let's go and see the next one under proportional

voting.

Right.

Come on.

For the last few people are looking at it.

Come back.

Okay.

So.

Why did you choose here?

Okay.

So we see a lot to be to this point

and see how the good and how much people here

are like a large broad to this picture and think

about on average.

Now what happened when we look at proportionality.

Who is missing here.

Chop, chop.

Was not like a bit there.

There is a bit of a delay between you and

Manti here.

But.

So indeed.

What is happening?

Okay.

Much more publicly.

Right.

One thing though, much like let's try to get to

district two.

One thing also that you put less on personal rights.

You put a lot on public goods and stuff.

So in previous years I was doing it, but I

didn't put the personal brands and it was a bit

too easy for the student.

And indeed, most students very well understand that when you

work on a proportional voting, you should put more in

public good than that.

To what?

District one?

It may be harder to think about what should you

do with your personal life, right?

So this is this is what we are going to

do.

And indeed, you were right.

You are right on this.

And this is something that is going to come up

of the model that public good are going to be

boosted by proportional voting relative to transfers and data transfers.

But we will see codes over what happens to the

personal rents.

Okay.

So.

The one thing.

One thing to realise from the start is which district

which you have done.

All right.

Very well.

Which districts should be targeting the most with targeted kids.

The wings, the swing one.

Right.

The district two.

We are going to assume to make a life It's

likely easier that the bias is such that candidate A

is certain to keep this one and candidate three 756.

So this is going to basically help us right.

So and we're going to start.

Of course with voting.

We're going to assume that district.

One.

Is safe for a.

And district three is safe for bid.

So one is a win and wins the election.

In which condition?

When is a winning the election in this case?

Under plurality voting.

It's more than 50% of the second district voting for

a right to win the election.

If it's vote share in the second district is greater

than one half.

Now, be careful of using the annotations.

If you go to the book, you will be able

to mark what we do to to our data every

time you see the in the subscription, right?

It's not a square, it's district.

There is no square in the model, right?

Which is to say that.

Not.

This has to be true.

Right now we know that sigma bar of two.

Is equal to zero.

Thus likewise a swing district.

This term and this term cancel out.

And therefore I can also cancel this term because this

is going to be zero.

So and I'm left with.

This.

Now what is the problem.

This is the competition for eight wins.

District two and number two wins the election.

But what is the problem for candidate A?

What is it that a dozen.

When they choose the platform.

That is a no I cannot anticipate.

In this obviously heinous way.

This is the choice that he makes.

I mean, you know, some politician you might believe they

don't know what they put in manifesto, but I'm not

sure what I meant.

If you be a doesn't love you because it's a

simultaneous choice.

But what is able to do?

Anticipate.

Right.

What is the problem for A is that in this

sort of model, this from the perspective of A what

is it?

What age is the data?

So when the voters cast their ballot they know that.

And this has been realised.

But when they decide their platform they don't know data.

They have to treat delta as.

A random variable.

So this is the probabilistic voting model part right.

Of the of the model.

Yeah.

Um, is.

The delta realised for the voters after the platform has

been?

Yes yes, yes.

It doesn't matter where the three lies after the platform

has been announced.

It's not smarter that it's realised that the only, they

do not know it at the time, that they make

the platform.

Right.

That's that, that the candidate and the voter knows at

the time of the election.

That's the thing that matters.

So the probability that a win is equal to the

probability that.

This is true with delta being a random variable from

the perspective of.

Using the uniform.

Is going to be this.

So now we can think about A's maximisation problem.

He's going to choose that have good transfer.

Wealth to maximise.

The probability of winning times the rent from office.

Subject to meeting.

The budget constraints.

Probability of winning.

Payoff if he wins and he has to meet the

budget constraint.

Does the maximisation problem we need to address.

And we are going to do this after five minutes

break.

It is a problem.

That's very nasty.

So what we want to do is to reduce this

problem to make it more manageable.

So the first thing to note is that there are

two choice variable for which we can immediately find the

value.

What are these two choice variables?

So let's think about the objective of the politicians.

So that's the objective function.

What does it depend on.

It depends on tax rate.

It depends on F2.

It depends on g is dependent or.

So what is it.

This does not depend on.

What are two variables that do not affect the objective

of the objective function of the policymaker.

Like.

What is not affected by it.

I have seven possible variable, but only five and six

possible variable, but only four of them are present in

the objective function, which are the two that are not

present in the objective function.

Um, this is for you.

Are the district.

Defining for the upper district the spelling for the other?

This way do not matter in the function of the

policymaker.

However, they are costly.

So what is obviously the optimal amount of spending on

the other districts?

Is zero, right?

It's obviously zero.

You will waste resources on other districts that do not

help you maximise your objective function.

You will never waste money on this, right?

So And one, two, three.

Okay, so that's good because we have already removed two

and now we are left with four.

Another thing to realise that is largely subject right.

Is that.

Right.

So now we can change this to.

This is just.

After.

So while we have in terms of budget is it

all is equal to G plus 92 plus R right.

Now think about this picture.

And let's suppose just for a second right.

That you talks are let's say 70%.

And you put everything on targeted on 80.

Right.

You tax at 70%.

So for one second the third is equal to 0.7.

And F2 receive all the money.

So get 2.13 times 0.7.

And then g is equal to zero and r is

equal to zero.

And I suppose we have this.

Just for a second.

Like.

Just suppose this.

Now, what could you do if you were to be

a politician?

Where are you?

Can actually.

Keep the same utility for district two while making yourself

better as a politician.

How could you do this?

So in this case, if you think about it, what

W2K is equal to 2.4.

What is like zero three coming from the tax plus

2.1 coming from the transverse?

I claim you can give 2.4 to these two While

making yourself better.

How can you do this so you can maintain the

same utility for district two, but make yourself better?

How could you do that?

And keeping going to zero.

No one has any idea you can do it.

So let's think about the following.

All the possibilities.

You tax at 100%, right?

How much do you give to district two to keep

the utility at 2.4.

In this case, I'm a transfer to be able to

give to.

District two to keep the utility.

To 0 to 2.4.

While you have to give in term of transfer to

point four.

Right.

So before you are you are going to be coming

from income 2.1 coming from transfer.

No, you have zero coming from income.

But I'm giving you 2.4 from the same thing for

district.

However what can you do.

You can keep 0.6 inmates and then you can see

that the utility.

For district two is still 2.4 in this case.

Right.

It's very clear that I maintain the same utility by

doing this, but I'm keeping some for me, so I'm

better basically.

And you can think about this for every combination of

targeted public good or targeted transfers.

And general public good.

If you have an attachment that is below one, then

you can always.

We give the same utility to district by taxing at

100% and boosting your rates.

So if you do not add a transfer of 100%,

give me a utility for this picture.

I can boost the tax rate to 100%.

Give the same utility to district two and give some

rates for me.

So what does it tell us?

It tells us that the dominant strategy in terms of

taxation is always two times at which level?

100%.

Because I can always give the San Vicente to my

district.

I need a little bit more for myself.

Right.

So the optimal level of taxation.

A can or I mean, if there is less than

one a can always maintain.

Tax are two 100% keep district to.

Voters policy payoff.

Constant.

And get morals which mean basically to equal one is

a dominant strategy.

So we get that toy called one is a dominant

strategy.

And so that's good because no we are reduced to

the problem to suivi.

Right.

We know that the maximisation problem.

Is going to be choosing attitude.

Choosing g choosing are such that.

Now we know there are two ways we could go.

One is it could be to set up the Lagrangian.

But as you know, I don't like Lagrangian.

I think Lagrange are a way to make mistakes.

I think there is only one case where we will

do Lagrange and that's in week 21.

So at the end of the year 22.

Right.

So really only at the last, last time we would

do a Lagrangian where what we're going to do is

that we're going to do substitution, and we're going to

do substitute F2 by three minus G minus.

All right.

So we're going to say that.

So what we're going to get is maximisation of GMR

of.

So that's going to be the maximisation problem.

Now we will not look at the ACL and all

this type of thing.

We're going to assume that everything is behave well.

And we are going to focus on the first order

condition.

And I'm going to check the second order condition.

Right now.

What I want to illustrate here is the difference between

the effect of R and the effect of G.

Right.

So let's think about the effect of our beginning.

R is going to appear twice in the both are

in groups twice.

But let's think about how R is applying twice right.

R is applying twice here and here.

Right.

So what sort of trade off is going to happen

with all.

So in the end what is that all doing?

What about as I increase our relative to these part

of the objective function.

So what is the path of the objective function.

From.

Which if you win.

So this is the part that increase the utility of

the politician influence.

So this is the policy of increases.

If you want on the run be off.

On the other hand not always doing what.

You do.

So that is kind of how by keeping out for

myself, I decreases my chance of winning.

Right.

So what type of trade-off do we have with R,

which is a trade off?

I've already seen it.

What did you see versus.

Sorry.

Gospel truth.

You said.

Yes.

It's policy versus electronic policy.

Policy again versus electronics.

When you increase or you increase your payout conditional on

winning.

You decrease your probability of winning.

It's a usual trade off that we recover with the

right for the politician.

What about G?

G appears here and here.

So what is G doing?

That JPA is in the policy path, so it's only

going to be in the probability of winning that group.

So what is the trade off when it comes to

G.

It's basically to maximise your probability of winning should you

are located towards private goods private transportation to get it

towards public good.

It's just the budget allocation problem.

It's a simple budget allocation problem right.

So our generate our usual trade off G on the

other hand.

What's the best way to win.

Is it to put money on public good or is

it to put money on targeted transfers?

So if we do the first order conditions with respect

to G.

It's very simple because it's only appearing here.

Right.

So what we have is minus one plus a g

prime Is equal to zero.

All the rice is dropping and all the replying is

it's dropping.

And so it's basically.

Somebody dies on the table.

I mean I've never noticed the numbers would change.

They're all doing it's just like incredible from this angle.

It's very disturbing.

Okay.

So this is kind of like the first condition for

gee, what about the first condition for a sorry for

all.

So what we're going to get is we're going to

get is.

The loss that comes electorally.

Right.

So I'm losing that amount of chance of winning.

And so now I'm less likely to get my health

orders are.

And that is.

The first thing.

Uh, I'm in trouble.

So I.

And that's my air conditioner, bill.

Power conditioner and winning.

And so always I'll trade off.

How much I lose electorally versus how much I gain

in a policy conditional on the usual trade off that

we have.

Now, we could.

Rewrite it out.

Because this whole thing here is what the policy payout

that district you will get from candidate this.

This is what you will get from this.

This is what you will get from.

carefully.

Now, the problem is here is that we are not

done.

Do you have a question?

This is what you are giving to district two.

And this is what B is giving to this picture.

Now the problem that we have is that this equation.

Depends not only on what are you doing, but also

on what B is doing.

So technically speaking we should also solve for B.

However, we can use properties that we have learned before

the reading week.

And in particular one important properties we have learned before

the week is the conditions to get divergence.

What were the conditions to get divergence between candidates?

In an electoral model?

What did we need?

We needed to have probabilistic voting, right?

That was necessary.

We saw that absent some sort of smoothing, we were

not able to generate divergence.

But what was the other necessary condition that we had

to generate?

Divergence between candidates.

What was what should candidates care about?

They should care about policy.

They should have ideological preferences.

Do all candidates care about policy?

Do they care about the G that have to diverge

on this?

No.

They have the same policy preferences.

And if they have the same policy preferences, what is

the unique possible outcome of the electoral competition.

They propose the same thing, right?

And if they propose the same thing, what are the

difference between these two?

Thing is zero.

Right.

So.

From the electoral model.

We know that office motivated or maybe a more correct

statement would be non ideologically motivated candidate.

And let's call them office motivated here to B.

Which is that w qa is equal to w cube.

And that means that the rents the function for the

rents become.

Equivalently.

I put delta small so I don't have to deal

with corners.

That's why I said to you at the beginning Delta

is going to be small.

That's that's for this, right.

So what do we have?

Right.

I'll come back to this one second.

Why do we have we get that in probability.

This is equal to one.

This is the formula that defined the love of public

goods.

Age prime is equal to one.

This is the case f one is equal to zero.

F2 pv is what is left.

And f3 pv is equal to zero.

One down, one to go.

Okay.

So let's go to proportional.

Under proportional voting.

Remember that you win if you get a majority of

the vote and you get a majority of the vote.

That is the sum of the votes for a.

Across the district.

Hours could be greater than three hours.

Or if you are the average watcher, has to be

greater than one.

So that's the same idea.

So we know that.

I mean, we know I know for teaching this lecture

for nine years that the watcher for a is one

half plus PJ.

Of one minus tau plus SJ plus SJ minus what

the other guy is proposing.

Minus delta minus Sigma Bauchi.

And that's the voucher as a fox for the realisation

of that right at this point we think that delta

is real.

So we can do this sum.

And so it's going to be.

3103 Alpha.

This is cancelling out.

Somebody remove them.

So it's going to be.

Phi one.

Remember that delta two is equal to zero.

So just plugging it in and getting rid of the

one.

And that will be three times three as we are.

So it will be.

Putting things in common.

One minus two plus HG is present in every district,

so put them together.

Plus.

The transfer for energy.

Try to see.

What the other guy is doing.

The shock symbol about one kind of key one.

Symbol of freedom.

Three, three.

And this has to be greater.

That.

V one plus v two plus v three minus four.

That I put on the other side.

Now if you remember a long, long time ago, it

seems an eternity for you.

I know in this lecture I told you there was

a third assumption that was being made when I discussed

the assumption about h, about sigma, about phi.

And that assumption was that this thing will be equal

to zero, and that this is just to make this

term go away.

Right?

This is by assumption equal to zero.

It doesn't matter.

But.

This is an assumption that has been made to simplify

the problem.

So this is zero by assumption.

So what do we have.

We have that a which is if and only if

delta is less than.

E.g. here.

This?

One.

Then I realised that the deterministic the prime again for

candidate A is that A doesn't know delta right?

So.

The probability that A wins is equal to the probability

that one or the other inequality.

All right.

This is an equality one I'm going to repeat here

using the usual formula we are able to determine what

this is and that give us.

The following.

Maximisation problem.

Which is maximising of a tour g all the f

the rent of.

Probability of winning.

Come in from this thing.

Which come.

From the same path, from winning subject to the budget

constraint.

And what is different, obviously, between the two problem is

the probability of winning, because the probability of winning is

affected by the electron.

I forgot one term.

Which is.

One thing to note is that the model already gave

us authorisation and probably good affect only, so they do

not depend on the feed.

On the other hand, to get it transferred to one

district.

Is key because it's just for one delivery.

It's going to depend on the key of the district.

As we see in the model, the difference between what

is common to a district, what is specific to some

districts.

And then this is the other game.

All right.

So.

Remember we had this reasoning with us.

And we said, if you talk at less than 100%,

you can leave the same utilities to the district two.

While increasing your personal rates by moving to a higher

taxation level.

Is this reasoning specific to plurality voting?

Or can it also apply?

To the case of proportional voting to these particular.

And so what was the idea is that if you

thought that less than 1% with certain policies.

You can increase the tax side to 100, give the

same utility to the district, and give more runs for

yourself.

So not changing your chance of being elected, but increasing

your payoff conditional on being in office.

Does this is this logic sound unique to plurality voting?

No.

It's kind of like it's a general idea that, like

whatever you do with your tax rate in terms of

what you give to the district, you can do it

with 100% taxation keeping for yourself.

Right.

So basically what we have is same as people because

of the same reasoning as before.

That the tax rate is going to be equal to

one.

Now let me think about investing in targeted transfer.

And then think about I invest $1 in targeted transfer.

So.

So a dollar because now I'm not going to take

$10.

I'm not going to take ponds because this is too

complicated to do the thinking.

And, you know, as a European, we're going to take

you.

There is no money in Europe, but it doesn't matter.

We're going to take euros.

So one euros, right.

That is going to be put in the transfer.

You put it in targeted transfer.

Right.

Now the cost is the same for the three of

them.

Right.

There's no difference between the cost.

Right.

Whether you put it in this one 2 or 3

it has the same cost.

Right.

So if it's the district one.

What is the electoral benefit of this targeted transfer?

How much will I get in terms of additional chance

of winning?

If I put this euro in, this required.

How much more chance of winning will I get?

So it's coming from this part of the utility function,

right.

The objective function psi.

So how much am I going to get by putting

one more euro in one?

So I got to get outside.

I come from this one here is going to be

equal to one divided by two.

One plus two plus three.

So I'm going to get three divided by three one

divided.

By two plus three.

Right.

This is what I get in electoral benefit.

If I put this zero to district one to nothing.

If I give it to district two, what is happening?

What is the electronic benefit then?

Change the numerator.

So it would be the same thing here.

But noise v2 rather than v one.

Right is a very clear.

The witch of the sea gave me the greatest electoral

two, because we know that feature is larger than three

one and three three.

And that's why you don't need to know which one

of you one and three, you just need to order

it.

So and because it's also linear, that is not completely

every euro in the transfer is going to go to.

Will you ever give to one and say no exact

words?

I've given him to do so every year.

In practical terms, are you going to do what is

the amount of agreed transfer to one and three is

zero.

Right.

So the earliest benefit.

Which means that f one is equal to f three

is equal to zero.

And now we are back in business because we are

very limited against three of our choice variables the same

as before.

The tax rate and eliminated and the transfer to one

and three eliminated.

So what do we have?

We have.

The.

Same thing as before.

Same thing as before.

We're going to do substitutions.

Assume that f is equal to three minus g minus

is all and this is going to give me marks

of a.

I forgot to put the V one plus v2 plus

v3.

Sorry.

I knew we covered the same trade off.

You should have never been here.

Sorry about this.

The same trade off for all between increasing my policy

payoff by decreasing my chance of winning and the same

trade off for you, which is where do I put

my G to maximise my chance of being elected?

The first order condition.

Are going to give us that G is H prime

of g is equal to c two divided by three

one plus c two plus p3.

For R is going to be.

Minus c.

Electron costs.

How much I lose by putting more hands on myself?

Plus my policy benefit, which is how much I gain

time.

My chance of winning.

Now, what do I know about the chance of winning?

What do I know?

What do we know about the policy payoff that voters

get from candidate one?

Candidate A versus when they get competitively?

Into the platform between the two candidates.

Different.

No doubt there is convergence.

So this and this are going to be equal.

And the chance of winning of a candidate in equilibrium

is always.

One.

The convergence mean that is always one.

And so we are going to get that.

How is equal to.

With this?

We can start doing our comparison.

So the proportional voting.

We know the tax rate is equal to one.

We know that the public gets is equal to.

We know that the rent are equal to.

Transfer to district one I equal to zero.

Transfer to district two are the remnants.

Transferred to district three are equal to zero.

And now we can make a comparison.

So obviously in term of taxes.

This and this is equal.

This and this is equal.

And this and this is equal.

This is obvious.

What about.

Complicated.

Where is it bigger.

It's bigger in the proportional.

It's correct.

Why is that so?

Okay, so.

Here you have one.

What is the value of this?

Is it bigger or smaller than one?

Smaller than one.

Right.

However, what do we know about H.

We know that the h function has reached property.

And it is also.

It's also concave, which means that the derivative h1 is

of is decreasing or increasing.

If you have a concave function, your derivative is.

Decreasing.

Right.

So it takes longer to get a point here.

So think about it this way.

This is your H function.

This is g.

And we have these two points that we care about.

We are.

How am I doing here?

Sorry.

It's here.

Everyone's apologies.

It's like.

That's why I was getting confused.

This is the one that we have under plurality voting.

And this is the one that we have under proportion

of voting and our age function.

Have I showed me the beautiful one that is all

colours.

Quite beautiful.

That's our age function.

Right.

So what do we have?

We have that the level of public good and the

proportional.

Right.

Everything is here.

The level of public good and the proportional voting is

here.

So indeed it is higher and proportional voting.

What about France?

Where is it bigger.

It's bigger in Germany, right.

Because we have the one over to see we have

the minus delta, but we have this term which is

strictly greater than one.

So runs contrary to the way you played.

Let me remind you again, the way you play it,

like here versus here.

Here we say contrary to the way you play, rents

are bigger in proportional voting, and if friends and public

goods are bigger, we get that targeted transfer are bigger

on the variety, right, because it's three minus two numbers.

So they have to be bigger.

This this is bigger.

This is bigger.

So this has to be true.

So why are rents bigger under proportional voting.

And this is the last words.

So let's think about it right in plurality.

The problem is that when you take rights away from

targeted transfers, these costs you vote in the only district

that matters.

So there is a 1 to 1 mapping if you

want.

But we know that in our friends and.

Lecture 9:

We're.

Almost there.

No you're not.

Brother, we are almost halfway there because we see each

other again.

Next up.

So today we will again move away from the U.S.

and try to think about.

A different type of problem in political economy, which is

the problem of corruption.

Right.

Like this is like probably one of the first real

themes that we study because we really move away from

any notion of democratic electoral incentive here when we do

this.

So this is part of a dynamism of lectures that

should actually be free.

So Unfortunately, there is no time for doing history lectures

on these things.

So corruption.

State capacity.

State capacity two will be ideal.

But we are going to do a show, a way

of doing it, which is corruption and state capacity.

So what is corruption, right.

Of course corruption is illegal, right?

But I think that one way to think about it

is in which way it is illegal.

Right.

And it's illegal in the way of getting some people

and your advantage because they always have their own.

Right.

So this is kind of like the idea of all

definition.

We can take this in a very narrow sense of

personal gain We can take this in a broader sense

of also thinking about participating right now.

There are different ways that corruption can manifest itself, right?

One of them is bribes.

You just kind of like give a bit of money

to to do this.

There's a beautiful paper that just came out in the

are by around sanctions that are still on call.

But I just came up this just came up in

the last issue that was published last week that investigated

with the help of an experiment, the world system of

corruption in Congo.

When it comes to short stories, it's a beautiful paper

with a very complicated experiment that, you know, you may

want to look into over the break, you know, to

just not forget too much about political economy Another way,

right?

Basically, when you guys, you think phones and you move

them from the public account to the personal account of

your family, your friends, your party or whatever.

So this is, for example, of a huge scandal that

happened in Asia where there was like something like 1

billion taken away from a public investment company to kind

of like for the office holders in Malaysia.

Huge, huge issues like the one MDB scandal is a

huge embezzlement scandal.

Another one is, uh, illegal party financing.

And, you know, if you look at the news in

the UK over the weekend, they were saying that 10%

of party bonds seems to be coming from.

Don't use origin.

This is a very common way.

So here you are.

You know, it's a bit of like a slight slanders,

but, you know, in the lecture we say it's going

to go away.

It's like cannot be here.

Nicolas Sarkozy, former French president, former Libyan dictator.

And they are kind of like actually there's a trial

going on.

I think there was a trial and there was kind

of like some money going from that person to that

person and that person to thank gadhafi for all the

money designed to support the bombing of Libya and removing

gadhafi from power.

It's actually not the first time, apparently, that Sarkozy was

involved in illegal party financing, you know, but.

This is you know, some people say power corrupts.

I'd I said cover up, go to punk.

So if we look at the relationship between corruption and

development, this is what we see.

We see kind of like a positive correlation where the

country that happened to be less corrupt.

So the Corruption Perception index, that's a terrible way to

put it because it would end up being least corrupt.

Don't ask me why.

So they should have put the honesty position in this

interview because but then this is corruption.

And we can see that the list countries are also

the most developed.

Right.

So Britain is here, the US is here, France is

here.

And you know, at the bottom is where you get

the article from, which is Congo.

And this is the bottom of this.

I mean, there are some exceptions, but most of the

time you see a very positive correlation.

And here you have the same correlation, but not in

different ways.

Why does it matter the way we present this graph?

Why is it one that it's important to think about

present information always?

One way is that in the first graph corruption was

on the x axis or anything else in the variable.

The other one is uh.

Yeah.

So the idea would be it's corruption that occurs under

the moment.

And in this way it's sort of reverse.

Right.

It's like there are moments that can cause lower corruption.

Remember the auction indexes.

I mean, less corruption.

Anybody understand this sort of brilliant idea?

The killer bug has got to understand.

Now.

Why do we think about corruption?

So one way to think about corruption is actually a

form of excuse if you want for corruption is this

idea that it provides grease in the weeds.

So there are two ways you can think about using,

um, public services, right?

One way, which is the one that has been adopted

in most cases by Western democracies, is a node based

system where everybody chip in into the service.

No matter how much you use it.

So the best example of this is the NHS, which

is free to users because it's paid by taxation.

Another one is the user fee system.

And user fee system is mostly used to pay for

the service because if they have a pure supply, for

example, transport for London is a mix of both.

You pay the tubes, but the price of the tube

is subsidised by all other types of taxation.

The concept of public service not being paid by the

user.

It's actually quite new.

All the system that was before was actually a user

fee system.

So users the user pays.

Now in developing countries I'm going to use the word

developing countries for lack of a developing democracies, for lack

of a better term, that has been accepted upon in

the literature in the global South.

But, you know, I find this also slightly strange.

So developing countries, they don't have the capacity of digitisation.

They tend to have very low fiscal systems, something we

will briefly touch upon next week.

And so they need to realise.

And user fees and corruption is a form of user

fees by which the civil servants get to be paid

by the users.

So this is kind of like a way to do

it, is to think about this is actually paying for

the services through a form of user fee.

And that's the notion of grace in the weeds.

However, this is not what the research has in the

literature generally saying that it is more science in the

machine type of thing.

And it's that rather than being just about paying the,

uh.

The civil service is really about creating a lot of

inefficiencies.

How much inefficiency in general, by 10 to 15%.

And our roads and both this paper, I think, gives

like a very high number, something like 40 to 45%

higher prices.

Right.

So there is a lot of inefficiency coming is another

the problem is that it can also decrease the competence

of the bureaucracy, in the sense that you get people

who hire bureaucrats.

We tend to be less competent to sustain a system

of corruption and a system of power, and especially a

system of corruption towards partisan gains, that it is crazy,

again, as a as a case in point.

And the other type of inefficiency that we can have,

is it a distortion?

away from what is the Baltimore.

Right.

So it's a distortion on for example, more constructions.

You see more and more and more construction that are

useless.

So you will see cities that have tons of roundabout

like roundabout is great.

This is easy to build and you can really do

a lot of them, you know, paying your friends in

these different ways.

It can be also.

Um, uh, we have a natural resources at Essex and

visiting the department also show that usually the people who

are friends of the mayor will get the contract produce

kind of like services that are over expensive and take

longer to be provided.

So this is kind of like all these little things

that accumulate.

And here you have an example of distortion coming from

the Mafia Italian mafia using some properties of Italian words.

So I leave it to you.

So there's all these kind of like, you know, ten,

15% additional costs, you know, in terms of GDP.

This can start to build.

So.

The question then is why is it actually you know,

we have a definition, but we are social scientists.

We are not biologists that just classify things.

Right.

You have colleagues enough to classify all the varieties of

capitalism, to the point that there is as many varieties

of capitalism, that there are countries in the world.

But, you know, this is like taxonomy that are very

precise, like for butterflies.

But in general, I would try to understand what enters

into kind of like the measure of corruption that we

have.

And so for example, the corruption index of Opposition research

by Transparency International.

Think about two US experts and when they are experts,

ask question about institution is having an independent judiciary.

But there are questions that are more about experience, for

example, the general abuse of public resources.

The problem is when you start to ask questions that

are more about actual behaviour, not a parameter of the

game, you enter into a form of equilibrium, right?

And the difficulty with this is that my father mental

belief about corruption, which you did not ask to accept,

is that everybody is corrupt.

It's not a question about whether someone cannot be bought.

It's always a question about By almost.

Someone would be blocked.

Okay, so for example, for your evaluation of four, five,

three.

Um.

Definitely correctable.

All right.

So that's like I mean, any progress on this?

No, they will not.

Huh.

Because I'm not really honest of truth teller.

But anyone any professor at the NSC is corruptible.

I mean, really, do we really care about him so

much?

About the integrity of academic process so that we will

never accept.

But look at the amount of research fraud that there

is in academia.

You can see that.

It's like, really?

And you know this I'm not talking just about the

art that you can see or think about the stuff

on which reason to resign, which tells your friend that

you do not report, and all these different things.

Right.

Everybody is corrupt, right?

So why is it okay that there is a corruption

in the case of a place like LSC or actually

Mercer University?

The primary reason why there is no corruption is because

the price that professors would be willing to bribe and

professor would be willing to take to modify the grade

of an exam is much higher than the willingness to

pay of any student.

And so if you were to think about driving me

for your final exam, I can tell you you ought

to think probably seven, most likely eight figures under.

Right.

And that's not worth it for you to deduce it.

God like, you know, eight figures.

Number.

I can really retire if I'm caught and still doing

research.

Disgraceful.

But, you know, it's.

Yeah, we we can we can think about we can

start bothering around this room.

Right.

But we we never want to give a professor eight

figure numbers as tens of millions.

Right.

Just to be clear what we mean by an impulse

and not like in crappy currency or 1 million is

just $1, right?

Just to be clear, that we established the right way

for the bargaining.

Right.

But who would be ever willing to pay something in

the tens of millions for one grade in the Treasury?

That makes no sense.

There are cases of corruption in both the system and

indeed in the appendix.

There are cases of corruption in Romania in high school

level.

But here, here, there, the problem is much smaller.

It's in the tens of years.

Right.

So that's much more kind of like something that people

are willing to pay.

And therefore there is much more corruption in the city

and very little corruption in the case of like, you

know, top universities in the UK and in the US,

but it's not viable because the professors are fundamentally, intrinsically

incorruptible, because nobody is willing to pay the price that

is necessary for it.

The other question that's an.

Expert.

Expert surveys are.

Typically, uh, academics or few people who will receive an

email asking them to fill a survey.

And some of them are, you know, just like the

blanket email academy.

So I do receive some from this type of survey,

which I never answer, or some of them will select

a few expert and we and give them some money

to fill the survey.

But it's not like people on the street that I

ask about this, right?

But this is like people who live in the country

or study the country, and they usually take things from

an experience.

It's not very reliable as a service.

So that is the best we can do.

So it's not that I don't want to say we

should never accept a service, but we should always take

it for the service with a grain of salt.

Especially.

Abuse of public resources might mean different things in different

countries, but we will abstain from this.

So what we're going to think about, right, is a

model of serving a model that is more like, you

know, almost a decision theoretic problem of corruption.

And this model, we will also use it when we

see a beautiful paper at the beginning of the next

lecture.

So we are going to get two players.

It's going to be unofficial, and the minor and the

officials are going to decide between granting the contract to

the official firm.

If you want behaving honestly and attending the ball and

giving the contract.

That's what the problem is.

These officials are kind of like, you know, um, probably

value for bribe.

And so it is more or less corrupt.

But I sometimes I think my, my tongue will slip

and I say more or less honest.

But really what I mean is more or less about

the world.

And so what is the greater good in the society

is going to decide this side of the road and

anticipating the actions of the official.

So that's going to be for official, right?

For vision is going to have your choice.

He's going to accept.

The bribe.

Or as I said, about illegal behaviour.

Are you going to reject if you reject the right.

It will basically get this utility.

Which is.

How much you get from getting the most the contract

to the most efficient.

If you accept, the right is going to get some

utility from the bribe.

Some utility from the project being realised, but because the

project is not realised by the most efficient firm, there

is a cost.

And then, you know.

There is a risk of being punished.

Now what is important here is that almost every fibre

is indexed by C, because we are thinking about the

behaviour of an official in a given country.

So c reflect the country of your future.

So yeah what was it again?

What was that?

Anyway.

So bitter.

Delicious.

Very good beer is going to be.

The.

Inverse of the value of the bribe.

Official is going to be, as a result, incorruptible.

So what we're going to assume is.

B die is distributed.

According to f the function f of c, and in

particular we are saying that.

The probability.

Is the power function.

So the power function is kind of like an extension

of the normal distribution.

So the uniform distribution is right.

And it has kind of like the property that.

As the increase out of a C right.

You are making high beta, I more and more likely.

In the in the distribution.

I with the I more and more likely indeed the

expectation.

Of beta I is alpha c one plus alpha c.

So the higher alpha say the higher is the mean

with the.

Since when I is the inverse.

Of.

Know how much someone care about bribe.

That is.

Basically the higher is alpha C, the more honest are

the officials on average.

Are less corruptible.

So what is the problem for the official one?

The problem for official is faced.

He will accept the bill for accepting the bride is

greater than the pound from.

Which you said that I has to be less than.

So that would be basically the decision of an official

is I'm giving a bribe.

I will accept it.

If this is true, I will reject it.

This is basically the threshold for setting.

The bribe.

I'm not kind of like.

You know, baseline model.

They are not random.

They are also decision of.

The bribe.

Right.

So what is the prime of the bribe?

The bribe I would like to have.

The contract.

Right.

So even the artificial upset of the prime is going

to get the payoff minus the cost of the bride.

Minus days a week of being caught.

Yeah.

One thing.

If you need anything different, it's the same as the

bride.

Yes yes yes yes yes yes.

Because you could have a cheer for the bride of

a problem is not going to matter.

Because that's a continuous variable.

viable.

But assuming it's different.

If you don't like it, then everything is going to.

Is going to work.

Yeah.

If a so if.

Not.

No matter.

This is if the board is accepted.

If the price is right.

Why is it cannot be like I'm always assuming is

there's always a trap going on.

Whatever we can deal with it by putting price is

equal to zero.

So if the bribe is rejected, then you have no

chance of being caught.

I'm assuming that it can be something going on, and

just the option of trying to bribe someone could get

your car right.

Like you could go.

It's kind of like FBI things.

Or they pretend to be a politician and it's going

to be both.

In general, it's the other way around, right?

It's more like politicians and the people pretend to be

like some, uh, some officials from foreign countries willing to

buy them.

That's the type of things the media.

And how do you see you have more chance of

being caught if the bribe is accepted, that if the

bribe is rejected.

Right.

So.

This one could be easier.

So what is the bribery problem?

Why would they try to choose a bribe such that?

Probability be accepted rather.

A equals one given B and the pair of the

decade.

Plus probability.

The divide is rejected.

And then they get this.

Now here the bride doesn't necessarily know whether that the

will be accepted.

And the reason is he doesn't know or she doesn't

know the value of it.

Right.

So what is the probability that the bride is accepted?

Smaller.

Yes.

That is exactly.

Yes, exactly.

This comes from this condition, right.

The probability that one ordered.

Let me call this delta c see because it's going

to go faster as a result.

So it's equal to.

And.

So the maximisation problem is.

After slightly averaging is going to be this.

This is basically the difference.

Between getting your car accepted and your partner.

Like so much you gain from getting the right to

be accepted.

So yeah, this pie.

So the pie is the probability that your court judgement,

the fact that you try to bribe someone.

Could be zero.

If you don't like it, just put it to zero

in this thing.

Right.

If you're saying that someone can only be called if

they are actually given a bribe and the developers have

been accepted, then you would be equal to zero.

It's just to look for cases where it's not.

And then you want to know.

Home.

To.

Minimise the pain.

You try to put the Astros as quick as possible.

Yes, sir.

You try to zero as possible.

Okay.

So here we can take the first order condition by

simple communication.

This is just relative to be.

So we get.

If I go there.

Let me just say something.

Here we are again.

Actually, a constraint optimisation problem.

We have a general limitation because the drive has to

be greater than zero.

Now what is the best way to deal with a

constrained optimisation problem?

If it is time to do it with all constraints

and to see if it works well?

Exactly.

So the first is basically we do it in two

steps.

We first told that solve the unconstrained problem.

And then we basically check for the constraint.

Right.

So.

Now because I solved the constraint problem.

What can I put here?

Well, I'll give it to you.

Because I'm looking at the unconstrained problem.

What can I do?

Equal to zero.

It is.

If I were to do.

The constraint problem.

What should be.

Should.

Be resolved.

The first order condition would be weakly smaller than zero.

Right?

So that's why we become painful.

So that's why we prefer to do it in two

steps.

Of course alternatively you can go crazy and do a

Lagrangian correction.

That's like when you have a psychological issues if you

do that for this type of problem.

But you know it's good if it doesn't mean you're

really close to being in the country.

So what we're going to do is we're going to

get rid.

You see that here with alpha minus one if it

appears with Alpha A.

So we're going to get three of those four to

the power of minus one.

This is going to disappear.

And this is going to be to the power of

your heart.

You.

Know, because your mind is right here.

So this is going to be to the power to.

What exactly.

So this is kind of I.

Know we can also see that this term and this

term so we can remove it.

And then we can rearrange with respect to the b

and we define that It then constantly.

Is equal to.

This quantity.

Now let me show the mistake.

And now basically said do we introduce a concern.

But here we can do the only thing we can

do is to say.

That beast is equal to the marks of.

Physics.

That's what we can do because we don't know any

of the values here.

So of course, there's something like sorry, this is not

taken care of.

Otherwise, it makes no sense.

So what do we see here?

We see that.

Supposing this is positive.

Quite obviously the size of the blood is going to

increase.

Where is the value of the contract of the private

eye?

Now if you are not to find this will be

in trouble.

The other thing that we see is that, you know,

the higher the relativity, the relative punishment in the sense

of like how much cost it is for you to

have the private sector rather than not accepting.

So basically they say the lower the value of the

price.

So if I punish you, Emily, for example, you will

not drive too much if you basically.

It doesn't matter whether you try and fail or try

and succeed.

It's kind of the same chance of being caught.

These two are pretty close to each other.

Then that ranks up to many of them.

And that is kind of like, you know, something that

happens a lot, which is if for different types of

crimes, you end up receiving the same type of engagement.

People move to a higher level.

And here we are in whether the bride is accepted

or rejected, you get the same punishment, the same shares

of being punished.

Then you tend to put more right because who cares,

right?

And as you know, people who say, oh, we should

like cut the hand of those who still don't realise

that that meant that people who were stealing without murdering

people.

Right.

This is like just the logic of why you don't

want to have punishment for petty crime, and why the

fact that many petty crimes gets them punished.

Can actually be a positive for society, because that means

these people will remain being treated and not moved to

after more different type of crimes.

That this is like just this is a very simple

theory of crimes and we find it here.

This is proven to be true in the data.

The last thing that is probably most surprising is here,

right?

This, I said, is the average level of incorruptibility or

honesty in the country.

What happened was honesty increases as incorruptibility increases.

Right?

There's no demand.

Right.

Because it's a lie.

Right.

Indeed, as I was, the increases we receive being a

bribe.

Why is that sir?

Why is it the case that you need a bigger

bribe and ask us to increase what makes sense?

And what is more specific to the, um, power function?

And we used to think like, you know, I told

you already about this already when we were discussing the

example of professors, right.

In a world where there are a lot of people

who are kind of people tend to the other.

Right?

So there are very large data.

What do you need to do to get your right

to be accepted?

You need to put a higher bribe, right?

Basically, one of these effects is due to the fact

that even people tend to be quite hard to bribe,

right?

That are the reserve to get to be accepted.

This is just kind of hard.

But we are.

On the other end.

Another reason why we get this is because the power

function is kind of like a strange property in terms

of elasticities.

That is, the higher the alpha C, the higher is

the elasticities of acceptance to bribe.

And that means that that will push also the force

up.

Right.

Like if something is very elastic to getting to giving

you something, you will tend to push it up.

As a result.

If you know, you know for example.

That But if you think about importation that Donald Trump

put in, a lot of who is going to pay

for this importation is going to depend on the elasticity

of the US relative to the velocity of the Chinese

supply.

Right.

This is the one that is most elastic will end

up being the length of the effect of the tariff.

They're also very simple properties that come from a microeconomic

model.

Right.

And here we have because it's very last thing that

tends to be a lot of right.

So that is why did we get we get a

lot of these bribes in virtually on itself.

So if you think that indeed the richer countries are

better pool of officials, why would this is better?

We get bigger scandals in these countries rather than from

the perspective that we see in developing The focus is

on developing countries.

So that would be kind of like the idea.

Now what about let's suppose that this is positive.

For simplicity we can also think about.

All the corruption in that can be thought about as

the proportion of officials in the country that reject bribes.

And that's kind of like the perception of global abuse.

It's not the only component, but for all cases, let's

suppose it is the only country.

So what is basically equal to the percentage of officials?

And why do I say reject?

Because remember, the syntax is weird.

Higher number means more or less.

And so what.

Is it is basically one minus the probability.

The beta I is greater than.

The sequel to.

The.

And so the corruption index is.

So fundamentally.

The corruption index is country dependent for many, many different

dimensions, right?

There is.

The problem of the pool of officials here and here.

There is the problem of the quality of the judiciary.

That we render here and here.

There is the problem of the basically, what is the

quality of the best contract providers that happens here and

here?

How much?

What is the quality of the driver?

So, for example, in a world where k is relatively

low, where everybody is relatively not very good at doing

stuff, you will get kind of like a lot of

corruption.

But there is corruption arise because of the inefficiencies of

the service providers, not necessarily because people are not.

Right.

So it becomes very complicated to think about this index.

Right.

And in particular, what we would like to understand as

a result is what comes from cell selection, what comes

from the pool of officials in the country, what comes

from the effect of a good judiciary?

not come from maybe the effect of development, right?

So there are basically when we think about corruption, we

should not think about corruption as, you know, a single

element, but in fact are the outcome of a cannabis

dispensary election.

The quality of the judicial institutions, the quality of actually

the development in the country.

Right.

All these will affect the amount of power that we

see.

And the question is right, can you isolate this effect?

And I'm going to try to show you the two

examples that there might be a way to I mean,

for example, hopefully to get applied easily from the judiciary

to the effect of the elections.

Right.

Think about which one is the most important.

So we will do this.

After a five minute break.

But one thing we will do before doing this is

we are going to speak about what is the effect

of having everything as a concept.

What is the effect of having a bigger pool of

issues or less convertible recognition?

Greater alpha on the corruption index.

And it's not obvious, right?

It's not obvious because he tells us twice in the

powers and in the does not.

What should intuition tell us about the effect of having

fixing everything else right, fixing all these parameters?

What are intuition?

Tell us about the effect of a better politician or

official story On the corruption index.

What should be the effect?

The function index should be basically function and that should

be I.

You know this crazy thing.

The corruption index should be high.

And to detect with other derivatives.

That's important because otherwise we should not have this kind

of like model at all.

We are going to see whether that is the case.

Right.

So that's what we're going to do.

So we have a five minute break.

And the three of us for notational convenience and just

to be able to go faster.

I'm going to denote this whole thing by row.

And this whole thing we're going to say is it

has to be less than one.

So this whole thing is going to be denoted by.

This isn't a notational convenience.

So basically our syntax is not just one minus.

Just replacing.

This whole thing by row.

Because the only thing I'm interested in is the comparative

with respect to our first key.

Right.

So the rest I grouped them into.

Just one additional convenience, not just to be able to

go faster and not having to worry all the time

is the quantity.

Okay, so are we going to take the derivative of

this When you are something that has the power here

and something here.

What you do is you're going to transform it into

an exponential.

So this thing is actually equal to one minus exponential

of alpha c.

These two things are exactly the same.

Or you can always write the power as an exponential.

So now we can take the derivative of the last

time, because we have one function and then the product

of all possible customer functions.

So we have to be careful on how we do

this.

So we have a minus here.

And what do we get for the first thing we

get is so remember that.

V o u prime is equal to u prime and

v prime of you.

V of u is equal to.

U prime than the prime of u.

So what is your prime here is going to be

the first term which is going to be differentiated.

It's one.

So it's one times log of half of the.

The second term is going to be alpha c times.

Now this is becoming very nasty because we have to

reapply this formula.

The derivative of this thing alpha c one plus alpha

c.

Is equal to.

One plus alpha square.

That's wrong because this is also inside the V prime.

What is the derivative of the loss function?

What is the derivative of log of x.

1X1 by x and is one.

Sorry because I said oh that's fine.

It's one by alpha one over x.

Indeed the log function was created because we needed the

mathematician needed the integral of one over x.

And this is how the log function was created.

So this is one of us.

It's one of our user which is.

And then we're not done because we still need to

have an explanation of.

Why do we have the exponential gain?

Because the differentiation of an exponential exponential is a beautiful

exponential, right?

It's the derivative of exponential of x is exponential of

x.

The integral of exponential of x is exponential of its

wonderfulness.

And of course exponential is present in the normal distribution,

whereas exponential be not in the normal distribution.

So all we have is this 1TT.

And here is the case.

That is really annoying.

But it's not as important for you to see because

it often happens.

Maybe not in the crimes that we do.

So there is a few of them that are this,

but might happen if you were to continue doing this

form of research into the game.

Or the first derivative is not enough, right?

Because the design of the first is going to depend

on this, and this is not obvious to me right

away.

So.

So let's call this function h of alpha c.

Which sign we don't know.

So in this case what we try to do the

first thing to do is this.

I don't know this kind of this derivative.

So this function let me try to take the derivative

of this function.

And I get lucky, right?

Especially if I can sign the derivative of dysfunction.

I can determine lower and upper bound for that function.

Right.

And so the result might tell me something.

Right.

So this is something that you sometime do.

So we're going to take H prime of alpha C.

And you know you're going to have to trust me

on this one.

And it is going to be.

The thing I'm not okay.

And this thing you can check it yourself is going

to be positive.

So this is going to be positive.

So as a result we know that.

The policy is going to be bigger.

That H evaluated at zero R is going to be

smaller than the highest possible answer, which is infinite.

Data happen is equal to log of rho, which we

know to be negative.

So we know that the upper bound is negative.

So we know that h of negative.

So we know that this is positive.

So this was just to show you how sometimes when

you do a Jabra you should not stop at your

first derivative.

You might think that you know people should know this,

but I just review the paper where they stopped the

first derivative.

And this is all this is how we don't know

what to do.

And I take the second derivative and you find a

solution.

So, you know, there is there are two things that

there are three things where you can share your progress.

When you do algebra and magic.

One is you start to factor rather than expand.

Secondly, you understand how to work with function rather than

with closed form solution.

And third is you try to look for creative way

of solving things.

So start using the properties of second derivative right.

So that is kind of the way to to do

this type of things.

All right.

So we are we are sure because we know that

oh mother, at least as a prediction that is confirmed

with intuition as the pool of politicians become better.

We get to a lot more.

Um.

Higher corruption index, which is to say, less corruption.

Otherwise, this thing is crazy.

So with this, we can try to think about.

Can we pass all the different things inside corruption, right.

Remember the difference in fighting corruption?

There is an effect that is due to institutions such

as legal institution, and there is an effect that they

use to set selection into the public official, which we

are in a reduces from God without alpha.

So can we do this?

And before doing this, if think about it, is actually

very, very hard, right.

Because to be able to, for example, think about the

effect of such selection without looking at the effect Inside

of institution.

We need to see officials from different countries in the

same legal system.

Right.

Because otherwise you would be moving both the official of

different countries and the legal system, and you will not

be able to pass out the two of them.

So that's one thing you need to second, you need

to be able to find data on things that resemble

corruption, at least illegal action for private benefits.

So anyone has an idea where we could find.

Officials from different countries affected by the same legal system.

I mean, I wouldn't have found it either.

It's just like the smart people around instead of funny

for us, but like the UN, right?

So the UN is a good case because you get

all these officials from different countries coming to the same

legal system, which is the US system, the U.S. legal

system.

In fact, they actually have the almost zero reward system

because they have a form of diplomatic immunity.

But that's just something one of the problem.

Right.

And it's only about putting officials of different countries within

the same legal system.

Now we need to think about instances of behaviour that

resemble corruption.

And this is why.

I've got a brilliant idea is they look at parking

fines by UN officials in New York.

Okay.

So parking fines are for many, many years, diplomats in

the UN where you have immunity when it comes to

to bargain.

They just kind of do whatever they want.

And of course, you know, people being what they are

when they go to defending is on the Fifth Avenue.

When they go to the fancy restaurant, the what will

you do?

They will double back.

They would park illegally.

They would park on the pedestrian crossing.

Right.

And the police of New York.

Then I will record the fine, and the fine will

be never paid because they will claim diplomatic immunity.

And so what we have is we have a setting

where we see many, many fights from different branches of

officials under the same legal system.

So how can we think about it in our setting?

We can think of it as is.

Are you an official that has two choices?

Park illegally.

Or legally?

If you're able to get some.

Value from it.

Plus, maybe, you know, this person might think about the

community and think we see this slight negative payoff from

fucking it again.

Maybe you can think of this as being zero, if

you like, just to keep on with the model.

And for the moment, we're still going to receive some

fine here.

I'm going to put a zero basically to not seeing

out of the zero because I have diplomatic immunity.

If they both legally, you know, they get some payoff

maybe from doing the right thing.

Importantly, because they are all under the same system.

The US.

There is no AC on any of the variables.

But.

This is not.

Which comes from the central division.

So the only thing that varies from one country to

the next.

Because they are all in the US is going to

be the beta.

So now we know that, you know I'm going to

write it.

They are going to bark.

Clearly B is greater than.

This.

Letting that you know.

The only shows that goes to the UN for simplicity.

Are kind of like proportional, but even let's make it

equal to the average.

Top officials in their home country.

So this is at the individual level, right?

For another age.

Official.

Some country.

See?

Which is.

Another way.

Another way to official.

From countries.

We park illegally.

The benefit of parking illegally is better than.

The cost in some sense.

You know, taking into account the average level of collectability.

Does it make sense?

No.

We're going to make two assumptions to be able to

say something.

Right.

Assumption number one.

Well, I suppose that's.

The average of official.

Faces and.

An average official interface and marking decisions.

All right, so it's gonna happen that in their life,

let's say twice a week, they face a decision whether

or not to park illegally.

So in total, over here, 104 times they will face

a decision to park illegally.

The third thing, I suppose, is.

It's time they are deciding the benefits of parking illegally.

It's going to be drawn for simplicity according to uniform

zero one.

Right.

So you think of something called as little traffic.

Then there is very little benefit of parking illegally.

Sometimes they go, there's a lot of traffic and there's

a lot of older parking for that.

They can and then they have a strong incentive to

park illegally.

With these two assumptions, what we are going to get

is that basically.

What we care about is not the number of illegal

parking that we observed by an average official from.

So what does this mean for the question we ask?

Now if we have and making decisions these benefits and

parking illegally.

If B is about this, what of probability distribution do

we have.

So the choice of an official is what.

Is the politically two choices binary.

Right.

You know I can't legally I fuck you legally.

That's already giving you a hint about the type of

distribution that we are.

We.

It's a binomial with n instances and draws and the

probability of success, which is the probability of parking, is

equal to the probability that this is satisfied.

However, in all cases, illegal parking.

Equal to probability that P is greater than alpha C1

plus alpha C.

And so what we get is the average.

Number of illegal bargains.

From conditions.

From C is equal to and one minus.

This.

And now when we cover different countries the only thing

that is very is the alpha.

The higher alpha, the next level parking.

So if you regress.

The number of signs that an individual adoption from countries

to get and the, the curvature index of that country

is the only thing that if the correlation is fully

driven by the alpha.

Right.

Because nothing else of this guy, the corruption that matters

in the decision to park illegally.

But the alphas, right.

Because of the I was dependent on the the condition

in the country of origin and the selection.

The decision to park illegally in New York is only

dependent Depending on the condition in the morgue and the

selection from the original country.

If you regret the number of times that someone gets

from countries on the corruption index value for country, you

recover the effect of the pool of politicians on the

assumption.

Now, this is not something that Fisman and me were

doing in the paper, but there are methods that are

available.

And, you know, the corruption index is easily to be

found as well, going back in time.

So that's something that we can do.

Is that something that I did?

And so when you do this, you find that approximately

80% of the variation in fines can be explained by

selection of options, basically by the intrinsic.

Order of operations.

So what am I doing here?

Actually, what I'm doing here is that I'm showing you

a very simplified way to do structural econometrics, because what

is structural econometrics is actually to start with a model

and identify variations in the data that allow you to

isolate certain effect, certain parameters of your model.

And here we are, without you knowing it, doing a

form of structural econometrics.

We are interested in understanding how much of corruption is

explained by the quality of the pool of officials.

To do this, we need to just look at the

setting where variation in arts of production only come from

selection in the pool of auditions.

Does the sign from the yard, and as they show

you the number of signs that official from one country,

which.

Is only a function of the quantity of the pool

of opposition from that country and circumstances around your place.

So.

Therefore, if I regress an index that varies at the

country level for reasons of the Bureau of Production and

some other things, the correlation between my index and my

dependent variable, which is the number five, can only be

due to these parameters, and all of the boundaries are

not correlated with each other.

Therefore, the r-square of this kind of aggregation give me

the importance of selection.

Of course, we have to make some assumptions, simplifying one,

but we can also make simplifying assumptions.

They do assume that they do have some properties of

the shock.

And the fact is I did it as they did

in the easiest one.

Then they do the logical variables.

So that basically 8.2% of variation in corruption are due

to.

The selection of officials.

Not great, not bad.

But like we will, that's doesn't tell us much.

Because we will also like to know is how does

this compare to all the possible factors.

And in particular, you know, if you were to work

for the world Bank or some other institutions and you

have to revise our policy, you know, you could be

asked, should we provide better screening of your boss, or

should we put our money in improving the judiciary of

the country?

Right.

That's the type of like a big question.

Where do you put your money?

You put it on improving the pool or do you

put it on changing the institutions?

Right.

What would be the most effective?

So to do this, we need to have a setting

where the pool of politicians, Official church, but the Royal

Institution, for example, do church.

And the great thing about, you know, this memorial and

treatment paper is that they actually are this because at

one point the NYPD got fed up.

They were like, we do all these fines to all

these diplomats, and they never paid.

And Bloomberg called and said, you know what?

You're deploying your immunity for illegal parking and decline is

over.

It's over now.

You have a fine, you have to pay.

And I don't even mind know he managed to pull

it off, but he did pull it off.

All right.

Which means that suddenly you went from a setting where

it was, you know, no legal costs of being court

to a sitting.

Where Why.

Is becoming a problem to be called right?

So what happens is that.

Here.

The average number of fines is.

Pause.

Bloomberg before.

The admission comes from the fact that no.

If you are caught, you actually have to pay the

fine.

And so the difference is.

So controlling for.

The quality of the politicians.

You can recover the effects of the reform.

So this is what they do and then they leave.

Look at the number of unpaid parking violations we raise

on the Country corruption index.

And they look.

At.

How much?

There is post reform proposals for reform.

See, this is the one.

Actually, two.

That's what we have, right?

Now.

In itself, there are two issues.

One is how do we compare this coalition and that

position?

On top of it, the problem is what they use

is a negative binomial.

These coefficients are actually in law which can make things

even worse.

So how do we compare the two versions.

So we have one.

We know that the chi index.

The coefficient is 157.

The reform of the coefficient is 4.40.

In Colorado, -4.4.

Is.

I'd like to know.

So what we can do is we can look at

the variation in the data between the models that they

have invested right now, in the right way.

Positive numbers across the model are based on a friend

of the Democratic of Congo.

So if you go there, you can remember that a

bit of casting here, because we all went out to

play songs like crazy.

The leads were up in the daytime.

Switzerland.

So the the difference between the two.

So you do one minute is 58.

Mine is mine is 258.

So that's going to be 4.6 ten times zero.

157 you get 237.

You compare this with the cost of law enforcement.

That's 4.4317.

The look at the effect of the two.

It is telling you that increasing the cost of production

is basically 100% more effective than selection, which means that

you reduce by 14.5%.

Okay.

So if you.

Were asked.

By the world Bank where you should put your money,

what the country should put your money, you should say,

well, put it in improving the judicial system this greatly.

Professor in SC 453 we did this crazy thing with

you in data economy 180% more effective.

So this is kind of a common thing.

But, you know, we cannot say that the judiciary has

an even bigger effect, because if you change the judiciary

and make corruption more costly, that is going to change

the pool of people not going to come to office

or they are going to enter the bureaucracy, reinforcing the

effect in itself.

So if for no reason, I want you to remember

this 14%, because we are going to see a better

way to think about the effect of improving enforcement.

And the crazy thing is, the one we said is

better way of improving the sentence.

We're going to get something like 13.5% math crazy.

You can get 14.5.

We are saying it's 13.5.

I got a, um, uh, someone working with its father

paper as a dynasty paper.

And uh, he said like, oh, you know, I spent

all this time working on this beautiful model.

And the father said, yeah, I spent three years on

this one.

We get the exact same result.

Yours is nicer, but, you know, in terms of, like,

improvement of knowledge.

So what is kind of like this?

All the paper.

Yeah.

It is.

It's related to something you're going to see in your

problems.

So that's what I would like to introduce it to

you.

All right.

So this is if you remember, uh, political agency lecture,

I briefly introduce you to the random audience from Brazil.

And I told you that there wasn't none.

I don't look out of is proof because we are

in 2018 and are still pushing papers about this.

The eight ball that is beyond eight is that.

Right.

So what did we do there?

They still use the random bodies.

I remember the Monday days.

Every month, the Brazilian government was drawing the name of

municipalities, right to be audited.

And then federal auditors are going to the municipality, look

at the account and see the number of violations of

public rule.

They weren't the municipalities.

No, it just happened.

Right.

That because this is a lot of replacement.

Not immediately, but you channel quite fast.

There is replacement in the lottery.

What does it mean that?

By bad luck, if you want a good one for

the citizen can be audited twice during the term of

the mayor.

Whereas other are different ones.

So what will happen is that if you are audited

twice during your life, you see this paper coming twice

to your municipality.

The first time you have seen them, you have learned

about how efficient they are.

You might have learned about the risk of doing illegal

arts, in the sense that you could have seen the

previous mayors being punished by the federal government.

So there are different ways that you can think about.

One first, audits provide information that affect the behaviour of

the male audience.

So what they are going to do is look at

the difference in the amount of behaviour between those who

are the choice and those who are the only ones

doing that, whether their argument makes sense.

You will see in your problem set for me here,

right?

Like you will discuss whether we should actually believe our

argument, but for the moment take it off.

So this is kind of like you know what they

look at, right.

This.

So think about it this way.

You have two type of municipalities.

One where the mayor is seat two others.

And you look at The number of additions in the

701 with the majors is 1 or 2.

And you just compared this right.

And so this is among those who are giving a

difference.

This is kind of like the amount of art, of

corruption, of art, of violation of public goods.

The big word that the auditors found in the data,

for those of us who have been addicted, was and

the effect that they find is 13.3% right by like

it is right.

And like crazy things, you know, made up with a

lot of noise going into something that is critical.

So if you look at this 14.9%, so this is

kind of like what we get.

Now.

What do we get from this world?

Right.

So the first thing that I want you to gather

is be careful when people give you big numbers on,

you know, certain topics, like certain thing that is supposed

to summarise something like a corruption index, right.

Ask people who have been engaged in political economy.

You should always think that this type of like.

They single number supposedly summarising a world system most of

within them a lot of strategic behaviour and indeed strategic

behaviour make it actually very hard to understand what is

going on behind the numbers.

Is it due to different institution?

Is it a different pool of officials?

Is the is due to an efficiency of contractors and

things like that, right?

So that is the first thing.

The design of the thing is not trying.

But it becomes interesting then is to try to use

data to parse out what is the data due to

one channel, versus what is the effect that is due

to our knowledge.

And we will see that next week we are going

to compare the effect of corruption versus the effect of

state capacity using a beautiful day.

Again, thinking about it as predicting the effect of something

across different channels, not just the cost.

Then.

The second thing that is, the third thing I wanted

to say is that probably changing institutions is more efficient

than trying to change the people and in particular, changing

institution.

What I've done to meet the people who get to

public office on this campus.

So, you know, it's not surprising that the political economist

will tell you institutions matter at the same time, you

know, changing things, changing institutions, and is actually very, very

hard because there are two questions.

We have absolutely not touchable.

One is who reform the current system.

And indeed, you will see from time to time new

what is emerging.

Say we are going to reform this current system.

Right.

And receiving a lot of votes by the population.

One example is Bolsonaro, of course, was campaigning on getting

rid of this corrupt system in Brazil, a system that

had all the Petrobras scandal and things like that.

Of course, there was insult.

We see saw it, of course, in China, right?

Jinping basically campaigned to increase its power.

On an anti-corruption drive.

Right.

Which some people say was actually not an excuse, but

also a way to get rid of people who were

not necessarily as famous.

I have a paper that kind of show that if

you want to converge to work, you actually need to

use it to get rid of people that you know

are not necessarily aligned.

Which is crazy, because that's probably the only paper that

vindicate XI Jinping or whatever.

But this is this is another thing I want to

say is orphan reform, but has some unintended consequences.

And, you know, unintended consequences does not mean unpredictable.

It doesn't mean that the people who have done the

reform have not thought about it.

So let me tell you two of them.

Right.

What is about, you know, going on for one.

So one of them is going back to the cave

of academia.

What is the decades of education and reform that was

passed in Romania?

Uh, a way to decrease the amount of corruption that

are in the high school exam that then had to

be in person.

And so you would go, you know, to the professor

with your book and my book, and now you open

the book and, you know, there is a little bit

of banknotes there to facilitate the process.

So what they did is that they actually put cameras

into the classrooms, right?

And what the camera did you mean this sort of

like corruption became very hard to do.

Only all other more expensive production became available.

And what created this created the system where everybody was

corrupting the governor to a system where only the rich

were able to corrupt the examiner, and therefore it actually

increased inequality into the system.

Another kind of dark example is the case of what

happened when.

Um, you.

One problem that there is in many countries is the

problem that you don't receive for goods, and in particular

in the US, they are the thing where you are

the vouchers.

Right?

And you were giving the voucher to shop and then

the shop was writing on the voucher, almost money.

They are given the opportunity to charge the consumer and

this was the version that was given essentially to a

single mother to feed their children in, kind of like

very poor neighbourhoods in the United States.

Right.

So the young man realised that they were being overcharged

by this.

Right.

So what they did instead is that they basically gave

credit cards to the people, and the credit card was

to be fed.

And then there was to be, you know, receipt coming

up with the credit.

So far, so good.

It looks like the perfect system, because now you get

actually people to basically charge the right price at the

bottom, which is that indeed the price decreases.

But what the shopkeeper started to do is that sometimes

because there were so few customers, just those with credit

cards that were doing it became too costly to store,

and they stop selling that to the people, which means

that you actually decrease consumption, but in which way?

By removing the consumption of necessary items.

Lecture 10:

For you to survive before you can all have a

bit of rest.

I know for the conversation of relative that you are.

Still a breather.

So we are finishing this.

Um, we're thinking about state capacity.

Following from our lecture.

And, you know, next time we start thinking about all

the political actors and media and social media and, um,

special interest group as well.

So what did we do last week?

Right.

Last week we focussed on corruption, and we did this

because we thought that it was not something was costly.

It was illegal.

It was wasn't fair, but one thing we didn't know

was the overall effect of corruption on development.

I think, you know.

These two graphs were kind of like saying a different

story.

On the one hand, one was telling you that corruption

was causing lack of economic development on the other.

It's the lack of economic development that is causing corruption.

This is kind of like the order of magnitude.

So what we would like to understand is, you know.

Among all the issues that relatively speaking, because it's important

to be relative same to of like countries that are

having issues with economic development among all the possible problem.

What is the role of corruption, which is different than

what we've done last week?

Because last week we asked ourselves of all the possible

factors that could explain corruption.

Which one are involved?

What is the role of selection?

What is the role of institutions?

Here is this is really the room is just like

a complete mess.

When we come back in January, you know the table

would be the other way around is going to be

like a we may change room because since in January

you are the last class.

If they make me run around campus and we ask

them to change the room, and we have a room

that we can.

Meet up until at least 430, you know, in case

I were late.

But I also noticed last year that when I did

this, we weren't until 430 all the time.

So it was kind of like.

Not running late, which is continuing later in the year.

In fact, it's like, you know, it's like human beings,

if you have space, you feel it.

It's just the way we are.

So last week we said corruption is one of the

sources of corruption here.

We're going to tell a different question.

We're going to say of, you know, now the different

inefficiencies that can happen in the developing country, but also

in different countries.

What is the power of corruption to do this right?

And in particular that again, a question of like this

time, should we invest to fight corruption, to invest in

different type of issues?

We are going to do this with a beautiful paper

by Benjamin and Valentine.

It's really beautiful because it uses a model in two

ways.

One is about generating predictions that will be useful to

determine the impact of corruption relative to all the type

of problems.

Second is useful because they do such a good research

on model.

In the paper we are not going to focus on

model one.

We are going to do is to see how you

can generate prediction with simple model and in particular disentangle

mechanism.

And you know, in my view, I'm not a big

fan of structural model and no one that I could

explain why.

But for the sake of staying on track, I will

not in this lecture.

But one thing that I think is important is that

models should be there to discipline us, right, and discipline

us as we try to make sense of what is

going on?

There's one of the main road is also disciplining us

in terms of like, what do we look for in

the data?

And I think this model is a beautiful lesson and

how you can use even simple model to generate very

important prediction that allow you to disentangle one of the

biggest question you can have, which is a problem caused

by corruption, or are they caused by something else?

Right.

So this is a really good idea.

And the way that they work is we are going

to do this using an updated version of the model

we have done.

Last lesson is going to be building on the model.

So what they do is they are going to try

to display it, are going to look at procurement in

Italian state organisations.

Right.

So this is this wonderful share on which of us

all city procurement.

That LSC is is having, you know, the DVDs and

stuff like this.

And there are rules about a certain level.

You need to put the type there or anything like

that.

So the general look for this instead of authorisation.

And I'm going to distinguish between active and passive voice.

So active word is basically corruption that is buying from

the sellers that overcharge the uh to stay basically passive,

which is more, you know, capacity discourage not the right

year to make the type of purchases.

Seems like, you know, a state that might be in

this category, no response to the buyers regulatory burden or

this type of things that goes that are not above

like legal per se, Say, but create a lot of

inefficiencies.

So this is kind of problem.

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to

use three main two pieces of information.

So we talk about this photocopy that calls chest pains

and things like this.

And I'm going to use two pieces of information.

One is that I'm going to use the price paid

by an organisation.

That's going to be the first one.

The second one are going to exploit the fact that

state organisation can choose whether to buy a good independently

of the central procurement agency.

And we're going to see that when you combine the

prediction of rising from both, you are going to be

they're going to be able to disentangle the effect that

come from activists and from classes.

And it's often the case we will We also have

a similar type of work.

Funny development with a similar idea.

When we look at this combination, one thing is to

find evidence of the phenomenon is to find evidence of

waste.

And in four days you do not need much.

In fact, the drives are going to be enough to

give us evidence of.

Another thing is to understand the mechanism behind this way.

And in this case, you cannot do it with a

single test.

You will always need a second test.

And if you do, your first two tests to get

are theoretically motivated, you are going to find a lot

of information in the data.

And this is you will see that when we do

the discrimination lecture later on, it will be just before

meeting with next year we will have the same thing.

We will have two tests in a row.

Both of them being theoretically motivated that are going to

be hiring us to disentangle.

First, to measure discrimination and so on, to design the

mechanism of discrimination.

And I think there's a general do become producer of

research.

Think about motivating your test with theory and think about

the need for multiple steps, one that is never enough

to disentangle mechanism.

Despite what some of my colleagues believe.

So this is what I said.

So we're going to go for this.

So what we're going to do basically is we're going

to go back to the model.

But in this case, we are not going to think

about the bribery as being someone that is very active.

We are rather going to think about the bribe was

just going to be there as an option for the

officials.

All the action is going to come from the official.

So.

If you remember, last week we had.

Two choices.

Our official.

Could choose to be corrupt.

And in this case, it was getting the bribe.

The performance.

The contract basically was given to Rome via that.

There was a cost associated to this.

And so this was kind of what we were asking.

Or you could choose to be non corrupt.

And in this case there was only the preference.

And when we put that money when he was recovered

from being caught.

But we're working to kind of like, remove it for

the moment because that's not really important for us.

So for simplicity.

So the essentials, except that now before we had the

official deciding basically what is the minimum bride that they

will accept.

And we had a bride that was trying to get

the contract take into account the result, possibly will not

be able to.

It will be rejected.

Right?

He was going to think about our official.

We're going to try to, if it's become correct, to

extract maximum rent from the grinder.

And we're going to assume the bride is always willing

to give this money.

So what we're going to do is to make the

model as small as possible to the one that I

have in the paper.

Is we're going to assume that capacity is equal to

one minus mu c divided by.

Two here.

And we can assume that.

KC because it's just going to be beta right.

So tau.

Can be thought about the price.

Net of any inefficiency.

So.

You see the inefficiency that comes from.

The organisation itself.

Right.

So I'm keeping on using C.

But in this case we should think about it as

organisation specific see is an organisation specific capacity.

Now is just basically additional cost of the good.

So really what we think about in this case is

a driving model where you go and you say, oh,

this chair should be 100, right?

But you know, you give me ten more and I

give you the contract.

Right.

And so now the chairs are literally costing like 110

or this, this kind of thing, the idea.

So basically what we have is that, you know, we

should choose to be corrupt is getting we receive data.

I.

Mean, we choose to not be because it.

Is going to, uh.

That is.

That's kind of not the two things that there is.

So that's kind of like if the official is going

alone, right?

The race is for going independently.

What is the official doing if he's going independently?

He's going to choose.

The bribe to maximise.

This decision.

So taking the first condition we get.

This all right.

At this time, I am all for the possibility.

And the constraint is binding in my first control condition.

It could be that, you know, it is not equal

to zero.

It could be negative, which means that each time you

increase B you are actually getting below zero.

So we are going to have two cases to consider.

The first thing we have to consider is the one

where this is true.

In this case.

What is the optimal B for the operation?

When this is.

So what is the difference between this and this?

What is it about between this and this?

So let's call.

This function.

Hop.

What is this?

What is the difference between this and this?

There is no window.

There is no B, right?

So it's as if I have taken.

This is the function h evaluated at zero zero.

So what is this say?

This man.

What does it say?

It's saying what it's saying.

The first derivative of the objective function.

Evaluated at zero is negative.

So what he's saying in word is.

The first derivative.

Of the objective.

Function evaluated.

At p is equal to zero is negative.

Now what do we know about.

The objective function.

What is a property for us I mean it's implicit

because I told you that like unless I mentioned it

explicitly, that property will always be at this point.

What do we need to make to get a global

maximum?

Why do we need an objective function to satisfy?

It needs to be concave, right?

Which means that the derivative.

Is decreasing.

Right.

So if we have.

H zero less than zero.

What might be true about H for B that are

strictly positive.

Relative zero.

So sorry your h b here right here is like

h right.

How do I have compared to h zero given that

our function is concave and this is the derivative of

the function.

Is it bigger or smaller than.

That one.

What about has to be less than.

One is less right?

Because of the company.

Right.

So what we have is.

This comes from the concavity.

Of the objective function.

So what is it tell us about.

So remember the objective function is what we maximise right.

This is what we try to maximise.

That's an objective function.

I just got it to.

We are in the same place.

So what does it tell us about your objective function.

Where does this objective function reach a maximum given the

constraint that we faced.

So.

Let's say you start at zero and you start with

b equal to zero.

I know you increase the amount of bribe that you

are taking.

Are you making yourself better or you're making yourself worse

off?

Hey.

That's the one.

H is the derivative of the objective function, right?

So h is the derivative of the objective function.

What is the sine of h.

It's negative right.

It's negative.

So that means that with the bribe as you increase

the bribe, your objective function is going to go down.

So if I start at zero and I start making

more broth, am I making myself better off or my

making myself worse off worse?

So what should be my choice in this case?

Thank you.

All right.

So what we have is.

So what you mean is any positive?

Increase.

In V makes the official.

Strictly.

Wear stuff.

I think any be going further.

Make yourself strictly worse off crying.

Of course the price is going down.

Which is?

Make the official strictly better.

Right.

As a result, the optimal.

Rhyme is going to be there.

Is this clear?

Yes.

All right.

So how did we do this?

Let's just remember the state.

Because the state matters as well, right?

So when we said we have this constraint.

Yeah.

We mean that the first condition we don't know if

it's going to be inequality.

Right.

So what is is you think the derivative of the

objective function when you put it at zero, like we're

moving to the B to say let's suppose b zero.

If that function is negative at zero, that formed the

start.

Going a little bit more broad is going to make

use of even the concavity.

We also know that it would be negative everywhere, which

is maybe moving forward.

Thinking a bit more makes you worse off.

Taking a bit less makes you better, right?

And in this case, what is happening is the ultimate

thing that.

You can do is to take a low value of

equal to zero.

That's.

The third thing that you consider is the case where.

This one in this case it says that if you

start from zero.

Right.

And I think a little bit of a bribe, maybe.

What are those for?

My utility.

It increased its price.

I'm going to get better, right?

So as a result of what we're doing, this case

is going to be an interior solution.

And then what do we have?

We have that equilibrium.

Right.

This.

That's the equilibrium, right?

And notice that we do not have a solution.

Right.

That is actually the equilibrium is implicitly defined by this

equation.

If I don't know what you is other than you're

increasing and strictly concave.

And so I cannot tell you a number.

So just what we can do.

Is to think about how broad change.

We think that what a change in better right to

do this.

It's called the implicit function theorem.

But you know what this is going to do.

It's broken.

So why do we have we have that we want

to think about.

So what we do is we basically go back to

our function here.

Sorry.

I need to run.

And when we do that, we take the total derivative

of this thing.

With the total derivative.

And that has to be zero because that doesn't depend

on that.

Now what is the difference between what we call the

time and the total.

The.

Other side the partial derivative and the third term.

What is the difference between the two?

What is the password and what is the total derivative?

In the past, we only want to see the partial

effect of.

That particular thing.

Like that function is only dependent is dependent on multiple

variables.

So we just want to isolate the impact of that

one.

It's not all derivative inside the effect of one variable.

But you're on the right side right and the right

partial derivative.

That's why you know I gave you the key by

a confusing but partial derivative.

Only look at the direct effect of a change in

this variable.

Right.

So where Whether the fireball appears directly.

It appears directly here, as it also will consider the

direct effect of this derivative.

Thus the partial the total derivative.

Also consider the effect that works for equilibrium objects.

The function of this parameter is the difference between the

partial derivative and the direct and total derivative.

In total, we consider the direct and indirect effect partial.

You just consider the target effect, and so that's the

difference between the total all generated with the partial derivative

which is inverted delta.

And so when you can invert the delta for the

partial derivative.

So what is it going to be?

It's going to be basically minus.

Year task where you suck and.

Minus the partial derivative.

Thing.

And it has to be equal to zero.

That's basically saying any change coming from this from moving

to the better C harder to be compensated by a

change from moving the beta star, so that I keep

the difference between the two channels equal to zero.

So I'm still at the maximum of a URL.

So does the idea.

That we have here.

So what we get we get.

That is that I'm using partial here.

So this is basically telling us that.

So what are the stars, basically?

Marvin Gaye.

What is the sign of this?

Again, we cannot say anything more than the sun, but

the sun is just what we care about.

So what is the sign of this object?

This is.

One.

It's like a negative because this is clearly positive.

This is a squared term.

It's always positive to have a squared positive.

And you have the you double prime.

And the utility function is strictly.

So this is.

Strictly negative.

Does it make sense.

Does it make sense that we get these comparative statics

right.

It's like as always if you do math you need

to make you know it's great.

But we need to stop and think about okay.

Does it conform with intuition?

So what is better?

What is better?

Exactly, yes.

Anything particular is the reverse of how much you like

drugs, right?

It's the reverse of a much like bribe, because the

value of bribing the utility function is B divided by

beta.

So if beta increases, that means that the options like

replace right.

Which is that they are going to take less bribe

as a result.

So there is a logic behind Andres was right.

It has to make sense that I do more with

the higher the better, the more that the person is

or the less corruptible.

Because, you know, we discussed last week that everybody is

corruptible.

So the less corruptible this person is, the less alike

right, the less right.

So there is a perfect logic into this.

So what did we get out of it?

We get that better star of better say.

Is equal to.

Zero if.

It is equal to basically.

The solution is strictly positive.

Now we can.

This is basically equivalent to.

This is equivalent to.

This.

What about this is very large.

The official read as a library.

And then as a result.

Now just when I think my balance is not so

large, the official flag not sufficiently.

I'm now going to take some of the amount of

bribe they're going to take.

It's going to be decreasing say.

What you think about it.

It will look like something like this.

High.

Having gone and then being equal to the people here

will be all the better people.

So that is one thing.

Now that we have done this, we can.

Not like most as they define the integrated facilities.

What I'm doing.

Utilities.

That I maximise choice variable.

These are the utility of an I turn okay as

an official.

Once we plug in the equilibrium values.

Okay.

So.

We have that indirect utility.

Is going to be.

I remind you that nobody gets out of this room?

If there is any problem.

This is like a sorry, nobody could I.

What is it like?

This is like.

Everybody is like, oh my God.

I know I see your commitments and the danger for

your life right here in this room.

I'm very, very proud of you.

Right.

So, Robert, in this case, is going to be.

There's only one.

Now, how is the internet utility changing with this dataset?

I know I'm insisting on this better and you're like,

what the hell?

But you know, there is a reason for why I'm

really insisting on this.

So why is it changing here?

How is the utility changing with BTC?

Is it not affected by the data saying?

No, there is no better on this side.

So, you know, it's constant, inevitably.

What about you?

Yeah, it's hard because we are very stiff around here.

But also in this here we have a wonderful theorem

called the envelope theorem.

And I will give us the answer.

But so first let me say that.

It doesn't depend on it.

Right.

In the second case, and another one where there is

a break.

Right now they record because whereas the bride and or

so independently processes the function.

What is it?

Well, what we know.

Is that the total derivative, the one that take interaction

into account, the effect through the equilibrium object as well

as the other thing, is going to be equal to

the power.

And that's by again the theory.

Now.

We know each other.

I'm not going to give you a theorem without proving

to you this result.

There will be two easier though.

So let's see how this is happening.

Right.

One is what is kind of like creating this.

So we have this this thing.

So I'm going to first take basically the derivative of

B with respect to the letter c.

Come all of this with the derivative.

Maybe let's start with the partial derivative.

Right.

So what is it going to be.

It's going to be equal to the total derivative is

going to be equal to the partial derivative.

With respect to the three plus the partial derivative of

this function.

With respect to b times the partial derivative of.

So there are these two things together.

And that's what we need to be thought of.

Right.

You just don't look directly about the partial effect, the

direct effect of the function.

You also take into account that other variables changes.

And so you have to take into account these this

project as well.

You have to take into account both, if not what

it means to do the total and the partial is

just the total.

Take into account for this as well.

As for the total.

The first one is.

This thing here.

That's that's the partial.

The second one is.

Now we take.

The partial derivative to be.

So we have this term and we start to take

that off.

This is going to be.

This.

So does the partial derivative with respect to time.

With respect to the partial derivative.

That's kind of what this really is.

This is.

Now, what do we know about this thing?

I've seen this thing before.

This is if there is a change of the objective

function evaluated at B star.

Not other than.

The energy of the objective function evaluated at the equilibrium

quantity.

Let's see.

Why did we are the derivative of the objective function

that we evaluated at the equilibrium quantity?

Aha!

What is the name of the derivative of the objective

function evaluated at the equilibrium quantity?

Hmm.

That's the first order condition.

And what do you know about the condition?

Of your objective function evaluated at equilibrium quantity.

That's the first order condition.

Definition of the first order condition.

So That's the first order condition.

This is equal to zero and therefore this is equal

to zero.

The other thing that I remind is 16.

March.

So what do we how do we get that.

That is negative.

Okay.

So we know, what have we learned?

And we've learned that.

And we have also learned that the value.

Of being corrupt, right.

And accepting by, by going along is also decreasing with

the passing.

That correlation is going to be very important.

Another thing that we have learned is that the price

paid.

By the organisation.

It is going to be.

Musical, if there are three, is greater than we are,

which means no corruption.

And you see this to let us see how.

He is learning.

That there is a version.

And we are going to see that.

With this.

We are going to be able to determine the goal,

the impact of corruption on justice.

How are we going to do so?

Well, you have to wait five minutes and we will

see this after the break.

All we got to do is miracle.

What?

Looks like a miracle example, right?

So the first thing we are going to do.

Is to regress.

This is what the key for the theory.

Now let's do it.

Step one.

What they are going to do is they are going

to regress.

The log of the price paid.

By an organisation.

For a given group selected for chairs or tables.

Right.

On organisation.

Fixed effects.

So you basically for every category of course you put

them together.

So you could also good effect and are going to

regress log of five.

But we have to get a surprise on an organisation

like that.

So what is going to be this Delta C.

Well I take it exponential because it is a log.

Like what is going to be this one is going

to be.

Exactly.

One of these two quantities is going to be.

Important to the rock because let's split the music and

the top and the top to become the content.

So basically, by looking out the facts for each organisation,

they are trying to recover these quantities.

What this quantity is, is you can think of it

as the total waste.

Of organisation.

See, this is basically what is on top of the

price that is being paid.

By, you know, on average that it is all much

more on the same relative to the average, which is

exactly relative to the minimum wage you want.

This is exactly the way of associated with an organisation,

right?

It's not a few words because it's always a fixed

effect.

It's always relative to a baseline category.

But if we think that the most efficient in the

data is actually a waste of money, that is really

basically what comes total, there is no loss.

Then it's basically, you know, perfect.

So this is a good thing.

So that's kind of like what they're going to get.

However, what we know now is that we can rank

organisation according to their ways.

And we know that those who have a higher pay

are associated with a higher way.

So that would be.

Great if our only interests were to think about which

organisation are wasteful and which organisation are not.

But that term, what we really are looking for.

That's an interesting question and we will say something about

it.

But that's not what we are looking for in particular.

What we are looking for in particular is to be

able to understand the impact of conversion versus other type

of ways?

Can we do this with this data?

So suppose.

So the question is does it tell us.

About active versus passive questions.

So to think about it suppose you we have organisation.

C and C prime.

And we find that delta c is greater than delta

c.

So the fixed effect is higher than this replied organisation

C.

Is more corrupt.

Now, see, the problem is in the conclusion we can

make.

We are there to see.

So the fact of the matter is.

Anybody see that the fix is not the higher the

value of the fixed five.

The higher the amount of waste in this organisation.

Right.

That's one thing.

The interested in which organisation is more wasteful to say.

We are interested in starting.

Where does that come from and might have come from

possible.

Right.

And so the question is do we have enough information.

And to think about this process, what we are to

do with the part where you take the organisation and

let's say, you know, the, Uh, uh, province of uh

administration, the Province of Lombardia and the administration in the

province, uh, collaborate.

And you find that the province of Korea as a

higher.

Than the province of Lombardy.

Would not tell you that Calabria has more corruption than

that the administrative the insertion of.

Any problem is.

Not even problem.

Right.

Because it could be that the answer is no.

Yes.

For example, it would have.

Been more like.

That's why I chose the province on purpose, I suppose

not the name of probably.

It could be that Musa is much bigger than you.

Surprised.

And because the VC is actually much lower.

Than the VC prime.

So the.

That is the possibility.

That is the C delta t prime.

So it could be that, you know, most of the

difference comes from actually difference in positively.

So it's not enough to justify the feature flag to

be able to say something.

Right.

So if we had to stop here, I would not

be such a great Picasso.

But if you remember, I told you there was two

things that they were using.

Right?

They were using the price that is being paid, but

they are also going to be using the fact that

an organisation can decide whether to take the goods independently

or all the way from the central government.

That is called currency, right?

And so that piece of information, we have not used

information.

Right.

So what we have to think about is that this

is just about the price.

Now we have to think about the choice.

Between independent purchase.

And currency, which is the central procurement agency.

Right.

So the way I'm going to think about currency is

that if an organisation got their currency.

The utility is going to be.

This.

So gamma is equal to concept.

Right.

And they're also going to.

Uh.

Um.

That joke, if you want, like, you know, probabilistic voting

model.

And it might be that, you know, some people find

the system or less friendly.

And if you find the system relatively easy to use,

your more likely to use it.

If you find the system very difficult to use, you're

more likely to just go independently, right?

This type of like little prediction, right?

So now why is organisation C.

Why do we have to be that you know for.

You will have to be that the payoff from using

from going independently is less than the payoff of using

concepts.

Is that.

This has to be true.

I have to be that what I get from using

content is better than what I get, right?

So the the probability or the proportion, if you want

that then the probability.

And non corrupt.

Organisation use.

Comes.

It is going to be.

P and C music is going to be equal to

one minus probability.

That's.

Right.

Now we can do the same with.

The combined organisation.

And I are going to choose.

Conceive if and only if the utility they get from

going around given corruption.

Is less than the utility they get from concept.

And so basically the probability they choose concepts.

Shown in the probability curve.

Is going to be equal to one minus.

This thing.

So we do have this probability right.

And so.

We also know what is the probability basically of choosing

one versus the other as a function of whether you

are in the organisation or non-profit organisation.

Yeah.

I'm really I think like the most brilliant are going

to say okay, let's suppose for one second.

And always our policy was.

So basically, whereas the better C is equal to zero

all the time.

In this case what is this quantity.

The one upon this probability.

If you see basically which is our positive price.

Increases.

What happened to the willingness to choose comfort over bring

independently, and the amount of positive work which is the

only way is increasing.

What are we going to do?

This quantity.

For cash.

Rather than profit.

This is assumption.

So what happens to the probability of choosing cancer.

If you choose to increase.

The control value inside the bracket increases.

Does that mean that P will decrease?

Is the following said the increasing or decreasing?

So this is of course this is a bigger CDF.

So this is an increasing function right.

This is CDs which is increasing with its argument.

New increases than the value inside the bracket decreases.

And that's why the CDF will fall.

So this means we have a minus and.

Okay.

So as if we were to increase this right PNC

of misery Sorry is going up.

So we can do it.

It's basically devotee of PNC of music who is making

music is equal to minus this minus here.

And we have you from.

Minus all p prime of whatever is inside.

So this is positive and this whole thing is positive.

So the whole probability increases.

So why does that mean that E always.

Is positive West.

There should be a positive correlation between the size of

the West and the probability.

The probability of choosing the central procurement.

The bigger the West, the more likely to choose the

first central procurement.

And the size of the West.

We know it because we have calculated it before.

That's the fixed track.

Now, of course, you have to think about what happened

in the other case, right?

One always is activist.

Which is usually is equal to zero.

And in this case.

So this is the cover.

This is the concept.

And the worst is based out of this.

Now the problem is here.

This is actually worse.

The problem is the star itself is an equilibrium object.

Right?

However, I tell you, I know it was already a

little bit while ago.

I know there's a very important information we got.

Right?

What do we know about this stuff?

It's moving with one of the parameter parts already.

What do we know about beta stuff?

There's only one parameter that matters, right?

Because all of them are done.

The only one.

The latter is better.

See?

What do we know about the relationship between better star

and better say.

It's bigger.

Right.

So increase.

Better star decrease.

But we would like to make it the other way

round.

Right.

So we're going to say as better as the same

as better.

See the decrease is better star better see increases.

But what else do we know is happening as well

as the decreases.

Why do we know about this function?

We better say.

Which means that it decreases.

If it's decreasing, which is better?

See if I decrease.

It's going to be.

Decreasing with better.

So that was better.

If I decrease better I see what happened to the

function.

I'm sorry.

I think again you're right that this function is decreasing

with better.

Which means as I increase that, I see that function

is going down.

But if I decrease velocity, this function is going up.

Right?

That's like the that's the property.

Okay.

So what do we know?

We know that.

And you know, what is the probability of choosing cancer

in this case?

If this is going up, the chance of choosing can't

be going up or is going down.

This this one is concerned that it's going up.

So this probability is going up or is going for

the one minus just this function.

Is it going up or is it going down.

It's go up with the minus.

It goes down which mean.

And what we are we are if always is our

change.

As you see an increase in the total weight, you

should see a decrease in the propensity of choosing.

Consider.

And know what we are.

We have an empirical prediction that allows us to differentiate

between active and passive lists.

So what does it say that says if always.

Is active an increase in active right.

That is to say delta c equal whereas b c

goes out.

Has a decrease in.

Propensity.

To choose conflict.

And that is exactly the reverse prediction is all possible.

So if all else is positive, we should see a

positive correlation between the amount of total weight, the effect

that we found, and the propensity to choose cancer.

If all is positive, we should see a negative correlation

between the amount of total waste and the propensity to

choose a concept.

And now we are in business because we have a

very simple test that adjudicates between the importance of passive

versus active.

And why not?

That said, because it's obvious.

It's very, very innocuous extent.

But you know, this is a beautiful way to think

about it because you are using not relatively simple but

some simple test result that is important.

What did you learn?

Something is going to fix the fight.

That's a simple test.

It's not only if you look at the correlation between

the predicted effect and the probability of choosing to go

centrally, that's also a very simple test for these two.

Very simple tests are going to tell us which of

the two type of world is going to be the

most important.

Is it going to be positive or is it going

to be articles.

Right.

So that's basically.

What I do here.

This is the notation is a bit different because there

are slightly different way of doing it.

But the model here does exactly what they want.

It's exactly the same thing in slightly simpler.

This is you know, if all due to positive words.

Then you have an increasing probability of finding cancer.

In other words, it is after the fact that I

find that prediction is a slightly different further attached to

your robust design.

This ID is right because it's basic.

It's very it's using properties of maximisation problem.

So that's a very very strong result.

And so what did they find.

Right.

They find it a positive differentiation.

And what does it mean.

Well it means you know that it is possible that.

Indeed if they do, you know, when they do the

structural model, what they find is that more than 80%

of the way that we are easy to perceive right

now, which is lack of capacity, lack of skills and

things like that.

And where is this, where is coming from?

What is really the big driver of this word was

going to be not enough.

All the Italians in the room.

As this has an effect as a service by induction.

It's not north versus south.

Contrary to what you will believe.

Is infiltrated by the club in South Korea.

What is really creating more is big ministries like big

organisation.

These are the ones that are really inefficient.

This is what you are.

It's like you didn't know.

The smaller you are, the less what you produce.

It's really this big mastodons that are creating all the

problem in companies.

So why do we learn from this?

Right.

What we learn from this is, you know, that's a

lot of words is used to pass the question.

And it's not just easily.

There's this nice paper by a former college student that

shows that if you think about Ghana and you look

at public good provision in Ghana, one third of project

will be unfinished.

Imagine the amount of waste that there is.

One third of school that thought to be built will

not be fully completed.

Right.

And you could think this is due to corruption.

But what he looks at, he looks at the amount

that has been built because it has no data for

this project compared to the amount that has been paid

to the contractor.

So if it's corruption, you should see that the amount

that has been paid to the contractor is bigger than

the amount that has been built.

That's basically the notion of corruption.

That's not what you find.

If anything, you find that the amount that has been

paid to the contractor is less than the amount that

has been built.

And in fact, what appears to be happening is that

there is a problem of commitment, of committing resources of

the state every year and the resources keep on changing.

Construct builder gets to be unpaid.

Stop the project at a certain point because otherwise it's

too costly for them and then nobody pick it up

again.

It's just a matter of bringing the money to finish

the project, not of wasting money on top of corruption.

Right.

And so after that's what I said in this three

lecture.

But we only have two, right?

After all this, what did we learn?

We learned that capacity matters quite a bit.

And in fact, what we should have studied from the

start was capacity, not corruption.

Right.

But you know, this is kind of like the way

things are.

So there is a very nice model by uh, uh,

basically and a person in the appendix, very simple, uh,

very A mandatory definition, but additionally intensive seminars and the

like model with a lot of medications.

But, you know, in terms of logic, it's not a

difficult time, but we're going to try to think about

what happened, rather to think about state capacity per se.

We're going to try to think about what happens when

you try to boost that capacity.

What are the consequences of this?

So what is capacity?

Is the capacity of the state to actually penetrate civil

society and to implement logistically political decisions throughout the region?

Right.

All the institutional capacity values policy deliver benefit and service

to families and farms.

The one thing also to think about state capacity, and

this is something that is growing in the literature, is

visibility, is the fact that the states know what's going

on on the ground and in the UK is very,

very clear.

They are very, you know, there is uh tax.

Directly on your income and things like that.

A very good vision of what is happening in many

developing countries.

They do not know what they are.

I do not have senses of, um, that sense.

And a lot of the decisions were, uh, Williams.

Martin Williams was not one of five, but one of

mine.

What he did for his case, he is from CNN

and he maps the location of all local courts and

judicial court papers in the country.

The state didn't know where the courts were located.

Imagine, imagine this lack of information.

How do you make progress is when you don't even

know this information.

So this is kind of like it's not just when

you do something when you decide that this policy is

implemented uniformly.

It's also when you decided to do up the required

information to do the best policy for your country, absent

any distortion from politics.

So that's also a very big question.

I think it's a trending topic in the in the

concept of state capitals.

Right.

So there are three ways that, you know, in terms

of outcome.

But I think we should think of it as a

fourth dimension in terms of the information collected by the

state which is not there.

But that should be also a dimension of the problem.

What is the capacity to collect revenues from capacity?

What is the capacity to implement policies, bureaucratic capacity, and

what is the capacity to protect the rights of citizens?

And if you look at the data, what you will

see is that, you know.

This is like very hard to get because it's a

3D graph.

And, you know, 3D graphs are extremely hard to understand.

But this is something where, you know, physical capacity is

here.

This is top of this capacity, top of collective capacity

and top of legal capacity.

So here are the countries that have high capacity on

demand.

Here are the countries that have low capacity on everything.

Right.

And what we can see that really the reform of

state capacity.

And I wouldn't be willing to bet the false form

of state capacity are correlated.

So either you have none of them or you have

all of them.

Right.

And what is really impressive, and I think really something

as a puzzle is How stable.

Standing up sometimes.

So this is a physical incapacity.

And you know, one of them is Malaysia, here in

Vienna.

And, you know, this is from 1990 to 2018.

And during this period, Malaysia grew extremely well.

This is really a big burst of energy.

Look at this.

If anything, they go down right.

There is no catch up of Malaysia with Germany in

terms of fiscal revenues, even though in terms of income

Malaysia is trending towards.

The there is kind of like there is this kind

of like distinction between the two, which I think is

really this stickiness.

If you want, as I like to say, the economies

of state capacity is a very interesting dimension of it.

And I don't think anyone has a good explanation for

why there is so much to connect.

There is the growth of the time and the capacity.

You said you meant for capita income.

Yes.

Right.

But you can do both, like both GDP and per

capita.

I mean, I'm not saying they're rich.

Germany.

Right.

But definitely the difference in income per capita is bigger

here than it is here, where the difference in tax

collection is smaller here than it is here.

So in fact there's almost a negative correlation between the

two.

Right.

Which is kind of I think both it and the

fact that there is no growth, that is almost nothing

like decreasing.

It's also really impressive.

It's true for in contrast to the sliding.

There's a big gap.

But you know still there is a sense of like

Supply is still catching up to the western U.S., Canada

and some of the Asian countries as well.

Either you have all, uh, you're good at all of

the things, or you're bad at all of them.

So like a reason why they are performing so poorly.

And this could be because the legal systems are bad

as it allows people to evade taxes.

And that's why that's true.

But why is it the case that they are not

improving as the economy is improving, but that that's the

person, right?

Because if you look at, I mean, you know, one

of the reasons the state is so strong and they

can be debate and stuff like this.

But, you know, what makes state is a very hard

proposition to break, right?

Like if you can see what is the status quo.

And that has been kind of like one of the

reasons the the countries in Europe such as because have

been such as like killing each other for so many

centuries.

So, you know, the proposed China is also a country

that is also very good at killing each other.

For many centuries, we European at least believe that kind

of nature.

And China did it all with the even militarism.

Yeah.

It has nothing to do with it.

Right?

Like if income is, GDP is increasing.

But inequality is increasing as well.

Like the rich people have more income and they're able

to influence state policies also.

And they can get more laws that so that they

can evade taxes.

And that's why there's yes, it's good capacity.

Also it's a good of tennis.

It's a good thing.

I don't know the answer to this question, so I

cannot like, you know, make it up.

I'm not sure.

It deserves to depend on you.

It's not obvious to me that you know, the condition

of the state by any dangerous is better here than

it was here.

Because usually you find the early diversified.

And, I mean, there's competition within the elite, and that

tends to be to the benefit of the people.

And that is, you know, that's something we've seen in

our last lecture, not in terms of capacity, but in

terms of democracy.

So I wouldn't I don't think I would remember that

point at this point, but maybe, you know, so but

like I think that, you know, this is kind of

like it's not obvious.

It would be true if you have like a unitary

elites it's worked.

I think as development increases, usually division between the people

who want more and more manufacturing sector.

And that time actually they have a different thing from

the state and that can be to the benefit of

the people.

So that's if I mean actually indeed in to be

to be reading very in advance to 11 weeks in

a seven week next term, we will see that the

tax rate will increase following the participation, because a democratisation

arise because like in the 80s.

So there is kind of, you know, it's not obvious

to me that this, this, this element.

Yeah.

How much of this is.

Kind of culture because like being sticky sometimes in historical

development people tend to attribute also this kind of this

kind of like feature to like culture evolving kind of

slowly even though like in the paper, like this for

capital variables so that they were not super important.

Uh, like the size of the organisation.

I mean, it's true.

But you know.

And I mean, I don't I know not the data

before, but I think, you know, I think this this

must be going on for quite a while.

And then I think they were probably like gonna manage

to go there.

And then they got stuck.

Right.

So I don't think this is like, you know, I

think this is more a selling than a cultural argument

for data going further.

You know, I think if it was just a coach,

it would be hard to explain why some countries are

growing slightly.

Right.

So yeah, I think there is something going on.

And I don't think the literature has a very good

answer to this thing.

I'm not a capacity scholar, so I can I can

point to proposals that I see, but I cannot give

you explanation because that is not my speciality.

So I just want to give you like, questions to

be answered.

And definitely.

Let me give you.

Something.

Okay.

So let's talk about what can we do to boost

that capacity.

Right.

Like let's say you know again maybe some of you

will work for the RCD.

So first of all, I told you, if you want

to fight corruption, invest in the legal system, I tell

you.

But if you have money, don't put it in the

legal system to fight corruption.

Put it somewhere else, you know, because really your motto

is positive.

Whereas other than activist, what we would like to understand

is what type of reform can we do?

And so one way, you know, that has been kind

of promoted a lot.

It's called the professionalisation of bureaucracies now as a very

old idea.

And Unless I feel like going back to rebellion, I

think it should be a democracy.

And what is this idea of like, you know, an

Extinction Rebellion, like this idea of difference.

And in particular, this idea is very important to project

perturbations in the world.

That sounds obvious.

And it wasn't even more obvious in China, which has

a very, very long history of meritocratic recruitment, which is

kind of like one of the hardest entry exam at

some point in the world.

But it's actually a very new idea in most parts

of the world, right?

So there was patronage in the British Empire.

The army in Sweden was under patronage.

That is what is patronage is basically you put your

friends in position, you know, then, you know, prior to

1855, that's what happened in 1855, the 1850s, for reform

to open up of the army.

No.

Sunday.

What do we get?

You know, to move the army from patronage to more

form of meritocracy, just like a huge military defeat.

And you just get crushed.

And then they say, oh, maybe our patronage system is

not the best of the whole.

I mean, they just implement more meritocracy.

There is patronage, you know, is often combined with merit

system.

It's often a bit of both.

And in particular, patronage as being a huge feature of

the United States prior to any of the progress of

the 1920s, where not only.

And what happened in, you know, 1883.

Right?

It is not.

It was the federal government which imposed a worker that

is victim based for some position.

Right.

The impact of this is that the rise in this

had just come out in one of the journal.

And because the reform is incomplete as well, you know,

the composition is important.

The impact of the reforms, if you do not get

rid of all the patronage within a few, competent with

a lot of incompetent, is not going to have much.

So he also that the the federal law that pushes

the state to also start their own reform.

Right.

And because we have this reform that are implemented at

this day, we were going to start thinking about how

to deal with this.

And one way to deal with this is to do

what was at the top of the paper.

A difference in different strategies is what will be nowadays

called a study of difference and different strategies.

So what is done in this paper by we hear

you for the word probably that's not the way you

pronounce my hand, but it He's not in the room,

is anyone?

No.

This is this is.

I think I see him teaching me how to pronounce

the name.

It didn't work so well.

And so the first tech to pass mathematical equipment is

New York.

While the last night is, you know, takes us, for

example, you know, meritocratic recruitment in the bureaucracy is still

appointment based.

So.

One thing to note is this is not an average

treatment effect, because it's not the case that the treatments,

the meritocratic recruitment is randomise across states.

Right.

Instead, we self-select into the treatment.

So one way to think about it is that Stan

2003, the treatment of those who are.

They think that the benefit of doing so is maximised

and the cost of doing so is minimise, right?

Which means that since we're going to look at the

cost, we might have actually an underestimate of the negative

consequence of this, right?

Because it's basically the best case scenario that self-select into

the true.

So what do they find?

So now there is a problem.

And let's say you're not a naive politician.

You're smart.

You as you know backstabber like crazy politician.

You became governor of a state like really, you really

have to get that is not necessarily legally dirty.

You know, you need to have like some coverage.

So before the before, what will you do to maximise

your electoral advantage?

You will give, you know, a post office to this

person.

Something here, something there, you know to important people just

to make, you know, to to please the right people

at the right time.

Indeed you have like in this movie by called Lincoln

on the Abolition of Slavery.

You will see that Lincoln is actually buying off legislators.

He is basically talking with this person and they say,

oh, Senator blah blah from Connecticut doesn't want to follow

you guys, but what does he want?

Oh, it was the post office for his nephew.

Give him a post office for his nephew.

You know, it's really this whole bargaining going on of

patronage being provided by Lincoln to, you know, people to

get the policy ones.

And here it's kind of like the same thing happening

at the state level.

But no.

This is lost.

It's not because you don't have this access to this

position.

There are no based on exam.

And, you know, the people you were selecting, they were

not the brightest of the bunch.

So this is kind of so what do you have

to do.

Why do you know you're not going to see it

on your hands?

And what you're going to start to do is that

you're going to use all the levers of influence, in

particular in this state.

What they are is that the the state government transfer

a lot of money to localities so they can transfer

a lot of money to different municipalities across the state.

And so what do you do if the smart politician

is, but, you know, this sort of model for this

sort of positions and I cannot use this.

No, this pot of money, what I'm going to use,

I'm going to disturb the allocation of this pot of

money in order to compensate for my inability to distort

the allocation of position.

And this is exactly what is going to be happening

in the data.

Right?

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to

start transferring resources to lower level of government.

Huh?

This is going to be, especially in some type of

spending that are very easy to manipulate, right, Ron?

As I said, you know, roundabouts are a very good

way to transfer money, right?

And leveraging corruption and why they're going to do that,

you know, before they were giving the bureaucratic position to

they're not going to give the money to weapons.

And although actually the authorities meddling is going to decrease

as a result.

So we get huge you know, we have distortion in

one domain.

You shut down that level, that possibility for distortion.

What you're going to do is that you're not going

to eliminate distortion.

You're just going to move distortion to another place.

And, you know, the question is when you think about

this is simple.

This politician was maybe, you know, a little bit caring

about the welfare of the people.

Probably will have chosen the minimally disruptive disruption by going,

yeah, the burger.

No, he cannot do this.

It's probably more damaging distortion that arise as a result.

So when we think about reform, you know, it's a

bit like when you have a leak in electricity, Thames

Water, if you look if you are in London and

you live, you will see them sort of popping up

all over your neighbourhood from time to time.

This is the way they are working now.

Going there.

There is a leak, the fixed leak.

And you know what happened?

The leak reappeared on the back and it's getting worse

and worse and worse and things like this.

In fact, we had a joke that I was livid.

We could see the leak going down the road was

very funny.

Started up, and then it went down and went down.

He went down and my dad.

And every month or so you are crossing the road

during the break and stuff like this is something that

happen when you do reform of this type of thing.

If you block this notion in one dimension, you're going

to get distortion in another.

There is one more strategic adaptation.

You have to think what is the word distortion, right.

And what is the distortion.

But the idea that we will stop distortion altogether.

Is it again?

You know, we don't work with Angel.

We work with human beings that are strategic human.

Right.

And on this world, I wish you a fantastic drive

for those kinds of desires.

And I hope some of you can go home.

Relax.

This is quite the exam, and I look forward to

seeing you in January for looking at all the political

articles, the media and social media.

All right.

Have a very good break, everyone.

Thank you.

Lecture 11:

Last one.

Last we have seen the main tools of this was

the goal of the.

We saw one application in corruption.

We saw a bit of capacity, but mostly it was

about getting you to know the main models through which

you can think about political economic questions.

Prospective retrospective political agency this time we are gonna try

to do more.

It's not to say that otherwise I get too.

So next week we will have a very simple decision

theoretic models of consumption.

2 weeks from now we will see the best model

that we see in this course, which is a model,

right.

And in a few weeks we'll have a hard lecture

to introduce you to the principle, the principle of the

regulation principle, right?

So I have a few lectures that are a bit

harder, but really we have seen the building block on

which we are going to look at applications.

So today's media, then that's like all the political actors

in the system.

And we would think about it.

Right So, Why do we need to stay there the

media?

One reason is because this has been an object of

inquiry that has developed dramatically in the last 15 years,

like most likely are the next political Economy Nobel Prize,

and they will get it for the right and this

is coming in 10 years' time or something like this.

It's just a matter of time for them to get

it right.

But the other reason to study in the media is

that they are kind of like an essential part of

democracy and they are often called the fourth state, right,

the fourth branch of government.

And why do they make such an incentive important world

is because there are so many things going on in

the world.

Like so many that we can keep track of everything.

And what we do is that we pay in institutions,

the media organisations to philtre the world for us, and

that's what they are doing, right?

We have transformed many kind of like events in the

world into information that didn't reach the voters.

Well, Then when we think about it this way, there

are two important questions, right?

What is that?

The information is as we know from Some others, some

of it is an important part of holding politicians accountable,

but if you don't know what people are doing, if

you don't know what's going on, if you don't, you

don't know about the consequence of policies, you don't know

about the policies that are being made, and you cannot

basically all politicians accountable for the elections.

So they play a big role for this.

Another thing that is important is knowing this is, well,

are these really just a mediator.

Is it kind of like a purely neutral filtering device

or is this a device, an institution that introduce bias

in the process?

That some fact above others went out to the interests

of the organisation.

Right, to help allies and earth opponents, right, so we

want to also think about how does the media.

The political process thinking about how will it be.

And so that's kind of what we do in in

this lecture.

So we're not gonna ask 4 questions.

The first question that we're going to ask is do

media outlets matter.

That is obviously the first question we because if it

does not matter, then we should just end the lecture

and you know, go to the pub or the coffee

and get like this.

Now, obviously, you know, be spoiled by that.

They're all gonna matter.

So with this we're gonna move to the 7 part

of which is we're gonna ask ourselves, are the outlets

biassed and we're gonna ask to what extent of the

bias that is by.

But this is hard to answer.

But also, how far does the price of bias goes

to?

Is it just about, you know, big issues, or is

it really spreading across the board to all types of

issues?

This is bias, and we will see evidence that actually

this is spreading across all types of issues.

And very briefly, because it's not really the core political

economic question, it's much more, uh, industrial organisation we will

see very quickly some explanation for why this bias occur.

And now we will ask the political question that we

have about what are the consequences of this media bias.

But that's kind of like, oh.

So that's kind of like the plan for for this

lecture to answer these sort of questions.

Alright.

Suppose You're gonna research it for one second.

And you want to measure the effect of the media,

right, that that's.

To do so you understand that you and so you

need to compare in an environment where there is a

high intensity.

And there's a low media intensity.

Because you're very naive.

You have not taken or, you know, courses in economics,

and you just request that the board chair of the

amount of effort the incumbent is doing on the media

environment, right?

What would be the problem with this situation?

the problem with this.

But there is a problem with there are few things

you can talk about, right?

So what is indeed the problem of omitted variable bias,

right?

So you can think about one problem is omitted variable

bias, right?

So what is, but in the case of an omitted

bias, but importantly, right, when you think about omitted bias,

you need to think about a variable that is not

included in the regression that is correlated with the media

intensity.

And correlated with the bible, it's not enough to just

have a variable that is correlated with media intensity and

it's not enough to have a variable that is just

correlated with that effort made by politicians, right?

We need to think about a viable that is red

with both the right hand side and the left hand

side, right?

And then think about what are the correlation that gives

you the sign of the bias.

So let's think about.

Yes, let's say we have, you know, on the one

hand, we have politicians.

Any votes.

And then we have.

Media.

Just for you to refresh yourself from my beautiful calligraphic

writing.

So we need to think about.

That will affect both.

What can it be?

It's a kind of political knowledge that also intersects with

like demand for from like um public information from the

media, yeah we can about borders.

of interest.

In politics.

Right, that's right, a slightly broader, more bigger to put

more into it, right?

So how does border interest in politics affect media intensity.

What do we think the correlation is?

It's positive, right today.

interest in politics are fake politicians.

Positive as well, probably I don't know whatever.

So even though we have positive correlation here, positive correlation

here, we have an upward bias on our simple regression

of politicians and media intensity.

So what we will need to do is to control

if you want, but the reason that I use a

very big term.

to show how difficult it will be to control votes,

right?

Many things could be understood as this, and many things

we do not have access to that.

For example, if we take the average education of voters

in the constituency, probably not sufficient to control fully for

that.

So that's kind of like one thing.

If you have one of the signs that is different,

then you have a tonne of bias, right?

So that's, that's so you know whether your bias is

a or.

Now, what is another issue when we think about this?

Did you?

Right, this can we yeah, we could say in places

where politicians do a lot, there's a lot to report

on and therefore there is high intensity.

Right, so we can build 2 stories and make the

ILS not the right way to do so.

And so if I gave you the problem with or

in your mind should be but I like the concept

of omitted viable virus because it's it's exactly the same

thing or reverse causality reverse causality will make no sense.

Yeah, you know, it makes sense, so.

What do we need?

We need to find a way to have exogenous variation

in media intensity.

We need to find a way to have something here

that vary exogenously.

Such as we break the dependence here and we break

the reverse causality as well.

Now, obviously it's easier said than done, and I would

make two things that make great.

The first one is the.

The first one is they understand what are the omitted

viable risks and the be that affect what you think

about your ILS, when you think about the IV you

should use and things like this.

The great thing is they find great data.

the 3rd grade on a regular basis because you know

I did find some great data, but this is just

a one off very lucky draw thinking.

On average, I'm completely terrible at finding data.

The third thing right is that they are able to

come up with a very clever way.

To generate the exogenative opinion and that is really when

you have all three, you have a greater and there

are few and far between.

So, What we have is a paper by two great

combining together Jim Snyder and David Stromberg, and what am

I going to do to try to think about.

This problem is that they're going to look at the

overlapping between the newspaper media market which is endogenous, right,

the demand for the media is endogenous, and the congressional

district that is exogenous.

Now there is one case where this assumption is problematic

is because in the US you have a lot of

redistricting.

If redistricting politicians takes into account the newspaper media market,

then the relationship between the two, this is not exogenous

relative to media intensive, right?

So I will create my own sort of problem, but

it's not usually the way it's done.

The way they do redistricting and that they don't use

media market don't really care about it.

What they care about is of course predicating the partisan

composition of a district and the best predictor of partisan

composition of the district is the race of the people.

living there based in the US, the education of the

people living there and the income of the people living

there and what they used to do this is basically

census track data, so very tiny slice of place and

then they build.

A kind of like constituency district this way census work

together.

So technically it's very hard to argue that with districting

take into our current media market, but it's probably not

happening and therefore we can take the shape of a

district to be exogenous relative to a newspaper media market

and as a result we can compare the two, and

that's what they call congress, right?

So we can think about.

2 is the case where the media market, the newspaper

market, sorry, media market, and the congressional district overlap very

well.

I think about a district where there is one newspaper

in it and all of the readers of this newspaper

belong to that district.

So the very good.

The other case, this is this case where you have

newspaper A here and you have 2 newspaper A is

full in District 2, newspaper A is in District 1.

Newspaper B is fully in District 2.

Another case would be the case where actually the newspapers

is spread across multiple districts.

This is the case here, this newspaper.

Some readers are in District one, some readers are in

District 2.

The care or something.

If they know the newspaper about it.

They collect information.

The shape of the district is easy to play and

so they can make this.

Now, where should we expect?

The reporting about in the US we're talking about members

of Congress.

Where should we expect reporting to be higher?

Is it gonna be in places where there is high

congress and places where there is low congress?

What do you think newspaper I'm gonna talk more about

what is a newspaper B talking more about district 2

representatives in this case or is it in this case?

No congres.

Why would it below congruence?

If they um just stimulate debates think about most people

how many newspapers do you read?

like.

You two in the same country, one country, one in

Italy, one in the UK, right?

Most people read one newspaper, right, they have a local

one maybe on top of a national.

So it's not about readers are going to be they're

going to read one or the other, right?

The other assumption is that we can see that the

amount of space to be devoted to national politics is

very much constant unless there is a big issue, it's

going to be one page, right?

So in this case, what is the newspaper going to

do about in the one page?

It's going to do, let's say some about 50% to

be simple about this representative, 50% about this representative.

In this case, 100% of the one page will be

about this representative.

So the amount of coverage will be higher in case

of high concurrence versus the case of low congruence.

Of course under the assumption that there is a huge

amount of space for political news and The other assumption,

the other thing is, where should we expect voters to

be more informed, high congruence or low concurrence under which

assumption?

We do get assumption, very good luck.

And the assumption if you're less informed, you want to

inform yourself or in that if you're less.

If you don't have an opinion, you're most likely to

read more to form an opinion.

You are very optimistic about the world.

It could be that like in high congruence people would

want more because they're getting the best they're getting the

information, but in low congruence they're getting things right?

So let's assumptions assumption that reader, if they read they

read one newspaper.

Which is usually the case, right?

Under this assumption, if any, under this assumption, where will

they be most informed?

Congress, right, if they read more newspaper, it might be

that they are more informed, right?

So we can have this thing that like, again, it's

important because we cannot, can never make statements without adding

some structure, right?

It's like there are too many possibilities under the assumption

that there's a fixed amount.

Of space devoted to national politics, there will be more

coverage of this representative in the case of higherence versus

low congres and the assumption that borders with One newspaper,

one local newspaper, it would be more informed on high

concurerence than the locals.

Now.

As I said, we are dealing with great people and

it's really if you want to see the difference between

a great paper and And also great paper, maybe it's

too strong, but like most of the great empirical papers

are the thing that you know they're not going to

assume things.

I think they have to assume, but they're not going

to assume things.

They're going to show it, right?

They are going to show that indeed you're gonna have

more coverage in our congruence place.

They are gonna show that voters will be more informed

according to the measure we have of information.

And the eye coverage places, right, so they're not going

to take the assumption and just run just like Congress

and members of Congress efforts.

They're going to take the assumption and show all the

steps in the logical thing.

Another thing that they do very, very well is the

way they present their results.

This is a wonderful state.

of misery.

And here you are, you know, the different.

Congressional district, you have Springfield here, you have Stanways and

then you know you have staff.

And here you can see here the big red line

of the district, the small lines here are counties, which

is kind of like a unit of analysis in the

US around 100,000 inhabitants by county but with huge value

so we can see that not only you can see

that on average.

Congress is higher in some district versus other.

So for example, here, the district of Springfield has a

lot of my congress, but there is a Springfield local

newspaper.

Relative to this district that has very low.

On top of it we can see that we live

in a district, right?

We live in a district.

Some counties have higher than you can even do a

district analysis for some of the analysis, right?

You can look at this.

So.

What do they do?

They are going to compare the district within a given

state.

So compare, take the state of misery.

Look at what happened in high congruence district versus no

congruence district, and some outcome looking at what happened in

within the district between county with high congruence and county

with low congence, right?

They also compare counties that got redistricted to itself, so

basically.

You look at a country and For example, this county

is represented by someone that is here, so there is

very little conference because, you know, much closer to Springfield,

but if it turns out to be included in the

Springfield constituency.

There would be much higher congruence as a result, right?

So if you were to make this country belong to

this constituency, the state of this country will become much

darker.

This is, for example, like a way to do it.

But what we are going to try is mostly the

first one we're not even going to look at the

re table, but it is this beautiful way of presenting

the result.

Except for the.

But they didn't know it at the time it's 2010,

so give them some, but you know it's beautiful.

The third thing I want to show is, as you

have more of your readers living in a district.

Newspapers spend more kind of like the share of coverage

at the district gate become high.

The share of political news and the district gates become

high.

That's saying, for example, if all your readers belong to

the district of this representative, this district is going to

get 50%, not even like something like 50% of the

share of coverage of political news.

That's a very nice this is this correlation between the

level of congruence and the amount of coverage and it

is not.

The issue is that you have more conference, you have

more information about.

So the way they do this is a measure of

information, but that's one of the best we are is

recording the name of your representative, right?

So do you know the name of your MP?

You live in this country for not, oh, but you

know he's also representing you in terms of problems, not

just nationals, but every resident can be represented by the

by the MP.

I'll go for local.

You know the name of your MP.

And you felt that.

I know it, but it's only because mine is Jeremy

Corbyn.

Uh, it's very short man.

So at least we see that there is more knowledge,

right?

And then you look at what happened when you have

more and the politicians.

What do they do, right?

That's what we are interested about is going from the

part of the information to the part of accountability.

Do we see that when voters are more information and

become more knowledgeable, politicians actually start to add more.

Right, so one thing they look at is the amount

of effort that they put in the US Congress.

So as you have more conference between the district and

the leadership, they, they tend to be present for witness

appearances.

What are witness appearances?

The thing that some academics love to do because they

feel very important is when.

The US Congress is considering a bill.

What is happening and this bill is going to be

assigned to a committee everywhere.

That's how it works except in, uh, parliamentary system, but

usually the bill is designed by the government, but in

the other system it's assigned to a committee.

The committee is gonna hold.

Stations where they're going to interview people and they interview

people what they are called these people they are called

witnesses.

So you get, for example, Evon Bolton.

To be called to US Congress, hopefully never, probably never.

And you know, to talk about something, what do you

think about blah blah blah blah blah, I like, I

don't know and I don't care, but you know, this

is.

The one they also get people that are directly affected

by the policy working on congressmen.

So you get kind of like the mother that has

lost, you know, her daughter in some accident talking about

safety of cars and why you need to have this

type of safeties and things like this, right?

So you get this type of, of wins and so

what they're looking at is Whether you see the congressman

being present more in the committee when a witness is

being interviewed and the effect is yes.

This is.

Whether they work for the constituency or whether they are

on a committee that is aligned with the interests of

the constituency or whether they serve on a big committee

that is, you know, more about the system.

In fact, one of the most powerful committees in the

US Congress is the rule committee.

the rule committee decides.

Whether or not which rule bill will be put on

the floor, and it can be closed, which means you

cannot make amendments can be open, well then this is

a free fall of amendment and then you know, if

you on an open rule, the bill has very little

chance of passing.

It's very powerful, but it's not helping much of constituents.

So this is kind of like well and the other

thing to look at is whether the The congressman is

voting with the party as we call it the leader

of the party in the US the congressman voting with

the party leaders, and we can see that there are

less voting with the party leaders, which means that this

is the assumption that there are more voting for the

constituency, less for the party.

The last thing that we see that they look at.

Is how much?

Does the constituency get in terms of per capita spending

of federal package.

So in every bill you have this, not in every

bill, but actually in many bills you have this kind

of thing that is called the pork, and the book

is, for example, building the school or building roads or

stuff like this, you know, in the constituency, and politicians,

I think, as I told you before, they're really, really

kind of like.

of this.

That's why they like to communicate to their constituents, and

they brought the money of the new schools in the

district and stuff like that.

And what do we see we see in this.

They also get more spending for their constituency when there

are more under the eyes of their constituency.

So what do we see?

We see that more information produces more effort both in

terms of their attitude in Congress and in terms of

what they get for their constituency, right?

So this is kind of like.

And that.

So what's the outcome of this?

Not very surprisingly, but the good paper doesn't have to

be surprising to be good, right?

The good paper is something that can show you whatever

it is in a very nice way and convincing way,

right?

So a good paper does this, and that I think

is a good way to show that media matters because

they show you all the things, right, show you all

this on you.

And it's not.

Which is not necessarily the we want to adopt.

For example, it could be that, you know.

We have the politicians except more effort and in newspaper

to report more at least to do this, but they

really add more effort in the expectation of coverage.

It doesn't really matter what is the order of causality,

right?

What matters is that all the piece of the puzzle

falls in line together, not necessarily that this is the

right order.

OK, any information on this?

Yeah.

Now, Second question, thankfully.

Journalists would have gone completely crazy if it was not

the case.

Why do they think they matter so much.

They probably less than they think they matter, but they

do matter.

No, the question is, are guarded by.

Now This is some, there's something about economics that sometimes

drives me crazy is that sometimes they become obsessed with

measurement.

Like they become obsessed about measuring something.

They will measure it like there is a bit like

physicists that try to measure the speed of the light

to the 25th decimal, you know, and I'm like, for

engineering that matters because you want to have this precision,

read the neutron exactly at the or whatever, but.

when it comes to social status, we don't really care.

Fox News has a media of 90.3 to 1, or

media bias of 90.3 to 087, right?

This is not really important, you come upstairs, so we're

going to follow them a little bit into the obsession,

but there is something to be said that is actually

from.

Intellectual perspective, it is a very interesting question.

There's an easy way to measure, relatively easy way to

measure politicians' ideological position to look at their votes that

what we call the whole court.

The court is the least of them, and the way

this is being done in the literature is you will

think about the number of times someone bought conservative.

And that will be the conservative scope, right?

Now the problem is with this is that you need

what is called an anchor.

You need someone to anchor the conservative scale.

So sometimes this is done by using a special interest

group.

Sometimes this is done by using a legislator that you

would think is the most left wing.

So for example, Bernie Sanders in the Senate will be

your anchor point, and the number of times you vote

with Bernie Sanders, the number of times you vote conservative,

then you will think like, I don't know, some crazy

guy like of the Republican Party as your anchor for

conservative and you go this way, right?

So this is kind of like the way this is

being.

The problem is, in general there's no such measure for

media outlets and you don't get them to vote on

policies.

So on top of it, there are two types of

biases that we would like to learn about when you

think about the media which are not necessarily the same

for politicians.

One part is called publication, or I will call publication

bias.

So the publication bias is the decision of what do

we both on and how much coverage to give to

that topic.

So it's basically what is the space devoted to the

topic with 0 being this is not covered at all.

Another question is presentation bias often also referred as a

slut, and this is how you talk about an issue.

Right, so one.

Is an information disclosure problem, an information disclosure problem.

We are kind of like it's mostly paper by Milgran

and Roberts that would be useful to think about it.

The other one.

Is work if you want you can think of it

as a cheaper, as a persuasion problem, but the way

you slant it could be kind of a way to

think about persuasion.

You will think about persuasion models in your problems that

are associated with online media.

So your problems that are associated with media bias you

are doing, and then.

An interesting model of communication bias, and then in your

problems that are associated with online media, you're going to

do a model of persuasion.

to publication, but we can see that also work this

way.

You can have a very language and that would be

equivalent not talking about it.

So we are thinking about measuring the and measuring these

two types of biases.

So I was in Vietnam.

Now the 3 approaches considered.

One is explicit in the form of endorsement, and that

make it as close as possible to do the work

out of politicians.

And so you have this paper that use endorsement in

California of proposal to measure the bias of.

The second is more into the implicit behaviour implicit decision,

and that would be the coverage of issues.

You have S, Snyder and Snyder.

We talk about this one.

There's a paper of mine.

I showed you one result from that paper to show

you how far media bias is spread in some of

the issues.

The last one is also an inclusive language being used,

right, so this is, for example, the first one to

do it is this los and Milo.

I was looking at the citation of think tanks by

politicians and the citation of think tanks by media outlets.

Using a bridge to do this, and we are going

to discuss the Gs and paper that is going to

be using the language of politicians and comparing to the

language of newspapers.

recent developments that to be beyond this.

One is the talk show about who gets invited in

talk shows to measure the amount of.

And this paper showed that if you look at talk

shows and you want to measure the bias by looking

at politicians, you are actually underestimating the bias that people

are exposed to because the pundits that they invite are

often even more extreme than the politicians, and this is

using translator.

Another one is the choice of images and trying to

see to find a way to classify images of conservative

Republican, Democrat or Republican conservative or this is where I

really know we are starting to cut, you know, the

fingers of the fingers, the hair of angels a little

bit.

Now the one thing I understand is that all these

can measure different biases, sometimes it's presentation, it's publication, sometimes

it's it's a mix of both.

Another thing that is very important and I want you

to keep in mind is that while we are going

to talk about media bias.

We are going to be able to say that one

media outlet is more conservative than another one, but we

are not going to be able to say that one

media outlet is biassed to the right and one media

outlet is biassed to the left.

The reason we cannot do this is because we do

not have something that will measure a centrist media outlet.

Or if you want the position of voters if you

are the median citizen, not even the median voter, but

the median citizen in the data, right?

So usually every measure of biases that is being given

is a relative one.

It's one type of media outlet versus another type of

media, not one conservative.

Of course most of the time we are going to

associate the value conservative to one and liberal to the

other, but you know these things could be crazy and

most media could be to the right, could be to

the left and make an argument that most media outlets

in the US are left but just to be clear,

one of this paper work a little bit to measure

uh to the media in California.

So.

And so one advantage of endorsement is that is exactly

that at least in endorsement you can compare the media

outlet position relative to the median voter and you know

that if The media, the outlet has voted against.

voter and you can put the policy on the scale,

you know that that issue was more liberal and more

conservative than the median voter, right?

You can think about.

In this way, oops.

You think about a liberal issue.

And we're gonna say that here is going to so

let's say that this issue here our voters.

It is me.

And let's say that there is 60% that voted yes

and there is 40% that voted no.

As you have that's increasing taxes on uh big internet

companies.

This was put to a referendum and 60% of voters

voted yes.

40% of voters voted no.

Let's think about.

To the media.

Media A and also the proposition on the ballot and

media B did not.

That is the existed.

To vote against.

The proposition right so major A said Major said vote

against, right?

Can we say something about the ideological positioning of media

a relative to the media?

So could you play for me on the right or

on the left of the median.

And that everybody that is here yes, everybody that is

here vote no, and that includes as well the media

think about endorsement as a vote of yes.

Can you say something about the position of media a

relative to the media.

You right because it could be that it could be

here.

It could be here in which we could say that

a to the left of the median, but A could

also be here.

Because some people that are to the right of the

median also voted for the issue, right?

So we don't know where A is.

We don't know if A is to the left of

the median or A is to the right of the

median, right?

What about B?

Why do we know where B is?

We know that B is going to be somewhere here,

right?

We know that B is going to be somewhere here

so we can say that B is definitely to the

right of the media.

So what you can do is that you can look

at the endorsement that did not match.

The decision, and if you can see our issues as

liberal or conservative, which is relatively, then you can determine

how many times a media outlet has been to the

right of the media or has been to the left

of the media, depending on they actually lost if you

want, right.

Now that the problem with this is you only see,

you are only able to call to include the newspaper.

In your card if you asked, which is when they

took a relatively extreme position, so that's kind of like,

you know, problematic because most of the time they will

not.

They do just a syncotic.

The issue is that is that this can be done

for propositions and propositions there are not so many are

also on special topics.

So you know this is not kind of like across

all possible issues of specific set of issues that you

uses.

Do not endorse you out of nowhere.

They will think about the consequence of the endorsement.

They don't want to read, you know, during the election

campaign, many newspapers that.

kind of like usually endorsing a candidate and usually endorsing

a Democrat has refused to do so like the LA

Times, I think didn't do it.

I think the Washington Post didn't do it, and a

lot of readers got extremely mad because of this, right?

Bezos got invited to the ceremony.

So this is kind of like.

Another thing is to compare the coverage of officials, right.

So here what is other is That you need to

think about not all issues can be used for this

type of kind of measuring publication parts.

You need something that happens at least couldn't see because

we need to carry out quantitatively.

But if we were to do qualitative analysis, we could

look at like less prominent issues.

You need issues that we don't care about because this

is, you know, maybe, you know, walking people getting.

like walking on this.

These are probably of pos that there are, but I

don't think anyone give a damn about it.

That that doesn't work.

And you also need to think about coverage.

You need something that is non-manipulable, right?

That is not something that you can say that it's

white when it's actually black.

So one paper by Pian Schneider used scandals at municipality

level where the mayor is involved in the scandal.

Another paper last Snyder use economic news, right, such as

employment news.

And the good thing to use economic news is that

once they happen regularly indeed every quarter they release them,

so that's great.

Second, people really care.

About economic news, unemployment and these days inflation are, you

know, looked at with great interest.

They are not manipulable.

You cannot say that unemployment rate is 7% when it's

actually 4%, and that you have to report that there's

very verification to be done.

And on top of this.

You can think about good or bad news for the

incumbent politician.

Because if you are an incumbent in office and you

see that unemployment is going up.

And that would be.

Good news, right?

Invention is not always bad.

If you're good news.

If you are if you are actually they are worried

in China that they are doing a deflation period as

well.

It would be good news in Europe now it's bad

news for high inflation, right?

So there's this, but depending on what you get, it

could be good at least we can most of the

time it's gonna be it's gonna be.

So what we do is do the following.

Now I can think about the proportion of stories.

On the economy in 18 or like uh in the

day after the release of the report, but are you

gonna do this?

Why am I going to do this like you know

2011, you can do more of this stuff, but often

it is.

the most sophisticated stuff give you the same result as

the basic stuff.

They do a very smart.

What they do is they count to count basically the

space that there is in the newspaper they're going to

use the pronong.

B is good because of a or R or whatever.

It's good because that's something they use a lot and

therefore, you know, it's you can think that it's used

at a regular level every time so that the number

of times you see the pronoun is a good kind

of like proxy for the length of the newspaper that

day.

And whether it was a short or long, so that's

one thing.

The second thing, and then I'm going to think about

the the economy, for example, unemployment.

How many times did unemployment and associated term arise in

the newspaper that day and then you do the ratio,

and that gives you a very good proxy of the

share of.

Stories that are on the economy, right, that of space

that is on the economy.

They're not going to do the economic news, but they're

going to think about I value as bad news.

So think about unemployment.

We're gonna work with the unemployment example all the time.

I'm gonna have kind of like a dummy for democratic

presidents.

To think about this.

And so what is in this regression and I'm gonna

be, you know.

The newspapers the it's gonna be taking work on the

newspaper.

It's gonna be the news in itself, how much it

has changed relative to the last one.

Maybe for democratic, maybe democratic president produce more news in

general.

Donald Trump, we know vision here is going to be

negative, right, because he's a genius that's doing it, right?

If you think about it, he's always going to say

something outrageous and get coverage and you know, on the

singles that he says, much less on the single traders

that he does, you know this is.

And you're gonna get the interaction of the two and

then you have some control that I don't remember what

it is.

What is going to be a measure of media bias

in this case?

What is the coefficient and merge your media biases.

I OK, let's go one by one.

Could be this one.

What is he saying?

It's just thinking about the fact that some level of

unemployment are more newsworthy than others.

Is it media biases?

just basically if you want something that is called mind

bits effect, is that not news, you know, dog bites

man is no news, bites m is news.

Is the change a measure of media bias.

No, because it's basically just a maybe some big, big

change, probably more newsworthy than a tiny little bit of

change.

It is a measure of media bias, not really, because

it's really just about the president, the democrat, right?

This is saying what this is comparing how news is

being reported, the difference basically in the coverage of the

news when the president is Democrat, so the term is

equal to one versus when the president is Republican.

When the is equal to 0, so it's the difference

in coverage of the same news when the president is

Democrat versus Republican.

This sounds like.

This is the coefficient for me.

So if there's no media bias, what should be the

value of these coefficients?

0.

And if there is media bias, we should see that

the vi of this coefficient is different than 0, right?

And the newspaper that.

And what do they find they find in that you

know for most newspapers, the coefficient is different.

Then they want to think about.

Why is kind of like, you know, driving this difference

in coverage.

So what they're gonna do is that they're gonna think

about the propensity of a newspaper to endorse a democrats.

So they're gonna say, I'm not seeing a Democrat really

great on the newspaper fix the like of control of

the economic situation, whether there is war.

4 years.

So what do we have?

I was thinking about what is the probability that you

and Laros.

For for the economy, etc.

and a newspaper fits the fact.

What measures the ideology of a newspaper here?

The right so what do we get if the fact

is positive.

What does he tell us about the newspaper?

It's more than one.

It's more democratic leaning than the reference newspaper.

Right, again, you are right.

Most people would say it's all democratic leaning because, you

know, I want us to be clear that it's always

a relative statement.

When you do fix the tank, you're always going to

be one unit, right?

It is going to be omitted, right, and that's going

to be your reference.

So let's say we omit, I don't know which one

you want, the New York Times.

Be a bad way to omit the New York Times,

but let's say you do, then you will have the

relative propensity to endorse the newspaper relative to the New

York Times, that would be at 0.

So you are basically, and when it's negative, it's saying

it's less likely to endorse the the Democrats than the

New York Times.

Everything is, right?

So that's the ideology with positive giving you more liberal

than the reference category, negative giving you more conservative than

the newspaper.

And then I'm gonna do this very great stuff.

What am I gonna do?

Now I'm gonna do, what am I gonna do?

Atrial interaction.

Very nasty is going to be the economic news.

Regress on the need for Democrats and its estimated 6%.

And so I think about uh and then then we

do it to the.

So we have this time.

Ah.

This is EVD.

Yeah.

OK, so first, this term is only present when we

have a democratic president.

We need to have a democratic president.

Mhm.

Has to be equal to.

Otherwise it's dropping right because if you this is 0,

the water is dropping.

So we are EVT um NPG and this is.

We know that this is negative.

What is it saying?

You're a democratic president, right?

Let's take the case of.

A conservative.

You said I conservative.

What the conservative newspaper is one way.

The ideology be negative, right?

So let's say that if it increases, right, so unemployment

increases.

What is happening to the amount of coverage when you

have a Democratic president of Republican president?

Well, if it increases, this is negative.

This is negative coverage is increasing, right?

So this is saying that.

As news become worse.

More coverage, move a bit more.

And uh Democratic president.

No Republican president.

if you have a Liber on newspaper.

Which is to say that NPG is greater than 0.

What do we get?

We get this increases, and if it becomes worse.

This is negative, this is positive.

The whole thing is going up, so we have as

news becomes worse.

You are blessed over age.

And democratic.

Republican president.

You know the other name is the way.

If you are a democratic leaning newspaper, relative to, but

like let's forget about this.

You are a democratic, you are going to start hiding

bad news for your party.

But on the other hand, you will disclose a lot

of bad news about the opposing Republican Party, if you

are more conservative newspaper, you will be hiding bad news

about your party, the Republican Party, and you will be

really disclosing all the bad news about the Democratic Party,

and this type of strategic behaviour is exactly.

The way it happens in this closure, right, you will

see in disclosure game that what is happening is the

sender, the one that has the information, will disclose all

the good news that he can, they can, and they

will hide all the bad news that they can, so

there is this kind of thing, and we will see

an example of this when it comes to censorship actually

it's kind of like this story.

So that's the way it works.

So we see it we see is that, you know.

They hide the news, the news, they hide the news

for the party.

Why do I just want to.

And we will skip this one and go to something.

All right, so let's do a short 5 minute two

things.

One thing is that because I was a bit unclear,

sorry, the negative was not an assumption, right?

It was an empirical finding.

Just to be clear, the fact that they found that

C was negative was something they found in the data,

and that is conformed with the prediction of a model

of strategic disclosure, but this is an empirical result.

The other thing I wanted to say, and I forgot

at the beginning of the course is to all that

you, all of you were in the master and EME,

all your exam.

I'm a bit of a.

Goldfish my memory is very short.

I just hope that I'll be with your exam.

Alright, so let's keep this not very important and then

think about language, right?

So language is it's not, it's very brilliant, I must

say.

And it was brilliant by Gross Ros and Milo and

it was nicely improved by Ko and Shapiro.

So the way it's gonna be is the I is

going to be the following.

You start with something, you know.

We're not too much.

You start with something you know and what you know

is the ideology more or less, as we were discussing

of members of Congress.

This we are a form of merger of.

That what is you doing based on the way you

speak.

You're gonna give a high score.

For phrases, phrases of, for example.

To be also be credit cards.

That the distribution, this type of thing.

We're gonna give an.

And so now I have an energy for for the

language that is being used for all these energy called

phrases, we are looking at newspaper article.

You're gonna give an ideology.

Uh, newspapers.

And it's a two way process to start with you.

Looking at the way they speak, you define energy of

phrases thinking that words that are more used by Republicans,

phrases that are more used by Republicans are more conservative,

phrases that are more used by Democrats are more liberal.

From this you look at the newspaper article and you

say, newspapers that use more conservative phrases are more conservative.

Newspapers that use more liberal phrases are more liberal.

That's the bridge.

So that's really just the idea of this this kind

of like articles.

The is that use phrases, whereas girls and will use

they will see.

From the tank we think more cited by conservative or

more conservative, and then they see the think tank that

I cited in newspaper article if you cite more conservative

think tanks, you're yourself a more conservative news is the

same.

So the way you do this in practise, right, is

first, you are going to request.

The phrase that is being used.

By a legislator on the legislator ideology and that's gonna

give you coefficient for a choice.

So if you think about I ideology being here, you're

gonna get kind of like BP positive tell you this

is a more conservative phrase.

this and then you're going to regress the ideology of

the phrase used by a newspaper on the of the

phrase which are the PMPP and then from this you're

going to recover the coefficient of this regression is going

to be the ideology of the newspapers.

There are 2 assumptions being made.

What is that politicians and newspapers use the same language

independently?

There is a paper that look at the Fox News,

one of the papers that look at Fox News, which

is another one, and what the government doing this approach

is actually the other a sharp rise in polarisation in

recent years, recent years when it was published.

The problem with this is that one of the reasons

are.

Likely to discover this is because members of Congress started

using the language of false news and then that breaks

everything right because it's no longer you cannot bridge anymore.

There is actually a recent paper, I haven't read it.

I just read a quick summary of it by Alger

co-author that look at debate in parliament nowadays, and they

show that those who have recently been elected, kind of

like recent elected legislators, are starting to use the language

of people and social media, right?

So it's not that, you know.

You can go to the beach because it's basically the

source that you try to measure become actually the source

of the language from which you try to extract ideologies.

You are breaking everything.

It's kind of interesting to see how sometimes people adopt

the language of the source rather than talking the same

language independently.

So what did they find?

Right, they find that, you know, the sled index as

they call it, they find that the most liberal newspapers

of the bench, and remember it's liberal relative to the

bunch of newspapers is the same so it will be

very indexes here, it will be the.

Really, no clue what this is.

But you know, for example, the San Francisco Chronicle would

be quite liberal.

The Los Angeles Times would be relatively liberal.

The New York Times would be relatively liberal and the

most conservative would be the daily Oklahoma, not so much

of a surprise if you know Oklahoma, and only just

they elect only Republican people.

And the Washington Times, which is indeed the conservative newspaper

of the Washington area, conservative relative to the Washington Post,

3 business.

OK, so we have seen.

That media are biassed and in which sense have we

seen that media are biassed, we have seen that media

do not cover the same news the same way, right?

So there is a bias because you have the same

piece of information and you see different coverage of the

same piece of information according to who is in office.

And we show in our paper that it's also according

to the bias of the, the ideological predisposition of the

audience.

You also have newspaper not talking the same way, right?

So you also have this bias because they talk differently

about similar products.

So for example, inheritance tax, the left wing newspaper will

use inheritance tax or redistributive tax, and the right wing

will use, do you know what they use.

Very good.

They are very good at finding even pre-term they were

good at finding them.

They call it the dead.

Oh no, kind of talks the dead and stuff like

this, right this is.

So this is kind of like again it's relative to

each other, that's enough to know that there's bias because

if there were more biassed, every newspaper should use the

same language.

Every newspaper should use the same amount of of the

same piece of information, but it's kind of like.

Now why are they biassed, and here again, as I

said at the beginning of this lecture, it's going to

be very kind of like you know quick overview of

theories that have been involved because it's not a topic

that is really political economy, it's much more of a

topic for um organisation.

So what I think about that explanation.

For example, many owner choose new stories to maximise advertising

overly, and there is evidence of this.

There's a recent paper, I mean, there is a paper

some years back, I don't know if it was published

about the Volkswagen scandal.

Through the gate, the fact that Volkswagen lied about the

amount of emission that was produced by diesel and got

like into huge trouble because of this, there was a

huge scandal about this, and Volkswagen is still paying the

price for this.

And so what happened is that in Germany some newspapers

were receiving a lot of advertising money from Volkswagen.

Some newspapers were not receiving so much advertising money from

Volkswagen.

Guess which type of newspapers spend the more the most

coverage on the days I get.

Right, because we didn't receive so much money from Volkswagen,

right?

Now that's fine, but that doesn't tell us why there

should be necessarily an ideological bias.

Nowadays with Trump we can to see the connection, but

that's because the owner of newspaper are kind of like

caring about Trump's policy in other dimension.

But you know, in general, we don't see why they

should have an ideological leaning.

Another view is very cynical from it's a bit less

cynical.

I'm putting it even more cynically than he put it,

but it basically owners of the newspaper, they don't really

care about politics, but they care about making profit and

what they are going to do is they're going to

try to minimise cost.

How do you minimise cost?

You basically let journalists have a slant to their stories,

so you make them happy.

Left-wing journalists will have a slant who talk about issues

from the left.

Right-wing journalists will talk about issues from the right perspective,

and because they are happy to do so, you give

them a lower wage.

And that's kind of like, you know, reduce costs and

this is good.

However, as more journalists are left leaning, we should see

a huge left-wing bias in terms of newspapers.

That's not what we see, so it's not obvious this

can explain everything, right?

Another view is politicians bribe newspapers in exchange for hiding

out for news stories as the person's famous paper.

Again, the issue with this view is why do we,

in this case we should see newspapers swinging from left

to right all the time as a function of the

ideology of the newspaper when we see the newspaper I

actually quite fixed ideology in general, right, so that cannot

work perfectly.

So the explanation is that readers actually the reason why

you are biassed is because people don't want a certain

type of coverage, right?

They want coverage that is biassed in itself.

Why do they want so?

Because they have some form of confirmatory bias, very famous

paper by Besson and Schleifer, because they want news that

maybe are easy to digest because they have the same

language or.

If you have a bias in terms of like thinking

about an issue in a different like a different prior

conservative, something we barely do in our models.

If you think about our mothers, everybody works with the

same with a different prior, you can see a newspaper

will try to signal the quality byvising the coverage one

way or another.

For example, this model, you know, you had these 3

possibility, 3 problems that you could do about the work.

One of the problems that about pandering has actually been

relabelled to be a problem that about pandering by newspapers

for reputation purposes, right?

If you're not.

There is something slightly and with all these limits and

explanation.

They work well because they will tell you, you will

have left and right newspaper or media outlets because you

have left and right readers.

But they all fail in one way and that includes.

On paper because they have to rely on a form

of bias and they have to, it was something that

is non-standard either confirmation bias or there is something that

you don't like of reading news that don't go in

your ideological direction or biassed in terms of prior, right

so that's kind of like something.

No matter the empirical failures, what the empirical evidence so

far other is that urban side factor seem to be

the dominant forces beyond media bias, and I think the

way they do it, which is very kind of like

um smart, is that they look at.

Media outlets that are owned by the same owner but

operate in different media markets where you know some media

markets are conservative, some media markets are democrat, right?

In this case, and you can do this for a

bunch of outlets in this case, if it's supply side

driven, then you know the fixed effect on the owner

should be very significant.

And the coefficient on the ideology of the media market

where the outlet operates should not be significant.

If it demonstrate factor that matters, then the fixed effect

of the owner should be not significant, should be close

to zero, and the fixed effect on the market ideology

should be very significant, right?

That's exactly what they found.

They find very few derby on owners that are significant

and a very strong statistically significant coefficient on the ideology

of the media market owner, right, so this is what

they do.

So.

Now this is kind of as I said, important we

want to understand why we have a full type of

explanation and it seems that suggestively government side explanation are

dominating.

The other thing we want to understand is what are

the consequences of this bias later, right?

Again, think about the kind of like there was the

word information voters and if you want, there was another

thing which was like accountability in the background, right, is

the distortion of information leading to the distortion of accountability.

We cannot do the whole shame, but we are going

to do one part of the shame that is very

important is that we're going to think about how the

distortion of information in the presence of media.

It is because the media can be wrong if they

all do something different.

There has to be that some are wrong and some

are wrong.

It's the distortion of information by media outlets.

Generating distortion in terms of electoral outcomes that we know

from what we have seen in the previous term is

a really critical part of accountability in democracy, right?

That's kind of like what we want to do.

So today is.

We are going to think about the one of the

two main papers published on media bias and position.

So one of them is the one we're going to

see here.

The other one is a paper by any couple of,

uh, Petrova and Zaykaya on, uh, independent TV in Russia.

Right, that's probably the two main article on the folks

used to stay in the US context because in the

democratic law setting, right, so.

Fox News.

Arrived in US politics in the early 2000s, and that's

when when they arrived.

And so what we, what is the feeling that people

have is that Fox News is, as we know, a

very conservative channel.

Donald Trump is not conservative enough, right?

I prefer another channel.

Fox News did he have the conservative channel, did it

affect the fortune of Republicans.

That's, that's what we want.

So there is this famous paper by the Lavina government

that investigates the issue.

What is the problem?

Do.

What's the main issue.

So what is happening, let me give you just a

little bit more context, is that prior to the 2000

election, Fox News entered someplace in the US but not

others.

Right, because of like it's costly to roll out the

TV channels, so you know, for cost reasons they went

first, they first broadcasted in some places and not in

other.

What is the threat to identification in this case?

That those places were more conservative in the first place.

Yeah, well, they're going to control for the passport, so

that's going to deal a bit with it, but we

could see that those places were trending more conservative than

others, which will be the problem, right?

And, you know.

So in this case, right.

It's interesting to think about it, right?

In this case, what will be the bias?

There are two ways to think about it.

One would be the place where they are trending conservative.

One would be the sign of the omitted viable because

it would correlate positively with the entry of rely with

the increase in.

That's kind of another way to think about it is

that maybe it's not where they are trending Republican, but

it's a place where there's a large stock of Republican

voters as measured by the voter, right?

In this case, we could still.

Why can we still have a?

Mhm.

No, it's not, but you know, yeah, but that, that's

OK.

I think we can deal with very few things, but

think about, you want to think about the effect of

Fox News, right?

But the effect of Fox News, which we will see

more about this, right, to have an effect.

What must be happening is what?

It must be happening that some people.

We would not have voted Republican because of Fox News.

No vote Republican because they've been exposed to Fox News,

right?

But in places where there's already a large number of

Republican voters, how many of these voters can you convince?

Not many.

It's got a sailing effect, right?

And as a result, when we think about this bias,

what would be a sign of the bias?

Just wouldn't show any effects of news on just like

you know.

I think this is the change in the Republican voters.

This is Fox News.

But Now we have a large.

I can But What we know is that that may

go to a place where there is a large conservative

audience what is gonna be if there's a large amount

of Republican voters, how much of a change are we

gonna observe?

Not much.

This is gonna be probably due to selling effect it's

gonna be negative.

And therefore we are down bias.

And the.

It's also something that is tricky with omitted by a

pas is that you can build stories.

And we both say, right?

We first build the stories that are going in places

that are trending Republican, and we are plus plus upward

bias, and then we build a story where we have

plus minors, the downward bias.

But Because you can get the pieces.

So the argument that we're gonna make.

Right is that that's for sure through this big stronghal

effect, this big pool of potential viewers that are already

existing based on previous Republican vote, but that's true.

At the level of a congressional district, within the congressional

district, so inside the congressional district, right, localities or counties

that have kind of like.

And There are Fox News versus localities that do not

have Fox News.

Yeah.

What is going to happen is going to be due

to The sun available on the broadcasting basically waves, right?

So when you think about broadcasting, you think that there

is a certain amount of space that is it's also

true when you do it with cable is you do

it with wave.

That's why you cannot have so many radio stations, right?

You have a certain amount of wave, a certain amount

of space.

There are already many channels.

In that particular place, then you do not have space

to add Fox News.

If there are no so many channels, then you do

have to.

So what they are is that when you go to

a congressional a convention, when you compare the first conventional

district, then you are gonna find that the arrival of

ox news is associated with past Republican vote when you

go within the congressional district.

You're going to find that it's due to technical availability

and it's not correlated to Republican.

How do we do a recreational analysis where we compare

across congressional district and within congressional district?

What's going to be the difference between the two, right?

So.

Think about, you know, what you regret is Fox News

available.

You hear me?

On Republican vote chair.

He minus 1.

That's what you regrets.

If you want to do.

And across district, so this is in.

Municipality and in congressional district C.

Yeah.

Yeah.

If you want to do.

It's getting worse and worse man writing these days.

Mhm.

In bed.

If you want to do a cross congressional district analysis,

what should you add to this regression?

OK.

Lacrosse, the districts.

If you want to do it across.

You're right.

Your, your intuition is right, but if you want to

do it.

That's not.

That's the point.

If you want to do it across, you should add,

yeah, nothing, never add random.

There's nothing.

Right under the cross, we have nothing.

This isn't a cross.

I mean, he does some within and some across it's

both, but it's mostly consumed across.

If you want to do a reading, what do you

do?

OK.

I You got it right.

You got it right for the wrong one of the

two.

What do you do in this case?

You put fixed effect.

Once you put the fixed effect, you are doing within

that location comparison.

Mhm.

Right, that's the way to think about it, you think

about what is the comparison that you want to ask?

And you know sometimes you want to have an across

comparison because you have an idea that the cross comparison

would be biassed relative to a more kind of like

restrictive analysis, right?

So I, I have a paper and it's not yet

online.

It's going to be online where I do I do

one set of fixed effects and then I use a

more restrictive.

Fix the and I actually want the one that is

like more lenient specification to have a stronger effect than

the one with very restrictive.

This is what we find.

This makes sense.

It's not because you can show a bias, but the

problem is most of the time in social science you

will see presentation but they go right the way to

the super.

IV or whatever, but you have no idea what is

the bias they want to.

You have no idea whether the IV is successful because

you don't see the orders.

Showing something that is biassed and then something that is

less biassed is very important because it's only by seeing

the tube that you can see whether the empirical strategy

you are using is working.

You just show me the one that like you know

is good.

Don't show me the one that is bad.

I have no idea what is going on.

Right, the Navy and they're like why?

Why not because everybody told me to use that's not

the reason.

You should have a clear reason for why you want

to use.

Alright, so this is what they show, right?

They show this is basically the prevalence of foes the

same tone and municipality at the key.

You think about the budget in 1996, it's highly significant,

right, when you have like some sense control cable system

controlled, but no district fixed effect.

The moment you put the, it becomes not significant, right?

So that's and that's important to show this, right.

Show me the biassed regression.

Show me the one that is not biassed to convince

me that your argument makes sense.

So then we look at the effect of Fox News

on and how to define, they we're going to use

the last one, right?

First defined without kind of this kind of lower effect

without positive effects.

We are more you know story of selling effect.

When you have the fixed effect for this week, the

final effect, the effect is very small, right, the effect

is very small, is 0.42%. 0.4% are very lucky, but

we are in the 2000 election.

The 2000 election was decided by 1000 votes in Florida.

0.42% is actually changing the outcome of the election of

US history as well.

So you know this is kind of like a huge

substantive effect, but it's a very small effect in terms

of vote.

What they show is that they do have a placebo

or they look at the availability of false news, right.

In 2000 on board change vote share in basically previously.

In between 92 and '96 where there should be no

effect once we control for this fix because Fox News

was not present there and that's what they find.

1988, 92 thing we should find no effect because Fox

News.

That's what they find, right?

So in this case it's relatively reassured.

And in part that the borders because of and they

find an increase 1.47% of.

So we see a very small effect in culture and

a very small effect in turnout.

However, we have to be careful how we interpret this

result.

Because this type of regulations.

I'm not to be racing.

Seeing Fox News on your propensity of voting for the

conservative for the Republican Party.

That's not what they are doing, right?

They are regret saying voucher for Republican in a town

that has Fox News versus in a town that doesn't

have Fox News.

They do not know whether people are watching, how many

people are watching Fox News in the town where there

is Fox News.

So basically these type of estimates they have a name

in economics.

What type of estimates are there?

What of estimates are there?

intention to treat effect very good, right?

And we know, um, I will try to not now

because I want to show you something, but we know

that intention to treat effect and to be underestimate of

actually the effect on the treated.

And they underestimate because you basically your effect is measured

on a sample of people that are treated and a

sample that is not treated and not done on so

what they do in this literature in the media is

that they want to understand.

How many people who watch Fox News actually were persuaded

to vote for the Republican Party.

That's what they want.

We want to think about the rates.

That's the thing they're interested about.

So we can think about it the following.

This is.

The share of the population, they think about the treatment.

And yes, means that Fox News is available, meaning is

Fox News available in the account.

This is the percentage.

Of Republican voters in the population.

That's important.

It's not among the electorate.

It's not among those who are not, it's in the

population.

You are basically the share of artisan.

In the population, not those who will vote for the

Republican Party no matter what, but you always take it

if you want.

You have the other one and then there are two

things there is exposure.

OK And then there is the persuasion effect.

Right, and what they want to know is how many

people that are noting Republicans to begin with.

And we exposes actually switched up like change their behaviour

because of Fox News and I remember the effect on

is 0.42%, but we want to think a bit of

of like how many people who watch Fox News were

actually persuaded to vote for Fox News.

So we can think of it as V1 minus 0

is equal to 1 minus 0.1 minus 0.

So that's the increase in exposure.

And that is the increase in Republican votes in the

population.

Now we There's gonna be effect.

There's gonna be the percentage that turn out.

Um, the percentage a Republican.

But you see it in the population, right?

So what you need is that this is among the

electorate.

How many people showed up.

This is how many of the citizens actually showed up.

To vote What we have when we do this, we

can add that F is equal to 1 minus 1

minus 0.1.

And you change it so it it T1 R 1

minus.

T 00 divided by E1 minus E 0.

And this thing basically this is defined by the exposure.

So this is taking into effect the fact that many

people didn't vote for faculty to begin with.

This is also an important effect because Some people, when

you want to think about persuasion, some people didn't need

to be persuaded.

They were already voting Republican.

So you need to also kind of like eliminate this.

So that's kind of like the formula for this.

So what do we have?

is that in the control, the turnout is 56% and

the vote for the Republican Party is 43.45.3%. In the

treaty, the turnout is 56% plus 1.47%. That's what we've

seen on slide 34, and the board is this number

plus the increase in share that is 0.0042.

the increase in exposure they estimate it to be 0.1271

in the paper.

I'm not going to enter.

So when we do the the Republican Party and they

take it as to be the one that we have

in the control group, the 0.56 and when we do

the formula, we find that the effect is 9.5%. So,

of those who watch Fox News and could be persuaded

because they were not voting Republican.

basically 9.5% of them changed their behaviour and started voting

Republican as a result.

So when you think about persuasion, in fact, you get

a much nicer number in some sense.

So that's kind of like, OK, so let us conclude

on the story.

what are the consequences electorally politicians.

There is indeed distortion of electoral.

Always in different ways, online media, social media and stuff

like this.

Why is the world changing nowadays?

Next week for the answer, right.

I do not have to rush and I mean actually

not to rush, but kick you out because if there

is any question, I'm happy to answer.

Ma Thank you.

Yeah.

the I Hold on.

Oh.

Yeah.

Thank you, bye bye.

You got to.

Yes.

Oh.

you guys.

I think there's one thing.

Yeah.

Uh-huh I suppose everyone is between.

I.

Thank you.

I say that you know, all everyone from the media

is here and everyone here.

Lecture 12:

Here we are, online media and social media.

The new world, brand new world.

A little bit of a survey.

There's so few people.

Yes, the birth is 369-47546.

be 7654.

All right so What about society?

What do you think is the political consequence of social

media.

The increased distance between ideologically different voters, no effect decreases.

I don't understand what.

So make people opinion further away from each other.

Yeah.

OK, so here.

How much will you be willing to be paid to

stop all social media?

I'm assuming you're all on social media at some point

or another.

So how much are you willing?

So if you're willing to pay for.

You should bring 0.

And the maximum price that you know you can be

paid is 200.

So let's say to put some, let's say for 3

months.

I do not go to WhatsApp.

WhatsApp is important to communicate with family, but I do

know that in some Uh, WhatsApp is a social media

like in Pakistan and in India as well.

Yeah.

Mhm Alright, the two have not.

Well, You better not.

What I'm gonna answer this question.

We can do so.

Yeah It's kind of like crazy, right?

Social media and online news are the main source of

information nowadays, which is of course any newspaper, radio, and

TV.

I should have asked you where you get your news

on TikTok.

It's a big thing not to have TikTok, only in

the US, yeah.

So what about social media?

What are the last two here?

Did you, did you answer this car?

You said it was it.

I don't know.

I mean, who has not answered.

Come on.

You to.

What about for society?

Ah, interesting.

You're more positive about the effect that it has on

society than the effect that it has on you, which

is kind of like, you know.

Interesting take on it.

We think that is good for society and why?

No good necessarily, but better than for an individual in

the sense of maybe exposure to inequality, exposure to different

cultures, um.

that's for an individual to be exposed to inequality in

different culture.

No, I just think that it's more like I just

didn't want to put neutral in the first place so

I was more because the view you are taking is

actually.

Going contrary to the view of most people.

In the journalistic world and some of the how they

think about social media as we will see when you

take a very positive view when people have a very

different views of this.

And what do we think about polarisation.

Indeed, like we're gonna see court that believe this and

then we'll think of us what are the evidence saying

when we look at, you know, various papers.

OK, this is like the one I'm most interested in.

I want to say.

But 3 people.

said that it was bad for them, which means that

I'm expecting 3 people to say they would be willing

to be paid 0.

To stop social media.

If I don't 3 people there, it's like either you

lie to yourself here.

So we have 4 people at 400.

One is you.

So it's 200 pounds a month.

For people that they will need to be paid 200

or more to stop social media for 3 months.

Nobody put 0.

You know what this is when something is bad for

you, but you're still willing to pay for it.

Addiction is correct.

Right, that's the definition of a, you know it's bad,

but you're like, I need it.

I need my Instagram.

I tell you I stop being in all social media,

started looking for job related stuff that is not for

personal network.

It's amazing.

It's amazing.

It's great.

Much more time to do to watch cat videos on

YouTube.

Perfect.

I mean dogs for everyone, not just for you.

Uh No, it was just for you.

I will never put 200 pounds to stop it for

everyone.

It's a bit like, you know, I'll do it for

free.

Sorry, OK, so it's my fault.

I should have explained.

So your willingness to pay that is elicited.

And then what you do is that you select to

elicit truthful information, you actually select randomly some people.

And you tell them if you manage to not go

you get us access to your computer and if you

manage not to get on social media for 3 months,

you'll be paid the amount of money you said you

wanted to be paid, and you make them confirm that

they are happy to do so.

And you is the truthful willingness to pay by doing

so.

So what do people say about social media?

I don't like Julia, it's horrible.

So rather than exposing people to different culture, it's exposing

people to narrow of you.

Right.

gathering to people and you know, it's all the same

thing.

You have like the term of echo chamber, which is

the idea that you're always listening to the same thing,

like something that has an echo and keep on reverberating,

right?

There's like, you know.

The idea that because everybody gets this type of like

sensationalist news about the other side and people start to

really distrust it.

And then there is Barack Obama, right, that also said

the same thing.

He says in a way that has accelerated in a

way that much more sharply polarised the electorate and make

it very difficult to have a common conversation.

So those who are saying it increased polarisation, increased difference

in perspective were being kind of like, you know.

Correct.

And then one, the British Information Commissioner, that says it

has been fully confirmed by saying that voters are daily

isolate to the most harmful decision and opinion by false

report circulated by Austin Powers which no one on the

spot can refute.

I just want to know, you know, about all these

ills of the world, do you agree with the view

of John Edwards?

OK, so you're ready.

And to agree quite sharply with it.

So the basic idea, right, is that creating bubbles internal

social media will make us less exposed to one which

make us less tolerant of others, and these are due

to individual trust, there's an idea that it's also due

to algorithm consequences and we will see that.

There is some evidence in favour of this now.

Before we take a look at evidence.

We have this rise of polarisation right which you see

going on, so you can see that the internet starts

really to penetrate around this area and it's a little

bit already increasing before that.

So that's kind of what I'm the question for and

the internet is, you know, a big increase.

This is the last time there was this data in

this paper is after the internet has been disablished for

quite a while, we can see effective polarisation, polarisation.

Is basically the idea of how much you like people

from the other side.

And the way it's measured often is if your children

were to bring someone that were kind of like the

other side, a Republican, if you're a Democrat yourself, a

Brexiteer if you are, how much will you be happy?

How much will you tolerate that?

And this question we first asked about racial relations.

Like in the 1960s, you are in 1950s, it's incredible

the affective polarisation between African Americans and, you know, white

in the United States or between um.

Uh First generation coming from the Caribbean or Southeast Asian

and native British, right?

Then this has dropped because in fact the effective polarisation

has gone down, but you know, the political behaviour of

people after doing thousands of papers looking at polarisation had

nothing to do, and some genius guy said.

Let's do effective polarisation, and now we can redo the

thousands of papers we have done by doing effective polarisation

rather than polarisation of opinion, and all they are doing

that coterie of effective polarisation paper.

I think they are kind of like the gold mine

is becoming like thinner, so they have to find something

else, but I have no doubt that they will find

a way to read for the time, the thousands of

papers with the new ideas, so.

He is and you know this is in a trade

and things like that.

Now there is a problem.

With this whole argument.

of online media of the internet is that Most social

scientists, there are two problems, there are many problems.

One of them is that as it is often the

case, social scientists lack historical perspective.

Because if you look at his history.

There has been a belief always that a new medium

will generate dramatic negative political and societal consequences.

So in the 19th century, was at the time of

the chief press chief newspapers.

Then newspapers in France at the time, I think had

something like 10 million copies sold, 10 million, and this

was an enormous circulation and that was accused of spreading.

Fake news indeed.

This is a cartoon from 1894.

It has not been edited.

Fake news.

Radio was supposed to propaganda.

Television was to transform politics into entertainment.

Before it was there were serious.

Now it was all entertainment, and then video games, oh

my God, this was supposed to let people killing each

other all the time, right.

Indeed, you know, it's not much the case that the

word that you is actually a fake quote.

It's fake news.

It's actually a quote that is from 1787.

Of course I had to modernise the language, but it's

exactly the same idea if you think about it.

I put, you know, in a blue what I change,

but the idea was exactly the same.

So the notion that Online media create all these things,

blah blah blah.

It might be the case.

But it's not obvious that this should be a prior.

Because it comes in a very crowded, and it comes

at a time where all the medium have been accused

to do the same thing and you know, in the

end, society has continued and things like that.

Now it's not to say that everything is rosy.

Because when you have changes, as it will always be

the case, I don't believe in, you know, I'm not,

I can't, I don't believe in pro Augustus believing in

constant progress, he has his motto on the Brazil flag,

for example.

I don't believe in this.

I believe that most of the cases progress will bring

some good things and some bad things, and sometimes we

are looking at good things and sometimes we are lucky

and bad things per minute, right?

So what we're going to see is we are going

to see the charges against the internet and social media

both when it comes to polarisation and fake news, but

before doing so.

Inspired by a very good paper by Genso and Shapiro,

I'm not doing this, but that inspired me.

What I want to do is to set the thread

because one of the problems that people are when they

talk about social media is that they think.

Within the world of social media, but if we want

to understand the effect of social media per se, we

need to take a broader perspective.

We need to think about social media relative to all

the possible activities.

And so I'm going to show very quickly.

A small decision theoretic model.

It's not game theory, it's just microeconomists, but we are

gonna see that you cannot understand the effect of social

media.

On polarisation or even on fake news or on anything

without thinking about what is it substituting for.

We'll do this in a very simple modern, but you

know, this is going to be the idea.

All right, so we are gonna think that individuals can

allocate the one unit of time resource between their work,

their personal relations, TV newspaper reading.

That's prior to the arrival of social media or the

internet, right?

And when there is the internet, they can also use

put some time on on the internet, right?

So there is basically this kind of like additional thing

they can do.

We are going to use a very common utility functions

that is used in this type of like choice choice

choice modern, which is the CES utility function, right?

This is constant elasticity of substitution utility function.

So this is basically saying that your utility, sorry, here

should be R.

Yeah there should be an S here.

The utility is basically how much you consume, how much

time you spend with your relative, how much time you

read the press, waited, there's a wait for it.

And when you have the access to social media, you

add the social media to it.

Well I assume that work leads to consumption on a

1 to 1 basis.

So basically, how much time you spend to work is

how much time you spend to consume.

So what are a lot of details of the computation

in the appendix of the slide, so I'm gonna do

the computation relatively fast because this is more like, you

know, just a choice model to illustrate the problem.

So.

What the Yeah.

My son is doing.

He used to shoes.

Homage to quits.

consumption.

Tell us how much to put in this personal relation.

How much stupid.

In reading news, watching TV if you want to launch

it early.

Yeah.

OK.

I'm gonna call what is inside here by K just

because it is in the simplify our life, and this

is such that the budget constraint of the time spent

to work that translates into Consumption, that's why I can

substitute W for C.

This time spent with relation and the time reading the

press or watching TV or whatever is able to.

Now here we kind of do our usual trick of

substitution and things like this.

We're gonna have to set up on a range, so

we are, we are gonna set it up.

be Fork.

With all our.

Yeah.

I'm gonna do this.

I have plus one minus the same but like.

So what we're going to do is that we're going

to take the first other condition.

So the first with respect to see.

Now, if you have a function.

a function.

What is and you take the derivative of this just

for you to remember it's equal to.

V C U VC.

So function U is basically a divided by a minus

1.

Our function V is basically listed.

So the B and C is gonna be what is

here.

So it's gonna be.

Alpha Theta.

A minus 18 times the power a minus 18 minus

1.

So that's all the prime if you want, and then

our u is gonna be you sorry is gonna be.

should be 1 so it's gonna be a minus 1

K to the power.

1 minus the lambda equal to 0, right, and the

minus lambda comes from here.

This is.

Are you from this.

Now you can do the same for.

Oh, and you're gonna get.

Alpha are one of it.

2 minus 1, 9 is 18.

You have and you get the same thing.

What we are gonna do just like a location we're

gonna move the lambda on this side all the time

so it's gonna be basically equal to lambda.

Equal, equal.

Yes.

So what you doing that when you all you saw

this, what you are doing is that you take a

reference that to C and you take this divided by

this.

That that would give you.

Alpha C one of ETAs, you divide the cursor of

nation by C, you divided by the first condition by

R.

And as you can see that.

It's dropping Uh, that term is dropping as well.

And this is the same on both eyes, so this

is going to be equal to one.

So what you get is Oh trust in me, because

I know you're gonna trust me a lot.

This is gonna be this is.

R is equal to alpha divided by alpha C6.

And it's basically telling you that R relative to C,

the higher the weight you put on R in your

utility, the more you're going to consume it relative.

The more you're going to consume personal relation to pure

consumption.

The more you put in consumption.

Using all this art of fast fashion and stuff like

this, the less you're going to spend time with your

personal relations.

Oh no, grandma, sorry, I cannot meet with you.

I'm on the boohoo website like looking on what next.

So then you have also the same thing for P.

And what you do is that you use the constraint

which is.

P plus R plus C is equals 1 and you

replace, you make the substitution.

Yeah.

What it leads you to is C is equal to

alpha C divided by alpha C plus alpha plus alpha.

It has a very, very nice.

solution basically.

You consume as much as What is the percent of

the utility weight that is in consumption?

Uh, this is pre-social media.

In social media, if you do the same.

And creation, we're gonna get lambda of Alpha C.

Yeah.

With just the addition of alpha.

I see.

Here we are not assuming any effect of social media

like on like productivity like work or something like that.

So yeah, you could.

I don't think it's first order, right?

I think that has an indirect effect, so I would

say that because it's indirect, it's second order.

It can be that, you know, it improves work productivity

because it's easier to work.

It also improves the matching between worker skills and firm

skills that increase productivity and leads you potentially.

To put more time on work, like your substitution is

a bit different for work and that affects everything else,

but I would say compared to see the effect that

you know you can go online and spend time on

social media is a big thing.

So I know you are supposed to spend time on

social media at work during lectures and.

Right, but I'd say still this is kind of like,

you know, I don't think this is the main effect.

It will change, but it will not change the basic

idea of whatever.

What we have is something kind of like this, right,

where you change your weight over different things.

Now what does it mean?

Well, suppose I mean his life is just an education.

But suppose that any type of activities is associated with

a certain polarisation and your overall polarisation, your overall view

of the others and of your own opinion, right, is

based on in a very simple way, in a linear

way on basically the time you have spent on each

activities.

And if you think about it, you will see that

you can see it here at LSC.

I'm very sorry to say, but I don't think there

is a huge variation in public opinion, like in political

opinion of the LSA LC it's quite international, so maybe

thanks to the international.

I mentioned there is more polarisation but once you condition

on group nationality within groups there will be very little

polarisation right among academics it's probably even worse, right?

Like the number of right wing academics is very, very

small.

I know a few, but they.

OK.

So work affects a lot, your personal relation, the neighbourhood

in which you live will affect this a lot because

for example, we know that income and education are big

predictor of your political views and you know you will,

in most likelihood you be very successful individual with very

high education because You will succeed in your master.

So you will congregate with people that have similar income

type and similar education type and they will tend to

have similar political views as your own.

So there's a lot of like if you want lack

of exposure within also your personal relation, and you know

it's quite rare to have.

completely different political opinion life partners, the same thing and

things like this, right?

So every type of activity lead us to form a

certain people.

So what is social media doing, right?

Social media is doing two things at the same time.

On the one hand, social media is adding its own

level of polarisation, online media or whatever you want.

It's adding its own layer of polarisation.

That's the first effect.

But there's another effect that is very important.

It's also changing time allocations across the different activities.

Right, it's also reducing the time you put at work.

It's reducing the time you put with your personal relation.

It's reducing the time you put reading certain newspapers and

things.

So when we want to think about the effect of

social media, it is not enough to just measure this

as as many, many, many scholars do.

And we got to talk at the this this seminar

where one scholar was exactly doing this.

Right, you need to think about because you're only thinking

about what effect you need to think about the setup.

So what we do is that when we compare the

polarisation post and the polarisation tray, get the appendix of

the calculation, right, you get these differences, right, and then

you can see.

That you are basically the effect of social media, but

you have to subtract the reduction in time that you

were to put in work that now you put in

social media, the social media but you subscribe to the

reduction of time in personal relation that was inducing something,

same thing for reading the press, right?

So you have kind of like this dual effect.

If you want to understand the effect of social media,

it's important to know about the bias, but it's as

important, if not more important, to know about the other

pies and to know about the others, and really you

will see that all the time in the literature, except

one paper we're going to see now, it's slowly focused

on the bias and that gives us a very biassed

view, but then.

very biassed view of what is going on.

So this is kind of like the two key questions

are going to be this.

How much polarisation is induced by internet and social media,

how much polarisation is induced by other activities.

So we are going to take what is not relatively

old paper because in the world of internet things move

very quickly, but it's still important because it's one paper

that Really take seriously the idea that you need to

consider not just the effect of the internet but the

effect of other activities, right?

And that's the score and your paper.

So what are they doing?

What are they doing is that they are convering the

level of segregation of providing proxy for the level of

segregation that you have online and the level of segregation

that you have offline that is in your real world,

right.

So for online segregation they use basically there are 12,000

panellists of which they have their browsing history and there

are 50,000 basically computer where they can arch people at

the zip code level.

So zip code is quite a big thing in the

US about 2000 inhabitant by zip code, but that tells

you you can recover the political preference of zip code

with like uh marketing database and.

I'll tell you something about the ideologically.

They also have kind of like media consumption, also some

respondents, and they also use the general social survey that

asked people how many people do you know at work

that have like a different opinion of you in different

ways.

How many people do you know in your kind of

in your family have a different opinion of you?

How many uncles are crazy Trump voters?

So if they want to measure segregation.

And what they're gonna do is basically the following.

They are gonna take an outlet, right?

So think about an outlet is.

One particular entity within a medium and the medium could

be work, personal relations, neighbourhood and stuff like this.

But in most cases, you know, if you think about

work, most people have only one work.

And therefore the medium and the outlet are the same

thing.

Work and work is both a medium and an outlet.

If you were to have most people were to have

two jobs, then you will have work 1 and work

two as being the two outlets within the idea of

the workplace medium.

For newspaper is much more different because there are many

newspapers, right?

Our website is even more different because there are many

websites.

This is the time where Yahoo still existed just to

give you an idea of who remember Yahoo.

finance.

I see.

I see the one that is serious about finance.

What is going on?

What if I manage to remember to put money on

the savings account, it's a good month.

So, so for all words like you have kind of

like many different outlets, right, for the word as a

medium you have many different outlets, right?

So one thing is.

You ask yourself why take an outlets in New York

Times.

This is an outlet in the newspaper category.

What is it's also an outlet actually in the category.

It's in both cases.

What is your chances of meeting like your of meeting

a conservative.

In the new, like, in the New York Times website,

or, you know, in the idea of reading the New

York Times, like you're reading the New York Times in

the subway, and you know, the person in front of

you is reading the New York Times and, oh, you're

reading in the New York Times.

Who did you vote for?

OK.

You know, something like this, right?

This is that it happens, but it's the idea of

like what is the audience of the salle which influenced

the content of the salt in.

Looking at what we've done last week in the notion

of demand drives coverage.

Remember we seen this last week that demand drives coverage.

So it's like, what is the share of freedoms if

you want that are from that are liberal or that

are conservative in one outlet.

So that's one thing, but that's not enough to just

look this because, you know.

You have And that is really, really 100% liberal.

But there are only very few liberals that are using

it, and the problem is if you were just to

add all outlets the same way, you will overestimate the

segregation because you will have this very, very liberal outlet.

Like what is it?

What is a very liberal?

I only know about the very conservative one.

So let's go to very conservative, very bo is this

like this thing still exists.

I don't remember.

We don't even know about.

I don't know if I have no idea what this

is because, you know, who, who knows a very, that's

very interesting.

It's not one crazy person.

It's interesting because I will relate this evidence to something.

Who can know a very, very right wing outlet.

It's something called something like this.

Have you heard of it?

Something like, but like it's rybo, you see, I kind

of.

Everybody else has knows of ribo.

And I, I, I, I've never been.

I must be very nuts, right?

And on the last there is apparently this Jacob Ben

Jacoba Jacoba that's about, uh, where, where, uh, it's a

French.

I go that Jacoba's website.

What's that about Jacova's website?

No.

Not that this is important because you will see that

this thing correspond to what is the out of Fox

News.

You haven't heard of Fox News.

I OK.

What was out of the New York Times?

You haven't heard of the New York Times?

Really like I need to give you a reading list

for the course that also extend to, you know, all

the worst and crazy things that we are doing outside

of academia.

The crazy thing we're doing in academia or outside of

academia to just like have a cultural.

You also need to give us your.

website that comes from China that also pretty sure, you

know, you have the Daily Speaker is the name of

the, the men like propaganda website and you will have

variation I'm pretty sure I mean that there are actually

magazines in China that are subversive a little bit.

So, uh, anyways, so we, but it's interesting that you

know we have like trouble thinking about extremes and you

will see that like that's actually some pretty what what

is doing.

So you have the thing.

So the problem is if you take like something like

Jacoba.

We're only like some crazy neurons.

are going to Jacoba or maybe not soccer but like

you are committed to the cause, they just say, right,

and you were to call Jacoba as, you know, the

same thing as the New York Times, that would be

problematic because very few people go to Jacobin, whereas many,

many people go to visit the New York Times.

So what they are going to do is that they're

not just going to count what is the shape of

the audience.

Now we're gonna also we on it by how important

they are for liberal versus conservative.

So this is kind of like an index that take

into account not only how segregated the outlets are, but

also how important the outlets are for the medium by

people obviously for neighbourhoods.

You will rate your neighbours as what, so there is

like a 100% on your neighbourhood.

This is kind of like the formula.

You are basically the share of the audience that is

conservative, so Jacoba will be 0 and will be 1,

let's say there's no liberal going down.

I don't think, I don't think either statement is true.

I think there's one website in France that is called,

which is great because we have a very good insights

related to this.

And then this is the importance of this outlet within

the medium for liberal, right?

So if there is one outlet that is 100% liberal

and it's really important, made by a lot of liberal,

that would be kind of like weighted a lot in

it.

So that's kind of like the ideas of it.

And so this is what they fight.

People with whom you have political discussions.

That's going to be the people where you have the

most segregation.

I can tell you that that can make perfect sense.

Nothing gets you to shout at each other like two

people not agreeing on politics.

People you trust as well, family, neighbourhood, work, voluntary association,

national newspaper, and you know, zip code where you live,

Intel.

Then you have things like the county, the local newspapers,

the magazine, cable, broadcast news, all these tend to be,

right?

So going back to model.

What is, so of course this is free social media,

so probably when we think about social media, we should

bring it up here where it's not clear because nobody

has done this exercise really for social media again since

this paper, but you know.

When we think about the impact of social media, we

have to think about what, what is it substituted for

more?

Does it substitute more for personal relations, possibly, you know,

rather than going Grandma, it's like, no grandma, I'm not

going to go to see you.

Just watch my pee on Facebook.

Don't forget to like, oh sorry, Instagram.

Facebook is for old people like me.

Right, or does it substitute more for kind of like

more neutral type of news, in which case it would

be pretty bad.

So just by thinking about the model, we see that

it's absolutely not obvious what is going to be the

effect of social media overall.

It's not obvious what he's going to substitute for.

So another thing is, right.

They also look at what do people consume, and you

will see that's very related to what we've done.

OK.

So to do that, they think about as an individual.

Here's an outlet.

It is basically the audience of this outlet.

How much of this outlet I myself consuming?

So let's say um that is from conservative voters and

I only consume Breitbart.

So my alpha IJ for Breitbart is 1 and it's

0 for anything else.

And then, you know, the share of conservative and rebar

we say was 1, so then I will have a

conservative score of 1.

Let's say you are a true believer and you only

consume Jacoba, then your share of Jacobin would be 1.

There is no conservative on reading Jacobin.

It's all liberal, so you will have a score of

0.

It will be like a purely liberal.

If you have a relatively balanced diet, you will have

a score of what.

indeed would be being relatively balanced, but it's not balanced

necessarily because you're only looking at balanced outlets, but because

you can also balance across different types of outlets, right?

So they, because they have access to the browsing history

of some people, they can look at the outlets people

go to, right, and really it was beautiful that we

had so much trouble naming it because most people.

Are they, you know, close to one.

Most people online free social media.

And this is, this is a good or good without

the few of them lining up in front of Trump,

but uh, you know.

The inauguration, right, free social media, this was really concentrated.

Yeah, of course there are extremes here, there are extremes

there, but remember, even when you think about the extremes,

you have to think about what were these people consuming

prior to the internet and prior to social media, and

I don't think.

They were consuming, you know, the BBC.

They were probably reading some crazy newspapers to begin with.

So again, you know, it's not because we have some

extreme here that if people move there, we would also

like to know free internet, free social media, what were

they send people consuming, and my guess is that many

of them are already in the extreme.

So, what do you make of this?

We see that there is less reputation online but for

many.

All of that activity full of online media.

Even then word users seem to seek a relatively valid

diet.

And a few have a one-sided exposure, but it's hard

to believe that these people were not already having one-sided

exposure to, right?

This is confirmed by another paper.

There is a little bit more negativity that comes from

the social media, and you have a review by Cachezoa

and across them.

So what we're gonna do next is that we're gonna

try to think about what happened.

Within the social media, right?

So it's a bit of a different perspective because we

have no other paper that I know of that compared

the polarisation or the segregation, if you want within social

media compared to other activities.

So what we're going to be forced to do is

to think about what happened with social media.

We are going to look at it through some experiments

and all the evidence before doing this, we're gonna have

like a 5 minute break.

We might Finish on time, which you know the word

time is 52s.

But that's, I, I mean, it's not true because some

of you have things out there, but like next week

we won't finish on time.

So I might like, uh, is there somebody else?

there is.

Let me bargain with the person that is doing the

seminar saying.

If you 5 minutes this week, you give me 5

next week.

Because next week, you know, we see the best mother

we see in this class.

I'm pretty sure I would have convinced you it's the

best in this class by next week.

One thing I want to say about what we have

been doing, but this is related to the model and

what we talk about is that there is this paper.

It's not.

It's very exaggerated in its claim.

It's, it's bother Shapiro.

What they are suggesting in the data is that The

group where you see the most polarisation is the group

of non-internet users.

Now I want to be a little bit careful in

two ways when we think about it.

The first one is that they actually do not know

that these are non-internet users.

What they show is that the group for polarisation has

increased the most is the demographic group that is the

least likely to use the internet, you know.

You spin the story.

It's always a good thing, right?

The second thing is.

One reason that could be the case is because maybe

the moderate from that group went to the internet living

all the extreme outside of the internet where they fiction

into using the internet, which means that we should be

careful, you know, interpreting this sort of only looking at

one group and not the other because it One thing

would be what would have happened if this group would

have joined the internet.

They could have polarised more.

What would have happened if the people from that group

would have not joined the internet.

They could have polarised less.

So you have to be careful in this thing, but

this is at least relatively consistent with the first type

of evidence that we have seen on the fact that

the internet is not the most segregated activity.

Alright, social media.

So there are two issues that people keep on repeating

about social medias.

One is that the algorithm affects what people see.

Second is that people are exposed to fake news and

of course influenced by it because you know that's, there's

no and we return to this.

So how about the effect of social media, again, not

social media relative to others, it's all gonna be within

social media doing some within social media comparative statics, the

effect of social media on polarisation and different attitudes.

So you have this very nice but quite completely crazy

paper by Ly not Glas some some young scholar that

is at which is running an experiment via Facebook.

So I got to recruit people via that was circulated

to millions of people and that's very costly because that's

how I got the people because the people get the

ad and you had to pay Facebook to get the

other and then among the people who registered with self

select to to go into the experiment.

It gets them to randomly be encouraged to subscribe to

either liberal or conservative outlets.

So I think in us that would be a liberal

outlet.

MSNBC, that's a liberal channel.

The New York Times, this is a.

Slate is another leader.

The conservatives are Fox News, the National Review, which actually

ended up being very against her.

The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Times.

The Washington Times, if you remember, we saw it to

be very, very conservative.

So they get through the recruitment access to people's page,

and some people agreed to access, to let them access

their web history.

You know, privacy apparently it's not a concern for everyone.

And then they managed to have an empirical online survey

where there's an attrition rate of 50% right let's open

up on that when you rent something and you ask

them later like to participate in a survey, you, it's

actually quite a good attrition rate to be so.

This is the way it is.

So you are basically 1 million of individuals are exposed

to the ads.

So they asked to play an ad to be shown

to 1 million people.

That was very costly.

And it's kind of like those words 38 37,500 that

yet to be um.

Get to do a survey and get to be randomised,

right?

So then he's basically splitting people between liberal and conservative

and the liberals, he's going to some of them is

gonna offer the liberal outlets, all that is gonna offer

the conservative outlet, right.

And that means that some liberals get offered the liberal

treatment, so they get something that confirms their views.

All the liberals get offered the conservative treatment, they get

something that go against them, some conservative and conservative.

The facility gets right, so what he can do is

that he can compare the effect of being exposed to

an out group viewpoint, something that comes from the other

group, right, in the ideology of people, yeah, yeah, so

the a was.

Um, here is like, would you like to participate in

an expert, uh, experiment, something, something, maybe not put so

much like this, but like would you like to participate

in the advance of science or something like this, and

then people were accepting or not to be recruiting.

So you could think, for example, because it is important

to create some self selection going on there, you could

think that.

Those who refuse to participate will actually be the most

kind of extreme people and like, you really get the

moderate, for example, those who have a good view of

science, which you know nowadays has become also a political

issues, which you know, if you know science, I'm actually

don't think people are completely wrong to think it's a

political issue.

It is partly a political issue.

Right, so that, that's what it was.

So out of basically 1 million, he got 37,500 people.

So you can think about a conversion rate of what

would be 3%.

3.

45%.

Then you then you basically do this, then you are,

it's an intention to treat, right?

So what you are randomising is you are encouraging people

to subscribe to some website, but you are not forcing

them to subscribe.

So that's.

Exactly an intention to treat the effect that is measured

because you will have to do your randomization at this

level and at the level of intention to treat.

There are 53% that comply with the liberal treatment.

You have 53% that comply with the conservative.

And they look at outcomes.

So they look at the page like and post share.

So they have this for almost everybody, and they are

relatively split.

They look at the exposure to the post in the

feed in the feed feed.

This is done through the extension data, right?

And they have this also relatively balance.

And then they also look at the political opinion and

affective polarisation, and this is where there is an attrition.

And so that's how the people who say yes to

have the researcher having access to their feed and their

browsing history, and here is just like Facebook data that

they get they share and things like that without like

seeing the feeding themselves.

OK.

So, Mhm.

What is the effect of social media of this experiment

sorry on political opinion and again political opinion, right, is

the, the point is being exposed to in-group viewpoints versus

outgroup viewpoints.

Right, right, that have been exposed to a good viewpoint

versus in viewpoints and you know, for a conservative in-roup

means receiving conservative views for an odd group means receiving

liberal views and as you can see there is no

effect on political opinion.

And this I don't think should be seen as a

surprise, right?

What you are doing is you are telling people to

subscribe to some website so they might get some additional

stories on their feet, but you know this is a

few stories out of everything they see.

On their feet, out of everything they see outside of

their feet, out of all the discussion they have with

people, I don't think we should expect that by randomising

a few stories on someone's feed, we will move that

public opinion.

We want to move to someone public opinion, take someone

from Kansas, bring them to see.

I guarantee you that by the end of this they

will not have to public opinion.

Take someone from medicine, make them live 5 years in

Kansas.

They will also change their their political opinion.

It has to be a much more brutal treatment whether

we want to do this, not sure, but you know

this is what is.

There is an effect on effective polarisation, right?

So it means that people have a better emotional opinion

if you want.

Like you know, are more willing to tolerate others after

being exposed to our group viewpoint compared to those who

are only exposed to in-group viewpoints, right, controlling for ideology.

Now there is an effect, but I want you to

see that the effect is extremely small.

It's 0.03 of the standard deviation, the 3% of the

standard deviation, and that's a very, very tiny effect.

Again, I don't think we should expect a big effect,

so that's fine, right, but it's kind of we get

it.

So, Small role in shaping public opinion consists of a

further so the effect on political opinion, right.

And so that suggests that you know the fact that

there is no effect on political opinion means that probably

the news that they see on this new outlet they

subscribe to doesn't really change compared to the news that

they see on others.

What can be maybe changing is the way the issue

is presented.

Think about the immigration issue in the United States.

If you take a conservative outlet, they will insist on

criminality.

They will insist on jobs, they will insist on this,

and it would kind of like give you a sense

of moral cover to support the expulsion of illegal immigrants

from the United States.

If you take a more liberal viewpoint, what they will

talk about is probably the cost.

this expansion are created on the people that are, what

it means for the community, the feel of it does

on Americans that live in this community and things like

this, and you will get a much more personal story

and we know that personal story works much better than

art core statistics, right?

This is what Stalin come back to in a few

weeks was saying he said the death of one is

um.

It's it's a story.

The death of millions is just a statistics, right?

So you could not relate.

It's like you cannot compare this.

So what he does, and I think this is why

this paper is widely published, uh, yeah, is that he's

also trying to understand how do things change?

What caused this change in public opinion in political, uh,

not in opinion but in effective polarisation.

And you can think that there are different aspects that

matters between, you know, remember we are comparing those with

in views versus our views, right?

Those we do this.

So here's a few things that you can measure, right?

So first of all, remember there is this treatment.

I encourage you to, let's say we are the ali

site, and you know, they encourage me to subscribe to

New York Times, Slate, MSNBC, blah blah.

And encourage you, your living room, to bother to subscribe

to a conservative audience, right?

The first thing that can happen is that one I

could subscribe more because you know there's more newspaper I

want to know about later on than you.

So that's the first effect that can affect this, right?

And indeed we see a slight more fortitude you also

in in good views as a.

and altitudinal, but if you look at the difference it's

quite small, right?

It's like we put the numbers to automation we have

1.5 divided by 2.

So this is counter.

This is 4, so that will be 34, right?

So the ratio of 34.

There's no even thing that can happen, right.

Is that you get, I get more stories coming from

the outlets that are on the list, right, that were

on there, and you get stories from the outlets that

were on the list.

And that's like, you know, from the first time it's

not conditional on subscribing.

This is like from a kind of like overall perspective,

right?

So we know not everybody subscribes what we do not,

and so this is all, you know, from an intention

to treat perspective.

And so this is the number of.

In the field that someone see when that person has

received the attitudinal treatment versus the person has received the

contraaltitudinal treatment and that is 282 versus 22.61.

That's kind of luck.

This is exposure and then we have 282 divided by

22.61, and if you want, this is equal to more

or less.

One.

Then you have conditional on being exposed, you can click

on it and go on the website and see how

many visits you are doing, right from the start.

This is not conditional on this.

This is not conditional on this.

It's all from whether you are theattitudinal or contraattitudinal treatment

so.

behaviour and so if you want.

What we get is 1.7 divided by 13.21, and now

I'd say is more closer to 18.

And then the last thing that can happen to explain

the difference is that basically because you know I'm receiving

things on your feed you don't really like, you know,

you get this bloody bleeding out liberal or you get

this crazy.

Religious article coming up on your on your feed.

You're like, why, yeah, that's really I am tired of

using Facebook and saying this craziness, and then you start

using Facebook less after receiving a contitudinal rather than there's

also use and the use is basically.

sharing all this, so this is 0.11, 0.84, all right.

So if you look at these numbers, right.

And you know, from this you can recover the various

aspect that there is, you can recover what is due

to difference in subscription, what is due to difference in

al Gaza, what is due to difference in use, and

it's quite obvious.

Where most of the difference is coming from, right?

As far as most of the difference coming from if

you look at these numbers, yeah.

Oh, think about it as what do you want?

Do you want a high ratio or do you want

a low ratio?

Suppose there was no difference whatsoever between the two.

What would be the value of the ratio in this

case?

It would be one for for exposure, it would be.

One, etc.

etc.

Now suppose that.

There was no salting by the algorithm, right?

The job is to force it.

There was no salting by the algoism.

What should be the level of exposure?

What should be the difference in exposure?

OK, so you start and you are basically for every

3 outlets that one person.

He's doing in the anti uh an attitudinal 4 in

the pro-altitude, right?

So that means for if there was no algorithm effect

for every 3 posts in your feet that are anti-attitudinal,

how many posts are there for the protitudinal treatment.

It should be.

No, OK, let's do it.

It's good, it's good when you're confused, it's good because

that means I can cli, right?

So let's just like the in the case where there

is no difference, right.

So we have, let's say it's once for every 2

subscriptions, this is the NT is the pro and we

have the subscription for every 2 subscriptions right by.

The NT there are two subscriptions by the phone.

So this is a 1 to 1 ratio.

I, I keep two because then it's not, it's gonna

be easy now in exposure there's no algorithm.

So for every 2 balls that you see in the

ante, how many balls should you see how many, for

every 2 balls in the feed that people receiving the

anti-antigen treatment see, how many balls.

With the prolatitudinal treatment in the algorithm is just neutral

right like if it takes 10 posts from the And

it would take 10 from the car as well.

And then you have a use for every 2 balls

people click on.

How many in the anti-treatment, how many parts they should

click on in the poor treatment 2, right, this is

basically now let's think about a case where there is

difference in subscription but no difference in in afterwards, right.

Yeah.

Yeah.

same thing.

In this case, we knew it was more or less

1.5 to 2.

Mhm In time of exposure, what should we say?

We should see 1.5 that is that the difference in

subscription will transform itself into difference in exposure.

We will transform in as well, OK, so.

Then you can think about what is it that we

see so we can think about the difference in all

but.

Use so what we have is 1.5 divided by 2.

In the data this translates in 1 divided by 9

and that's you observe in the data.

And this will be again if there is in you

there is no difference compared to what you see, you

should recover 1.5 depended by right there was difference in

everything but at the top.

of views you are neutral.

What is it that we see?

We see 1.5 divided by 2, 1/9, and something like

18.

Yeah.

So now.

Of the three possibilities right between subscription, the algorithm, and

the use, which one is the most in some sense?

Where is the biggest distortion happening?

The algorithm, right?

Because in the algorithm we move from 34s to 1

over another.

That's a multiplication by Well 4/27.

37 divided by 4, it increases.

And in fact, the US seems to cover just a

little bit.

What is distorted?

People's view in some sense.

It's a bit the willingness to engage with other viewpoints.

Indeed there is kind of like some effect, but it's

mostly what the Google algorithm is giving them.

That's where the distortion is happening.

In the sense that the algorithm responds to the uh

change of very good, excellent questions.

Remember here we are for anti-altitudinal versus pro-altitudinal, right, and

you're basically it's a subscription to it.

What the algorithm is doing right is basically.

Picking a lot of latitudinal story to put on your

feed and putting very little attitudinal story to put in

your feed, right?

Remember it's the same people, right?

So it's like, so what it's doing is like it

sees that you have subscribed to New York Times and

it knows.

You could have all this information about you that you

are liberal.

They just don't know that you just have the leader,

they know that you have also access to all this.

So what are they going to do?

They're going to feed you a lot of story of

the New York Times now that you have subscribed to

it, right?

Now you're the same.

you subscribed to Fox News and they're like, but he

probably doesn't like Fox News that much.

So we're going to put very few stories of Fox

News in your face, right?

I know your ideological learning based on what you have

like previously we shared and stuff like this.

So that's what he's offering.

So that goes and says, Here's a liberal person.

Oh, this liberal has not subscribed to Slate.

Then you bring him a lot of Slate's story because

I think he will like it.

And if he likes it, it's going to be more

on Facebook and if it's more on Facebook, I'm going

to get more data, and if I get more data,

I can put better on and if I put on,

I make more money.

They basically put a lot of slate story for me.

In fact, 11 story on Slate on average 22 divided

by 2 is 11.

Now let's say that I got the other treatment and

I decided, well, let me see what Fox News said

just to, you know, to see.

Now what is saying is like that's strange.

The person doesn't like Fox News, so I'm not going

to show a lot of Fox News story because, you

know, if I show a lot of Fox News story,

that person will not be happy.

We'll start spending less time on Facebook and we collect

less data, we have less data, we have less money.

So I'm basically filtering the Fox News story.

What the paper that we have seen is showing is

that not surprisingly I would say the Fox News story.

That I'll put in front of me will not be

the average news story, but the most liberal of the

news story, the one I will indeed sometimes the exposure

measure that we have here is underestimated the difference in

the exposure that people get, right, because they will not

put like this Donald Trump's story, they will put oh

blah blah blah said that Donald Trump immigration policy may

not succeed.

something much more like aligned with ideas, right, but still

that's the way the algorithm works, right?

And so it does this here we have done it

in a very, you know.

And with the way you can do it in a

much more solid way here by separating right you know.

You can think about the exposure which is the same

thing we've done last week if you remember we talked

about exposure and persuasion rates.

So we just think about exposure is the subscription, which

we know how much more they subscribe if they receive

the quality to a statement.

And we know it's all divided by 3 basically.

The post on feeds, which is how many more posts

they see on feeds after subscribing, and we know here

it's something like 9 divided by 1 and the Facebook

usage, which is many times they go on Facebook and

if you want to think about the difference in exposure

between the two groups, you have the difference in subscription

keeping the um.

Post and the use, the difference in post hitting the

subscription and the use constant and the difference in use

and the combination which you have not taken to account.

And so what he does is what it shows is.

40% comes from the algorithm which we need to add

some of the combinations.

27% come from the subscriptions and 10% and we use

this because we have seen in the data that they

use we counterbalancing a little bit the algorithm.

So what is really driving difference and exposure is going

to be the algorithm of the social network.

Basically it's not like, OK, nowadays you go on X,

clearly there and they're going.

Right, but if you go on Facebook, as much as

you know, I have little uh sympathy for the rubber

baron of our age, the rubber baron, or the one

who are as rich as the one we have today,

but at the beginning of the 20th century, you know

them without knowing them, but you don't know them as

rubber baron.

One of them is.

I only know this because of the Tower.

Another one is Vanderbilt, and you know only this person

because of the university, and I can tell you the

Musk, Bezos, and Zuckerberg will be as forgotten as these

people 100 years old now if it makes you any

sola or any sadness.

I'm pretty sure I can bet on it, you know.

I don't know what I wanted to say, but it

was a rand, so this is kind of like, you

know, telling you that Z is not doing it for

propaganda.

This is not a propaganda machine, but it's not doing

it to make the people more polarised.

The only reason he's doing this is because he believes

that people would be more likely to come on Facebook

if they see things they like and they will like

more things that are aligned with the public opinion.

And the more they're on Facebook, the more money it

does.

So it's all a profit oriented things.

If you want, it is a negative externality on politics

or a profit oriented business model.

That is as its core assumption that people consume more

of the product if the product show them something that

is aligned with their opinion.

But that, that's what is happening.

It's not like propaganda and a propaganda that I would

say.

All right.

Now another answer that we have, right, is fake news.

Right.

It's the notion that fake news.

It's affecting people's view, more views, right?

People are distorted because of fake news.

Indeed, you know, we do see something.

There was this thing of the Petergate scandal, and I

know you can click on it if you don't know

what it is.

It is a story that there was a fake news

circulating that leaders of the democratic parties.

We're going to the basement of a pizza place to

engage in pedophilic practises.

That, that was the story.

In New York, and what happened is that one person

once went into this pizza place and opened fire.

That, that, that's, that's what happened.

Now, otherwise, you know, it is true that there were

some democratic politicians as there are some Republican politicians that

were engaging in this sort of art in some basement

that were not this pizza, but it had nothing to

do with Hillary Clinton and the big boss of the

Democratic Party, right.

So every fake news is also to be successful you

need to have some element that is credible and to

be credible, there needs to be something that is often

an exaggeration of real things that are happening in practise,

right, so.

Again, there is a lot of talk about fake news.

You know, there was this fake quote that I give

to you.

The literature is much less kind of like worried about

this, right?

Social media is a limited source of news.

I come back to this.

Social media news, news knowledge, I should say news knowledge,

without increasing influence of fake news.

There is a recent experiment.

and on top of this, there is this paper that

started looking at 16,000 Twitter accounts and what they did

is they tried to look at the time where you

could still access the API of Twitter as an academic.

They would try to look at the exposure of people

to fake news and whether people were actually, you know,

reposting fake news.

So what do they see?

They see that looking at the political feed of an

average person in Twitter, fake news represented 1.8 1.2% of

their faith, and so a very, very, very small amount.

Second, what they see is that exposure to fake news

is not homogeneous.

You have a few people really being exposed to a

lot of fake news, and many people think very, very

little of it.

Further, There is only 0.1% of people that account for

80% of fake news.

And if you think about what we have seen just

before the break when I showed you this histogram about

the diet of people, and I show you that there

was a fringe, and this fringe was exposed to very

kind of like one-sided viewpoint where most people are exposed

to Not necessarily a balanced diet, but at least some

diversity in their views.

Same thing for fake news.

Fake news is being pushed by a fringe of the

population, and indeed being seen by a fringe of the

population.

Now I'm not saying that this is not a concern

because these people can actually act on the news.

And start doing damage.

There is an example in this country of fake news

yielding real political consequences.

Can someone remember it riots, the riot this summer.

What were you saying?

Well, Brexit is some, there are some fake news in

Brexit, but it's also some truth.

In what they were saying, right, not all, but and

also, you know, both sides, but indeed this summer in

this country, so there was, it's all over the news

these days, if you look at British newspaper, there is

someone who clearly suffered from severe psychological issues of sociopathy,

at least that has killed 3 kids in a town

called Soport.

There was a rumour that was said.

speculated that this attack was carried out by some immigrants,

or at least some asylum seekers, and that became a

rallying call for some French far right extremists to attack

others where asylum seekers were sent.

Into attack also many members of the Muslim community that

happen to be from Southeast Asia, Pakistan and India and

Bangladesh, right?

So there was all these events that started to affect.

So I'm not saying it doesn't have real world consequences.

But I compared to, you know, the way it's put

into the media as being the issue.

There's a big difference between when we said that.

And then there is obviously the typical assumption made by

people that either study political behaviour or think they understand

political behaviour, which is that if you see a fake

news.

To be like, oh.

Oh, it must be true, really, you know, that is

definitely correct.

I believe it 100%.

And there's this view that people.

are just a bunch of idiots and they are completely

unable.

To think about something as being true or false, and

they would be completely swayed by a fail, right, completely

swayed by a fail.

It's not to say that the react to fake news.

Indeed, if you're a politician lacking Brexit.

And you are able to spin something in a way

that is a little bit, you know, sufficiently ambiguous and

as an element of truth to it.

You can move people's beliefs, right?

But it's not that I'm gonna accept it as truth

with capital T and the more crazy is the news,

the least likely they are to accept it.

And in particular.

This is what this paper is doing.

What they show is that if you do ask them

to basically compare fake, you put like fake stories and

true stories on the same thing, people will in general

be able to say like the true story.

Indeed, 87% of people will distinguish a true story from

a false story.

So you might say, what about the 13%, the 13%

is not swing an election.

And it's a very tiny minority.

In particular 60%.

will be sufficiently confident that they will put a 3

to 1 odds in favour of it, but that is

to say they will put $1 and get $0.33 in

return, 1.0 $33 in return, and they will show high

confidence in favour of it.

I actually want to put $3 to get $1.

That's what a 3 to 1.

Again, 8% will have the same confidence for families.

So there's a clear, you know, not only they recognise

it, but many people, 2/3 of them do have quite

a good ability to discern.

One thing that is important.

Is that partisanship matters.

Indeed, people liberal, we see, you know, a true news

story that goes against her views and a fake news

story that goes for their views are slightly more likely

to be the fake news stories and one is the

reverse, and the fake news story goes against her views

and stuff like this, right?

So there is some effect of partisanship and some confirmation

bias, but that's a 2% effect.

Right, what is the key predictor of selecting 2 versus

5, right?

It's educational income.

It's always education income.

This is like one of your best predictors ever.

And people who are educated and have relatively high income

are much better able to basically identify true news stuff,

and that's not, I don't think.

The question of intelligence, I think it's much more a

question of being exposed to political news in the first

place.

More educated and higher income people pay more attention to

politics.

Therefore they have more pure knowledge, and they will be

able to select the news with higher confidence than someone

that has very little knowledge.

Like, you know, if you know nothing, who knows something

about be at no.

Vira is is when you do skiing and then you

shoot, you know, nothing, but if I ask you a

question about Vilan, you probably like have no idea you

would be unable to decidele from falls.

If I ask you a question about what would it,

what's your favourite sport?

No I ask a question about your favourite pop star,

whatever it is, or your favourite movie star.

I'm pretty sure you will be much better at discerning

what is true from what is right?

So this is education and income is not a mark

of intelligence, it's more a predictor of appearing knowledge before

I.

The last thing I want to say is that We

have to be also very careful in how we interpret

evidence, right?

So for example, if you ask people, will they be

willing to share a fake news or arm talk as

they call it in this paper, they would say, Yes,

well, quite a few weeks, yes, in fact, 15% would

say yes, notice that 87%, 15%, we always find it.

I mean if you look at the culture of the

far right in France prior to the rise, it was

13, 15% all the time, right?

So this is like this is a number that is

kind of like an interesting number.

So 15% will say yes if you actually make them

share the news and say yes, click yes so the

news will appear on your feed maybe not, and this

number 4 to 5%, right?

So we get closer.

To this type of numbers relatively quickly.

Also, what is kind of like thing is that people

are willing to be influenced when it comes to fake

news.

So this paper make people allocate people to free treatments

one to see fake news, what they call a fuck.

In fact, it's a very, very well designed fake news.

It's a statement by Le Pen saying that 85% of

French laws are decided in Brussels.

Which is false in the number, but everybody knows that

many laws are indeed in Brussels.

It's a beautiful way to put fact.

And another one is a statement where she said that

the European Union wants 50 million immigrants, the European Union

has said that there's a shortage of 50 million workers

in Europe by 2050.

And you know, yeah, it's not completely false.

There is a way that you could think that filling

this gap will be done with.

It's really carefully crafted in a way that is not

fake, not true, just in this grey line of interpretedness.

So then you know, when you ask them, these people

who just see this news, there's the people who see

news and fact checked.

And there is this, are these people who see news

and the possibility to fact check this and what they

show is whether you are exposed to the fact checking

or you see the you see the possibility of fact

checking that reduce your willingness to share by 2%, so

from 3 to 5 from 5 to 3%.

So that reduces it to a very tiny group of

people.

So you know when.

You put, you know, say that we will not checks

anymore or anything on Facebook.

You can think that this is gonna have some effect,

not such a big effect because maybe it's only 5%

of people, but it may double the number of people

who share alternative, right, so this is kind of like

telling you something is happening.

This is a beautiful paper.

It's a paper that has a huge problem of self

selection into something into voluntary fact checking and voluntary fact

checking, clicking on the fact check and the way they

deal with it is a beautiful way to deal with

self selection.

So I really recommend reading it to see how you

can actually use self selection as a way to send.

Alright, so what did we see today?

I hate social media.

I want to be very clear about this.

I am not on Facebook, not on Twitter, not on

anything, not definitely not on TikTok and Instagram.

I hate it, but even though I hate it for

myself, it has to be the case that if I

look at the academic literature, not at me, the newspapers,

but at the academic, it seems to me that most

of the church that are against.

Social media, all the all the political crises what happened

in Romania where they basically cancelled an election because they

didn't like the out because they accused Romania for this

that's like it might be complete.

I cannot see that in my mind, but you can

see the ideas that I have in my mind, right?

It's completely wrong things you cannot do this, but you

know, all these charges, if you look at them seriously

in the literature, there are issues but on average as

people.

That's not.

It's not.

It's not the case because one of the socialisation and

media have a balanced diet.

It is the case that the fringe has very limited

viewpoint and exposure, though these receive way more assumption and

Attention that it needs and you have to think about

this range was not, you know, reading the BBC before.

So, I would say related also to the source part

A and one thing that we should actually think more

about when we think about social media is that one

thing that it does is that it can solve coordination

problems.

It can solve coordination problems for good, helping people go

against tyranny, and that's what you are.

In the Arab Spring, and that's why dictators shut down

social media whenever they need when they feel they're in

trouble, or can solve coordination problems for grouping the far

right in one place to attack a hotel where there

are asylum seekers that are staying there so coordination problem

is neither.

Good or bad by itself, it depends on what we

saw, but really social media really can be really having

an impact in that particular dimension.

And if you want to see a little bit about

this, this is something that you know you will have

in one of the appendix of this lecture.

The other appendix is based on the.

computation.

All right, so this is for social media.

Next week we go back to a bit more theory,

what we think about intro and then we see more

than in, not the one we've seen.

I see you next week or in.

Yeah.

I don't, if you could remember to send me.

He went I might think of it, but you know,

if some chance I forget.

We prosecuted.

I want to try something that.

I don't.

Lecture 13:

I don't think we will have time to do 47

slides even if I were to be on time.

Uh, would you, uh.

The most of the ones the world.

OK, so.

Most of what we're going to do is going to

be based in the US because, you know, that's where

the data is, but it doesn't mean that this is

going to be a, you know, just the US phenomenon.

Indeed, this is a problem that affects.

Most countries across the world.

I had some students asking me to speak about lobbying

in the European Union, right?

And I told them I know nothing about lobbying in

the European Union and talk about populism in the European

Union.

OK, just talk about populism.

So for example, Donald Trump was like, you know, in

his first.

Um inauguration speech was like.

That it was going to drain the Washington DC swamp,

but it's full of lobbies, distorting, and give back the

regime to those to whom it belongs, the people doing.

But that's not just Donald Trump, but it's Barack Obama

who said, I will take on lobbyists.

Both of them probably fail because Donald Trump appointed more

lobbyists than anyone in the government, and Barack Obama gave,

you know, Obamacare is just the result of almost lobbyists

fighting that, that I get reform.

So it's not, it's very hard to.

We moved the influence of families and one of the

reasons we know a little bit from a mother we've

seen is that potentially it's because they do provide relevant

information.

So One issue is one of the reason people feel

very Kind of like uncomfortable when they think about special

interest group, about lobbying because it seems to go really

completely against the idea of what democracies are about, and

it seems to basically democracy is supposed to be one

on one vote so that everybody will have the equal

say in political decisions, but in practise.

Because not everybody is able to talk to a representative.

In fact, only professionals talk to representative.

It ends up being that not everybody has the same

political.

Oh, some political influence.

Some are way more power than others, and these people

tend to come from, you know, the wealthy part of

society.

there is kind of like, you know, a I good

and by tradition that what the group are doing.

is that they are buying policies.

If you have like the auctioneers, so there is, and

this is the auctioneer telling you that Congress has been

sold, but then obviously the buyers wish to remain anonymous,

and this is kind of funny.

And if you go into basically the popular literature, you

will find many, many kind of like uh books on

democracy for uh republic laws, etc.

etc.

and this idea that it's always The case that the

system is corrupt by interest groups because of the money

that they invested.

So that's kind of like the argument that.

And you know, there's some reason to believe this.

These are kind of like the money spent in US

elections.

So 2024 is not complete yet, but it's going there.

We can see that from 1919 to 2020 there has

been a huge increase both in the cost of congressional

elections but also in the cost of presidential election.

Indeed, 2024 seems to be incredible because it's the first

time in many, many years that such a reduction in

the amount of money this is.

And then you, you have economist, and because economists were

my love, you know, I think they have done a

lot of great things for social science, but not all

the things that they do are great, are a bit

narrow minded.

So you're an economist and you know you've been told

price, quantity, market exchanges, and you come to politics and

you're like, oh, I'm gonna apply my economic mentality to

this question.

So when I say that contributions are money.

Basically the price that a dangerous would pay to buy

good good policies.

So they're going to think that, you know, the market

exchange that they see when you go to the supermarket

is exactly the same thing that happens when you basically

go and look at.

They're going to apply the same frame to a very

different model.

So but the, but the thing about it in this

way, the basic model which You are in the appendix,

right?

Goes the following way.

The, the, the main model goes the following way, and

the basic model is a bit simpler because it's like

a special group goes to um the specials good.

I go to floor and I say, look, here's a

contract.

Right.

If you decrease stocks by 1%, I give you 1

million.

If you decrease it by 2, I give you $3

million.

If you decrease it by 3, I give you 7

million, right?

And then if you do it by 4, I give

you 8 million.

And then you know you look at this contract and

you say, well, you know, cost benefit, and then you

pick one item in this contract and usually of course

the contract is designed so that I get the most

that I can get out of you given the cost

that you have of changing policies.

That's kind of like what is happening.

The one thing about these models that people don't talk

is that if you have two in interest groups of

similar weight, the entrances can sell that.

You interest group, one is stronger than the others, and

you know, the biggest group gets more, but it's very

easy to counteract a little.

So I'm not gonna say that you don't have evidence

of money by policies, but you know, I don't think

they are coming.

So where is one nice evidence of money by policies.

So the Death and Li sugar Company was one of

the biggest donors to the Conservative Party in the UK

and in particular to the Leave camp in the Brexit

referendum, and they get tonnes of money for Brexit.

Why did they give tonnes of money for Brexit?

Because it was calculated that they would make 73 million

out of it.

How would you make 7 million?

Well, they are the only sugar company in most sugar

cane, right?

But because France, uh, some department in, you know, overseas

that do produce sugar cane, they are very high tariffs

on sugar cane importation, which of course were to be

dropped the moment the UK were to leave the European

Union.

So what happened is basically they gain the reduction in

tariffs from sugar cane, which is their main input in

the production of sugar that you see.

So that's kind of like one example where we can

really trace contribution to policies and the sense of like

buying policies.

However, while I'm not gonna deny.

And there are some examples like this.

There are cases of senators being flown in private jets

to, you know, luxurious island where one in the luxurious

island stays in the luxurious islands, you know, this type

of things.

In general, when you take up an average look, it's

much harder to find systematic evidence in favour of money-based

policies, right?

So.

For example, we have this very famous paper called Why

I there So Little Money in Politics?

I say that if you look at the amount of

contribution or legislators get.

And you include the legislative fixed effect in the model,

and basically contribution has no effect on the votes.

Why?

Because what is happening is that do not give money

to swear votes.

They give money to get their friends elected to Congress.

I seen that many people giving money to get elected

to Congress.

This is seen also with retiring legislators who basically behave

exactly the same as when they were in office.

That means like when you're retiring, you don't get contribution,

but you don't change your vote, that like you were

voting with your preferences.

And one thing about contribution is that even if they

are meant to influence because there are many people making

contribution that does not seem to have such a big

impact on kind of like electoral outcome as well.

Like it's very hard to sway electoral outcome.

We can also see several casual observations that suggest that

it's hard to believe that money by policies.

So one of them, you know, is that in the

US.

Contributions are being cut, right?

And for a long time they were capped at 5000,

I think it's around 7000 per cycle, so per campaign,

and I think it's 7500, something like this.

So it's 15,000 per candidate, right?

And here you have this.

Wonderful quote.

I think one of the best quotes I've ever seen

a politician say to really destroy their own campaign.

if you're saying that I can be bought for then

I'm offended, right, which is obviously a terrible because it

suggests that it could be if you were to put

more money on the table.

That's terrible.

So this is was the governor of Texas.

This was during the primaries where Mitt Romney was selected

to run against Obama in 2012.

Rick Perry started the campaign as the big favourite actually.

And then he basically destroyed himself during the electoral campaign,

and I was doing an electoral debate where he was

debating a crazy congresswoman.

We just had a moment of fame during this campaign,

Michel Buchmann, something like this, and she was accusing him

of having accepted to make vaccination compulsory against a 5000

contribution by a pharmaceutical company, and he said, for 5000

I cannot be both, you know, it was really just

missing for 50,000 we can start discussing, but he didn't

say this, right?

He also in the same debate, it's a very Very

funny scene of self destruction, he went and he said,

we have to cut to show you that a lot

of the discourses, and we have to cut 4 federal

agencies.

agency number 1 A, agency number 2, housing, and I

make it up.

agency number 3.

And he blanked and then he turned to another candidate

to get some support, but him, he turned to the

most crazy libertarian in the debate and then look at

him and say, it's not 4, you have to cut.

It's 5.

And I was like, you can see this scene.

I'm pretty sure you can find it on YouTube.

And then it was over.

Well his excuse he actually had a huge bad problem

during the campaign, and that explained like a lot of

his bad performance.

The same like facts, even though you have campaign contributions,

right, it is the case that many what is called

political action committees that is basically.

When you are in a firm and you want to

give money to candidates, you cannot do it yourself.

You have to create the political action committees, and that's

like the political action committees of Apple, of Google, and

all this, and what they do is that they don't

even give to the maximum amount, but it's not that

they are constrained by the contributions really.

They just don't.

Another really what I think is the biggest issue with

the money by policies that we will see.

today.

Is that We see there's a lot of money.

Indeed, you know, I didn't talk about the scales, but

here we are talking about something like $15 billion.15 billion

dollars being spent in the election, and the problem is

the budget of the US government is in trillions and

in thousands of billions.

And so that is really a tiny drop relative to

the amount of money that the US government can give

to special interests.

Indeed, a small part of the envelope calculation suggests that

the rate of return of contribution if you believe it

by.

Benefits is 2,000%.

So basically, you put $1 you get $2000 in return.

That's much better than Bitcoins.

But if this were true, we should just stop studying

and should stop teaching.

We just form a park, give money and get like,

you know, you know, with like, you know, 10,000 together,

we may need.

of it.

So obviously that suggests that this is not true.

The last point I want to show is that.

Another reason it is unlikely to be true is because

it's not even 15 billion, it's not even where patients

who put most of their money.

So this is kind of like I don't have the

number for 23, 24 and not complete so that's what

we have this one.

The total contribution to legislators was 3.66 billion, right, but

that includes contribution made by, you know, average individuals.

The contribution by parts of alpha billion.

If you include very large donors, you get to 1.53

billion.

This means there's still 2.1 billion by citizens, average citizens

lobbying expenditure on their own are around 6.84 billion, right?

So they are something like 4 and 4 times the

amount spent on contribution by wealthy individuals.

Where do they put their money?

Basically in lobby when it comes to providing information to

policymakers.

So the one we're gonna speak about, we really dig

into loy especially with good friends is not contribution.

But we're going to think about lobbying, right?

And lobbying is contact between legislators and special news group,

and there's no direct transfers of money.

Now I'm not saying that there's some type of like

indirect one, you know, in in fancy restaurant, but a

lot of this has been restricted now, so it's much

harder.

You know, for legislators, but of course they will never

tell you otherwise.

They will say that's very useful because I get the

information that I need in 30 minutes.

I don't know how to vote.

I don't know what to think about this deal that

is in front of my committee.

I discussed to the lobbies and I get 30, 30

minutes I get the information that I need.

Now, there are 2 types of lobbies actually, right?

What is firms of their own lobbies.

They all kind of like internal people that go and

work for Congress.

Another one is higher lobby by specialised firms, right?

In fact, the internal lobbyist is not you and me.

It's often people that have been doing it in a

private firm.

For one, and I'm approached by, you know, a new

friend.

So this is, this is what one thing I want

to say before we go to this is like some

companies swore when they were young and up and coming

that they would never use lobby.

And nowadays, I've become the main lobbying spenders and that's

all the tech companies.

So you know a uh uh a sector like it's

getting ossified when they start using lobbying to protect themselves

against competition.

This is kind of like something else.

So what we're going to think about is why do

you need specialist and why do you even go even

to a higher level, taking into account that what is

happening is just talking.

And to do this, we are gonna look at, as

I promised, the most amazing model we will see in

political economy which is Co and Soer Chimo.

Before we go into the ship order, is there any

question?

So.

A politician.

He's going to take The policy.

Heights, which can be between 01.

That's basically.

The politician Or if we were to use the language.

And all that is the receivers.

So the chooser is jus.

OK.

And the effect of the policy.

It's not a.

Y and it's gonna be X minus omega.

Omega is the state of the world.

What we are going to assume to make.

Our life easy And that Omega.

He's drawn uniformly between 0 and 1.

Now what is gonna be the problem of a politician?

Yeah, he doesn't know.

That's the problem.

If I want to be precise, we're going to say

the realisation.

Of the random valuable, right, so of course he knows

that omega is distributed between uniformly between 0 and 1,

but he doesn't know what is the actual value of

Omega.

Luckily for the politician, there is a special interest group.

God knows.

OK With the realisation And this will be also Sunday.

Unfortunately for our politicians.

This question onco doesn't have exactly the same preference as

I'm going to use him because most politicians, as we

would see in the week after reading weeks, um, this

is like we'll talk about in politics exactly for that

reason.

So what are the utilities, so the utility function of

the politician.

It's going to be basically.

And he wants the policies to match the state of

the world, or if you want, you want.

You are going to be zebra.

Why to be zebra.

What about the points go?

Well, what the special was up.

Mo is an outcome that is equal to B.

So B.

is bias of the and this is known, but there's

no uncertainty about this.

The only source of uncertainty is the state the realisation

of the state of the world for the politicians.

Everything else is common knowledge in this.

You can have games where there is uncertainty about the

buyers, that's not the game we are studying.

So how does the game work?

Nature Draws the realisation.

move.

So.

Message.

Um The politician sees arm and shoes.

Thank there's a message.

And the politicians sees the message to the policy and

then of course.

He and our real life.

So basically what the specs group is doing is to

choose message M on the set of the word.

I to Yeah.

And here we can say this is from any message.

Any policy is never going to be.

Beyond below 0 or below 1, but let's define it

a bit more.

That's so.

From the state of the world, that the specialist observed,

it sent a message, the politician.

Observe the message.

Chooses The Any question on on this?

Yeah.

So the first thing we're going to see is that

there is no truthful equilibrium, right?

The truthful equilibrium or truthful strategy is when if the

specialist group observe omega, it reports omega, it sends a

message equal to that would be a truthful strategy.

But if you want is that there's a 1 to

1 mapping between any state of the world and any

message, any realisation of the state of the world and

any message.

the good strategy.

We're going to define it in the simplest way.

We're gonna say that.

If I see omega, I give you omega.

If I see the omega is 0.2, I give you

0.2.

If I see the omega is 0.7, I give you

0.7.

We are going to see that there's no equilibrium.

With fiscal strategy.

How are we going to show that there is no

equilibrium with stressful strategy?

What is going to be a proof technique?

Yes, in particular, we're going to do a pro by

by contradiction, so what we're gonna assume is, you know.

We're going to support that plays a truthful strategy.

It is of omega equal to omega.

We're going to think about what the best response is.

And then we're gonna go back here and we're gonna

ask ourselves, give a peace-based response.

Is it the best response for the special going to

be a truthful strategy?

So that we can do it for every.

if we want, but we just need to show one

profitable deviation, but it's always enough to show one profitable

deviation.

What we're going to do is we're going to show

it for one omega.

So we're going to choose to do this would be

one which omega should we choose to show profitable deviation.

Let's just pick on omega and show that the specialist

group doesn't have an incentive to basically say that M

is send a message omega, some value between 0 and

1.

That's actually the worst possible.

No, no, that's good.

That's actually probably the worst, the most difficult one to

find a profitable deviation here, right?

So that means that if one is the most difficult,

what's gonna be the easiest 0.

Before we go, let me just say one thing.

Let's say that B is strictly just for simplicity, even

we are even refund.

Let's suppose that omega is equal to 0.

Mhm.

So, We're going to think about our special group if

he plays the strategies.

He has two sons al 2.

He and did.

Now, what is he gonna do?

What is the X that he will choose?

After seeing message here.

So what do you assume about the strategy of this

question interest group?

what is it that people believe after saying 0?

That the state of the world is 0.

So what is the best response to the state of

the world being zero for the policymaker is 0, right,

because they want the policy to larger state of the

world.

Yeah.

OK.

And so One is gonna be SIG's payoff.

Well, it's gonna be minus.

X is 0, minus B minus omega which is 02,

this is gonna be minus B2.

Yeah.

Mhm.

OK, so we have done it.

Here, I've done basically the silo thinking about what happened

on past I think about potential deviation.

Which deviation would you do?

That is to be So let's say that instead of

sending message 0 as it should because omega is equal

to 0, agendas group deviate and send measures B.

What is best response?

In this case.

It's B because we still believe that the situation will

be through the score or we are in no silo,

so we skip the 4 P.

the special interest group is truthful as we look for

it.

Once we have shown a profitable division, what do we

do with Osado?

We take it, we do a, you know, a run

of paper and we saw it far away, and we

will start from our ways, right?

But once you are working.

Within the potential.

A candidate for equilibrium, right, you are always believing this

to be true, and that's very important of course because

it doesn't work, that's all this is going to drop,

and we're going to eliminate this possibility.

But for the moment we don't know that it doesn't

work, so we is always working under the assumption that

will be stressful.

Of course that's a stupid thing to do.

He is not stupid, so that's never going to happen.

To show that it's a stupid thing to do, we

need to show what will happen if he was stupid

enough to do this, right?

That's that's what is happening.

So the best response in this case it's X equal

B.

Which leads to a payoff of Yeah.

Minus X equal.

Minus B minus omega is equal to 0 square and

this is gonna be 0.

Obviously, which one is better?

Mhm It is 0 that is better.

And so what have we found?

We have found a profitable deviation.

We have on one side of the world where the

special group as an incentive to deviate and that's enough,

that's all you need.

What we have shown, we have like basically shown this

part is not working.

But then you see that when you present it like

this, you do get the fixed point nature of an

equilibrium, right?

It has to be that when the specialist group does

something, this is the best responsible, and when you think

about the best responsible, it's also the best response for

the special group and you are in the fixed point

that you're turning over.

that kind of like.

Well So we know for sure.

The policymaker is not going to learn the state, and

that's what we learned.

There's no truth for equilibrium.

So the question is, can he?

Still Learn something.

OK.

Now, there is always one equilibrium where there is no

learning.

And think about an equilibrium where the special interest group.

This type of equilibrium are called bubbling.

Equilibrium So, I'm not gonna spend too much time I

spend more time there.

Other things in this model.

What is happening is the group.

Pigs.

And randomly.

On the line P since M is randomly chosen for

all omega, right, it's just a random thing.

P ignores.

M and P always chooses.

Uh Or, or Alex say why we get the one

off just in a little bit, just trust me that

it will be one.

So that's always an equilibrium.

There's no profitable deviation for a special good because whatever

the message, the policymaker is always doing the same thing,

so might as well pick randomly, and there is no

profitable division for the policymaker because the message provides no

information.

So we have this bubbling equilibrium all the time, right?

That's basically.

Equilibrium often played by politicians with voters when they are

in difficulties or when there's a scandal, they will start

to bubble.

You see that like the random stuff and there's no

information content in the message.

So that's kind of one thing.

So that's like the worst equilibrium in some sense because

this.

So can we do better?

Is there anyone who has not been, has not seen

a cheapop game, who has seen the Chip To game

before?

You are forbidden from answering this.

Anyone would have an idea and.

Well that could be done.

To get some communication going.

What we want is that some information is transmitted, and

I want you really to think about how difficult the

problem is.

The specialist group can say whatever it wants, no constraint,

no cost of flying, nothing.

There's no signalling in this case.

There's no cost to be paid if you do something

other than something else to be more credible.

It's all chipped up.

It's all, you know, life is free, nothing, no way

to do any costly actions.

And despite this, We are going to see that under

someparmental values.

There is going to be some information transmitted.

Despite the fact that lying is free, that there are

divergent preference between the two.

There is no way to commit to something costly to

build your credibility as we've done at the beginning of

the course.

Despite this, you are going to get some information in

equilibrium.

It's just magic.

It's not magic, it's game theory, but it's like the

closest equivalent we have to magic.

Anyone has an idea how you could construct.

I mean, I think about Crawford and Silver right?

because I know the answer and it's easy for me

knowing the answer to explain it, but think about the

fact that you do not know.

What the equilibrium is gonna look like and you have

to find it.

Like you're in a vacu.

You have to find it.

So anyone, and you know I would never have found

it.

If I were to be asked a question like this,

I'm probably quite confident I would have never have found

it to go, even if we would have thought about

it.

I said, of course the equilibrium is this.

Nothing is being ever transmitted.

That's kind of obvious.

There's so much incentive to lie and stuff like that,

right?

So I would have basically said, yeah, there's no point

of looking at this problem.

It's a stupid problem to look at.

The only thing that can happen is no equilibrium transmission.

But, so anyone can, I'll be very impressed.

Like, don't worry if you don't, you're just like you're

common of motor like me and not like and so,

but like, you know, anyone has an idea of how

we can construct.

Home communication.

Anyone wants to venture against.

I see a lot of courage in this room.

Right, it's good to be wrong, but like it's OK.

OK, so the answer is gonna be yes, and this

is how it's gonna work.

Hey Carl.

State between.

0 and 1.

What is going to happen is that we are going

to partition.

This interval.

Uh, it would fall.

And each.

Intervals so will be associated with a different message.

So this is, there go right.

So what does it mean?

I One.

To get to 30 and this is gonna be a

quarter 4, right?

Of course I'm a partition in 4, but, but we

are gonna think about not only.

How many partition, but what the partition look like everything,

everything is gonna be determined in equilibrium.

So the way the equilibrium works, you will see also

that this drawing is wrong but it's wrong on purpose,

not the right representation.

If the state of the world falls between 0 and

the first threshold, the specialist group sends message M1.

If the cell of the world falls between 1 and

2, the specialist group sends message M2.

If it falls between 2 and 3 and 34 and

the end, 3 and the end of 4, right, so

it's basically each.

Interval is associated with one message, right?

And so what is the message basically saying it doesn't

have to because this is, you know, equilibrium behaviour.

That The message and I is saying.

Omega is between.

Omega minus 1.

And then I'll make it.

He's basically saying.

I'm not telling you what omega is, but I'm telling

you which bones Oga falls into.

Yeah.

Oh We have a lot of work ahead of us.

First, we need to understand what is going to be

the best response.

Of our policymakers or politicians to a given message and

that's going to be the first thing and we're going

to do this before the break.

The second thing that we have to do is, given

the best response, we have to think about one, what

are the bonds.

2, how many bonds I basically how many intervals can

I create in this partition?

What is the maximum amount of communication that I can

have the size of each interval.

And then we will just think about the properties of

these intervals.

So before we go for the break, let's think about

the best response of the policymaker to a message, that's

going to be the first thing.

The first day.

It's gonna be peace, best response.

OK.

To message him.

So what is he gonna do?

He is gonna do, he's gonna try to choose a

policy.

To maximise the expected utility.

The Ps.

Given.

That he has received the message.

Which is basically saying, given the meaning of the message.

Yeah.

The message tells you that omega is between omega I

minus 1 and omega.

Right, it's very clear that that's the message what it

means.

So we take the first other condition of this, we

can do many things we could decompose the expectation into

its constitutional, but we're gonna go faster because what is

true about expectations.

What have I, I think told you about expectations.

What type of operators are there?

Uh, linear operator, exactly, which means that when you take

the first order condition, the derivative of the expectation is

equal to the expectation of the derivative, and that's going

to make our life much easier, right?

And that's because it's a linear, you cannot do this

with buoyant, because variance is not a linear operator, so

you cannot do this.

Only the expectation allows you to do this.

So what we have is the first other condition is.

We know that the derivative.

to 0, but that's equivalent to.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But the negative of the expectation is equal to the.

Expectation of the derivative because expectation is a linear operator,

right?

I only do it with expectations.

That's like an easy one to do because this is

just a quadratic last function, so it's minus to x

minus mega.

Yeah.

But we have the two we're gonna, the 2 is

the constant so we can take it out of the

expectation then we have the 0 so that's gonna drop

out and for the minus.

OK.

Now what is X.

Yeah.

Relative to the expectation, this is the expectation of our

omega.

So X relative to omega is uh.

Is X or random variable X is.

No, no, no, X is not.

X is what?

Who is choosing X?

So it's a choice variable, right?

So it's a choice variable.

It's not a random viable.

So from the perspective of the expectation, it's a constant,

and we can take the constant out.

And so we get that.

X of MI is equal to.

Now we know that omega is uniformly distributed between 0

and 1 and there's a great property.

Uh, if you want to truncate it.

Uniform distribution but it's basically saying what is the distribution

of only girl when only guy is restricted to belong

between these two parts.

What is it gonna be with the uniform distribution?

when you truncate the normal, you still have the uniform

distribution, but over the bone basically of the truncation.

That's not true with other distributions.

The only one with the normal that we all love.

I don't have this property, that's so it's like, you

know, what we should have is some mathematician that combined

the property we love of the uniform and the property

we love of the of the novel.

This will be like an amazing distribution.

And so as a result, what is the expectation of

omega given that omega is between.

This is one that is basically that that this is

distributed according to this, what is the expectation of your

uniform.

So.

Now let me just before we go to a 5

minute break.

Remember the public message, right?

The public message was basically the message contained no information,

so after seeing the message, you will only know that

omega is distributed between 0 and 1 as before.

So you would have learned nothing.

And so the best response of the politician would have

been 0 + 1 divided by 2 is equal to

1.

So that's why we are the one off.

That was just I didn't want to do it there

because I knew I could be covered.

OK, so we do have this, and we're gonna do

a 5 minute break.

OK, so now.

We need to do 2 things.

Right, we need to find what are these thresholds.

And we need to understand how many of these interval

we can fit.

The best possible.

So remember we have a Interval between 0 and 1

and we split it so this is equal to omega

0 we're gonna call it we have omega 1, omega

2.

Omega 3, and here we have omega 4.

4.

This to be an equilibrium, right?

We have these different messages.

OK.

It's M12 and 3 and 4.

To say that the civilization of the world is here.

This is the omega that has been dropped.

By nature.

What must be true for this partition to be an

equilibrium.

From the perspective of the special interest.

One another station was good.

Think, best to do it for my guy is here.

So think about it in terms of the way we

always think in terms of incentive compatibility constraints.

Right, we have to have an equilibrium, it must be.

In that doing what is prescribed is better than doing

anything else.

So I mea is here.

What is it that must be true for this question?

What is it that they must prefer to do?

Yes, over over 23 in particular over 2 because you

know the, yeah, so here it must be that the

IG prefers.

M1 over M2.

Let me please.

Cars the realisation of the world is here.

One must be true about this special and good.

Again right this time.

Hello, Jake.

and over and then 4 let's just.

OK.

what happened If the state of the world are going

to be exactly omegawatt.

Given what we have said so.

If you are to the right.

Of the goon You must prefer as a special group

M1 or M2.

If you are to the left of omega 1, you

must prefer the special interest group.

And to over 1, but what I find not omega

one exactly.

One must be true I omega one exactly.

You must be the spatial group must be different between

M1 and M2.

So the threshold assert that at each threshold.

The specialist group must be indiffer.

And so what do we have?

We have that for each threshold.

What you want.

You Omega is equal to omega.

The specs group must be.

Different.

Between The message MI and the message MI plus one.

But in different conditions.

Let's say something about it because we know the payoff

of the special.

So I would be saying that.

Acts of the policy chosen by the policy makers.

Minus the bias, minus because we are.

In the case where omega is equal, the realisation is

equal to omega.

Swear has to be equal to.

X of MI plus one.

I have to get the same pay off if I

send message MI and the policymaker choose XMI or if

I send MI +1 and the policymaker get MI +1,

choose choose policy X of MI + 1.

Now we know what XMI is.

We have calculated before.

It's in the previous day.

I'm gonna go back, but this is.

These quantities.

So we have it.

Just putting.

The omega high here, so this is 2 omega minus

2 omega divided by 2, so this becomes minus and

then the minors are dropping because they are on both

sides.

This.

I necessarily negative?

That's because omega is greater than omega -1, and then

we have a minus B so that has to be.

This will have to be.

Positive.

The reason it has to be positive is that if

it were negative, you could never.

quite right because you have.

think here Uh I'm saying like it is, it is

your B, so to get an equality, you need to

be on both sides.

So when we take, we are gonna remove the square

and why do I need this side?

Yeah, because when you remove a square, you do not

get just the value you get the absolute value of

what you have like kind of like dealt with.

So what we have is.

This is we know to be.

2, so this will have to be B minus.

When you give an absolute value a negative input, it

speaks to you a positive one, and this is positive,

so this stays the same.

There's a fun And so what do we get?

We get that.

by 22 B minus 1 + W I is equal

to Y + 1 minus WY minus 2 B.

keeping This is them on one side, we're gonna get

Y + 1 is equal to.

21 minus minus 1.

Plus 4 B.

I'm just going to check that there is no mistake

because otherwise this will create a lot of problems.

B What is this?

That's a series.

Of all the two.

And if you want to solve for a series of

the two, of course you need to think about everything,

but you need to know two points in the series,

right?

If you have a series of folder one, you just

need 1.

If you have a series of 2, you need 2.

If you have a series of 3, you need 3.

Why is it a series of 2?

We start with 1 + 1, or the 1 or

2, right?

This is what it is.

So the good thing for us is that we know

the 2 points in the system.

The two points that we have in the system that

we know about is that omega 0 is equal to

0 and the last point has to be equal to

it, the last of your elements, right?

So basically we have our two parts, so now we

can play with the series, so.

We start with omega 2 and what is omega 2

is omega 1 minus omega 0 plus 4B, so it's

equal to 2 omega 1 + 4B.

That's all then we go to omega 3.

Omega 3 is 2 omega 2 minus omega 1 plus

4B.

Well, we know what omega 2 is.

So omega 3 is 4 omega 1.

Minus omega plus.

A B minus omega 1 + 4 B, so we

get 3 omega 1 plus 12B.

OK, then we go to omega 4, and then we're

gonna stop.

What do we get?

We get 2 omega 3 minus omega 2 + 4B.

What is omega 3?

What I average it's gonna be 6 omega 1.

Plus 24B.

What is omega 2 it's 2.

Omega One plus.

For me, yes.

Plus, so we're gonna get 4 omega 1.

24.

So we have this one, this one, this one.

And now our goal is to understand.

Basically, what is the structure of these states?

Right, basically to to see.

What the other is to basically find the value for

any number in the service, and it's going to be

obviously in the function of omega one because we cannot

solve for omega one without thinking about the end of

the service that we really want one, right?

So one thing that you can see easily is what's

going to be the number on omega one.

OK, so look at it.

If you have a 2 here, so what we want

to find basically, so to be clear is what it

is for any omega I is to find the logic

for any omega.

So think about it.

So we're gonna think about omega 1.

What do we see?

When we have omega 2, how many omega 1 do

we have?

When we have omega 3, how many omega 1 do

we have?

When we have omega 4 many omega 1, do we

have?

4.

So basically the omega is gonna be I times omegawatt.

That's easy.

Right, because this is the southern one is much older.

All right.

So I'm not going to find it with you, but

you know, if you look at it and you think

you should be, we can be able to find it

and it's going to be 2 I I minus 1.

And you can see it works because when it's 2,

it's 2 times 242 minus 11, so that's just 4.

When it's 3, it's 3 times.

2 times 36 3 minus 1212 and you can see

that for 4 it's 8 times 3 is 24, so

you can see it working logic.

So we do have the basically we know the threshold.

I can tell you the formula for that threshold relative

to omega one.

Then we're like, great, we've done great progress.

Magic is getting close.

Yes, but still we don't have omega one and still

we don't have the number of partitions.

We know the formula for expression, but we don't have

the number of partition and now.

With one equation, we're gonna solve both at the same

time.

OK.

So what is missing here.

Yeah.

It's gonna be the number.

of our missions.

And the value of the first problem is that this

is gonna give us that.

OK, so One must be true is that omega N

is equal to N omega 1.

2 N N minus 1 B.

And this is just applying that formula and everybody is

clear on this.

But we know what is omega.

And we know it's equal to what.

And so with this we are gonna be able to

find both.

So that's the way to proceed.

Start with And is equal to 2.

So what you have is basically this term becomes 2

omega 1 plus 4B.

And then you ask yourself, Can I find Omega one

strictly positive, search that.

21 + 4B is equal to 1.

I know the word, you ask yourself.

Yeah.

Is 4 be greater or smaller than 1?

If 4B is greater than 1.

There is No omega one, greater than 0, such that.

2 omega 1 plus 4B is equal to 1.

Everybody sees that and if 4b is greater than 1,

and I try to write something that is positive, I

have to be greater than 1, so I cannot find

it in this case.

And I'm Marx.

is equal to one.

But the maximum number of partition you can do is

one which is basically to say that the only equilibrium

is public.

One is just say there's one message for the word

space.

Yeah.

4 being less than 1, there is, there exists.

OK it's unique mega one search that.

2 megawatt plus 4B is equal to 1.

So what do you do then?

You move and you think about inequality.

If that's the case, next step is an equals 3,

and you say is 12b greater than 1 or 12B

strictly less than 1 if it is greater or equals.

If this is the case, there is no omega 1

strictly positive, which implied and max is equal to 2.

If this is the case.

There is omega one.

Where do you go?

You go to an equal for.

Mm.

And what is your marks in general I really care

about the process, the logic behind it, right?

You go and you test yourself.

Basically to find an omega one here I need to

be sure that just the 12G doesn't get me up

to one just to get me below 1 so that

I can add my omega 1 in the interval, right?

And so you do this and if you try get

you over 1, like that's over.

I have to go back one step.

If not, you can try to go and see if

you can do the next step.

In general, the way in Marxist form.

Yeah.

When you are N max, when you look at basically

the coefficient on the B at N max.

You are strictly pillar one, but if you were to

go one step or one more.

You will go above one, right?

So if you were to add one more, so here

this become just 10, 2, you will go above one,

and that gives you your advice.

It's the solution to this.

So what do we get we get that.

Yeah.

You're going to be able to get some communication, that

is, you're going to be able to have.

The interval 01 divided in more than one piece basically

more than one piece in if and only if.

B is strictly less than 1/4, you're gonna be able

to get a greater than 3, which is to say

that you're gonna get not 2 messages but at least

3.

If and only if that is strictly less than one

of 2.

Yeah.

So you can get some communication, but only if the

bias is not so large.

recursive structure for like the number of segment we can

do so we can have like a general rule of

like number of as a function of me it's coming

from because you see there's a missing here.

It depends on the B here.

I will tell you the the and the the N

is determined by the P.

the omega 1 is determined.

So what that?

OK, so let's say.

Let's do let's say that we are any country.

So we have.

Omega 2 is 2 omega 1 + 4 B.

3 omega 1 plus 12, 1 will be determined by.

1 minus 24.

And.

The one thing to note, in fact, it's a general

rule, that if you look at This one after the

other.

It's gonna be I omega i i omega 1 plus

2 I I minus 1 minus I minus 1 omega

1 plus 2 I minus 1, I minus 2 B.

this is the value for omega is this one.

The value for omega minus 1 is this one, and

that is equal to omega 1 plus.

Oh, I might as well be.

So that to me.

Hm So what can we see about the distance between

the threshold?

So for example, like what can we say about the

distance between the switch that is take omega 3 minus

omega 2 and compare this to omega 44 minus omega

3.

Which distance is bigger?

So as you increase I, one up on to the

distance between the threshold.

It increases, right?

So you remember I told you for pedagogy I've done

the interval here.

Very far away Yeah, this is wrong.

You can see why this is wrong because they are

not like this.

They are going to be smaller than bigger than bigger

than bigger, right?

So the real three-way structure of the equilibrium.

Yeah.

We will be more closer to this where you have

omega 1, and you have the second one that is

a bit bigger, and you have this one that is

bigger, and then you have the last one that is

the biggest.

Then you should.

OK.

Right.

They are kind of like this business.

Small, bigger, bigger, bigger, and it always increases the thresh.

So that means that there are some messages that are

more precise than others, right?

The message is close to zero are more precise and

then the message will not make eyes closer to one.

Why is that so?

Yeah.

To get an intuition for this is not obvious, but

we're gonna get to get an intuition for this.

Let's go back to our truthful equilibrium, right.

When the state was 0, we saw that what was

the incentive of the special interest group, what incentive that

you have to say.

It's to be, right?

So it has to be.

Under or over exaggerate the state of the world over,

right?

And why is that because especially when the policymaker one

else.

on your side when the policymaker want X, the special

is on X plus B.

So the specialist group has an incentive to always say

that the state is higher than it is, right?

So how do you incentivize the specialist group not to

do this?

Why do you make it more costly to give high

messages?

Why are they more costly because here, right.

The policy is going to be in between, and so

there's gonna be a lot of mistakes in this branch.

Here, the policy is gonna be in between and there

are going to be very few mistakes in this.

So you're basically saying, OK, you won't love.

You notice that if you lie, I'm going to take

a policy that is going to have like, you know,

a long likelihood or large likelihood of mistakes.

But if you tell the truth, I'm giving you a

policy that is kind of like with many mistakes, especially

when you say, OK, I'm going to tell you the

truth.

So this is the tendency of the patients group to

exaggerate, make that the message become less informative as you

go towards, like, you know, the bigger numbers of realisation.

bigger message, the higher message or less informative than the

smaller message.

So let's see how specialist group had a tendency to

underestimate, right?

So when the policymaker want X, the special group on

X minus B.

How will the message look like?

He'd be the opposite.

It would be very small.

And as we go towards euro, it will become bigger

and bigger, right, because you want to say if you

go towards your buyers, you're going to be punished by

a policy that is less good in some sense that

has more uncertainty around it.

Because the middle of it's further away from the points

in the, so that's kind of like the way it's

working.

You lying by making messages that are in the direction

of the special less precise.

And so that means that there's less to gain from

pushing the message.

So this is kind of like the big lesson and

not that we've done this, it's all incentive structure.

Arise only through the strategic interaction, nothing else.

It is also a very natural element with language because

in language some words are very precise and some words

are very, very, you know, how to make sense of

social justice.

The girl is.

These are kind of like urban nation, patriotism.

These are words that are like, you know, very loaded

of bias and at the same time very precise for

communication, right?

So this is kind of like natural element of this.

So we have this structure, but what the hell does

it have to do with lobe and of course, besides

the fact that he's beautiful and there is an element

of chik talk between what can we learn from this,

right?

Well, notice.

But as we were discussing, as you reduce the bias

between the sender, the good and the receiver, the politician,

you get more communication, but that's that's what is happening.

But as you reduce the bias, you get more communication.

In particular, a case where you will be, we will

be between 1/12.

And 124 and in this case the end marks would

be equal to.

See versus D is the numbers so this is gonna

be harder, but 124 and 1/40.

And in this case, the end marks would be equal

to 4, but you would be able to have 4

messages here when you have only 3 and this.

one message the law the bias.

The more messages you can fit in.

Yeah But the one thing about this game is better

communication benefits everyone.

So what could be happening is that think of a

company.

That is indeed between this branch.

And could I as A lobbyists.

Which is closer.

To the politician accompany us.

The B that is in this range, whereas the lobby

has a B that will be in this range.

Well what can happen is that The company is better.

Of hiring the lobbyist.

Um.

No.

On his own.

So basically, by delegating the lobbying.

So lobbyists tell us the biassed.

That is more closely aligned with the politician, the company

itself is better off.

So what is the justification for these professional lobbies that

they provide intermediaries.

That are basically in between what the company wants and

what the politician wants, and that intermediary position allows them

to basically provide better services both to the policymakers and

to the companies that are hiring them.

And that's the way how you can think about the

role of professional lobbyists.

That is this intermediary between what the company biases and

what the politician biases, and what are they doing?

They are basically taking part of what is gained by

the company, and that's the salary.

So I've done a kind of like a sort of

numerical example here.

So I did it with a max of 2.

In this case, the firm expected utility will be 0.41.

If they were to hire lobbyist which could allow max

of 3, the utility would be 0.26.

The company itself, not the lobby, the company.

and that will lead them to have a 36% ga

to the bill.

And so we have this kind of like rational if

you want, or lobby is being paid millions of dollars.

Why?

Because they basically allow for the better transmission of information

between.

The firm that wants something and the politician that wants

something that is partially aligned with what the firms wants.

Now, how do we know that lobbyists tend to be

more closely aligned with politicians while there is this thing

of reverting them.

There is many congressional ads when they exit Congress will

start working for lobbying firm.

That means that they basically, you know, have been in

a working relationship with the congressman for many years and

then they basically stopped working for the congressman but not

work for the lobbying firm.

And that's kind of like create a certain amount of

trust between the lobbyists and the congressman.

It also analyse when we think about it this way,

to think about what happens to a lobbying firm.

When the congressman makes a retirement decision, if these stories

I believe there is an element of trust between this,

if it's really about this, the moment the congressman with

whom the lobbyists worked some time ago take his retirement,

the lobbying firm should lose a lot of its values

because the the trusts linked to the buyers have disappeared.

The good thing is there is Paper that's exactly.

So there is this paper by Blanavial and other, and

so what I'm looking at is basically they look at

the revenues of hired lobbyists, that is the one that

went from congressman Ed and I became lobbyists 6 months

prior to the existence 6 semester post exiting, right.

And exit of legislator is going to be due to

retirement or electoral defeat, but you know, in Congress it's

always surprising when there's an electoral defeat.

This is what they found.

This is camouflage.

6 months before, everything is fine, you know, the congressman

is still there, and the congressman starts to defeat to

receive a defeat, so it's part of the value, and

this is the value of the firm.

They basically lose almost 50% of their values.

That's especially true for congressmen that have access to this

type of exits that have the power to make policy

decisions that are those who are in the ways and

means appropriation, that's those who give contracts basically to, so

you get this kind of like effect that is.

So what does it suggest?

They make a story it's all about, you know, corruption,

but I think this is a story that is very

much consistent with what we were talking about.lobbing is a

lot of cheap talk, right?

I need to tell you something, but you know I

can lie.

And by delegating my lobbying to someone that is closer

to you, I'm hearing something.

The legislators is getting something and the firm is getting

something.

It's basically part of improving.

Everybody is better off as a result.

And indeed when the bra, the trust is lost when

the congressman or senator disappear, the firm is losing a

lot of its value because there is no point for

this firm if it's not an.

Alright, so let me say a little bit more about

all the stories of lopping, and I'm not gonna tell

you the detail because we are short.

There's this beautiful paper by Alan Diolf that used the

simplest model of economics.

And think about not lobbying, buying policies, but lobbying, making

it less costly for a policymaker to work on a

policy.

So it's not a subsidies than a purchase and what

they show, and it's really nice because it's really just

with, you know, indifference curve.

It's the paper is all in different skirts.

What they show is that you can rationalise many, many

facts about lobbying by taking this perspective.

For example, why lobbies target the most productive legislator, because

that's why the subsidy will have the biggest effect.

Why do the targets be put all right with them

because that's why the subsidy will have the biggest effect.

It's really beautiful.

The way they are kind of like doing this and

it's really really this part of, you know, different kind

of so that's a very nice way to think about

it, not about buying.

I'm not giving you something something but telling you when

you saw the price of working on this was, you

know, one minute of time spent on working on national

security.

I'm gonna show you that it's 0.8 of time working

on national security and that explains a lot.

Another thing is, even after looking at lobbying, which, as

I said is where most of the money is spent,

it's not easy to think about.

The influence of suspicion without including a broader perspective, right,

in particular, think about the National Rifle Association.

It is one of the most influential special interest groups

in the world, in the United States, and it is

one of the least, it's not one of the biggest

fender in the United States, right?

So how can the National Rifle Association have so much

influence if they are not a defender.

Right, and one way they do is that rather than

giving money, they provide votes or at least they provide

the threat of removing votes from a from a legislators.

How can they do this?

They can advertising, they can mobilise members, and what we

see is that we see relatively big effect of.

If you think about advertising, there was like a very

big consequential decision in the US to restrict how much

individuals or corporation could spend supporting a candidate in not

giving money directly to the candidate but express support on

TV to a candidate.

Right, so before this decision called Citizens United, you will

not, you will be with any individual, any institution would

be restricted on how much they can spend in advertising

in support of or against the candidate.

The Supreme Court saw that this was anti-constitutional violation of

free speech and we removed all restrictions.

The thing is everybody was worried this would be giving

a lot of influence to firm and artist has given

a lot of influence to billionaires.

Firm didn't enter these groups, but the billionaires like the

coros did and what if the change is used by

this, it's basically 5 6% points.

So that's a huge change because this is really changing

the equilibrium.

The other one is to mobilise members, right, and a

very nice paper by Bombardi and Trey, what they show

is that if you want to think about who contributes,

you have to think about firmly divided into three categories.

You have small firms that will never contribute and they

will not contribute because what the cost of contributing is

too large relative to what they will gain from it,

so they don't do it.

You have large firms that contribute little.

Why?

Because if they don't get what they want, they will

basically tell the workers, you know, we're having a lot

of issues.

We might cut jobs and that's because of Congressman X,

so you probably want to vote against Congressman X in

the next election, and that threat of mobilising workers is

enough to get them a lot without the need for

contribution, and it's legal firm.

We do not have.

The number of voters necessary to basically influence the number

of workers to influence elections that are sufficiently big to

find it worthy to enter politics that contribute to that.

And so what they say is, well, if you don't

include in your ideas the implicit price of mobilising workers,

you are very much overestimating the cost, the what you

get.

From contributions and so the whole idea is to show

that this photo is there and to use a structural

model to kind of recover what is the implicit price

of mobilising voters and to recalculate the return of investment

of politics.

So this is what they show for, you know, voters

and contribution you can see this.

Inverse your shape, more firms do nothing, big firms do

little.

Most of the action is in the mid contributions.

Why you include votes basically, and you think about the

implicit price of a vote rather than a of investment

of 2,000%.

$1 gives you $2200 you have an investment of 13%.

$1 gives you 30%.

It's already a lot, much better than the bond of

the US government, but you know that's at least is

a reasonable number to get it right?

so.

That's it, right?

and economies is focused mostly on contribution, but what I

try, I've tried to really convey in this lecture is

that you have to look beyond this to really understand

special of internet, informative lobbying, advertising, mobilising members and very.

The threat of doing so and threat is very hard

to uncover that is kind of like where you would

see the influence going on, right?

Don't look at contribution.

So that's basically the the message of this lecture to

be not so economists and a bit more political scientists

next week, no.

Next week, um, and we go and uh we trash

some papers.

OK Oh.

You you Oh.

OK 2.

Yeah

Lecture 14:

I have to teach populism across 3 different courses.

Alright, 3.

And the problem is that there are students who take

these three courses.

No, because there's UV 3 to 5 as well, right,

across 2 years, right?

Which means that every populist lecture has to be kind

of have some different content, right?

So I do think that unfortunately, of those three types

of lecture that this is maybe the less good one.

Sorry about this, but we'll try to make it entertaining.

I am think about it, but you know, I'll, I'll

put it here.

I do have, uh, yeah, but I don't, no, no,

I don't put it there.

Sorry.

So, let's try still to make it entertaining, right?

And in particular, I'll try to make it more econ

related than any of the other lectures that that we,

right?

So I tried to find this was very helpful.

This was done by some of the polling company of

the Pew Research centre and I had done this thing

up to 22 when I look at the vote share

of the populist party.

And I was really hoping that they adapted it to

2024 and I spent like a good amount of time

on Sunday trying to find a graph.

I like it was not done.

So this is basically the best, you know, the best

we have now, but we know a few little things.

So for example, we know that in Poland, the PIS

has dropped.

Italy, well, you know, they are still very strong.

Hungary, we know that they are still very, very strong.

Greece, we know there have been a slight drop in

the Syriza party.

Spain on the other hand, we have seen a clear

increase in what is going on.

Belgium as well, Sweden kind of constant.

Netherlands has increased dramatically recently.

Alternative for Germany is scarily high in Germany right now,

and you keep, which you know, went very, very low.

It's going back up a little bit, right?

So, so we have this, this type of things going

on through the new name of UKIP, which is called

reform, right?

And Reform UK was actually, as I always say, one

of the names discussed when they created.

Keep in 1992, so it's not like, you know, a

name that come out of nowhere.

Now I, I wanted to suggest that I have a

paper on UKIP in local election in in the UK

and to do a last minute change, but I've not

updated the figure on that paper relative to the last

version of the paper, so we cannot do this sorry.

So, and of course in the US we have seen

that Donald Trump that lost in 2020, went back in

24, right?

So there may not be a further rise in populism

or at least a constant rise everywhere, but there is

actually a constant really high level of populism.

Across many of the Western democracies and of course if

we go beyond the West that we tend to look

too much at we see populism everywhere, right?

We see populism obviously in Latin America with uh Miley

and um Bolsaro and the president of.

Possibly of Chile and other places we see populism potentially

in India with mode.

Actually the element that suggests that some autocracies are adopting

a populist type language like some people have said that

Xi Jinping is actually using a populist strategy to stay

in power.

Just to that this will not be what we're gonna

say, but this is like a related phenomenon.

So where when you think about populism, I think that

there are 3 questions that are really important.

The first one is why did populists rise in recent

years?

So you need to find an explanation.

That tells you what is the effect of some factors

on the populist right that were not so present in

the past and it cannot be something that was always

around because populists have not been always successful or as

successful as they are now.

The second question that I think is very important and

often overlooked is why populists are gaining this vote and

not other parties in particular is why are not other

parties watch?

It's a double question in some sense.

One is why are not other parties reacting to populist

rise and doing something.

And that must be a strategic decision of them.

It's not like a mistake as people said they do

the best they can probably we will not touch upon

this too much.

There are some pretty good paper doing this.

There's a paper by.

Uh, Bernard Kurtzen and co-authors called Lesbian voters in the

QGPS and the former fellow that was teaching, uh, your

course is 453, Adam Brzezinski has also a paper on

narrative that is kind of like trying to explain this

kind of like lack of strategic reaction.

Why is it the best response for mainstream parties to

behave the way they are behaving today, right?

This is another question.

And we need to what we will ask on the

other hand is because this is a double question as

I said is why are populists to get the vote

of the people who feel something is not working for

them, right?

What is kind of like the channels through which they

are credible at doing so and then so we will

have like just a very simple uh comparative like a

picture on this and then the last question.

is what are the consequences of populism in particular, we

can think that populism and populist answers of legitimate demand,

that indeed there are things in the system that are

not working for certain people.

Indeed there are distributional consequences of recent changes that affect

some subgroup of the population a lot, and these people

are hurting.

And they turn to populist because they are ethic, so

that's kind of like we can accept this we don't

necessarily agreeing that the policy that populists put in place

are the right policies, right?

We can think about it as be under this is

a difference between understanding and accepting.

You can understand why people turn to populist, but you

may not accept the fact that they turn to populist

because you think this is actually morally wrong, right?

And I think in social science we also try the

economists are very good at thinking about welfare, which I

think is sometimes dodgy we try a lot to understand

why questions rather than like what happens after but here

in this case we'll try to make some.

Discussion about it if time permits so we're going to

try to explain populist success right.

So possible explanation, I'm gonna start from the bottom.

So one of them is cultural changes, the fact that

the world is changing, white men are losing, and populists

are getting out of it.

Another cultural changes might be the fact that class.

As a political differentiation has been replaced by education and

that's kind of like an argument in Piketty's uh QG

article with co-author on this, you know, I've committed two

small papers, one of them I, I should have maybe

talked a bit in this lecture, but so be it.

The other one that I think is important is the

withdrawal of the state, right?

The fact that basically there's less welfare state, there's more

austerity, and that will tend to affect people that are

economically vulnerable more, and these people will feel abandoned left

behind because of this.

Another one is immigration and we have kind of like,

you know.

Multiple evidence that immigration matters slightly less evidence in terms

of like what's the channels through which immigration matters?

Is it culture or is it economic?

because it can be that there's cultural changes associated with

immigration.

But it can also be that there is economic competition

associated with immigration.

And the first one, which is the one we are

going to really focus on, is the economic transformation.

We're gonna talk about globalisation and about automation.

One thing I will not talk about this financial crisis.

However, if you look at the rise of populists, it's

always, if you look at the graph and any way

you look at it, mostly in the Western world, it's

always the tipping point or the change in the curve,

the critical juncture is the 2010 elections, which is the

first election post financial crisis.

And really, you know, my, my strong feeling is belief

if you want, not academic, but more like the thing

I really feel, and I've still not managed to find

a good way to do it is that.

The financial crisis and the Great Recession of 2008 really

felt like a huge betrayal to people and not because

necessarily the bailout of the bank, but the main reason

is for.

15 years politicians have told people before 2008, you know,

we cannot do anything for you.

The world is changing.

You need to adapt and you need to do this

and you need to do that, and we cannot help

you.

Come 2008, financial institutions go bankrupt and what does the

state do?

The state bail out all the banks.

Now bailing out the banks is actually probably the right

economic policies to do.

The moral fault and political mistake was not to prosecute

the bankers.

And there really you can see the betrayal instint in

the eyes of people, which is on the one hand

we tell them you cannot do anything for you and

then a bunch of elite bankers, millionaire, crash the economy

and get zero punishment for it, and I think that

that in my view is really the great betrayal.

That happened in in in in this period and that

kind of after that it's really a very fertile ground

for populists to rise so that's kind of like something

but there is surprisingly not a single paper that I

know making really this argument in full but I never

found it.

And I was there and to be fair, just also

to be clear that belief that sense it's not a

great insight of mine.

There are many other academics that I've also the same

insight and I've talked with them and, and we all

kind of agree that something happened around these days.

So it's not like Stephan Walton big idea.

Right, it's more a general folk idea, but nobody has

really put it and nobody has thought about a real

test of this.

So we're not going to do financial crisis.

We're going to do globalisation and technological change because these

are like the most icon.

Driver of populism according to the literature.

All right, so globalisation So Roderick.

I don't agree always with what he says, but that,

that AC piece is really wonderful and I really recommend

it.

It's in your reading list.

Make a point about the effect of trade and capital

liberalisation and in particular it's very critical of capital liberalisation

and a little bit of uh less of trade but

like so the point of Frederick is the following it's

like, look, we all agree among economists maybe we don't

agree, but it's hard to make an argument against the

fact that if you liberalise markets because of better efficient.

Allocations of capital and goods and production and things you

will get an overall improvement, right?

So trade liberalisation, capital liberalisation improve the economy that's fine.

The plan is.

That it doesn't just improve the economy, it has huge

distributional consequences.

Now start from a closed economy and open trade a

little bit, then you're gonna get like a huge efficiency

improvement and then you know if you have like the

pie grows by a lot, it's very easy to compensate

the losers and that's like, you know, if you double

the pie, I can guarantee you that you know compensating

people is not a problem.

The argument of Roderick is that the more you liberalise

trade, the lower are the gains.

So basically, there is less and less distribute like overall

welfare efficiencies.

So if you want the gains are concave.

However, the bigger and bigger are the distributional consequences.

That's the distributional consequence of that, and in particular it

says the one that has the biggest distributional consequences is

liberalisation of capital.

That's really helping a lot of the people at the

top of the income distribution and it's probably hurting a

lot of the people at the bottom of the distribution.

Right, so he's saying this point and so his point

is that globalisation will not generate tension at the beginning

from the start of the end of the Second World

War to basically the 1980s because we were in a

part where there was a lot of gain from liberalising

and therefore it was easy to reallocate this gain in

order to compensate.

Losers, but nowadays with especially the liberalisation of capital, the

gain from globalisation are too small, the welfare consequences are

too big, and people are getting very, very mad about

globalisation and they turn to populists as a result.

They are losing and they turn populist as a reason,

right?

And you know, if you think about this reasoning that

he wrote.

Thinking obviously about the Trump victory in 2016 because that's

not a piece that went through the review process that

was clearly an invited piece and to his credit, he

did a wonderful piece for an invited piece right this

is like, you know, usually you will write pop pop

pop pop proof proo proof pop down.

He really put a lot of thinking.

It's a very beautiful, very easy read, right?

It's really trend that is in demand and it's providing

a very nice way to think about.

Why Trump practised protectionist policies, right?

And if Trump is not gonna be very convinced or

the voters of Trump are not gonna be convinced that

trade policies is gonna hurt the economy because they're like,

I don't care about the economy, right?

It's like what.

And there was a a beautiful quote on the Brexit

referendum of some remainer that went to talk to uh

uh people about um Brexit and how it would be

bad for the economy and one person in the audience

answered in a very beautiful fashion, this is your bloody

economy, not ours.

I'm talking about this is one of like an interesting

point of me, right?

So the other advantage for trade.

When we think about it more from a scholarly perspective,

so that's more from a political pers global economic perspective,

from a scholarly perspective is that.

We actually have a quasi-natural experiment with trade and the

quasi-natural experiment with trade is the growth of Chinese exports.

Right?

And in particular, the explosion of Chinese export after China

joined the World Trade organisation.

Here's you know, for example, A very interesting policy decision

that is actually a another political mistake from an economic

standpoint, China, China joining the World Trade organisation makes it's

a no brainer.

Right, it's a no brainer.

There is no discussion that this is the right policy

from a political standpoint, looking down, you know, the game

tree, it's a huge mistake because China was already growing

and you were losing all control over kind of like

the tree of Chinese import into the economy.

So we had like a lot of cheaper consumer goods,

but this has caused dramatically in terms of.

Um, labour market in Europe and in the United States.

Now, you know, I also think that, you know, there's

a, it's certain irony that the West made war to

China to open their markets, right?

In the end of the 19th century, more than once,

right, and it's through trade to the West that China

is becoming probably more powerful than Europe.

I think, you know, in terms of like the irony

of history is kind of a wonderful example.

I'm not sure China is becoming more stronger than the

US, but then Europe is really going in the direction

pretty fast, right?

So the beautiful irony of history.

Right, so the main paper and the reason why it's

going to be published after.

The paper we study is because one is in economics

and one is in political science, so we're gonna do

the political science one.

Why do we do the political science one?

Because the political economy one is done in another course

as a coursework, so I cannot teach it in this

course.

So we're gonna go the political science, it's gonna be

a very nice but very sad lesson at the same

time.

So the economics one is very long.

Oh my God, it's so long.

It's like 60 pages at the end of it you're

like, oh my God, this is like I prefer to

be Dostoevsky, and I really don't like Dostoyevsky as an

author.

Great author, I just don't like it.

And it looks at like very different things and things

like this.

It's by author and all called importing polarisation.

They look at Congress election and they look at Trump

victory in 2016.

It's a very rich paper paper that builds on the

previous paper when they look at the effect.

Of the China short on the market, it's, it's really,

you know.

There are dodgy stuff in this paper.

That you can identify by looking at the replication file

but they cannot put under the rug in their thing

and like, you know, we will not talk to to

this but if you read it and want to know,

ask me the question I'll tell you where the dodgines

is coming from, right?

But this is a rich paper and then you have

political scientists.

While in political science, you know, you can do quick

and dirty papers.

And get them published faster.

And that's what we're gonna see a quick and dirty

paper.

That use the same strategy.

They are not saying the contrary, they're not saying that

they invented it.

They do give all credit to this person, but they

are just doing it on Europe, right?

So this is, this is what they are doing.

Now, I like Pure Standing a lot.

He's he's he's a, he's a very, very nice person.

He's actually a good researcher, but here this is where.

Publishing incentives and quality of research went in slightly, not

in parallel fashion, right?

So this is not a judgement of value on them

as authors.

They're actually pretty good researchers.

Think about it as a judgement of value or the

incentive to be first or basically be script, right?

And that creates the wrong incentive.

So this paper was coming, everybody knew it.

There was a longing for to apply the samey to

Europe, and they did it and they did it fast,

and you can see, I'll show you why they did

it first, right?

So they are going to do, what is the basic

idea of this, right?

The basic idea is to compute an index of exposure

to Chinese importation.

So how much, think about the local level, we're gonna

use variation of geo geographical level.

How much one region, because that's mostly what they use

is affected by Chinese importation.

That's the idea.

And the way this is going to happen is going

to be through the industrial composition of this region.

So China is very, very strong in some manufacturing goods

and it buys all the time and so places that

were producing these type of goods face more competition from

China, China being more efficient and also having a lower,

less expensive workforce.

This is kind of like wiping out industries in that

sector in Europe so that's the idea.

One problem and author explained it very beautifully with simply

looking at the index of exposure to Chinese importation is

that when you think about Importation in itself, it's always

going to be the result of two factors in economics.

What are the two main forces that we always have

when we think about economic problems.

Supply and demand, yeah, exactly, right, or the demand and

supply.

I don't know why I say supply and demand.

Makes sense to say demand, demand and supply, right?

So the problem is places that receive a lot of

Chinese importation could actually be places that are doing pretty

well economically.

There could be demand that is driven by the economy

doing well and if the economy is doing well, it

tend to basically decrease the voucher for populist parties right

so there is kind of like a sense of like

a problem with using the exposure in itself because you

could capture some demand effect.

The good thing is that this reasoning about the demand

effect clearly induce a downward bias in your estimates.

Right, because rather than capturing the competitive effect of importation,

you are capturing the economy doing well of importation, right,

so that's great.

And the author do show you that indeed the OS

coefficient is much lower.

Then the IV coefficient, right?

So that's, and that's like a very nice thing to

do.

When you think that your estimates as a bias and

you have a nice story for your bias and make

economic sense, showing the ILS is actually useful, right?

Do not hide the simple result because the simple result

is informative about why you did an IV.

Many, many times you see paper and they go right

away to the IV and I'm like.

Why do you show me an idea?

Oh, because that's the way we do research nowadays.

I'm like, yes, thank you very much, but that's not

the question.

The question is, what is the bias that you think

you have here?

What do you think your bias is doing to your

INS estimate?

Show me your IS estimate.

Show me the IV coefficients, right, and show me that

indeed the bias is.

So that's kind of like this one now.

What they are going to do is rather than using

the index of Chinese exposure, they are going to instrument

it not with the Chinese importation to that region in

a given industry, but the Chinese importation in the US

in the same industry, right?

So basically, they're going to use.

The correlation between the importation to the US in a

given industry and the importation to Europe in a given

industry.

There are two ways to interpret this instrument.

So the one way to push it is that the

importation that are correlated between the US and Europe are

due to supply shocks in China.

Right, why is, to take an example, it's not very

cord in it, but like why is demand for electronic

vehicle importation for electronic vehicles from China increasing both in

the US and in Europe because China as always when

you grow economically become more sophisticated in the industry and

now that I've reached the capacity to produce a lot.

of electric vehicles for cheap, right?

So basically the rise in the number of electronic vehicles

imported from China to US and Europe is due to

supply factors in China.

So that's good because that's exactly what we want.

We want basically the supply shock, the importation shock coming

from the supply side in China.

Another thing you could think of is that, well, you

know, in a globalised world with the internet and things

like this, test may be correlated.

But it could be that, you know, when there is

this new type of shoes that are popular in the

US they will also be popular in Europe, right?

If you know the problem with this is that if

its taste is correlated, that makes your instrument not such

a good instrument.

Because it's again a factor that is affecting this.

However, why is it not so much of a problem

for the researcher if there's a little bit of test

correlation that is still present test correlation across the US

and Europe that is part of the effect of the

instrument.

Why wouldn't it be a problem?

Yeah.

And if you're if they're trying to argue that, um,

like Chinese importation like drives demand for populist parties, it's

just gonna be that the coefficient that they are still

estimating is a downward exactly towards the the coefficient that

there is exactly every time you have demand within the

equation, like some remnants of demand, you will don't want

your estimate, right, because again, demand driven by economic condition,

economic condition decrease populist v, right, so every Even if

there's a little bit of demand left, that's fine because

it's still a done what bias, especially if you do

find a statistically significant effect, as obviously they will do,

because otherwise you will never see this paper.

Alright, so this is basically.

The exposure to Chinese importation index.

So it's gonna be The J, so think about Jay

as being an industry lover.

So you take some years before your treatment and the

treatment of China's joining the WTO is 2001, so they

take 1990s and they look at the share of workers

in region R that work in industry jails in 1990s.

So that's basically, so it's basically this point is telling

you.

How big, how important is this industry in the economy

of region R?

Yeah.

And then, so this could be CG should be for

country J and this should be an index variable.

Then what they're gonna think about is What is?

The level of importation from China.

Right?

In this industry, and they're not gonna think about a

per capita level but not a per capita level of

citizen but a per capita level of workers, so they're

gonna think about what are the the change in importation

from China between 2001 and the date that they consider.

Divided by.

The number of workers in the country in Industry in

the 1990s, right?

So basically, how much more is coming from China.

Yeah, pair workers in the 1990s.

And so this is gonna be me 2 years prior

to the election.

So just every 2 years to have this much.

The importation, there's the instrument is going to be.

This one where it has the same feature, but rather

than looking at importation from China to region R.

To country C, sorry, it's going to be importation from

China in industry J time T in the United States.

To the to the United States.

As it's using what is happening.

So of course AA are doing the reverse.

They are using what is happening in the USA and

instrumenting with Europe, right?

This is just like flip coin and this is the

same thing.

So this type of instruments have become very, very popular

in economics, and they are called shift share instruments.

And it's basically the idea of like you have a

shock and it propagate in different ways.

It's a little bit like a difference in difference with

intensity of treatment, right?

This is your shock and it will propagate according to

the importance of the industry in the region.

So what they do is.

One, they are gonna look at.

Not populism per se, but these courses that they associate

with populism.

So they're gonna look at basically.

What is the amount of nationalism in election in this

particular region?

How they're gonna do this?

They're gonna basically wait.

The amount of homage parties are talking about nationalism by

the virtue of this party.

Right, so everybody has a nationalism scale score.

So for example, think about in this country, reform will

have a very high nationalism score.

The Conservative Party will have a high but less high.

labour a bit less, Lib Dem and Green will probably

have a very low nationalism score and you weight the

nationalism level of a region by the nationalism score times

the vote share for the party in the last election.

The way you give a nationalism score.

Do about it He's using this dataset called the Campa

manifesto Project.

The company manifesto project has basically for each dimension here,

there are some claim what they say it's a positive

or a negative on this dimension.

Positive negative on that dimension.

So for example, you know, Marine Le Pen that always

talk about nationalism and very rarely criticise nationalism will have

a lot of positive claims on nationalism and very few

negative claims.

So what they do is.

Detect this, fine.

And then they basically look at the log for a

party, for each party, the log of the number of

positive claim minus the log of the number of negative

claims.

Let's see So I will not need it, but in

the end I think I can give it makes more

sense.

All right, so think about for.

Yeah Party P In region.

Ah, what you will get is you get.

For region R.

You get a nationalist.

Lavelle if you want Ada Ste.

And it's equal to for each party.

In the country, the vulture.

That this party get.

Tom The nationalistco.

Of the party in action and he should be.

The vote chair in region are of party P inten.

What is going to be the nationalistic score?

Yeah.

It's gonna be the log of positive claims.

Minus the log of negative claims.

From The campaign manifesto.

I.

Mhm.

Let's stop like just, you know, 1 2nd.

And let's think about what this represent, right?

Now when we use the scale.

I You're having a trouble deciphering my yo.

That's like from the campaign manifesto project.

Yes.

No, no, no, no, but don't hesitate because I know

that I'm a beautiful and writer, right?

I'm a calligraphic master recognised both in China and Japan,

right.

Mhm.

Mhm.

So when we think about a scale, there are two

types of scans, I mean, maybe more, but there are

2 types when we think about data, and think about

the difference between what we've done with social choices long,

long time ago, the.

I was very impressed that someone asked me social choice

question officers recently or very traumatised, maybe, maybe the most

adequate way to put it and the way we think

about utility, the two for social choice or what are

we working with?

What is the utility?

What is the utility function?

Deeply, yeah, we like, we go to the philosophy of

economics there.

What is the utility function?

utility function is a cardinal representation of ordinal preferences, right?

That's what it is.

It's basically putting numbers on Your order of preferences.

And that's, that's what utility does because working with order

does limit to what we can do when we put

utility function it become much easier to work with.

So that's what we are doing with utility function, right?

So basically there are two types of ways to think

about in piece of information.

One is ordinal and one is cardinal, if you want,

right?

Ordinary is giving you the order of thing cardinal is

really giving meaning to.

So suppose you find a party that has 12 positive

claims, let's say there's no negative claim for simplicity.

12 positive claims and a party that are 4 positive

claims, right?

Should we say that one party is more nationalist than

the other, or should we say that one party is

more nationalist than the other, and the difference in nationalism

is log 12 minus log 4.

So in one case when I say one party is

more nationalist than the other, I'm just making an ordinary

statement.

The second case when I'm saying one party is more

nationalist and the other and the difference between the two

is 12 minus log 4, right?

I am making a cardinal statement.

When we think about the manifesto project, does it make

a lot of sense to use this data as cardinal

data?

or should we think about them only as ordinal data?

Do you really think that a party that has 3

claims and a party that has 1 claim, one party

will be 3 times more nationalist than the other?

We don't know.

First of all, yeah, we treat our statement the same

where someone could have a lot of small statements that

are meaningless and one could have a big statement that

is this, right?

But even more deeper than this, even if you believe

that the manifesto project is really able to equalise the

claim so that each clan is, you know, has the

same sense, global sense, but there's not like one big

one small.

Thinking about it in cardinal term makes very, very little

sense, right?

The manifesto project is very useful to say, here is

one party that is much more nationalist than the other.

It's one party that is much more neoliberal than they

are, whatever you want, right?

Based on how many claims they have.

You know, and how many positive or negative claims there

are on these particular issues, but to treat this as

a cardinal value is really I think problematic, right?

I think that like this is kind of like a

big issue to impose a functional form solution is kind

of a big issue.

But you know, to be fair, they are not the

only one doing this.

Everyone doing political behaviour and some economists don't worry, this

is also an economists flaw, will use it as a

cardinal value and it always gets me ballistic right because

I'm like how can you use.

Like also because people don't even think in terms of

cardinal versus ordinality or they think this is the first

thing you have to think about it.

It's like, you know, when you have a leaked square

scale, which is a scale where like you totally agree,

somewhat agree, neither agree nor disagree, somewhat disagree or totally

disagree, you cannot think that, you know, moving from the

first to the second answer.

As a as a meaning that is quantifiable relative to

the 2nd to the 3rd, the 3rd to the 4th,

the 4th to the 5th, you should treat like either

you dichotomize it and then it's just like how many

people agree, or you should treat it as really 5

categories and use a very dirty negative binomial model that

you should never do in your life.

So dichotomize it.

Now they also look at the voucher for nationalist party.

And then they run the the following specification.

One thing is that they have the vote of the

score for in a district should be in a district

in a country at times.

They are a country, you have fixed the flag, so

they only compare district within a country.

Then they have an importation shock that they do as

in a country in a region in which the district

D is located at T and then they have the

standard errors.

The region is smaller than the country, but the region

is bigger than the district, right, so take about 3

levels.

You have your electoral district, that's the smallest.

You have your region, that's the 2nd, and you have

the country which is the biggest.

So there are two things to kind of like notice.

The third thing is that it is a form of

panel data.

Connel data.

However, they are not treating it as a panel.

In a panel, you will have two levels of fixed

effects.

One level of fixed effect is your time fixed effect,

and that's the country year fixed effect.

One level of fixed effect is your geographical level fixed

effect, and that they don't have.

Someone could take that data, rerun it with region fixed

effect and see what happens.

My view, doesn't look good because you know my perspective

is if it's not shown it doesn't work.

If something should be done and it's not being done,

this is because it didn't work.

You should also apply it if you want to read

my paper and think about what is it that I

don't show you because it didn't work.

The other thing is like something that it's, it's to

be fair to them, I think it matters much less

is that there is a mismatch between what is the

what is the level at which the dependent variable is

measured, which is the district and the level at which

the main independent variable is measured, which is the region

bigger than so many districts.

are having the same shock and that is basically increasing

your number of observation and clustering at the region level

as they do is not going to solve this out.

It doesn't compensate for this because standard error moves at

square width of observation moves at linear N, so you're

still increasing, which means that actually what is going on

is that you're increasing your power, your capacity to detect

the effect, OK.

Now.

In the auto paper, just they do the same thing

and so because it's a course, this is a problem

that I give to students, I have checked, I have

re-aggregated the data and made the shop at the same

level as the um I mean made the and viable

the goer for Trump.

At the same level as the shock and this did

not affect the result, so I'm relatively confident that that

will be the same here.

It will not be a big difference in the effect

between the two, but you know, something that I would

have liked to see in summer.

I just wanted to ask you to repeat what you

said about the the difference in measurements.

So usually if you basically what you're doing is like

think about we have one classroom, right?

And think about that is Philippa's classroom that is there

in the other room to contract an organisation, the competitive

course so I suppose that there is kind of like

a treatment going on in the classroom like uh the

president of LSC randomly select which one of the two

classrooms to go and give a speech to and then

there's a survey about how how much you like LSC

at the end of the year, right.

Some I'm just making this story, right?

Technically speaking, right, so what the researcher could do is

to regress at the individual student level how much the

lakele on whether they there was they were in the

classroom where Larry Kramer, I think this is how much

I know about my president, right?

Larry Kramer made his speech, and this is like this

will be one solution, but it's actually a little bit

cheating.

Because the treatment is not at the level of the

individual.

Well, it's not the randomization didn't happen at the level

of the student.

It happened at the level of the classroom.

So actually the more correct unit of analysis would be

to compare the course EC 453 with the course of

age.

But obviously the number of observation will drop from 30

because I think we are 15 in both courses, more

or less, to 2, and then it's much harder to

detect anything with two observations and 30.

And that's the same idea here, right?

So they have one shop which is the importation level

that is at the regional level, and it affects many

districts within this region, but every district is treated separately.

It's considered as receiving a separate treatment even though every

district received the same treatment.

And the randomization if it happened was at the regional

level.

So you are multiplying your observations in a certain artificial

way, but as I said, I, my edge based on

what I've seen in the other paper is that it

doesn't matter.

This I'm more worried about.

Not having done this, that worries me that they didn't

do it.

I'll tell you why it worries me also a little

bit later.

So let's see about the results.

So we have like, you know.

Things.

So the nice thing is, we see, so let's take

the radical right voucher.

The import shock in RLS has no effect, which is

a good thing.

The import shock in a radical right has a positive

and statistically significant effect, right?

And the first stage is here, the statistic is not

the most amazing one ever, but it's working.

This is working.

So this is that you see also in uh I

think this is the one we talk about the uh

nationalistic score here and nationalist autochy so everywhere and everywhere

your uh OLS is smaller than your idea actually, you

know, technically speaking, if you take about the first stage,

it's not that much different.

I think it's kind of like the same effect just.

Mhm.

So one thing that they are kind of worried and

rightly so is that on the one hand, they have

a shock in the region, voter in a district, but

really who should be affected is voters, right.

And this is something I'm sure we have talked about

before.

It's what we call the problem of ecological influence, right?

is that you would like to know what is happening

at the voters level, but most of your good data

are at the higher level of aggregation.

So what we do to get rid of this is

to look at.

Survey data.

So survey data is not used as the main strategy,

but it used to try to make some progress on

the uh ecological inference programme.

So what they do is that they look at the

effect of the shock and they also look at the

effect for different professions.

But nothing come up significant.

For some reason they have linear term as well.

Let's not discuss this.

So basically what you have is like the shock increase

the propensity to vote for the populist party by 0%,

right?

And 50% actually if it's going from 0 to 1,

which will be an enormous defer, and then they look

at what is the effect for different profession and nothing

really comes out.

Which is slightly surprising when you think of it.

So for example, the fact that unemployed, you find no

effect, that's slightly surprising.

You will expect to find some.

Another issue here is that technically speaking, they do have

two.

Endogenous viables or viables where you should worry about bias.

One is the love and valuable and one is the

interaction.

Well it's not because you're interval that the omitted viable

bias or the demon bias is not present, right?

But they only have one instrument.

So the only instrument that viable.

So this is kind of a like a slightly problematic

approach.

Yeah, what do you with linear terms?

Uh, that's a good question that I think they put

linear trends in uh.

Across a cross sectional survey, but you know.

Pretty sure there's a table in the appendix that shows

that.

It's holding without it.

So what do they interpret this as globalisation threatens the

success and survival of entire industrial district, the affected communities

seem to respond with the voting behaviour sociotropically and honestly

I have no idea what they mean by this.

Another thing that really has annoyed me about this paper

is that I looked everywhere in the paper in the

appendix for.

Descriptive statistics, right?

Because coefficient in themselves.

Means nothing without descriptive statistics and in usual thinking about

the standard deviation and things like that.

It is impossible without using the data that didn't go

that far to recover the descriptive statistic.

I think that like standard practise should be at the

bottom, they should be, what is your effect in terms

of standard deviation.

Like how much does something change when you change the

standard deviation, even if you don't provide statistics, at least

that we have an idea.

Is this a big effect?

Who knows if the standard deviation is 0.01, that's a

very, very small effect.

If the standard deviation is 0.6, that's a big effect

because this is like really increasing by quite a lot

of populist right so you have to kind of like.

Think about like what is the size of the effect

make it very hard to make sense of this paper.

It's really, you know, they saw the stars, they did

a bunch of robustness to show us that the stars

were actually, you know, robust and not like a meteoror

and then they just like published it as fast as

possible to.

Put their flag on the kind of in the soil

as kind of like the populist expert in Europe and

in political science and it worked.

That paper has more citation that paper alone has more

citation than all my paper combined so you know.

Alright, let's do a 5 minute.

Let's get.

We started, I was looking at Philip Agu's lecture.

There was a lot of V1, V1 square divided by

2, V2 V2 square.

This was very impressive.

So.

Right, so automation, right?

The other way you can think about economic disruption is

through automation.

And it's true that there is a long, long history

of economic disruption linked to automation, right?

Interestingly, A worker in their own profession that believes That

it could be replaced by robot is actually correct in

their expectation, like someone who is at risk, understand that

they are at risk.

And as a result, they demand protection from automation.

So they were proposal to tax robots and things like

this.

This is not stupid, it's difficult, but you know, this

was not a completely stupid policy, right?

But of course we all participate in this, right, as

I always say, we are all.

Creating economic disruptions.

Who has done shopping in the last week?

Nobody does shopping anymore.

You haven't done shopping.

I don't eat.

Yes, grocery shopping.

So, so for me shopping is only grocery shopping.

I must say you see it's like, uh, have you

gone to the supermarket?

Have you used the soft uh checkout?

And so you're basically destroying jobs.

But it's true.

It's just, it's true.

This is what it is.

Ryanair, obviously one of the most efficient company in the

world, is adopting is one of the first to adopt

this uh automatic or luggage.

You have to you yourself, weight your luggage, the luggage

like give you the thing automatically, and everything is automatic.

It's, it's working very well.

So they do this, they are very good at this.

So.

It's gonna change completely.

A lot of professions, maybe one day professors as well,

you know, I don't think we're still there yet, but

you know, who knows.

So In another paper by Anne Lee Conanton and Steining

looking at the fear of automation and the vote for

populist, the same people plus one.

So what they do here.

they use the European Social Survey, just survey.

Which contains information on reported vote choice which is different

than how people vote, but the problem they face is

that it does not contain information on the risk of

automation.

So how do you deal with this?

So what they're gonna do is they're gonna use.

They know where a person lives.

They know the age, they know the gender, they know

the education, and they know the composition of the workforce.

Of industries and regions.

So for example, they know that, you know, workers in

let's say the automobile companies tend to be in this

particular region, tend to be male, tend to have just

finished high school, right, and tend to be like between

over between 40 and 50 year old, to give you

an example.

Right.

They also know this for different sectors and then they

can say, OK, if you're a 40 to 50 year

old male who has not finished education in this region,

you have, let's say 20% chance to work for the

automobile industry, 15% chance to work.

For the public service, etc.

etc.

right?

So for each person they are gonna give them a

score about where are they likely to work?

Like what is the chances that they work in this

particular industry given how much they match the profile of

the people who work in this particular industry.

And then with this, they are gonna basically multiply this

predicted probability of working there by the automation score for

that particular sector.

So that's kind of like how much at risk you

are.

To automation.

And then Because it's not over.

They also multiply this by the change in the number

of robots between T1 and T-3 prior to the survey

here, right?

Yes, the number of robots is a robot in this

sense?

Yeah, yeah, it would be like, like, see if it's

a, if it's a factor, you know, you can see

it right?

I mean, in the service, it would be self self

uh self checkout machine and stuff like this.

So there is data on how many robots are being

bought.

In a country for like desk workers for example like

the computers.

No, that's not a robot, right, because it's not a

substitute for the work of a person.

Huh?

For example, one thing that will count as robot this

is that more and more, the help line will be

done by AI.

It's already done quite a bit by AI but just

like identifying keywords.

Now it's gonna do fully by eye and it's gonna

reduce the number of people working on the phone trying

to reach them is gonna become really mayhem.

Right.

And so there is kind of like that would be

robusts, like investment in AI would be robusts, for example.

I also seen that companies that were doing something, not

pretend they are doing it with AI like Grammarly has

been around for 30 years and now they call themselves

the Grammarly AI and I'm like pretty sure nothing has

changed, but AI is such a catchy word that they

renamed it, right?

no investment in robots in this case.

All right.

So, One thing to note though is that this change

in robots that are gonna instrument with changing robots in

other countries, is at the country level.

So you cannot do it at the industry level, you

do it at the country level.

So this is kind of like a.

Yeah, and in this paper.

The average fixed effects.

And here I was like, what the hell is going

on?

So this time I'm thinking it doesn't work without the

region fixed effect.

OK, so you have Country here fixed effect, region fix

effect.

How much a person is exposed, which is what is

the probability that this person works in sector J time

the score automation should call for sector J across all

possible sectors time the change in robots, right?

So suppose you were having someone that has 100% chance

to work as a In an industry like let's say.

You know, car making.

That has a huge automation score, then this person will

have a huge robot exposure score because that would be

very close to basically, that would be a high number.

And they would basically take the wall.

So it's again a sort of like Relatively strange shift

share instrument, right?

It's relatively strange because your exposure comes from your probability

of belonging to this sector at the time of the

treatment as well.

So is it like a propensity score?

Yeah, it's a propensity score but not matching individual to

other individuals but matching individual to sectors.

But it is a sort of perisco but not matching,

right.

Yeah, that's what they do for this is going.

So, Yeah.

The baseline.

I don't know what the coefficients are, but we will

never know, so it doesn't matter.

Knowing about the size of the effect is also not

a very interesting question.

This is kind of like telling you, yes, there is

a positive of automation on propensity to vote for populists.

Then they look at, you know, the China shock just

as a control.

And the China she that was the big paper in

2018 comes not significant this time.

So they're thinking about the fact that if you have

the region fixed effect, everything disappear, now you should be

really worried.

Then they basically say, OK, maybe it's 0 is because

of something else.

So here's the thing, it's like.

This is the robot.

If you are exposed to the China shock, but you

don't work in a place that is susceptible for automation,

then you become less likely to vote for populist, but

if you vote in a place that has automation and

you can sum this the coefficient.

Then you become more likely to vote for populist, and

then you're like that makes absolutely no sense, but you

know, why is the China shock, which is an importation

driven argument related to automation?

Maybe there's a story about, you know, the firm to

remain competitive, kick out the workers and stuff like this,

but this seems to be a little bit far-fetched.

This is a nice one that they look at offshoring,

but they find nothing, so bad luck.

And they look at traditionalism and they find that traditionalism

has a positive effect on voting for populist, but it

is attenuated by automation and that also makes very little

sense because you would think quite the contrary when you're

a traditionalist and then you have automation that should really

get you like even more angry about it but no

so this is kind of like, oh yeah.

So, There is some sort of correlation and probably some

sort of causal link between economic changes in the form

of globalisation and automation and the success of populists.

Though two things that I think are important are one,

the evidence is probably less strong than what the other

claims, but they should not be judged negatively for this

because I do not know a single paper where the

evidence is stronger than the claim and probably don't know.

Not even a single paper where the evidence is as

strong as the claim, right?

And then the goal is to push the claim really,

you know, you, you, it's like an elastic like you

take the claim as far as possible from uh from

the evidence before the elastic break, and that's like basically

what is, what is going on.

The other thing that is important is like even if

we were to put substantive effect into this, there is

no way that economic grievances will give us a full

explanation on the rise of populists, right?

It's probably really.

The the consequence of many different factors working on power,

like it's a form of maybe not a perfect storm,

but kind of like, you know, a good hurricane, right,

that is happening at the same time, different things that

are going down similarly and affecting.

The way voters perceive the system is working and the

way they think the system is not working in their

favour, and they turn against the mainstream party as a

result, right?

So this is kind of like everything together.

So what we're gonna do next is like having some

one possible cause, and I'm happy to send you papers

on all the causes if you want.

Yes, sorry.

I was just thinking that it's a bit weird that

now with Trump, there's like so much investment in AI

if it's the case that people don't like automatization and

then like paralyse automatization by voting for populist, but now

the.

that is the one who was pushing forward on organisation.

I mean It's, I agree with you that.

It's not obvious that it is so strange for two

reasons, right?

One, you will have to look at among the people

that are service jobs that are not really like, you

know, low white collars, which are the ones that are

gonna be most affected by it.

How many of them vote for the weapon for Trump.

If they vote mostly by Democrat, he doesn't care.

The enemy of the deeper any case that's, that's, that's

one thing.

The third thing is Like many other populist, he really,

you know, he presented himself as a man of the

people, but he's also like.

You say in French cum, very good friend with like,

you know, the oligarch of, of this, this thing.

So it's also basically paying off the oligarch that may

suffer through other policies like immigration and things like this.

So I think this is my, my, my curiosity would

be how many white collar voters vote and I if

it's law that really solve the polls are completely.

If it's mostly blue colour that for turn, then you

know, it doesn't have to cater to this votes too

much.

So I think I'll I'll say it's also might affect

the way the bureaucracy is working in Washington and since

he wants to eviscerate the bureaucracy, that's also to this

advantage.

So I think that the reason that I'm not completely

orthogonal to trend, right?

It would have been much more surprising should you have

said, well, no, I'm gonna do a free exchange treaty

with China like that you would have said something really

orthogonal to its uh brand and population.

And voter population.

Any other other question on the And also notice that

the traditionalist, if you want to believe this study, the

traditionalists were actually not angry on automation.

Right, sir.

OK, so, Why populists?

I'm going to go very, very quickly on this because

I don't have so much to say, in particular because

I'm, I'm avoiding one of the interesting questions as I've

said, which is why do mainstream party allow populists to

rise not a law is too strong, but do not

manage to counteract it.

Why do they keep playing a certain strategies?

Why do they think it's still the best strategy and

which is a.

A more interesting puzzle here I'm gonna think about, you

know, there are people that are losing these days that

are hurting.

Why is it the case that populists are credible, in

particular, given that many of them are not exactly the

same as those people.

When you take Marine Le Pen, she has left all

of life in a castle.

Donald Trump, he was born with a golden spoon in

his mouth.

It's not like a man of the people, Donald Trump.

So why populist?

And.

So one thing I'm going to just argue very, very

briefly and it's gonna be like really sweet slide is

that populists are gonna play on what is called descriptive

representation, right?

Descriptive representation is the idea that they are going to

put people that look like the people that are hurting.

And that is the following reasoning is that If this

person, if I don't trust the elite, if I don't

trust the expert, if this person looks like me, I'm

more trustworthy, right?

I will not vote for an elitist candidate because I

believe these people are both off for, you know, even

if they're not both off they have other interests in

mind than my own, but I will vote for someone

that has the same type of experience as I do

because I believe that this person will be voting in

my interest.

Let me say that this is not crazy.

The data does show that having someone that is like

you is actually beneficial.

A minority representative had minority.

Right, so this is not a woman representative help woman.

We will see this in uh 2 I mean 3

weeks' time, but 2 lectures' time.

So there is kind of like something going on.

So what we would see is that in Sweden, but

of course we know in Sweden they know they know

everything about everyone.

There's another thing about candidates that this is actually what

is going on, right?

And here they are comparing.

Two types of people that are losing, there's a loser

from welfare reform that they call economic outsider and the

lazy loser from automation that they call vulnerable economic insider,

right?

They, they show that those that are economic outsiders tend

to be attracted to populists.

They also show that vulnerable insiders tend to be attracted

to populists in that day in the paper, OK?

And then they basically look at how many.

Of those categories are candidates in various parties.

So this is in the population, we can see there

is quite a bit of uh outsiders in the population

and quite a bit of renewable insider.

In fact, the two of them together represent more than

50% of the population.

Then you have the secure insiders, you have the retired,

and you have the student.

This is what is happening in basically the mainstream party

on average.

There are a lot of secure insiders as candidates.

Right, very few, uh, vulnerable insiders, but in particular very,

very few economic outsiders, like very, very few economic outsider

compared to the population.

This is what the Sweden Democrats are doing.

They are actually overrepresenting both the economic outsider and the

vulnerable insiders.

So this is basically and like much less the elite

than other people, right?

So what is going on is basically that the Sweden

Democrats.

Uh, kind of like trying to convince these people.

That they understand their concern by fielding candidates that have

experienced those concerns, right?

And I do think there is a problem of recruitment

in many mainstream parties and it would be better to

have.

People that are maybe outside of, you know, the little

bubble of London and all this type of things to

run and with the death of the trade union that

has become much harder for left wing party even to

recruit this type of people that the conservative, you know,

whose managers are those who go fox hunting are fox

hunters are actually engaging in descriptive representation.

The problem comes much more from the left that is

full of university graduates.

And it's kind of like losing connection with some of

the people that they are natural consistency usually, or used

to be.

In income distribution, you can see it as well.

It's kind of very nice, right?

Is that you can see that the population.

That's the distribution of the population.

It's across all income percentile, you know, it's the same

graph we saw very briefly when we were doing political

agency.

This is like the other parties.

This is the left parties, and you can see that

except for really the top of the distribution because these

people have other things to do than to go into

politics, right?

There's a huge overrepresentation of rich people.

Whereas for the Sweden Democrat there's an underrepresentation of rich

people, right?

And interestingly it's really about the individuals themselves rather than

the parents and we've seen that the parents candidates come

from every part of the distribution when it comes to

families, but they themselves are more successful.

almost every part of the distribution, but they themselves are

relatively unsuccessful.

Yeah.

How do you recruitment problems?

Very good question.

There is no way I think to this based on

what I said, I cannot, I should not make that

claim.

I have no way to do it, right?

But still in any case, the, the, the, the thing

with the fact that you know, the Sweden Democrats are

willing to take in these people and fill them as

candidates, whether that, whether this is as you say.

A demand story from the Sweden Democrat finding people or

supply story from the outsider going to the Sweden Democrat

and Sweden Democrats accepting that.

I don't think it mattered that much for the argument,

right?

The question would be why it matters is more why

are these why are these people not attracting.

Democratic outside economic outside my guess knowing a little bit

about participation right is that this is more the Sweden

Democrat making an active effort to recruit these people that

would be my hunch, but you're right that based on

what I presented you there is no way to disentangle

between the two.

You, I credit to you 100%.

All right, so this is for why populism, as I

said, short, because I'm abstaining to looking at the other

interesting questions that will require a lot more work, a

model, and you know, the political science students are taking

3 weeks to solve it.

So we are gonna think about the consequence of populism,

right?

And this already said it, that's what you, sorry.

One difficulty, though not as been progress being made to

sort it out in other ways, so there are two

ways you can think about the effect of populism.

One of them is within a country looking at municipalities

or regions that go into the control of populist and

seeing what happened there.

Now, it is interesting because often populists use local level

to showcase a good deal, right, which I'm pretty sure

voters are not completely full because, you know, they kind

of understand that the party is putting a lot of

resources in a way to, you know, it's a bit

of a, to remember our political agency model where people

put effort to maximise performance, but the voter are subtracting

the effort from the performance because It's probably what is

going on there.

They put a lot of effort, a lot of resources,

but voters are like, yeah, yeah, but I'm gonna subtract

this from your performance.

So this is not working in my view, but still,

you know, you could look at the local level and

see what they are doing.

That's very helpful and I will talk briefly about papers

doing it, but at the same time it's a bit

limited because populists are not really interested about winning at

local level and what a populist wants to do is

to win at the national lottery, but they don't care

about local level it's just a stepping stone to the

national level.

It's basically by default that they do stuff at the

local level.

So for example, you keep, when they were competing in

local elections was more to get their members occupied because

the members wanted to do stuff and they said, OK,

let's do a local election company.

So that's one thing.

So if you want to look at the national level,

then this become a bit complicated.

Because you know, usually we don't like to compare countries

to countries.

There was a good days when I was kind of

like starting my PhDs where, you know, different and deep

cross country comparis and were acceptable.

That was the good old days.

Unfortunately that's no longer the case, so you cannot do

this anymore.

So because we think that you know if France get

a populist it's not the same as Germany and so

we don't really know what is going on so etc.

So one way to that to make in some sense

the control group more similar to the treated is to

use what is called the synthetic control method and there

is this paper in the ER by Fonke and coauthor

that do this approach.

So what is the idea of this approach is really

very, very close to a difference and different approach, OK.

So what you're gonna do is that you're gonna create

a fake counterfactual countries.

And this fake counterfactual countries is gonna be a mixture

of existing countries, and you're gonna make sure that these

fake countries look as close as possible to your treated

pre-treatment.

So think about Italy.

And uh actually uh 5 Star Movement and LeGA, you

would take a mixture of countries across the world so

that to match Italy on free MS 5.

5S and Lagas government on a bunch of outcomes that

you think are important like the economy in particular, inflation

and stuff like this, right?

So you're gonna create this fake control.

That's why it's called this synthetic control.

One difficulty that you have.

Is that if the controls really look like the treated,

then they are probably gonna be spillover effect, right?

And spillover effect could have underestimate the treatments.

So for example, two countries have good trade relations because

they look the same.

OK.

And then the populist of having in power that decrease

the um the production in that country and then you

basically underestimate the effect.

Of populist in power because you have one the effect

on the country that is treated, and second, you have

a decrease in the country that is your control.

So that's a problem.

You could also overestimate it if you think that, you

know, people that would have invested in the country.

Go to invest in another and then the spillover effect

is positive in so it's kind of like this in

particular you would never want to have as your unique

treatment a huge economy like the US because that you

know that Trump when Trump arrives in power, it's basically

affecting every country in the world.

Obviously some economists still did the sensitive control method with

Trump.

What you can do as well is like, for example,

Brexit, the effect of Brexit has been measured with a

sanity control method, right, because.

That's what it does Yeah.

So they're gonna identify populists are basically.

So this paper was presented in the in the seminar,

the research seminar we have in Tuesdays, and this was

really the, the biggest fights because you know, you always

fight in seminars.

It was the biggest fight at the moment at the

part of the same.

So it was about identifying populists.

So the way they identifying populist is basically This idea

that the populists split the electorate into virtuous people and

corrupt elite, but in particular it was the way historians

were talking about politicians and whether the historians were talking

about politicians in power doing this sort of division.

One issue with this, right, not two issues with this.

One is that historians, when they judge, you know, a

politician, will judge a politician according to the accomplishment.

So for example, FDR for Glen D.

Roosevelt in the US, when he started doing all these

reform, introducing minimum wage, the Tennessee Valley Authority, etc.

I'm pretty sure it was called not maybe populist but

demagogue or something like this, right.

However, it is believed the economists many.

Economists disagree that the New Deal was a tremendous success.

So now it's called to be a founder of new

Keynesian economic and you know, the golden period that go

from 1940 to 1980s in time of days.

So so there is this type of of things.

So probably, you know, the judgement is tainted by The

success of this person.

There's a recent paper in Econometrica where they look at,

there's a historian in 1900s that has evaluated the intelligence

of monarch.

Right in the past, and then the researcher is regressing

the performance on the monarch on the evaluation of the

historian.

And I'm like, The evaluation of the historian, whether a

monarch is smart or not is for sure tainted by

the performance of the monarch when he was in power.

So what are we doing here?

Like, you know, this is like, it's not that there

was IQ test, Swedish style to all monarch in the

16th centuries, right?

So we will have the usual suspect and blah blah

you know this was kind of uh an issue to

remember that they may be overestimating the negative effect because

it's gonna be negative.

Let me just spoiler alert, it's not gonna look good

for populists.

And here is probably the thing that is the craziest

about the synthetic control method, right, is that when you

create your synthetic control, your doppelganger, you basically tell.

The software find me the best combination to imitate, for

example, Italy and Berlusconi.

Find me the best combination of countries and I put

no restriction on what this country should look like, right?

just.

The data are gonna speak.

It's great because you are not like putting your biases

into the process, but it's not so great because the

outcome can look slightly strange.

So for example, Italy and Berluscon2 resembled Cyprus.

Why not, you know, corruption probably that works.

Luxembourg.

And Peru And you're like, OK, then you have Easter

and Nano too.

It's Portugal, Brazil and Uruguay.

Now we know that, you know, there was a whatever

Slovakia.

There's Peru again, China.

Everybody knows that China and Slovakia are exactly the same

thing.

Like who would deny that China is a different country

than Slovakia?

And then also probably problematically Croatia, which is close close

to Slovakia and could be affected by what is happening

in Slovakia right so generating.

So you basically do this.

So for example, you can think about Italy is 30%

Cyprus, 25% example, 45% Peru.

I mean, it's true that Peru has good food like

Italy, so maybe I don't know this was like.

It would be interesting to see, uh, this could be,

I think, in my guess, like, look, I'm gonna make

a big conjecture.

We're gonna see there's gonna be someone that is gonna

be smart enough to improve sensitive control method with artificial

intelligence and you're gonna have.

A plethora of artificial intelligence sanity control, you know, Christian,

just keep an eye and then you can do a

dirty, a dirty and quick paper, you know, be the

first in political science to do it and stuff like

this.

No, no, no, no, you know, I understand career incentive.

If you think I'm I'm always a purist, and I'm

a purist when I teach.

If you think I'm a purist when I do research,

I try, you know, the elastic.

Everybody does this.

All right.

So with this in mind, and all the caveats that

we can have.

Let's think about the effect of populism, right?

Here is basically before in year 0, that's when the

populists arrive in power.

And so everything after year 0 is populist in power.

This is post.

This is pre in power.

Now one thing is that given that the synthetic control,

the fake counterfactual is much on pre-treatment by a board

of interests, in particular the economy, we have no difference

pre-treatment between control and treated.

Well that that's, that's by construction.

If you have a different pre-treatment, that means you have

done your synthetic control badly.

And that's the difference between the 3D and the control

and it's 0.

That exposed and we see that the decrease in the

economy relative to the sanity control is equal to something

like 15%, 12 to 15%.

Yeah, so it's a huge effect, huge.

Now one worry that one could have is that, you

know, the populist when they arrive in power, they don't

arrive at random.

They can be a crisis, and if there's a crisis,

it's very hard to solve it and so necessarily you're

going to get like a negative effect and stuff like

this.

So they do something that I think is very nice

and like probably the best evidence that they are in

favour of what they are doing.

Is what they are doing.

So here they are matching the treaty and the control

up to the time where the populist gets in power

and then they basically look at a different tale.

Here they're gonna do something slightly different.

They're gonna march up to 5 years before the populist

gets in power, right?

So from here to here.

They are much by construction, so they cannot be any

difference then you know, from here afterwards they are basically

you let basically the two go together, right?

If recession were to be at play, what we will

see is that the populist start to go down and

stuff like this, right?

So here it's really like marching all the time from

particular from -5 to 0.

-5 to 0, this is not much by construction.

But this is just basically you let the two run

and what do we see?

We see that the populist and the the country that

is about to get a populist and the country, the

fake control that will not get the populist are going

the same way.

It's afterwards that there's a divergence into us.

Another thing that is really I think important and really

interesting.

Especially when we want to think about voters.

If you look at the curve, it's not the case,

right?

The populists are triggering a recession.

Right, it's not the case that we have a decrease

in the growth of the country, the GDP.

And that's the GDP level.

Rather, it is that a country and a populist start

to grow less fast.

That a country that what he would have experienced absent

populist and that's what we say and that is actually

making it much harder for voters to identify that the

populist is incompetent, right, because seeing a recession will tell

you oh this is crop.

I should not have done this.

Seeing moderate growth.

You know, this, this country doesn't exist, right?

This is a fake country.

So this is like this is a good way to

to compare for scholars, but voters cannot do this, right?

This is like a fake comparison.

So for voters they don't have this thing of their

purpose.

So what they see is like they see moderate growth

and they're like, well, it's probably working relatively fine because

I see moderate growth.

1 in 5, the country should have grown much bigger.

And it's exactly the same with Brexit, so Brexit does

not trigger recession.

It's just triggering lower growth so that the UK gets

the economy that it's supposed to get after, you know,

shutting down self in the foot and decreasing by 10%

GDP potential by closing on trade with the partners.

But it's still growing at a lower rate than it

should have been.

And that is making it much harder for voters to

identify that Brexit is not working.

That is something I think that is important when we

think about why do voters not punish populists because it's

very hard for them to identify that populists are doing

poverty.

We need a fake control to our.

On top of this, even if the economy is doing.

Not so well, you could have redistribution within the economy

in favour of the population that is voting for populists.

So for them it's even harder to identify.

It's probably actually rational for them to keep on voting

for populists because even if the pie is not growing

at the rate it should be, the share of the

pie that they are getting is growing, right?

So always think about these two.

Things, right?

Think about pie and the share of the pie.

It's always very important to really think about the overall

growth or decrease and the redistribution of the pie because

the two can go in very opposite direction for some

people.

What about inequality, right?

Because you know they talk a lot about elite and

stuff like this, while right wing populists tend to increase

inequality a little bit, your AI statement maybe left wing

populists are actually delivering a bit on inequality, right?

The reason iss work a bit less is because it's

not necessarily much on inequality.

So they are delivering a bit on inequality at least,

but you know how they delivering Pol Pot was very

famous for saying to Cambodian people, you know, communism is

very simple.

It's 0 for me and 0 for you, so you

know that's perfect equality.

And this is what we have so far.

So let me also say about all the type of

things.

So populists, for example, they really do not like checks

and balances, right?

Indeed you could see it with Trump.

One of the first statement that Trump made is to

tell Republicans, let's not waste time and just like rubber

stamp all my nominee.

For government, because in the US government for good or

bad reason, it's not necessarily good actually, to be honest.

Every nominate for the government needs to be validated by

the Senate, right?

So there's a two-state Trump nominate the person goes to

the Senate and the Senate appoint the person.

So it can take a long time process and Trump

said, let's remove the appointment.

Just rubbers on my decision and we'll go faster.

But that was like removing the checks and balances, right?

So that is kind of like this.

I think also the left lost a lot of credibility

when they started saying that Biden should back the Supreme

Court.

So they, they should basically increase the size of the

Supreme Court, and Biden should nominate all the judges.

Again, what is interesting is that there's actually a very

good argument in favour of increasing the size of the.

Good because the Supreme Court is seeing more and more

cases and they don't have enough justices to do it,

right?

So this is kind of like a plan.

But there are also ways to do it that is

more liberal to say, look, we're gonna increase the Supreme

Court judges by 84 for you, 4 for us.

No, it was 8 for the Democratic Party to compensate

for, you know, the imbalance in the court in favour

of Republicans.

So that is also kind of like when you say,

oh, Trump is a danger for democracy and you do

this, that's when you basically decrease your brand quite a

bit.

So this is kind of things, but let's see what

they do to institutions, populist right.

So here you have judicial constraint on the executive, huge

decrease and they all do it.

Melanie right now is a tin of reform of the

judiciary.

The PIS in Poland reform of the judiciary.

Right, all ban completely decrease the power of the judge.

The reason why it's not happening in the US is

because actually the president already has the power to nominate

judges.

That is a huge power that the president have and

so that's kind of like avoiding it in the US.

What about free and fair election?

huge decrease again.

Right.

Media become more controlled.

Free television lose their licence to operate, etc.

etc.

and we see it here as well.

And we see to it.

OK, just like to finish, what about the local level?

And then we can.

So you have one paper that show what a populist

may do.

So for example, they show that the quality of the

bureaucracy is being reduced, like bureaucrats tend to be less

well educated.

The debt of the locality starts to increase and the

public good projects start to be longer to overrun.

So basically, There is low competence of populist leaders, which

can come, you know, from the fact that they tend

to be lower educated people, and, but, you know, again,

let's think of this is one of nice paper that

for some reason is not yet published.

And what they have here is a very nice taste.

It's kind of a cute test, cute to not makes

a bit, but it has a meaning, right?

So it's in Austria, but there's been also like the

FPO has has increased quite a bit.

And what they look at, to think about what is

the cultural consequence of populist, they look at the number

of players in the local team with foreign sounding names.

Right, so it's basically, you are foreigners, you play football,

you go to play for the local team.

And then whether or not you play for the local

team pre and post uh mayor mayor running what they

show is that there's a decrease in the number of

footballer with foreign signing names in local team after a

mayor arrives.

How did this paper work?

They do is basically they con they use an RDD

so they basically think about populists that are just winning

the election versus mainstream politicians that are just winning the

elections, right, so that's what they do.

Now, RDD works very well to control as I try

to, to, let me remind you, to control for the

level for any difference at the level where the RDD

is performed.

So the RDD is performed at the municipal level.

But what we are doing is that we are randomly

allocating a populist mayor and a non-populist mayor in a

municipality.

What does it mean?

It means that the populist, the municipalities where you have

a populist, look the same as the municipality where you

don't have a populist.

What the RT is not doing is randomly allocating politicians.

Because that would require us to do randomization at the

politician.

Instead, what the, so what does it mean is suppose

that populists are growing and they are favoured by the

electorate.

The populist mayor that tends to be elected just at

the margin would be worse on average than the non

populist politician.

Inversely, if there is a bias against populists.

The non-opulist politician that is just elected with a populist

tends to be a worse quality than the average non

that basically there's a difference in quality around the threshold

for politicians, right?

So that's one issue with RDD is that if you

think there are difference in the electorates.

Right.

About this, then basically that difference will still be present

in your art.

And in fact, it could be exacerbated.

So you have to be careful.

This is not randomising whether a mayor is populist or

not, it's whether a municipality gets a a closely elected

populist or closely elected non-opulist, right?

One paper that you will see with your discrimination against

women lecture in week after the reading week so to

solve in week 8.

Actually in week 7, I think you will see that

this is kind of like this is really related in

that paper at the bottom of it, which you will

not solve, there is a discussion of RDD and how

they measure not bias against women.

So that's, that's all on populism.

We've seen the role of economic change.

We have seen that populists get vote because they engage

in descriptive representation and the consequences that they hurt the

economy, they failed to reduce inequality.

They weakened institution and something we haven't seen, but you

can look at the slide is.

Lecture 15:

Lecture 16:

This is on last week on democracies.

It seems fitting given the time period.

And uh next week, we are going to uh study

autocracy for 3 weeks, right?

And then democratisation.

On, uh, two things, remember some of you, uh, talked

to me about this.

We have a public lecture.

Uh, big political economy public lecture on the Monday of

the last week just after our last course, but the

week before.

If you have pay attention, if you look around, you

will see that Jim Robinson is coming on the 25th

of March.

And we'll give a lecture at LSC.

So I'm not sure exactly how you get into it

because I haven't seen many announcement about it, but keep

an eye for this.

And it's nice because a week after we trash his

mother, so you know, this is just like, you know.

A nice way to, yeah, we trash like the uh

assemble Blue Johnson Robinson because why not to finish with

a bank, right?

And we're not trash it, we'll, we'll point out to

some relatively severe flows of of the paper.

But today, to finish on a beautiful note on a

democratic politics, we're gonna talk about discrimination against women in

politics, right?

So that's gonna be uh the theme we're gonna cover.

So we define discrimination as two individuals experiencing an equal

outcome as a result of one non-relevant factor such as

sex or race.

We discuss sources, state-based and be based.

We discussed this beautiful experiment and last week.

We are like that how difficult it is to capture

discrimination, this importance of keeping everything else constant, often done

by experiment, but I'm going to show you that I'm

a bit exaggerated here because you can also do it

by employing multiple data sets.

So last week was more last week, last lecture, sorry,

time flies for me it was, it was last week.

Last lecture, we were like more generally talking about discrimination

and even like doing a paper that arguably is not

very political economy.

Today we are gonna use what we learn to study

a topic that is very much political economy, which is

women in politics, right?

And in particular we are going to kind of like

there are many questions that we could ask, we could

ask who engaged in discriminatory practises?

Is it voters?

Are these like gatekeepers in parties?

Is it both?

What are the effects of policy remedies to the discrimination?

And does this discrimination matter, right?

So this is kind of like what we're gonna try

to to think about.

In particular, we will talk about quotas and what is

the effect of quotas that is sometimes subtler than the

way it's presented in the media or in some papers

actually that I think don't think carefully enough about the

effect of quotas, but first thing first.

Can we provide evidence that there is discrimination against women

in elections?

So, I haven't checked the most recent figure, but like

last year there have been more like elections like in

Germany, only 27% of legislators were women around the world,

right?

And there were only 7 countries would have more than

50% of women in parliament and one of them was

Cuba, which you know, we don't think of Cuba as

being an example of democratic regime, right?

So.

Again, I haven't looked at the last election in Congress,

but I don't think it's gonna be much better.

In the UK prior to the election it was 35%,

Meta is 32%, the US it was 30%, and Japan.

Prior to the last snap election was 10%.

So for a group that constitutes 50% of the electorate.

That's like a huge difference in representation, right?

Now, of course, that's not enough.

To think about discrimination, right?

We know that average are not amazing.

One thing could be that it just happened that for

a reason that have nothing to do with politics, women

are less willing to write, right?

It could be that discrimination is happening elsewhere.

Forcing women and getting certain type of skills that make

them less willing to run for politics, right?

So it's not saying there will not be discrimination, but

the discrimination will not be at this point in the

process.

As always, this is the difficulty when we think about

discrimination.

So that's kind of like one possibility, but you know.

It's kind of like difficult to argue that the misallocation

of skill is so big.

That 90% of MP in Japan, right?

That's like I think that's a difficult argument to be

made, but maybe that's an argument.

So We have evidence that they are reading this, right?

We have evidence also that actually Voters are discriminating against

women, that they are slightly when if you put them

a male candidate and a woman candidate.

Everything is equal.

Voters will tend to choose the male candidates slightly more,

right?

So we do have evidence of this.

Your problem set is trying to make you think about

what happened when you have discrimination against women by voters,

what happened when you have discrimination against women in terms

of cost of running, and what type of empirical evidence

is consistent with one or the other.

That's based on a very nice paper by Ethan Buenosquita

and Carter actually.

Uh, and that teach you also a little bit about

this beautiful concept, one of the few that I would

love to teach, but that's enough time to, which is

called first order stochastic dominance.

It's like another beauty.

First the cast.

So what we're gonna do instead is we are going

to show that there is discrimination against women in politics.

At least at some point in the process.

By contrapositive this paper by Nan Berry from 2011, 2011

it's a bit oldish in terms of causality, but it's

interesting in terms of pedagogically because it shows you how

you can find some, some smoking gun for discrimination when

you combine data sets rather than like you know what

we have been doing it, we have said here is

one situation.

In that particular situation you need to control for all

relevant factors, but in fact if you manage to combine

different evidence together, you might be able to point out

the discrimination as well, right?

So this is another way to measure discrimination.

So what they're going to do is that they are

going to use two data sets and they're gonna see

that when you combine the pattern of both data sets.

It must be that there is discrimination.

So that's, that's gonna be the idea.

So, here's what they are gonna do.

First, they are going to think about the performance of

women relative to men.

In Congress, right?

Now it is always hard to measure performance in Congress

and indeed, you know, one possibility is to redo this

paper.

For a dissertation in a way that updated and improved

upon it.

So now we do have some data.

On effective base of legislators, it's a database by Alan

Weissman and the author whose name escape me that has

basically have the legislative effectiveness data set with every legislator

is, is given a score in terms of effectiveness.

So that would be one thing.

What they use, because that's the data that are available

in 2011, is outlets.

You remember outlets is like this.

Public good that is targeted to a district.

So roads, schools, hospitals, this type of thing that congressmen

and women really care about, right?

Because that's what they release.

Press releases are all about this.

So they never talk about what they do in Congress.

In that press release, they always talk about what they

do for the district of this, right?

So that's seems to be important.

Now the way they're going to do this is they're

going to do a panel data.

Right.

Which We know nowadays it's not optimal, so it's a

form of stagger definive where what is happening is that

you are considering as a treatment, the fact that a

woman is elected to represent the district.

And so that's, that's what it is.

But it can be a better way to potentially do

this, right, than a staggered differently.

Or upon data, one could be maybe thinking about another

design or thinking about an event study and all these

type of things and you know, that also is something

that is updateable.

I really, there is a dissertation to be written that

update this paper, just saying.

For those of you that have to write dissertation.

So there are two types of fixed effects.

It's gonna be the district fixed effect, the top fixed

effect.

There's gonna be some district characteristics like the population.

Economy, there's gonna be some.

Representative characteristics such as which party the person is from,

and then there's going to be this coefficient, which is

a dummy for whether the district representative is a family

or not, right?

And so the idea is like I like really like

a bad definive design because you have also give like

this week reverting to the control group which you don't

want to have in definite design is basically what is

the effect of electing a woman versus not electing a

woman.

Right, so the average treatment effect on the treated, and

the treated is this t that are like.

So this is kind of like what they find.

They find that on average women bring 9% more public

goods to that district, and 9% more public good to

that district.

And in particular, this seems to be driven by mostly

places where districts that are conservative, so that's what this

is doing.

So it's basically saying that the effect of getting a

woman on the number of public goods you get is

much stronger in conservative district than in non-conservative district, right?

Now if you think that conservative district discriminate more.

Which means that really for a woman to win election

in a conservative district, a woman has to be really

much better than men.

That is perfectly consistent with this, right?

So this, this can be.

One thing they do that is kind of like, you

know, Interesting is that they also look at sponsoring a

bill, which is one dimension of effectiveness, and it seemed

that womenonsor bills, right?

They didn't look at committees, prisons and whether they work

more, but at least they do more sponsoring.

Another thing they do that is quite frankly is that

they also look, the sample is small, so we have

to be careful how we interpret the result, but they

also look.

And widows that are elected, right?

So often, not often, unfortunately, but sometimes, or fortunately, a

member of converts died, a male, right?

And the widow is running.

And of course, the widow is running on the name,

right?

So, Bernie Sanders die, and I don't know what Bernie

Sanders like, Why, but like Bernie Sanders's wife, start to

run with the Sanders lover, right?

And the idea is because they are using their male.

late partner's name as a signal to the voter, they

should suffer less discrimination as a result, right, because they

are not running on their own, they are basically using

their former husband name as a way to improve their

odds of being elected.

If there is less discrimination against widows, then there is

against, you know.

Non-widowed female members of Congress, then widows should be performing

less well than other females, and that's indeed what they

found, right?

So it's all the evidence in favour of female being

better, right?

Now Still Even though it seems that you know.

Congresswoman are all performing men.

It's not enough.

And again, because we, we're not sure that they have

control for all possible characteristic relevant to getting outlays and

stuff like this.

So what we need to think about as well is

to use kind of like a different measure.

And what they're gonna use is basically the fact that

we know that at the at the time they were

considering, women were holding less than 25% of seats in

the US Congress, less than 25% of seats in the

US Congress, right?

So let's suppose By control positive, by by prove by

contradiction, let's suppose that they were not to be discrimination

at all at any level.

Now if female and male were to be equal in

terms of quality, what should be the share of women

in Congress?

It's 50% indeed, and that is not what we find,

so that's not possible.

Now, because they are 25%, right?

That's great.

We could say, but maybe they are less good than

me in Congress, right?

They are less, less performing, right?

And that would explain the 25%.

Unfortunately, we cannot conclude that they are less performing.

Why is that?

Why do we know that women do not perform less

well than men?

What did the previous analysis show us?

You've just seen the average woman.

All performance just like I think the number, you know,

so was like point estimates are always tricky to interpret,

but like, yeah, but that is like we should not

find no better performance.

We should not find better performance by female.

See, but that's not what we see in the data.

But so it must, if we think about the better

performance of human than seeds and there's no discrimination, they

should own more than 50% of sals, right?

So every possible case is ruled out by the two

data sets that we have.

This is ruled out by the seat.

This is ruled out by the performance that we've seen.

This is ruled out by the fact that they only

own 25% of the same.

Absent this, we will not be able to rule out

this thing and this thing.

absent the first test, we would not have been able

to rule out this possibility.

So it's a combination of the two that tell us

that no pattern of data absent discrimination is consistent with

the two pieces of evidence that we have, which is

that female out for men and or less seeds than

men.

So that's the two pieces of evidence, and these two

together rule out every possible case without discrimination.

Is it clear to everyone?

All right, so we are gonna work under the assumption

of there is discrimination.

You are going to play with 1 and 2.

In your problem sets, right?

3, there has been some evidence that Parties actually tend

to put women in worse seats.

There are recent papers doing this.

What we're going to see is that using a very

quirky case, we're going to see that one might actually

be at play, right?

So this is gonna be.

Quasi- natural experiment using French counteral election.

All counteral elections are really the most useless election we

have in France, right?

But they are there, they only matter because the people

that you elect for Contonal election, they have a slight

power, but they also serve to elect the senators, right?

So this is like uh mostly what they serve.

Now in 2015.

The government said that pairs, today in the election, you

are electing a pair of people.

First, were to be gender balanced.

And it has to be that every pair that is

put in front of the electorate in the 2015 election

has to contain one male and one female.

Names, On the pairs appear by alphabetical order of the

last name.

So I'll be always kind of like almost always second.

One.

Actually, in this room is one of the few rooms

where I have the high chances to be first on

the ballot.

But you know, in general, since most names that come

more from Europe do not finish with later BMW, I'm

usually 7, right?

So this is like one thing.

They are about the assumption, that's an assumption they don't

test, but that's an important assumption.

So the electoral system is such that if the pair

receive more votes, it's the ear that is being elected.

It's the two candidates.

So you know, you have the right and the left,

the left receives 2 more votes than the right, the

left is getting the 2 candidates elected.

I honestly didn't know this.

Before reading that paper.

And I would have thought before reading this paper that

it was more proportional system where, you know, if the

two names receive a lot of vote, they get to

the to see.

If this is more balanced, each one gets one thing.

It very much matter that, you know, that's the belief

of border because it's hard to explain the finding without

this belief.

I believe they cannot test in the data, right?

So they do not know, they didn't have the money

to do a survey about this.

So let's suppose that at least some voters.

mistakenly believe that there is a form of proportionality in

the election.

If they believe so.

And there is discrimination.

When they see a woman ranked first.

They might start to discriminate a little bit.

I'm not thinking that both of them will be elected

no matter what.

And so that's indeed what they find.

They find that pair with women receive ranked first, receive

less vote than pairs with men ranked first, within the

same party, right?

And what is the party that seems to be the

one getting the most damage from this is the right

wing parties, right, which are the one of more conservative

voters similar with the case that we had before, right?

And they find also that this is driven usually by

places where there is less information about cantonal election which

correspond to this idea that you don't know how the

system is working, that it really doesn't matter who is

first for this.

So, that's more kind of like thinking about discrimination, but

really, you're gonna think about it way more when you

do your problem set and thinking about what evidence is

consistent with what form of discrimination.

Here we're gonna think rather more in terms of policies

that are meant to resolve discrimination before we do this,

is there any questions so far?

All right So one of the main solution.

That has been advanced to reduce discrimination is quotas, right?

And the idea of quotas is to reserve some places

for members of discriminated groups.

One of the most famous and most debated form of

quota that has been ruled, I think, non-constitutional recently is

affirmative action.

For example, affirmative action in universities.

And you have seen that every company in the US

but Apple to their credit, as it's kind of like

remove diversity, equality and inclusion initiative, right?

DEI in the US is in retreat because of the

fear of truth, right?

It's been retreating the federal government, it's been retreating company

and upwards say no, no, we are keeping it.

So this is, it's really like something that has A

huge political undertone, especially when it comes to universities.

There's a beautiful book.

Called the shape of the river.

Very strange title for what the book is about.

It's written by two former provosts of universities, and they

think about what is the effect of affirmative action.

At admissions level in universities, and they make an incredibly

strong case in favour of affirmative action, right?

So, I was never very much against it, but I

thought there were all the measures that could be implemented

that would be less um potentially.

Politically salient but still accomplishing relatively the same goal, and

they demonstrate without any doubt that only affirmative action has

the potential to give a chance to members to many

members of discriminating minorities, especially of African Americans in the

US.

And so one reason they say this.

Is that because this is a relatively small minority of

15% of people, first, the number of seats that they

are taking from the main group, which is the white,

is actually very, very small, like it's really not changing.

By any significant amount the chance of what going into

university and second, because they are very small, if you

were to do a policy that would be, for example,

quota based on demographic, sorry, socioeconomic variables like income below

a certain level because even though African Americans are much

more likely.

To be poor than white within their group, given that

they are way more white than the African American, there

are many more many more poor white than they are

poor African American and so doing places reserved for people

who come from lower socioeconomic background would actually be much

less effective than doing quota based on actual ethnicity.

It's a very beautiful book with beautiful argument and they

also demons.

that um students that are accepted with affirmative action do

not perform much worse than students that are accepted without

affirmative action, right?

So this is really a very strong book in.

Of course, one group has been one other small minority

has lost a lot from Affirmative action, it's Asian-American, which

ended up being the one being losing out a lot

on this process, and then that's why it became a

huge debate because it's not the white, the white got

Keep their place, the Asian-Americans should have got more place

without affirmative action.

Now we're gonna look into quotas for women in politics.

We can also think about quotas from ethnic minorities, and

there is some slide at the end, some bonus slide

where you can compare the effect of quotas for minority

to the quotas for.

And for women, and why they might have different effects.

There are two types of quotas that can be implemented.

One would be option quotas.

So option quotas and says that a certain number of

candidates are reserved for a group.

So, a certain number of candidacies of places where to

run are reserved for women.

What is the advantage?

Of quarters of this sort of quarters.

And what are the disadvantages?

What's good and what's bad about these quotas.

If we want so, let's let's also think about it

in a particular frame of mind.

Let's say we want to reduce.

Discrimination against women, but we just like, you know, we

have to think about the whole electoral process, right?

So we have an objective, but we work on the

constraint of the war electoral process, right?

It's not that we are opposing reduction and discrimination against

women, we're actually supporting you, whether you do or not

outside of the classroom is, you know.

Your question, but here, we have to put into this

frame of mind of this, right?

So if you are someone and you propose this, thinking

about, you know, not just women, but also the word

process, what is good about those quotas?

I guess an advantage would be that you're not imposing,

so you're not necessarily saying the disadvantage of this would

be that voters still discriminate against women.

Yeah, very good.

So if there are two things one is at least

you are kind of like in some sort respecting.

The electoral process by allowing for electoral competition exactly.

The bad thing is that if discrimination happened at the

level of voters, you are sorting out no problem at

all.

There's another disadvantage with option quartex.

What is the other disadvantage resorption quarters?

If you are, let's say, let's say discrimination happens at

the level of party leaders.

Suppose you are a party leader.

And you, you don't like woman politician, and there are

many of them, I can tell you.

Why are option quotas not that great?

You might um put in place a candidate that is

objectively worse than a male candidate, so that it is

possible that they get less votes just because of the

quality.

Yeah, I mean, that's, yeah, you could do this.

You could select only low quality women, but that's not

easy to select low quality woman.

That would look kind of bad for your party as

well.

If you do so, you can do better than this.

Are all seats equally winnable.

If you are to do, if you are like a

party leader who doesn't like women politicians, what will you

do with women candidates?

Exactly, unwinnable, right?

You would basically make sure that they were mostly in

places where it's unwinnable.

You know, that's the way, for example, the British system

is working.

One of the difficulty of the British not necessary for

women, but like it's like It really is a system

that reinforces ecophancy because it's like if you're being a

good Malleable members of parliament, they will give you a

winnable seat for the rest of your career.

So when you arrive in parliament, you have all the

incentive to be, you know, behaving well, which is of

course not necessarily good for constituents.

So that's kind of like one thing.

What about quotas?

6 quotas are great and bad for the same reason.

None of this one, but for the same reason, we

didn't seek quotas.

So I think you I mean it's because it's building

on what you said it's for demographic processes in the

sense that you're not allowing for fair competition.

Um another disadvantage might be that you might give those

seats to women in positions that are not so relevant.

So here is really sit, so it's like, you know,

it's offices.

Your idea of giving position would be more on list

quotas, right?

So yeah, but the problem is, what is good about

this is that you are basically forcing.

Women to go to like I been ensuring that woman

goes to parliament.

They have a percentage of seats and offices that is

reserved to them.

OK.

On the other hand, it's not that great because you

are forcing people to choose women.

So this has been used a lot, for example, in

India.

In India, there are constituency that rotates where in a

given election only women or only scheduled class or tribe

can run.

So if you are a male, you cannot run in

that election.

It's impossible by law.

If you are not from a scheduled class, you cannot

run, it's impossible by law, right?

So this is kind of like, kind of like something

that happened.

One way that This has been done kind of, it

would be very hard to do this.

In Western Europe, though you could say that a certain

number of constituencies in the UK could be reserved for

women to run, like men could not run them.

One way that has been done and is a kind

of a mixture is usually done in this kind of

list system where you make sure that women are always

in good position on the list.

So you still give some choices, but you know there

is kind of like position on the list.

OK, so close this system, the manipulation is exactly as

was said, you could put people.

On the low of the list.

So close this system is you have a list of

candidates.

Let's say you have 15 candidates on the list, and

the number of votes that you get tells you how

many people on this list are elected.

And the way it works is that it's the top

of the, you move from the top of the list

to the bottom.

So if one party were to win all the seats,

the 15 people on the list will be elected.

Most of the time, since it's a proportional system, parties

managed to put 5 or 6 candidates at most out

of 15.

So what do you do?

You give like position 89, 1011, 1213, 1415 to women

and you're like, it's 50/50.

It's not my fault that they didn't get elected, right?

So this is the way you manipulate this.

So, if you have an open list system actually, then

it becomes, that's an open list system, you have a

list, and the party puts the preferred candidate at the

top of the list, but voter can vote on any

candidate on the list, right?

And it's the candidate within the list that receive the

most votes that get elected.

And so like if voters are the ones discriminating against

women, open list systems are in big trouble, right?

Because No matter where you put women candidates, voters can

undo it by voting for men on the list, right?

So in opening system is almost as if the only

way you do it is by getting.

Um, all reserve list, right, like they do in mostly

in India.

So one thing is option quotas.

Indeed do not seem to work very well.

We have evidence that option voters tend to be ended

on either by party or by voters.

One way where it works is this crazy Italian system.

Italy always in advance to the craziness.

This crazy Italian system where Voters could get a second

vote in an election if they were voting for a

woman.

And so if you, if you vote for a man.

Actually, they were splitting their ballot, to be clear, right?

So if they were to vote for a man and

then they wanted to vote for a woman that was

OK.

If they wanted to vote for two months, that was

not OK.

If they wanted to vote for two women, that was

not OK.

But very few voters in Italy or even in France

or in the UK will vote for two females.

So really the goal of the reform was to force

people to vote for a woman on top of a

man, right?

So this was to give more chance to women.

So the answer has been to move throughI quotas either

implicitly and informally like Labour in 2020 explicitly and informally

in Sweden informally in the sense that it's not by

law but it's by the decision of the party.

And so what the party has done, the left wing

party has done in Sweden, is called zip quotas.

So deep quotas is basically If your first name on

the list is male, your second is woman, the 3rd

is male, 4th is woman.

If the first list on the list is woman, the

2nd is male, 3rd is woman and things like this.

So it's 11, right?

And I was not out of goodness of thought.

Because that's never happened in politics.

That was done because the election prior to them in

implementing this, they didn't put many women and then basically

feminist organisation associated to the party said we will stop

voting for you and campaign for you if you want

not to change policy, and they said, no, zip quota

we are doing and every party started to follow suit

with the with the and then we have the most

stringent is the reserved seat in India.

So What is the effect of Qatar?

And here I think we have to.

Go a bit beyond the way people talk about it

because the way people talk about it is, oh it's

fantastic, blah blah blah, everything is gonna be great, but

in fact, we will see that there are some subtle

effects of quotas when we think about it firmer, right?

So what we're gonna do is we're gonna use a

very simple framework, it's not even a game, it's just

like a statistical framework to think about the effect of

quotas.

We are going to think that there is a party.

So Party with a large number of members who are

gonna say must one.

Of members And we're gonna assume that 50% are male,

50% are female.

It doesn't really matter what does matter.

Is that there is, there are enough female party members

to feel the number of candidacies, right?

It's like, that's the only thing that matters.

The fifty-fifty here.

It's not interesting.

What just matter is, if the party wanted it, they

will be able to do fifty-fifty for candidacy.

And that's, that's what it matters for the model to

go through.

The mass is useful.

We need the mass is useful for the way we

compute things, but it also doesn't matter that much.

It's an approximation of having a large number of people,

right?

So we're gonna say that the party.

He's gonna feel a mass land slots.

And so There is a certain number of races where

the party compete at national, local, regional, whatever, and are

looking for candidates in these races, right?

And we use a mass again because that makes our

life much easier in the computation, but that's not really

important.

So that's the number of seats if you want, of

races, yes.

That's an alpha.

OK, I, I get, I, I give it to you

that it might look like a lambda.

Like it's a bit, I, I, I'm the first to

recognise that my own writing is absolutely terrible, but here

I must say.

I thought you said lambda.

Did I say lambdas?

OK, sorry.

So this is my, uh, letter quickly.

So it's my fault you're blaming me basically.

We would have to look at the recording to see

what is the truth of all this, huh?

And if I'm wrong, obviously it will be beat.

We will never know who was correct or.

But that's the disclosure.

Disclosure again we will do some actually in 3 weeks'

time when we do a censorship.

In autocracy, so All right.

All first slots or races where they want to basically

have candidacy.

We are going to suppose that for both male and

female.

Each individual.

It's characterised by.

An ability time and The ability is uniformly distributed.

In some interval, which is the underlying theta overline.

And that's the same for female and men.

There's no difference in ability between the two.

OK.

So we are not thinking that one group is better

than the other, they are not.

We're gonna make the assumption.

That there is meritocracy in the party.

And we do have some evidence in favour of this.

If you remember when we saw The Swedish data.

I think it was like, you know, last term that

lecture.

With 7 of the first lecture, we sure saw that

there was selection going into politics, right?

Candidates were better than the population, candidates for higher offices

were better than candidates for lower offices.

Right, so we saw selection going on.

So we're gonna assume that there is some meritocracy going

on, right?

So we're gonna say that.

A male Individual Becomes Candidates If And only if Their

ability is above a certain threshold.

And some saying The ability for women.

Now that's threshold.

We don't know it.

And we assume, we do not assume.

That they have to be equal.

And what we know is that ability is equal, that

threshold, we don't necessarily observe it.

We know there is meritocracy, but we don't observe the

threshold, right, but we're gonna see that we can recover

it.

So to be able to recover it, we need one

more piece of information.

I And we're going to assume that absent quota.

1% of candidates are men.

Right, so that's basically what we have.

What do we know?

If we were a researcher, like as a researcher, what

do we know, basically.

We know Alpha.

The number of races we know X, that's easily.

The percentage of male candidates, that's easily it's very easy

to compute.

These two things you just count them.

Here's the number of races where the party compete.

Here's the number proportion of candidates that they have.

We do not know.

So this, I don't know why I put the next.

The ability Of candidates.

But we know And they are distributed.

Uniformly, not importantly uniform.

We just know that according to some distribution.

We do not know.

The threshold But we know Syste He's meritocratic.

Right, so is it clear what we know and what

we don't?

So things that are easily observable is how many races

is the party competing in as you really just have

to count it, and what is the percentage of male

candidate.

It's also just something you have to count.

Huh?

What we do not know is what is the ability

of candidates.

We know that all they are distributed, and we do

not know exactly what it takes to be a candidate

if you are a female or a male, but we

know what is the rule.

Right.

And from this, we are going to be able to

recover a lot of information and in particular, we're gonna

be able to make predictions on the effect of quotas,

right, so we don't know much, but despite knowing not

so much, we can make a lot of, we can

say a lot.

Yeah, I'm not sure if I understand the idea of

these thresholds correctly.

Um, so they are different for male and female.

Would it be something like discrimination from the voter it

would be discrimination.

So in this case it would be more discrimination from

the party.

But it could be that the discrimination from the party

is driven by discrimination from the voters.

We are a bit agnostic about this, right?

It would be the party that selects.

Women and men according to different criteria.

Why they do so would be like it's a black

box.

But the idea is that women need more ability to

be elected than male.

For the moment we don't know.

Right, because we need to do a bit of computer

and practise, yes, but we need to do a bit

more computation to do this.

Alright, let's do, we're not gonna start it now, we

do uh.

7 minutes break, we start at 5 so.

Let's get it done, so.

Here's what we have, right?

Now, let's think about how we recovered this from the

information that we have.

So.

We know That Woman What Ability Above Right.

So let me do it in more steps, sorry.

So what is the probability a woman becomes candidate?

Which we're gonna, for simplicity C equal 1 means candidate.

is equal to the probability that the ability of this

party member is above the threshold.

And that's, that's what it is.

The probability of woman becomes candidates is the probability that

ability is above the threshold.

Now what do we know if we have A mass

What is the beautiful thing about working with masses?

It was translated.

In proportion indeed, right, usually we have done it the

other way around.

We have said what is the percentage of vote that

a party take and then we said no, that's actually

the probability that a voter vote for this party.

Here we are just reversing it.

We are saying what is the probability of woman become

candidate?

It's going to be also the proportion of women that

become candidates.

And this is also equal to the percentage.

And so using uniform distribution.

It's This thing Same thing.

It's gonna be equal to.

Now, What is the number of women in the party?

What is the mass size of women in the party?

50%, right?

So the number of women.

Who are candidates is equal to one half.

Same thing here, the number.

Of men who are candidates is one of.

This thing.

And with this, we can get everything.

Why?

Because we know what is the total number of candidates.

The total number of candidates has to be equal to.

I'll find it, yes.

So we know that total number of candidates.

Which is gonna be the number of.

Woman candidate Plus the number of Male candidate has to

be equal to alpha, sometimes called lambda.

And then we know that the proportion of male candidates.

Has to be equal to.

X basically, right?

So what is the percentage of male candidates?

It's the number of male candidates.

Divided by The total of candidate which is equal to

alpha.

Right?

I mean, this is, this thing, but it's also alpha,

right?

And so what do we have?

We have a system of two equations with two unknowns.

The unknowns, the two equations are these two.

What are the two unknowns?

See Now that we know Hm, the raw f and

ram, right, so this is the two unknown.

So we can just solve a system of two equations

to unknown.

So we know that from this.

We know that this has to be true.

We can plug it.

In one which will give us to have.

And so what we will get is.

This is.

And then similarly, And so we get a point that

you were raising, right?

As the number of candidates increases, male, as the proportion

of male candidates increases, or the number if you put

alpha times X, what is happening?

Well, the threshold for male is decreasing.

And more and more male candidates indicate that the threshold

for male is decreasing.

So now we can think about.

So let's call this no quota because.

What is the Is there any questions, sir?

Rece Yes, X and alpha observable.

Theta the thetas are estimated in some sense.

That is a belief, but we have them.

Everything in this quantity is not.

I mean, everything here is no and this is recovered.

So that we can calculate the expected quality of a

male candidate and the expected quality of a female candidate.

Yeah.

Well, the expected quality of a male candidate is.

Was it is.

Ability conditional on the ability being greater than the threshold.

Right, because only those above the threshold are.

Getting them.

And that is equal to.

Yeah.

And Q stands for no quota.

It, it, yeah.

Same thing for women.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

With this, we can think about the effect.

Everybody is clear on all this.

With this, we can think about the effect of quota.

Right?

Which reserveup sign of seats for women.

Maybe to make it more yeah.

But then we know exactly what is gonna be the

threshold because the only thing that mattered in the threshold.

What's the number of candidates here.

So what we just have to do is to think

that the threshold with quota, we just have to replace

X by.

And then one minus side by by curing it, right?

So doing the same reasoning, you don't have to redo

it.

We know that.

Mhm.

Yeah OK.

Yeah This is gonna be true.

Which leads to.

Yeah.

Bless you.

Yeah.

OK.

Yeah.

And now we can think about the effect of quotas,

um.

OK.

So for male, it's That's the average quality with quota

minus the average quality.

Without quota.

So that's equal to.

For female during the same operation.

It's gonna be this.

OK, so this is the average quality with quota.

This is the average quality without quota.

When you do the operation, you get this.

And when you do for female, you will see it's

the same thing but you have a minus sign.

So what is the effect of quotas on the average

quality of candidates from each group?

Well, actually, the average quality of male candidate is going

to increase.

The average quality of female candidates is actually going to

decrease with quota, and it makes sense because what is

the quota doing is basically decreasing the threshold for women.

Making it easier for women to run because they are

getting more seats for them.

For men it's making it harder for them to run

because they are having like, you know, less seats to

compete for.

So that's why you have this, right?

Of course Q is supposed to be greater than 1

minus X.

Or rather This is greater than 1 minuscule something right

now more male candidate with them with without quotas than

with quotas, otherwise, what's the point of quotas, right?

With the uniform distribution.

The increase in male candidates.

Is exactly the same as the decrease in female candidates.

As such, the average quality of candidate doesn't change.

What you gain from man, you lose for a moment.

Except that that's not correct.

Don't write this.

That's not correct.

No, no.

That's not correct theoretically.

The worst thing is the first time I've done this

model 2 years ago, I actually made this conclusion.

Then last year, I said that, that seems strange.

There is something that Doesn't work, right?

And indeed.

It's not correct.

And so let's see why.

This is not correct.

We need to do a bit more math to think

about the average quality of candidate in general, right?

And that's kind of nuts if you think about it

because the uniform gives you this nice thing about, you

know, one group gain is exactly offset by the but

on average it's not gonna be the case.

Why is it like this?

So this is the average candidate.

Quality given.

Candidacy in general.

Mhm.

And this is equal to.

By the law of total probability.

Right, so you have the quality of women than the

proportion of women among candidates.

Which is the moment that make it divided by the

number of.

Races Average quality of male and the proportion of male.

That I can which is the melt that makes divided

by.

N The number of races, right, which is constant with

or without quotas.

So that quotas leads the party to run more, we

said there was constant question that.

Now what is this thing?

What is the formula?

Not the final formula.

But what is the formula for conditional expectation?

I remember what is the formula for conditional expectation?

So the formula for conditional expectation.

It's actually the following.

For any distribution.

It is the integral from row F to the upper

part of the distribution of the variable of theta I

times D of F or F theta of small cap

F theta times DI sometimes it's.

To send notation student.

When I was a student, I preferred this one.

The two are exactly equivalent, but somehow when I was

a student I was preferring this one.

Not that I prefer much prefer this one.

It's just like all this changes, right?

So it's basically an expectation is what is the value

of the variable take times the probability that the variable

take this value integrated over all possible values, right?

That's, that's what is an expectation, except that we want

values above rows, so we cut.

We truncate below by row F, right?

So it's for all value between row F and the

upper bound of the distribution, which in no case.

I see about.

The probability of getting this particular value.

Right, so that's what it is, and these two are

the same thing.

Divided by, because we are truncating, divided by that quantity.

Which is the probability that CR is greater than so

recalibrating everything.

So that we take into account that CTI has to

be greater than.

Everybody.

You see, even in a simple framework, you remind yourself

of something.

So that's kind of like what conditional expectation.

Now you can do.

The one for uniform and you get to see that

we get the formula that we usually use.

So in our case, what do we have we have

that the average quality.

It's gonna be.

That's for women I put it up just one second.

And that for me Right, so I've just replaced our

condition and expectation by the formula.

So what do we see that this term and this

term are cancelling out this term and this term are

cancelling out and that's important because if they are not

cancelling out, then we get the fact that they can

out on average.

The fact that the gain from male and the gain

from female can on average if we don't take this

into account, but taking this into account which is not

the case.

So what do we get?

We get it's.

Taking everything that doesn't matter.

This thing Now the integral of X is.

If I integrate X, what do I get?

It's quite divided by 2 indeed, very good.

So what we get here is So now let's think

about the one with quota just because we're gonna try

to find the optimal quotas.

To go a little bit faster you will have to

trust me on this.

That's what is the average quality?

I just replacing that by the value that we found

before.

And now with this, we can think about maximising.

The average quality with respect to Q thinking about finding

the optimal cue.

OK, then maximise average quality.

So this is just taking the first order like on

like the derivative of this, putting it at 0, right?

So this is basically.

To Alpha Theta above.

Yeah, it's gonna be bit more complicated.

We have this minus here and this minus here they

can sell out, so the minus is gonna stay, so

it's 2 coming from the power 4 alpha blah blah

blah blah with the minus.

Now, obviously, We have all seen.

This wonderful factorization happening.

Uh, like it's like it's like in your face showing

itself, right, telling you, oh, I'm here fuck on me.

Right.

And so this as a minus, so this term become

minus the bar, this term become plus, yes.

After doing all this, we get.

Yeah What is the optimal quota?

It's a Right, you have to equal this to 0,

strictly positive, strictly positive, this has to be zero.

It's 0 at Q equal to 10.

It's basically increasing up to Q equal to 1 and

decreasing afterwards.

Why?

Wait a second.

That makes no sense.

We saw That everything that you were.

Losing from women, you are gaining from men, and still

the average quota is one off.

Can we reconcile this bonus point for who gets the

intuition right.

This is correct and the math is correct, and in

fact the intuition makes perfect sense.

Exposed Not necessarily So remember, Every loss in quality of

a female candidate is upset by a loss in is

basically.

Seem to be compensated by an increase in quality by

the same amount of milk.

Still.

As long as you don't have a 50/50.

Among candidate and men, you are losing, you basically are

under Having in terms of average quality, like, you know,

you, you underwhelming average quality of candidates.

How can the two be possible?

How can the two be possible?

Yeah, you're not questioning the fact that the thresholds are

different now.

No, no, no, no, no, that, that is, and I

think you know this model capture a lot of basically

what is happening and this is, this is pretty correct,

I think.

I mean, as a.

formalisation excluding a lot of things.

There's a lot of things entering the threshold, which I'm

kind of shutting down and black boxing, but other than

this, it's approximate.

OK, think about it this way.

Right?

Think about it this way.

So what do we say, for example, right, just like

as an example.

We move, for example, women average quality from 0.9 to

0.8.

Mhm.

And we are moving male quality, let's say from 0.6

to 0.7, just to make an example, right?

So that's the way it's working, right?

I'm moving, this is female quality decreasing from 0.9 to

0.8.

So by an amount of 0.1, male quality increased by

0.6 to 0.7.

But it's clear that this is basically what we have

been talking about, right?

Now, Sure, I've decreased it, but what is happening when

I compare the two groups?

Right?

What I've been doing is that I've removed men that

are between 0.6 and 0.7.

And I've replaced them by then by.

Women that are that are men that are accredited, right,

so what have I done is it's true that the

quality decreased by the same amount in the two groups,

but what you've done in fact is that you are

removing mediocre men.

And replacing them by high higher quality women, and that's

why the average quality increases until you get that one

off.

But if you get above 1 off, what is happening,

you're starting to put in the system more mediocre women

instead of men that are higher quality.

OK, so the substitution that is happening is in both

groups you are in one group you are getting quality,

and other group you are losing quality, and it looks

like it's the same, but in fact, what you are

doing is that you are substituting mediocre male for higher

quality woman, and that's what quotas are doing, and that's

what average quality is going on.

So the way to think about quotas is that it's

gonna have 3 effects.

One is going to increase the average quality of the

male candidate.

With no competition to be selected.

2, it should decrease the average quality of female candidates

unless quotas incentivize women of different quality to run, but

in general it would not.

And 3, it will increase average quality.

The problem is everyone who study quotas is absolutely persuaded

that they have to find a positive effect on every

dimension.

So they are torturing data until the negative effect on

female quality disappear.

But the negative effect on female equality is statistical.

It doesn't mean that women are worse than men.

It's just that women candidate with quotas are worse than

women candidate with a quota, but they are still better

than men on average, and that's what average candidate quantity

increase.

That of course is if we have discrimination to begin

with.

If you put quotas in a system where there is

no discrimination.

Then quota will necessarily decrease average quality.

So in fact, looking at the effect of quotas tell

us something also about the presence of discrimination.

If we see that quota increase average quality of candidates,

that means there was discrimination in the first place, right?

So we can also think about it in this different

way.

So what is the data telling us?

Briefly on this, so this is this paper by Besleo

which is called actually Mediocre Men something something, rightly so,

and so they lose, they look at this deep quota,

right, this part that like if you have a man

first, you need to have a woman second or vice

versa.

At least one woman in the top 3, right?

And so what they look at is, first of all,

The first idea is to say, OK.

It's great to talk about quality and ability, and we

have Swedish data, right?

So we know everything about everyone, how many times per

day they go to the toilet and stuff like this,

like I'm barely exaggerated, right?

So it's good to know all this, but do voters

care about quality first, right?

So that's the first question.

We have made all these things thinking that, you know,

quality increase and stuff like this, but is it something

voters care about?

So what they're gonna do is that they're gonna do

the mint regression, you know, plugging.

As many Uh, control as possible, taking the residual and

thinking that this is a measure of ability, and they're

gonna see whether candidate with higher.

Means of regression is getting more votes, right?

And indeed that's what they find, they find that if

a person is competent, somehow voters are noticing it and

they are noticing it beyond.

Uh, party, so when you put the rank least rank

fixed effect, what you are saying is two candidates in

the same rank that is position one is the one

that is more competent getting more votes, and the answer

is yes.

So we see a lot of the effect of competencies

from parties.

The coefficient decreased dramatically, but still a lot of kind

of like a lot of voters do care about competence

beyond parties.

And this is true for getting re-elected, and this is

true for top rank and, and things like that.

So it's true for cognitive score and and leadership score.

So what about, how do they measure the effect of

female quotas, but what they are gonna do is the

following.

All of Sweden is treated because the the the the

Social democrat implement the zip quotas everywhere.

In uh Sweden, right?

And so you cannot do a different traditionally.

So what they are gonna do, they're gonna use the

fact that in some constituencies.

There was a huge imbalance between men and female, while

in other constituency it was very close to being fifty-fifty

already.

So the constituency were pre-quarter.

There was a huge imbalance, get a huge treatment.

I agree there's a big difference proposed.

The constituency where there was a little bit was already

very balanced, they get a very small treatment.

That is basically a difference and difference with intensity of

treatment.

So rather than deciding who get the pill, you get

7 pills, you get 2, you get 5, etc.

and then you reuse this uh.

Variation in the intensity of the treatment to measure something.

So it is what they find when they do this,

right?

They find that.

The average quality of politicians.

Is slightly increasing post quotas.

Right, slightly.

The average quality of male politician is increasing dramatically, and

the quality of female is slightly decreasing.

And, and then, so this is kind of like what

you get.

So I've tried very hard with municipal trend and stuff

like this to just get a positive effect and kill

the negative effect, but you know this is.

Same thing in all the paper.

Now, I won't talk about the spillover effect of quotas.

It's basically, suppose you put a woman in position of

in the least.

Does this have consequence down the line?

That is, do you, once you have opened the door

for woman, once you have like had them through the

ladder.

If you remove the app, do you go back down

or do women keep on going up?

And what the literature are showing is that actually tends

to benefit women post quota.

So in future, they are, they are more likely to

become leaders, they are more likely to be re-elected even

though they have been elected on the quotas and stuff

like this.

So it seems to be the case that, you know.

Woman, once they are into the system tend to be

able to prove themselves and kind of like keep on

winning election and growing in their political career.

So again some evidence of discrimination is taking place, but

I think more importantly from a political or public policy

perspective, right, is do should we even care.

Right, like sure, probably for women who want to enter

politics, it's important to have quotas, but you know, the

number of people who want to become politicians is right,

who wants to become politician in this industry.

Should I do that and say, what?

Are you crazy?

I don't think many people have the willingness to become

politician, right?

I've seen crazy experiment where people try to encourage women

to be patient.

I'm like, but they they don't want to run in

the first place.

Why do you bother with this type of thing, right?

So sure quotas matter for the people directly affected by

it because that add to the women that want to

become politician, but that's a really, really, really small portion

of the population.

What's more important is, does it matter for representation and

in particular, is it the case that if you elect

or you are maybe forced to elect a female politician,

things are gonna change in terms of policies.

And so you have a very, very famous paper by

the Nobel Prize winner which are Dulo by Duflo and

Muath so not.

Butnery but different really not.

So what they look at is basically whether Female in

power, this is at the village level in India where

some village at some point in time are reserved for

women to run.

So men cannot run, so for sure a woman gets

in power.

Does it change policies?

And so what they do is.

They basically first told women and asked them and men

and asked them what is your priority.

So there are two measures of priority.

One is basically how important is some things for the

population on average, right, like how much they care about.

So in rural India they care a lot about public

goods.

They care about welfare programme and then the rest much

less and also in terms of not only how much

they care about something but whether there is distribution or

conflict, whether a woman cares about something differently than men,

and in particular you can think that you can see

that when it comes to.

Child care men care much less about childcare than women.

Surprise, surprise.

When it comes to and also in Majasthan, when it

comes to the type of public goods, woman cares way

more about drinking water.

Surprise, surprise, that's what you know who is getting the

water on the fountain, that's gonna be the woman.

Men care, they care way more about.

Um, broad improvement, a bit more about how they, they

get less, I think about.

Uh, irrigation and ponds, which is also not surprising because

men tends to be the agricultural worker and things like

that.

So what they can see is when a woman gets

in power, that she puts more effort in what woman

cares about controlling for how much the population cares about

this, right?

And you know, guess what?

The answer is yes.

What is happening is that we see that woman.

Put way more money.

In terms of public good towards the type of good

that woman cares about, right, even controlling for the level

of care that there is in the village, right?

It's not the case that they start to do things

that were neglected.

In fact, in terms of like, you know, there's no

effect of how much people care about something.

What they do really is that rather than doing things

that men care about, they are going to do things

that women cares about.

And what does it tell us?

It tells us that the lack of women into politics

means that half of the population is poorly served by

the population.

That's what it tells us in general.

So that's it.

So this is what we are.

We have women are likely to be discriminated, but it

is less likely to be candidate, as likely to win,

higher quality when you would see why when you look

at the province.

We're gonna, we see that as a way to remedy

discrimination and women will see.

Help women with leadership position which we didn't see but

you can look change politics and if you want to

see what happened when a minority from the tribes or

class gets into power, do we get the same effect

as for women in terms of changing policies?

That's in the bonus light and that's for you to

check.

All right, next week.

How do we kill people in sorry, how do we

work in autocracies, right?

Thinking about competence, loyalty, trade-off, institution in autocracies such as

parliament and censorship.

I see some of you this week.

If you haven't signed for your slot.

Don't forget to do it, right, for the 2nd SME

for the study it concerns.

I have a very good week for those of you

I don't say.

Thank you so much.

I was wondering, I'm sure I read a paper about

this.

I remember there were the people with the effects of.

Yeah, yeah, of course I understand too short.

I the one I know if you know, another one.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Bye-bye.

Thank you.

my application, I opened up to and as long as

I added you as my remainer, they send you the

link.

So, uh, um, I, I plan to discuss this with

you on Wednesday because we have.

So what, what should I do now?

Should I just, uh, package all my materials to directly

or we wait until Wednesday.

Lecture 17:

A lot of mothers.

You prefer teaching autocracy more than democracy?

Yeah.

The problem is this.

Autocracy by nature of less data and that creates like

much more imbalance in the content of the course.

We see very quickly a few papers but none of

them are like amazing, uh, because like so difficult to

identify.

Good data when it comes to autocracy.

So I, I like it because uh I mean, most

of the models are actually pretty common to what we

have seen.

You may not see it, but you know that similar

family except the one we see next week.

So next week, this weekend.

Relaxation, spa.

Massage Because next week lecture as you know, I know

students struggle with it.

It's it's not.

Terribly difficult, but it's very different and therefore it's.

Getting students, making students uncomfortable this week.

Actually, I think that algebraically it's more difficult, but at

the same time it's, it's so we're gonna see a

lot of like.

Interesting tools in our last 4 weeks, right?

So, as I say, when we do autocracies, it's harder

to have data, that's the nature of autocracy.

They are less transparent than democracies.

Therefore, the empirics is less good.

Therefore, we are doing more theory than we are doing

empirical analysis.

There are exceptions to this, but uh there is one

lecture to scrub to fit the other one.

So we are gonna do a few things that are

kind of like complementing our the theoretical training of the

year.

Here, if you remember a very, very, very, very long

time ago when we were all young and fresh in

the year.

We did an infinitely repeated game that was for a

political agency type of things.

We are going to return to infinitely repeated game, but

here we're gonna do something slightly different rather than using

stationary so get perfect Nash equilibrium.

We're gonna use Markov.

Like equilibrium, you're gonna see it in the lecture here

and then your last problem set, which is to solve

for one version of Asimo Blu and Robinson's papers, you

will also have to use Markov perfect equilibrium again, right?

So this is next week, yes.

Next week I said this was very formal.

Someone would knock on the door.

I was like, oh my God, the president of Felisi

is coming to see me teach.

No offence, but you know, I prefer you than the

president of Felicis.

That's on recording, so I'm in trouble.

So, um, next week we will see one of the

most marvellous things that have been invented called the revelation

principle where we are going to be able to say

things without solving for anything, kind of like incredible.

Then after that, we will do a disclosure again and

then finally, we will actually solve a model that is

using probabilistic voting, which you know, I want you to

still have fresh in your mind because chances are that

your exam do have probabilistic voting model.

But if one year doesn't have it the next I

mean.

Some examples are actually two probabilistic voting model that exam,

right?

So no probabilistic voting by heart when you enter the

exam room, right?

There's no trick.

It's not gonna be a principal, uh, revelation principle question

that would be really nasty.

I'm not Francesco Lava who love, but all right, so

what is autocracy?

Well.

When Tolstoy ist on a garden, he says that every

family is happy in the same way and every unhappy

family is unhappy in its own way.

Well, you know, it's a little bit the same when

we think about democracy and autocracy.

Democracy is relatively hard to understand what we talk about.

We're gonna assume that there is free and competitive legislative

elections and that the executive is accountable directly if he's

elected by the citizenry.

Or indirectly if it is elected through the parliament and

any regime that does not satisfy one or two will

be called an autocracy.

So for example, the UK.

As free and competitive legislative election and the executive is

accountable and directly, the US as free and competitive legislative

election kind of and the executive is accountable directly because

there's also election and presidential law, right?

So this is kind of now in autocracy we will

see that there are legislative elections.

And we will think about the role that they play

now what does it mean if we remove free and

competitive legislative election if we remove the executive accountable directly

or indirectly, it means that there is no institutional mechanism

to all leaders accountable.

There's no institutions.

Now, it's important to understand that institutions are not a

necessary condition for accountability.

But rather they are a way to establish accountability rules,

practises, norms in autocracy they will be different because there

is no institution to out for them.

Now why do we study autocracy Now.

20th century was the century of photography.

I went again to that website, and I don't know

why they do it I refused to update it.

So there are different scores, and I tried to look

at the and there's not much to show this.

I should maybe have looked at Freedom House.

So Po5 was a project that was trying to categorise

regime on the score between + 10 and minus 10.

Democracy where regime that we're getting a score above plus

6.

Autocracy is a regime that we're getting a so-called minus

below -6, and everything in between we call a nonmocracy,

and so we don't really know if it's an autocracy

or democracy, it's kind of like in between.

And you know, until 2018, it was kind of like

democracy going up, autocracy going down, of course you have

the fall of USSR that is like the biggest fall

in the number of autocracies in the world and nanocracy

were here, but what has been happening in recent years

and this has been going slightly down, and this has

been going up, right?

It's not really that autocracies have increased, it's much.

Much more this kind of regime that are breeds that

have kind of like increased more and more, yeah, what

are examples of anocracies you would think that allban Hungary

is close to annoys, right?

Um, you would think that Hong Kong, which is not

exactly into the Chinese system, is an example of anocracy,

right, that has been moving down and down in the.

Well, both of them, right, so that would be an

example like this.

A lot of African countries might also feel in this.

Now we want to return a bit to our question

of combined institution and in particular we would like to

understand what is it that we gain or lose if

we live in democracy.

And what is it that is happening, which is, of

course, related to the structured essay that I'm gonna talk

with many of you this way, right?

Another person is that there's very dogenous performance among autocracies.

So this is, for example, this is not changed much.

Democracies tend to be concentrated here.

With relatively low but positive performance, autocracies have a much

wider spread.

Some of them perform very poorly, some of them perform

quite well.

And so we have this, this thing.

Now, this graph is a little bit disingenuous by uh

by the author because it's not the case that There's

a sense of the modernization theory, but let's just say

the development theory that most democracies tend to be developed.

Now, what is the causality here is a very big

question, right?

It's not necessarily that democracy caused more development or more

development cause democracy or both, we don't exactly know.

And therefore very developed countries tend to have relatively low

growth rates because they are what we call the technological

frontier and their growth is triggered by new innovation that

are small.

Autocracies tend to be catching up and tend to have

very, very high growth rates.

So that's kind of like one of like when they

are kind of like functioning well.

So for example, Democracy at enormous growth rate after World

War II because a lot of European democracies were catching

up with the technological frontier that were the US.

China with a set of institutions that is very.

Um, good at incentivizing economic productivity and having incredible growth

rate because they are catching up still today with the

technological fronti.

The closer they get to the frontier, the smaller it's

gonna be the growth rate of China just mechanically, not

region-based stuff, just the mechanical effect of this, right?

So and we can see that China is getting much.

That to the frontier now they produce like electronic vehicle

and stuff like this that are kind of like advanced

technology and and smartphone and things like this right so

this is kind of like let's be careful how we

interpret this.

So it's not really this different and not it's more

the fact that one is very concentrated and one is

very widespread and we like to understand why.

Another thing that we have in democracy in autocracy, right,

as I say that there is no institutional rule, but

it doesn't mean that the autocrat does whatever he wants,

and I say he because with the exception of potentially

Indira Gandhi, all autocrats have been made.

Now, you know, I'm personally I'm a huge believer in

equality of success.

Which means that when there are more female autocrats, they

will be as bad as male autocrats.

Equality works in every direction, not just in good, but

also in bad, right?

So we'll see the next leader of North Korea is

probably gonna be a woman, and I'm pretty sure this

is gonna be as bad as uh the Kim Jong-il,

uh, and, uh, father, etc.

OK, so that's kind of one thing.

Maybe the only.

Exception of unlimited rule, but even then it's complicated might

be study but Stalin might be the only one who

managed to really face extremely little constraint on Israel and

one reason we can do this is because.

When Germany invaded Russia in 1942 for Russia and Barbarossa,

it happens that the Russian secret services knew not only

that there will be an invasion.

They knew the day the invasion will happen and they

knew the time the invasion will happen on that day.

Not only they knew this, but they got the information

from two different sources, one in Japan, one in Berlin.

And while the German army was doing movement close to

the frontier and despite the information that was received, Stalin

said that he did not believe it, that this was

out of sabotage, and that the people that were providing

this information should be shot.

Now it happened that the information was correct to the

minute.

Right, and as a result, when the Germans invaded, they

started really going into the country, right?

This is like they invaded hundreds of kilometres in the

1st 48 hours before the defence of the Soviet Union

could start to put themselves into place, right?

So this was a huge military catastrophe.

Stalin went in the Dutch job that he had like,

you know, for, for, for the elites and were not

to be seen for 24 hours after 24 hours, the

Politburo said well you know it's a bit problematic.

What do we do?

So they went to the Dutcher.

And the knock on the door, OK, this is not

exactly what happens because of course there are servants, people

doing stuff, but let's just make it, you know, a

little bit more Hollywood dramatic style, and they knock on

the door and standing open white and you know, not

really well dressed and stuff like this and studying is

certain that they.

to overthrow him just waiting for the moment where the

guillotine is gonna fall and the first thing that the

member of the Politburo says is Conrad Stalin, what do

we do now?

And then, you know, startin suddenly recover all these scholars

and become again the great leader.

That lead Russia through the Great Patriotic War, etc.

etc.

So even at the lowest point where it was proved

to be completely wrong, Stalin was protected from coup from

it really inner circle, the Politburo that is kind of

like the highest top of the selector.

Now in truth, Soviet Union is a fantastic system.

And Stalin was much smarter than like what this example

suggests I would say based on historical evidence that I

know that Stalin is the politician that has best understood

political agency problems.

He was a genius at political agency problems.

This was incredible.

In fact, there's a book called Subnational orthocracy thinking.

About the relationship between the centre and the region of

USSR and the author of the book that are clearly

not friendly to Stalin are admirative of how he managed

to manage the relationship between Santa and provinces.

It's one of the most interesting politicians you will encounter.

So most of the time going back to our matter,

politician autocrats.

In power leaders face some constraint.

These constraints are the member of the electorate, and this

is a beautiful term.

This is a term coming from Bueno de Moschita and

Smith Berno and mesquita father, not Bueno de Mesquita's son

that will be giving a lecture, uh, in a few

weeks' time.

I'll send an email soon again to remind you about

this.

He called it electorate.

It's great because you know in in democracy we have

electorate.

Everybody can vote in autocracy you have selectorate, only a

select few.

Can be the one deciding the fate of the autocrat

so they impose constraint on autocrat and of course there

is also popular pressure we have seen autocrats being overthrown

by the people, but it is much harder for the

people to overthrow an autocrat than it is for voters

to.

Vote vote out an incumbent at the at an election,

right, so the constraint is much lower.

So that's kind of like the way to think about

it.

Now what I want to do with you is to

see, put yourself in the shoes of an autocrat with

a budget of 100 and think about how you're gonna

divide this budget between different items.

And let's see how you think about it, and if,

if you were an autocrat, you would have a lot

of chance to survive.

It's also to tell you whether you should seek an

autocrat career in becoming autocrats or not.

So I'm sure that Conrad Stin would have been extremely

good at this game, right?

So what we have is a Mani.com, you know it,

you love it, and the code is 76193642.

So first, let's say you know you're unconstrained.

In the sense of this electorate is very weak, nobody

is with you, and you have to allocate between public

good targeted transfer to your group.

So here, let's say we have two groups, it's gonna

be small so we're gonna take the.

MSC in economics versus the non MSC in economics, right,

to make it a bit of a division.

So your group is this, right?

Security services to deal with internal threat and private rents,

you know, to build your mansions.

And try to make it more or less up to

100, right?

It's OK if it's 102 or 3, but doing this.

Yeah.

Mhm.

We're supposed to be 8 playing.

6 7 a.m. No, I went back and I lost

all purpose.

It's OK, don't worry.

Don't worry about it.

I'm just kidding.

OK, now let's suppose that you are in neutrient variant

with a member of your group, right?

So it's easy for us with student, but Your group

is, you know, MSC econ versus non MSC.

I'm priming a certain identity and try to divide the

budget.

This is a Stalin uh.

Pre what would it be 1927 pre-booting out.

So in this case targeted transfer to your group just

means my other two.

Exactly.

Well, if there are more than 2, who, who is

none?

Well, here I think you have only 23 MSC non

MSC equon would be everybody that is non MSC equal

in the class, including those that are out and including

our ghost of this week, right?

So.

Not just like people that are here, not just in

the river.

There's a lot of thinking.

It's not supposed to be, you know, life and I

know now you're like judging yourself, you like, whether you

have a calling to become an autocrat or not, but

still, OK, so.

Then you are with two students from South London Technical

College.

Basically some random institution.

I.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And so the last one is gonna be democracy.

You are the incumbents, right?

I think that the electorate are all the people here.

And also those who vote uh in abstention because they

didn't come today, but all the students of EC 45.

To have a chance to be assassinated uh by my

group.

Well, you know, even Trump got nearly assassinated, so everyone

could be assassinated.

Hopefully not.

Yeah.

Yeah.

OK, so let's see, well, uh, let you do it.

You're very ungenerous with yourself, uh, while someone is completely,

I, someone is really an altruist at heart.

You're not gonna make long in autocracy.

The person who put 0 to yourself as an unconstrained

leader.

You're not gonna make it long.

OK, so you basically split it, very little public good,

a lot of transfer to your group.

And 50 here.

OK, so let's see what happened if now you are

here.

Not much, you basically be have the same a little

bit more transfer to your group, and you.

Some of you really are gonna have trouble surviving.

So here.

Then what is the difference between these two basically?

What was the idea?

The idea was like, here you feel much more secure,

you have some constraints, but these people are kind of

people you know, so you're relatively fine, right?

Here are like much less secure.

I imagine that some of you are like I'm gonna

maximise my income today because we know what happens tomorrow.

Maybe that's the reasoning, but you know I also like

the fact that you basically went up and said I'm

gonna protect myself more thing is that you do less

transfer, less public good, and what happened relative to democracy

then at that point you basically see that.

Corruption goes down, public good goes up.

So we will see all your answer are going to

compare with answers that we have from a model by

John Pareigel.

Now in that model, it's not exactly the same because

we don't have security services.

We're just gonna have private rents, targeted transfer and public

good, right?

And we're gonna think about it and we're gonna see

that.

But it's true that in general there are gonna be

a lot of forces pushing public good up in democracies

versus autocracies.

We're gonna see that private brands can actually have some

forces which is pushing them up as well and why

that is the case.

We will also see that.

Mhm.

Less security of basically, especially the selector rate the people

from the group will allow the autocrat to extract much

more rent from the process and we will see why,

right?

And so the paper is titled The Politics of Fear

and we will see which type of fear is it

talking about in this model, so.

OK, so it's not.

Always easy as a model.

So bear with me and our reason why we're gonna

have some parameters because they allow us to do some

interesting comparative statics down the line, right?

So they're not necessarily intuitive, but this.

We are going to think of a world where not

only there are different groups, but those groups are segregated

across different activities, right?

So think about, let's say Malaysia.

To give an example, you have two groups, you have

the Malay and mostly like uh non-Malay which are Chinese

mostly and a little bit Indians, and Malay were engaged

mostly in production, whereas non-May were engaged mostly in trade,

right?

So there was huge segregation between the two.

Between the two groups, right?

And you have other examples like this of countries where

some groups are really specialised in some activities, other groups

are specialised in other activities.

And we're gonna have a parameter to measure this.

We're gonna assume that.

The leader can tax two activities associated with each group

differently.

So what you cannot do is to tax the group

differently than another, but what you can do is to

give one tax on trade through import tariffs and export

tariffs, for example, and one tax on agriculture or subsidies,

right?

So you can do this type of thing.

The other thing that the leader can do is to

provide targeted benefits.

Benefit that would come to uh The group and not

to the other groups.

So classically again Malaysia is a good example actually because

in Malaysia for the little I know, the Malay were

getting a lot in the bureaucracy like there was really

a programme to target Mali and add them to the

detriment of non-Mali.

Now, we're gonna see that these benefits are actually probably

a curse for the people who get them.

So here are two groups.

There are going to be of size by A and

by B and there are two activities A that at

the beginning of the game is associated with Group A,

B, that is associated with Group B.

And we're gonna say that if you are Group A

and you want to switch to activity B you're gonna

pay a cost for this it's gonna reduce your wage

by this, and that cost will be incurred and that

decision to switch will be made before.

You pay taxes, but after observing what is the tax

rate that has been put forward by the leader, and

so.

You can see where we are group A.

It Coupe is good.

So the size is by A, the size is by

B.

They are good at economy at.

And be as good at activity.

B.

Yeah.

They get.

Why, let's see, let's make our life easier.

It stays.

A and um.

Yeah.

Yeah.

We could have the wage depending on the activity, but

this is not gonna play any role, so that's why

I'm not like a.

Yeah.

You can think of CIA as well as a measure

of discrimination.

And for example, in a very tight community, if you

start to go into the type of work that is

done by other groups, you will do less businesses and

things like this because you will be judged poorly and

have a lot of issues.

So that would be one thing.

So leader, Which at the beginning of the game where

I suppose is a can do two things.

What it is, I mean, that's the same tax you

decide the tax rates.

For activity.

Control.

5TVTA and 5TVTB.

2, you decide.

Yeah Yeah.

Coupe and B Did I write something poorly?

No, I mean, no, 17 week in my handwriting should

have no secret for you.

And he's gonna see.

Yeah.

Give someone for himself.

Basically what he doesn't give a gifts for himself.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Now we can assume, actually I'm gonna make a small

change that the amount of transfer that is being made

has to be greater than some lower bound.

Which could be 0.

Right?

So this is a form of non-discrimination.

Yeah.

Now after doing all this.

The member of the group.

are going to decide.

Whether or not to retain their leader.

And in autocracy if the leader comes from Group A,

only members of group you could think of a selected

member of group A can decide to keep the leader

in place or not.

If it comes from Group B, only members from Group

B can decide whether to keep the leader of that.

And so this is kind of like, what is the

electorate in this world?

He's the member of the same group as the leader.

Yeah.

Yeah.

If they don't overthrow.

What we get we get is policy.

I implemented.

And we move to the next date.

Mhm.

If they were all.

Then two things happen, policies are 0 on every dimension.

Yeah.

And then with probability gamma.

The new leader.

From the group.

First to power.

With probability 1 minus gamma, a new leader.

From The other Group.

That's about Yeah.

So what is happening is, as long as you do

nothing as a electorate, you know that a leader from

your group, the same one is going to be in

power, but if you start to want to do some

overthrow, right, what is going to happen is that you're

going to create some uncertainty and in the uncertainty, it

could be that power or pass to members of the

other group.

Of course, here it's kind of like a global thing,

but we could think about it even differently.

Think about, you know, functions within the Communist Party in

China.

As long as the faction that is beyond Xi Jinping

is happy with Xi Jinping and living in power, they

will remain in power.

But if one day that faction decides to remove Xi

Jinping, it's gonna open a vacuum, and there are chances

that a new faction will get to power.

That is kind of like what happened, of course here

we assume that the leader is safe if the faction

that protects him.

Keeps you in place.

In practise we could also have some probability that change

happened nonetheless.

What matters for the model is that the probability here.

Has to be lower, the probability of change has to

be lower in that case and that case, right?

Just to avoid carrying out too many parameters.

That's why I put the probability of one that the

leader remains in power every period there and probability gamma

here.

May I know what's the word before gamma.

This one.

Probability, I mean it's prob, B R O B.

sorry.

No, no, no, no, no, you're, you have nothing to

be sorry about.

I am sorry for my handwriting.

Yeah.

Again, we do this everywhere, yes.

Isn't the absence of like repression or purchase here making

it too easy for like the who is not the

leader to replace the leader?

So that's a very good point and actually that probably

plays in favour of the model, right?

Because indeed, as you see, there is the leader is

quite weak apparently on paper because if the selector decides

to remove him, he is removed.

No question and there is no way for the leader

to consolidate power.

We will see that in practise.

Like this is more the during practise, it can be

quite strong.

And the key parameter of his strength.

It's gonna be this gamma.

Mm Any other question on this?

OK, so we do this practise this game, I mean

this thing multiple times, right?

So this is kind of like What we Yeah.

Infinitely repeated type of thing.

All right, so let's get the payoff.

This is a bit of a nasty one, so I'm

not gonna write them on the ball, otherwise we're gonna

lose a lot of them.

So, if you are A member of Gue but sent

for group.

You're gonna get some payoff coming from the transfer that

you get, the job in the bureaucracy, the advantages, etc.

With the function concave, if you stay in your sector

where you're good at, you're going to get your wage

minus the tax rate.

If you want to switch sector, you will get the

wage minus the shock on your income that is the

minus the tax rate in the other sector.

For the leader, what he's gonna get is.

From good pay is going to get the income that

comes from this group.

Right, which is, if they all remain in the sector

as they will in equilibrium, that's the tax rate in

this sector, if the switch is the tax rate in

the other sector, minus the transfer that it gives to

this group.

This is a per person transfer in some sense.

And therefore, this group is gonna be this other.

And it's gonna be The size of the group, the

transfer, the toxic extract from this group, which are B

coming from sector B if they don't switch, coming from

sector A if they switch minus the transfer that he

has to give to the member of this group.

And we're gonna get into some factor delta.

So what is happening every period the leader our non-supplier

policy.

The the citizen of group of the same group decide

whether or not to support the leader.

If they don't, the leader is overthrown, no question asked.

If they do, the leader will survive this period.

Economy.

Switching and activities occur if there have been no over,

then it's implemented and the leader move on to the

next.

There have been over, then there is basically a zero

status quo policy implemented.

The leader lose power and then next year you get

the same group in power with probability gamma or a

different group in power with probability 1 minus gamma.

And so there's a possibility of alternate in power at

this moment.

Any question on the cat?

Can you explain 4 again?

Sorry, for B, yes, so if the leader is over

phone, two things happen.

One, there's a status quo policy that is implemented.

Second, this is, you can write it like this, with

probability gamma.

A new leader from the same group goes to power

who's probably one man is gamma a leader from the

other group gets to power, right, so the group lose

power in this case so that's what it's saying.

Any other question?

So here we have an infinitely repeated game, right.

And we know that we don't like infinitely repeat again.

There are too many equilibria, and we like to restrict

the number of equilibria we cannot.

So the way it's done in this type of game

is to think about the mark of perfect equilibrium.

We cannot use stationary because not everything is the same,

right?

There's difference between one group and the next and things

like this.

So we cannot use stationary.

We have to use something that is lack stationary, but

adapted to the situation we have, and the one we

have is called Markov perfect equilibrium.

So Markov perfect equilibrium is exactly like stationary equilibrium with

a twist.

It's not exactly like what I should say resembles stationary

equilibrium with a twist.

So what is the twist?

So in stationary actors play the same strategy every period

that's what what we are in Markov perfect equilibrium, you

will define some state viable.

So basically the important component of the game and what

is going to happen is that conditional on the states

variable being the same players play the same strategy and

so if the, if you get the same state viable

it's always the same strategy.

If you change the viable then it's always the same

strategy with that.

Variable is that value of the viable settlement.

So the important thing when we do Markov perfect equilibrium

is to identify what is the state variable in the

model, right?

So we're gonna do it here when we do as

the Robinson in a few in few weeks, we will

also, I will tell you what the state variable is.

I will not solve the game.

Because you do your problem side, but at least we

will talk about what the state variable is in this.

So what is the state variable in that game?

What is that player should condition the strategy on?

What is the state variable?

What can be changing basically?

It's very good.

So that's an excellent point.

One thing that is important is to make sure not

to confuse, and it's not easy, parameter values of the

game that never change, right, with something that can be

changing.

No, but it's amazing because you don't even imagine every

year.

Everyone makes the same mistake, and then you're the one

that had the courage to say it, but I'm pretty

sure that in that room, almost everybody had the same

idea.

So we have to not take a parameter of the

game.

parameter of the game do not change, so it has

to be something that changes.

And then affect strategy every period.

So something that is chosen every period in some sense,

yeah, the amount of the very good.

So that's another one that cannot be a state valuable.

Why?

Because this is a choice valuable if we pay it,

right?

So you cannot really condition, so that's gonna be a

strategy.

There's gonna be one of the strategy that is conditioned

on the state viable.

Um, the, um, the first group that they're activity that

they're doing that I'm Group A, so in the first

period I'm in activity A, so that choice is your

therapy because that was decided in the previous period.

Very good.

So sorry, that, that's also because it's my fault.

You can see that that choice of economic switching is

done every period.

Every period they start in their own activity.

But that's my fault for not saying it.

Otherwise this would be a state viable if switching was

forever.

If once you switch then you cannot go back, that

would be exactly a state viable, will not be the

only one, but it would be one of them, so

you would have identified one, right?

So, or if there was no reset actually it could

also be a survival.

But no, this is, in this case, we're gonna make

our life easier, we're gonna assume that as we say.

The revenue from his own group.

Again, that's a choice.

I mean, it's also switching a little bit so it's

related.

But you're getting it, you think about group, it's good.

It's very normal to have trouble identifying state viable when

you do a Markov perfect equilibrium at the beginning, right?

And you're also gonna have trouble when we do amolo

and Robinson.

The only way you really become good at Markov perfect

equilibrium by doing it really a lot of times, right?

So.

No worries that we have trouble here, right?

This is like this is normal process and some saying

in week 21, it will also be hard.

What is, what does the dealer, how much to tax?

Yeah, but all these decisions are prepared and they are

gonna be affected by the state variable.

Can you repeat the definition of a state variable again?

Yeah, it's gonna be something that can switch but what

matters is that variable every strategy would be conditional on

the value of that variable and so if the state

variable takes one.

and we remain at this particular value.

The strategy is always the same.

If you switch to another value, the strategy will be

different and will be only the same as long as

the state valuable remain of that value.

The outcome is going to be every day.

You are thinking too narrow, but it's normal because this

game is actually not the easiest one to identify that

viable, right?

So, Suppose that someone from Group A is in power,

someone from who doesn't have to be the same person,

but someone from Group A is in power, and should

we think that the strategy of the leader will be

the same as long as the group is in power.

Yes, it will be the same.

Now let's suppose we have a change and someone from

group B is in power.

Is the strategy of the group B leader going to

be the same, whoever this leader is.

It will also be the same, right?

So the state bible in this case is what is

the group identity of the leader.

Once we have this, the strategy will always be the

same.

It's not the leader that matters, but really which group

he is from.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So what we're going to do after the break, we're

going to do a 5 minute break, is that we're

going to think about an equilibrium where there's not going

to be overthrowing by this electorate.

And so we're going to focus on an equilibrium where

if A leader is in power, it will stay in

power forever and that's the equilibrium we will focus on.

But of course we have to consider, as you know,

a possibility what will happen if you were to be

overthrown because that's gonna impose constraints of money can do.

And that's gonna be kind of like what we do

after the break.

So let's do It's by.

We want to build an equilibrium where there's never overthrowing,

right?

It doesn't mean that there's complete freedom for the leader,

but at least he knows that like every player, he

will stay in power.

The first thing we have to think about is Is

it good or bad for the leader to have economic

switching?

Does the leader like to encourage economic switching or does

the leader prefer every group to stay within the kind

of like economic range?

What do you think?

What's the best for the leader to encourage economic switching

or to keep groups in their own activity?

Yeah.

OK, let's, let's think about it a certain slightly different

way.

Mhm Let's suppose that the leader is from Group A

to begin with.

It's easier.

What's gonna be.

A constraints.

On Group A.

And the leader from Google.

What is he gonna do?

So what is this problem?

He's gonna choose taxation and transfer.

In order to do what?

In order to ensure that the members from Group A

would rather stick with him than replace him and I

say him again because really autocrats are males, right, him

with someone from at least.

Take a chance at getting someone from the other group,

right?

So overthrow him with the risk of group pay losing

power, right, so that's gonna be the biggest problem for

me.

So we're gonna start with leader.

And we seem to have an equilibrium with no over.

So what is the constraint?

The constraint must be.

Group members.

Prefer.

To keep Neither.

Then overthrow.

He Right.

So we have to see this is gonna be, what

do we call this type of restriction on what the

autocrat can do.

It's called the participation.

Pretty good.

The policy question control is when you enter a game,

you decide you can put yourself out.

So if it's not a participation, was it the other

one?

The incentive compatibility.

Yeah, you want, you have one chance out of two.

Pretty good, but this is the incentive compatibility constraint, yes.

So what is gonna happen if they are here?

So if they skip the leader, they have to decide.

We that to stay in the same activity.

How to switch Mhm.

They are gonna receive.

Some private transfers.

Yeah.

And then we're gonna move to the future.

And in the future, because they don't have the leader,

they will get a continuation value for Group A with

A being in power, right?

This is basically the continuation that we have in stationary

again.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Now that has to be greater than overthrowing the leader,

in which case the policy is zero, so they get

their wage.

Yeah.

Now the problem is if they do this with poverty

Gamma, they get someone from their group.

Who is poverty minus gamma they get someone from the

other group and we have to basically put it like

this Group A1B is in power.

Yeah.

All right.

So when we look at this, right?

Is it gonna be easier to satisfy this inequality when

there is switching or when there is no switching?

So switching is no switching is Z equal 1 that

stays in the domain.

I think actually it's a reverse in the way Z

is sorry, keep consistency.

Switching is Z equals 1, no switching is Z equals

0.

So what is it better?

What, what is, when is the member of Group A

up here?

not switching, right, because they don't have to pay this

theta, right?

So when we think about this constraint on the autocrat,

it's easier to satisfy it if there's no switching.

OK.

Mhm.

And so that has two implications it has to be,

so this become.

But it also implies that what they get from staying

in sector A is greater than what they get from

moving to sector B, so it should be.

Or in other words, Mm.

Yeah.

Now once we know that there is no switching, we

can see.

Right, that the tax on activity is gonna be effective,

is gonna be constrained by this incentive compatibility constraint.

However, the tax on activityB does not enter here, but

it doesn't affect the incentive compatibility constraints here for the

money.

All right.

Only a matters.

So what the other court wants to do is to

basically maximise the tax rate on activity B.

However, there's a problem that is the autocrat, given that

it maximise the tax rate.

Will not want members from Group B to switch because

if they switch they will go on the tax rate

for activ ETA that is necessarily constrained and so it's

not good for the autocrat, right?

So what we can see from this is that tax

rates.

MyTBTA is constrained, let's call it by the IC, whereas

on the other hand the IC does not depend on

the tax rate on B.

Which means that the leader from Group A wants to

maximise the tax rate on B without inducing switching that

will lead to a loss of revenue because they will

all be back to this lower tax rate.

Right, because one on B you could do whatever you

want on A, you are constrained by the fact that

you have to satisfy thisciive constraint.

So what this means is to avoid switching, it has

to be that.

So he pushed up the tax rate as much as

he can up to the point where.

Yeah, avoid switching.

So the switching exert a constraint of a much tax

rate you can extract from good.

So with this, we can think about the problem of

our decision of our leader.

So it's problem is gonna be to maximise his per

payer utility.

Which is Yeah.

The revenue he gets from group A, knowing that there

is no switching, so we know they are going to

choose AA they're gonna stay in activity A.

Plus what he gets from group B we're gonna stay

in the activity be such that it stays in power,

so.

Yeah.

Mhm.

That's the IC of the group member.

Mhm.

Yeah.

The second constraint is.

No switching.

From the member of Group A.

The third constraint is not switching from the number of

group B.

The 3rd that we have said is that.

Transfer needs to be greater to some lower bound institutional

constraint.

Now, which one of these two talks right is gonna

be the biggest?

The one on activity or the one on activity B

B, right?

So that means that that's not gonna be a that's

not gonna be binding right if you are if we

know that activity B is tax more and then you

add something is strictly greater than this, right?

So that one is.

not binding for sure.

What about this one?

Is the other card or we're ever gonna choose something

less for B than the upper bound in the tax

rate?

No, so they will always maximise it.

So this one is gonna be binding.

This.

For sure we're gonna get that.

This is gonna be true because you get nothing from

giving transfer to Group B, so you will always give

to Group B the minimum possible.

And what about the IC?

How is the IC going to be determined?

Is it going to be binding or not binding?

If you are an autocrat, are you going to give

more than it strictly necessary to stay in power?

Are you just going to give what is absolutely necessary,

just really the bare minimum to stay in power.

So what does it mean in formal terms that something

is the bare minimum is the constraint is binding, right?

So that is also to be binding.

And so with this we have almost solved the problem

almost because.

We know what is 2 AB.

We know what is a AB.

We just have two things to solve, but we also

know this constraint is going to be binding and therefore

we can do a substitution in it for one of

the two constraints and we just have a maximisation problem

with one variable.

So let's rewrite the problem and we will do the

substitution we have.

Choosing to AA and AAA of No, so I don't

know why I I got very excited of doing a

division.

Yeah.

Right, because that's 2AB it's 2 A plus T top.

Yeah.

And that's the minimum that is given to group B

to the minimum puzzle.

You can put it to zero if you don't want

to carry out this parameter.

I'm just keeping it as a Way to uh make

compari and later on between autocracy and democracies and then

we have kind of like one constraint left.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Mhm.

Is that?

Now, what we can do is to replace story here

by what is here, right?

We can say that.

So A is equal to.

Right, moving it on this side, the arm, the wedge

cancel each other.

Here and here.

The other thing is we're going to bring this on

this side, so we're gonna get beta VA minus delta

delta gamma VA, so it's gonna be 1 minus gamma

VA minus 1 minus gamma here.

How do we know the value of A and VB?

For the moment we don't, we do do a very

good question.

For the moment we don't, right?

But two things are one, we assume existence, which is

fine because we will show that there is existence.

The third thing that is important for us is that

that is not.

Affected by this period choices, it's all in the future.

So from the perspective that today it's a constant, that's

gonna be great for us, right?

So that's gonna disappear in this, but then we're gonna,

of course, play with this.

One second, here we are just thinking about the period

T and then we will think about solving everything.

Alright, so now we can basically do the plugin.

Now that's so good.

If you do not mind trusting me.

It's gonna be this thing.

So the reason here is that we have 5 A

plus 1 minus 5 A.

So this is gonna become just to A and then

I'm just making the substitution.

And so what we have is this thing.

Minus a A plus some term that is constant plus

some term that is the future but the future is

your decision today do not affect the future.

That's what the markoff is giving you but every payer

is independent as long as the state viable citizen.

So we take the first set of condition and what

we get is.

This thing.

That's how you define the transfers.

And then we need, we know that.

This is just rewriting the IC constraint which is putting

the equilibrium value here which is left undefined.

Bless this thing.

Now we are not done.

Because as was rightly said, we don't have the continuation

value yet.

However, in this particular game, what do we know about

the continuation values?

OK, so if a leader from Gure is in power,

what's gonna happen to this leader?

It's stay in power forever, right?

We're assuming that there is no overthrowing and stuff like

this.

So what is the continuation value.

Yeah, well, if you are the leader from Group A,

right, you start with it in the player.

What are you gonna get?

Well, you're gonna get your wedge minus the thoughts.

Plus the transfer.

And then what is going to happen next period?

The same thing so we can put no stationary mark

of perfect it's really groundhog day, right?

It's like.

Basically this kind of like movies where you get in

a special loop is always the same day again and

again and again same thing today you start the day

like this, you're gonna get your wedge, but it's gonna

be taxed, you're gonna get some transfer and tomorrow you're

gonna leave the same day, so you're gonna be back

at this point.

We have done the same trick if you remember I

remembering it's been so long that I completely understand if

you don't, but if you were to dig deeply in

your memory of your youth when it comes to political

economy, you will see we have done the same trick

for stationary equilibrium.

So what we have is VAA is equal to Yeah,

with the what we did in a that.

The emission value depends on a, which is kind of

our state variable.

Yeah, now we have to think about the one on

B, right?

We are not done because indeed compared to what we've

done, we will be done with the stationary here because

the A will always be the case and we will

just have the same continuation value.

As you see, very good point, we have two continuation

values and they are each dependent on the state value

but so that's kind of like the one we have

as well we need to think about it as well.

So we also need to find the continuation value in

the other case, you know, we need to think about

what happened out of equilibrium path if there was a

change of leader, exactly that is not something we do

in stationary, but you have to do in Markoff.

So if you are in the.

The case what is gonna be your life?

Why you're gonna not switch because the model is symmetric,

right?

If a leader from Group B arrived, they will not

want to do things to you.

You will not switch.

You will get your activity being tagged by the leader

by Group T.

You're gonna get the minimum transfer available.

That can be given.

And then what happened tomorrow?

The same thing your day we start.

It's really boring to be uh a player in a

Markov perfect equilibrium, never get stuck in a mark of

perfect equilibrium.

So what do we get?

We can even go further.

And said that this is This thing, why?

Because we know that you're gonna be taxed to the

maximum without switching.

Now using all the symmetry of the game, we will

see not symmetry but symmetry of the game BB will

be equal to i B.

The first one minus 5 A and on top of

this.

OK.

right for the I see constraint in the case of

a leader from Group B for the member of group

B is that the tax rate has to be equal

to the transfer plus the difference between what they will

get when they get the leader from Group B minus

what they get when they get the leader from Group

A.

Plus the risk of changing in the future, and the

risk of changing.

So if we do all these boring stuff, right, so

now basically what you will do next, you will find

these two doing the same thing and then you will

solve for everything it's very boring.

So what we're gonna do is that we're gonna assume

that we have done it.

And we can see that after doing some actually I

can show it to you.

That's easy.

So what we can do is we can do this

is a star is row of a star plus delta

1 minus gamma.

You were VAA it's omega minus 2 plus.

Minus omega minus to B minus theta plus of this

limit.

Is that right?

What I've done is just replaced this is the VAA

and this is the VAB.

very clear it's just the replacement that I've done.

This was coming from the ASA.

So now we're gonna multiply everything by 1 minus delta.

We're noting that the W is dropping because you always

get it.

OK.

so this is becoming plus.

OK.

Then we're gonna put all the two A star together.

So this is bringing this term on the other side.

We're gonna put all the stuff together.

And then we will have the reiter.

Now if you look, this is 1 minus beta gamma.

This is 1 minus beta gamma.

And so what we get is This.

Then we know that it's gonna be just a symmetric

thing, so we just replace all the way by this.

Just replacing.

Every time you have an A here you replaced by

a B.

Every time you have a B, you're replaced by an

A, and that's what you get for B.

And then that is a very easy system of two

equations to solve.

OK, so what do we learn from this man?

Some bad mouth will say nothing, but we are gonna

try to be, you know, a bit more positive than

this.

What is this?

This is actually the cost of financing transfers.

To Group A.

And you can think of this as really the cost

of financing transfers to Group A.

This as a result, is the surplus that the autocrat

is getting.

OK?

This is basically what needs to be taxed to finance

targeted transfers.

This is in some sense the surplus that the autocrat

is getting.

You can think about it this way.

Actually, maybe better than thinking, so this is the RARASR

is the utility gain.

This is what you contribute to the to the electorate,

but this is what you give to the electorate, and

that part.

Is the surplus.

For the leader That's basically what the leader managed to

extract on top of what it has to give to

this electorate.

Is that clear that this is really these two components

here?

And indeed you can see, so where does this surplus

come from?

But even deeper than this in some sense.

What does this represent?

Who loses first?

Who are we talking about here?

This is electorate because, right, but where does this power

come from?

Um, giving in the taxes they have to pay to

whom to him?

No, because this surplus, right?

Doesn't have air in it, right?

This is the surplus that the autocrat can extract from

the electorate, right?

It doesn't have a in it.

What does it have as a letter?

It has B in it.

So where does this surplus come from?

OK From the other group doing what or being what?

huh?

It's not survive because think about what does this tells

you.

It tells you that this is a tax rate chosen

by a leader from which group?

The other group, this is kind of like the transfer

that you will get from the other group.

So what is this?

What is this surplus coming from?

It's not coming from Group A being in power.

It's coming from.

No, no, yeah.

It's coming from Group A not being in power.

This is basically the utility costs for the electorate of

Group A to have to lose power to Group B.

They will receive a higher tax rate that would be

only moderately compensated by.

Some little transfers.

So what is this?

That's the utility cost of getting Group B to become.

The electorates.

Mhm.

And that's the utility comes from, it's very clear that

this comes from Group B.

You can see it with these letters here.

This is very important, right?

It's Group B, it's a leader of Group B choosing

the tax rate, and this is, if you remember.

How much someone from Group B will give to Group

A, just a minimum possible.

OK, so it's basically what this is the fear of

losing power in the sense of selector power in favour

of Group B.

Yeah.

So the surplus that the autoroir can extract from comes

from the fear of losing power in the other group

to the other group, right?

That's what the surplus can explain, can happen.

OK, let's suppose just to make things a little bit

clearer, it doesn't really matter, but OK, so this is

kind of the U loss and this is kind of

like something else, right?

In particular, it is a function of gamma, this thing.

Bye.

This thing you can check is decreasing.

With gamma if I made a mistake.

Yeah.

Yeah, it should be.

OK.

OK.

Yes, yes, this is decreasing with gamma, so I just

like somehow my mind was like making a statement that

I was not solving has got me pumped a little

bit, you know, old old version of computers and you

do new version would be better.

AI master, right?

So this is decreasing with gamma.

So what does it mean?

I mean this cost that I'm paying.

I fear it less when gamma is up.

Mhm.

OK, so that means that the surplus that the autocrat

is able to extract is decreasing with gamma.

In fact, you could also show that BB star is

decreasing with gamma.

Yeah.

I said the higher is gamma.

The less the autocrat can.

Extract.

Why is that?

So let's go back to where does the surplus come

from.

The surplus comes from the cost of getting Group B

in power as a selector rather than Group A.

That's where the surplus come from.

That's the utility loss in some sense.

However, Right.

Why will you, if you overthrow the leader.

When will you experience group being in power?

When are you likely to experience group being in power?

What is the probability that the change of power happened?

minus gamma, right?

So what does it mean that gamma is large?

It means that when you oversre the leader.

The chances that you get to be to remain in

power and control the next player is very, very large,

which means that you are not afraid to put constraints

on the autocrats because there's not much chance that you

will lose power and will be within power.

And the other one when gamma is very low.

If you start to overthrow the leader, the chance that

you remain in power and ex explained are very, very.

Small, which means that the leader says, you know what?

I know you're scared, and I know that without me.

The regime is done and therefore I'm gonna extract a

lot from this.

So what is going on in this model, models that

have an entrenched selectorate should have very little rent extraction.

What is an example of a model with an entrenched

selectorate?

In the world today.

Come on, you should know it.

Like some of you I've experienced it for many years.

So the CCP is an entrenched electorate.

They've been managing to be in power for what now,

almost 80 years, 79, right, right.

So the 79 years they have entrenched themselves.

They know that if they remove the leader, it's very

unlikely they're gonna lose power to some other parties or

to democracy or whatever.

Therefore, the leader of the communist party has a lot

of constraint on the election.

On the other hand, gamma is low.

That's what is called personalistic regime.

Personalistic regime of the form of what was happening in

the Philippines where when they overthrew the regime, they opened

the villa and you know, the wife of the regime

leader had 2000 pair of shoes of, you know, highly

expensive designer pair of shoes and stuff like that.

In this type of regime where as soon as the

leader disappear, the regime collapse, the leader will be able

to extract a lot of it.

So if you are always, you know, member of PC

453.

All members of London Technical College and stuff like this,

you know, if you think that You have to think

about whether or not the regime will survive without or

without you.

So if you're unconstrained, which means that, you know, people

will, without you, the regime dies, then basically that's the

moment you should really extract as much rent as possible,

right?

Whereas if you are like in something where they.

Lecture 18:

So.

We now go toward institutions in autocracies, OK, so.

Last week.

We try to make a distinction between autocracies and democracies,

OK.

And the idea was that in democracy, the electorate is

the principle, OK.

And we have regular context for power in the form

of elections, right?

So free election every 456 or 7 years depending on

the country.

In autocracy, most of the cities that are not.

Able to hold the other code accountable.

It's rather the selector rate and the context is triggered

by the selector right by overthrowing the dictator, the selector

rate increased dramatically the chances of getting a change in

power.

So there is kind of like this notion that is

similar, however, you know, with the different with one difference

being here it's institutionally established, here it's equilibrium behaviour that

determine whether we will have context for context for power.

There are also similarities between democracy and autocracies, in particular,

In both setting we have institutions such as parliament, parties,

election, media.

If you look at like, you know, even North Korea

as a parliament as one party as elections with, you

know, sometimes two candidates, both from the same party and

as media in fact apparently they were showing the Premier

League football from time to time on North Korean TV.

We kind of like, you know, some games of 2

years ago, followed by the game of like the last

weekend, so a bit of a mess, and of course

not showing any team that has any South Korean player

in it.

So one thing we want to understand is when we

look at institutions, do they have the same role in

autocracies and in democracies, or do they play a distinct

role, right?

And if they played the stake role, what is the

role that they played in autocracy that make it different

than the role that they play in democracies?

So this is what we are gonna study over the

next two weeks, right?

We are gonna start today with.

What I should probably not have said was a hard

model in order to max up attendance, but you know,

I don't even think it's hard.

I just think it's different than what we have seen

and that makes it difficult.

Then we will play with like all the type of

models and they will be much more kind of like

similar to some of the things we have seen a

little bit, at least during your problems, OK.

So first let me convince you that this type of

questions are important, right?

So one thing to do so is, you know, not

to take my word for it, right, but to look

at the evolution of the number of parties in autocracies.

So.

You always have like something basically around 20%, 17% where

parties are banned, you used to have.

Something like 25%, 40% or 50% where there was a

single party then the fall of USSR happens, right?

And now you are a vast majority of photography that

are actually multi parties, right?

So autocracy is not synonymous with single party.

Of course this is not population weighted because if we

were to population weighted, China would dramatically increase the number

of single parties autocracies, right, just because of the mass

of inhabitants, but in terms of countries, China is almost

an applied.

Right?

It's not like the main type of autocracy is that

there is a rent.

There's also more and more.

Countries that have legislatures, right?

Of course, most legislators.

Are either unelected or you know one party is extremely

dominant, right?

Indeed there are only 20% of legislators where we have

less than 75% of the vote share controlled by one

party.

And the nonpartisan legislator, though again we can see an

increase in the number of competitive legislators, right, so both

we see an increase in the number of parties, but

we also see that there's quite a bit of regime

that are parliament, right?

Obviously less than 75% means still more than 50%.

It's not like, you know, that the other quarter is

like, oh, opposition, just do your thing, right?

It's like.

Still in control but allowing for good representation of the

opposition.

And when it comes to media, right, this is the

democracy, average democratic scores here, and this is the average

median score, media score over like a certain period of

time, of course, there is clearly.

Clearly a positive correlation between democracy and media freedom, no

doubt about this, but it's not the case, so autocracies

really start over here and think about the minus 5

as being autocracy is pure autocracy.

It's not the case that all autocracies.

Are having a media score of 0.

There is some amount of variation in terms of media

freedom.

I mean there is some little piece of information that

trickle down through the media in autocracies.

And so we also want to understand.

So what we're gonna do in this lecture is we're

gonna try to understand first why is there a parliament.

Second, why it's very rare that we have pure censorship

only, you know, PRK, People's Republic of Korea, so North

Korea.

And maybe MMR, what is MMR?

It's good at uh country names abbreviation.

Anyone has an idea?

Myanmar, right?

Only these two countries really and Cuba maybe are having

like very like, you know, almost complete censorship.

So that's what we want to try to understand and

of course by understanding this, we will understand the role

that they play in autocracies, which is of our metro.

OK, so we're gonna do parliament.

And to do parliament, we're gonna use a model by

Roger Myerson.

So, A point that was raised I think last week,

a very good point that was raised last week, unfortunately,

I'm sorry not to remember by who was that while

sure the autocrat has needs this electorate to stay in

power, right?

But the autocrat should also have an incentive.

To kind of like restructure this electorate to its advantage,

decrease it, you know, put people that are more li

and things like this in the industry, and indeed, you

know we have.

Uh, video recording of a real life example of a

reshaping of the selector and I really encourage you to

click on the link.

Hopefully it's still it's not broken because this is a

BBC video and this is Saddam Hussein and the Baath

Party in 1979.

So there's a congress of the Baath Party in 1979,

right?

And what happened is that Saddam Hussein closed the door

and then someone speaker goes in the podium and start

to basically say there is a plot against our dear

leader Saddam.

And I'm gonna give you the name of the traitor,

and he start in front of everybody to mention names

says uh Abdulaiaridum.

I don't know put it, you know, I try, and

you have like, you know, military police who comes.

You come with me.

Exactly, you know, exactly.

You do very well, you do very well.

Right?

So you have this kind of like things happening and

they do this and and Saddam just sit there, you

know, and he kind of like light up his cigar

and he smoked his cigar as the purge is going

on, right.

And at someone, the most incredible thing is that someone

is so Iraq is so there's many people, there's tension.

Saddam is kind of getting a bit sweaty and he

takes his tissues and he starts to wipe his kind

of forefront with his tissue and then you have.

Many people in the audience would take that tissue at

the same moment and start to wipe the forefront with

the tissue, right?

So you have like this form of mimicking happening.

So it's a very impressive video and it was filmed.

So we do have the workout of this, right?

Now in practise this is one of the rare case

where indeed we do see the purge happening like in

front of our eyes, right?

In general purge are actually quite secret.

The way this electorate is being reshaped is quite secret.

And that means that the electorate itself fearing that they

may be urge become less willing to support the autocrat

and that is a form of credibility problem for the

autocrat, right?

The fact that the autocrat can't behind the back of

everyone reshape its electorate coalition can lead everybody.

To feel less willing to support the the autocrat and

we will see that institutions like parliament that in the

view of Myerson served as a way a bit like

in the case of the Ba'ath Party but to publicise

when some people of this electorate have been removed will.

While controlling applying to constrain the autocrat actually benefit the

autocrat, that is they will solve partially the autocrat credibility

problem in a way that will allow the autocrat to

be better off, right?

So the institution that is meant to constrain the autocrat

actually benefit the autocrat, right?

So that's kind of like the point of the mess.

So to do this.

We are not, we are not, so the way it's

gonna work is, let me just give you a bit

of the idea of the model.

The way it's gonna work is that the autocrat is

gonna decide the size of the electorate, the number of

people that belong to the electorate, right?

And this size of the electorate, the number of people

that belong to it must be incentive compatible for the

autograph.

In which sense does it have to be incentive compatible?

It has to be the case that the autocrat doesn't

want to purge members of this electorate, right?

so that everyone who is in it knows that they

are secure knowing that they are secure, they can protect

the autocrat in case there is a challenge to the

autocrat, right?

So.

That's kind of like the idea uh that is right,

so do you choose a size and it has to

be the size has to be such that you do

not want as an autocrat to purge this electrode.

You want to maintain as it is.

It's in some sense an equilibrium size of this electorate.

We are going to see that by allowing parliament that

serve as a revelation of information in some sense, the

autocrat is gonna be able to choose a different size

with parliament and, and the size that the autocrat choose

with the parliament is first weekly higher.

And weekly better for the autocrat.

Right, so that's kind of like the third thing we're

gonna and where the magic.

Of the genius of Roger Mayerson is going to happen

is that we are never going to know what is

actually the optimal size of this electorate with or without

parliament.

We're not gonna be able to say anything.

But despite not knowing what is the equilibrium size, we

are going to be able to say the size of

the sector with parliament is weekly greater and the autocrat

is weekly better.

In most cases it would be actually.

strictly greater and the autocrat would be strictly better.

This is pure magic.

It's almost magic to the level of cheap talk.

It's probably the so most magical thing we see in

this year together, right, because we don't solve for this,

and despite this we can't say what are we gonna,

how are we gonna do this?

We are basically gonna apply the logic.

Of something called the revelation principle.

So the revelation principle, which has been very much in

use in the 1990s and 2000 and it's becoming again

very much in use because a lot of problem of

information design.

Being solved exactly the same way as the revolution principle

was kind of like invented by Myerson and some other

um theories, and he got and the other theorist within

got the Nobel Prize for this, right?

So what is the basic idea of the revelation principle?

So, suppose, right?

That let's give it in the context that is kind

of like easy.

Suppose that I am.

A seller of a good, let's just say this beautiful

pen.

Very valuable has been used to solve many problems in

EC 453.

Really a definite memorialia of your yearly, right?

So I'm the seller of this space.

And I like to, you know, and you are potential

buyers.

My problem is I do not know how much you

value this pay, but what is the valuation that in

your mind you are for this?

I know that in fact in truth it's infinite for

all of you, but you know, in principle I do

not know the valuation of this thing, right.

And the question is, what I would like to do

is to be able to recover this valuation, to be

kind of like making the maximum profit out of the

side of my pen, right?

So we can come up, I can come up.

With one kind of like process to get the information

from you to try to get the information from you,

right?

One example would be cheap talk.

I tell you, tell me how much you value this

pen, right?

Of course that's a stupid process.

It would not work well, but like that would be

something, right?

Another one could be, you know, um.

You can think about this and then you know, I

will give the pain to the person that give me

the highest valuation, and they will pay the valuation that

they have told me, right?

So that would be something kind of stupid to do

so, but you know, this would be one way.

And with this type of like process where I try

to elicit the information is called a mechanism, right?

a mechanism by which I'm trying to get as much

information about how much you value this pain as possible.

Problem is I can come up with one mechanism.

You can come up with a mechanism, you can come

up with a mechanism.

The workers outside can come up with everyone can come

up with a mechanism.

Indeed.

The number of mechanisms that exists in the world is

infinite.

There's no limit to the number of mechanisms that exists,

so how do we do?

Well, what my son and colleagues found is that you

could with the help of simple inequality, determine what the

best mechanism will give you.

So in some sense what Meyerson gives us with the

revelation principle is.

The frontier of efficiency.

So what Meyerson is doing is this this is why

it's incredible is transforming an infinitely dimensional problem into basically

a very simple maximisation problem.

The limit of what Meyerson and colleagues are doing is

that it doesn't tell you what the best mechanism is,

but it can tell you far or close, you will

be from the best mechanism.

So what have been application of this concept?

So for example, everyone knows about first price auction.

Right, first price auction is you bid your like you

pay your bid.

Everybody knows about second price auction.

Second price auction is where you don't pay your bid,

but you pay the bid of the next highest bidder,

right?

Well, thanks to the revelation principle, we know.

We have the revelation we have the revenue equivalence theorem

that is that if I use a first price auction

or a second price auction, I'll get the same revenue

from my pen.

Another thing that we know is that for example, if

I wanted to sell my pen with an auction, the

best thing I.

To do is not just it's not a first price

auction or also price option but is to do a

first price auction with reserve price, right, and I accept

that from time to time I will not be able

to sell my bank, right?

So sometimes failures to sell is actually great evidence of

optimality.

Another beautiful theorem is called the Mayerson Satawa theorem, right.

And let's say we are the two of us and

we still We are now in exclusive relationship for the

pen, and exclusive kind of bargaining for the pet, right?

So you have a private valuation for this pen that

I don't know.

I don't know how much you value it.

The problem is I also.

A private valuation for my pen.

I kind of like maybe I like it a lot.

Maybe I like it a little.

You don't know how much I value this pen as

well, right?

So let's say your valuation is between 0 and 1

pound.

What do you say yes?

You say no, it's much higher.

Between 0 and 1 million pounds 0 and 1 pound,

right?

Fair price, fair price, and so on this time is

useless.

So, and let's think about my evaluation.

Now let's say between 1 and 2 pounds because otherwise

we're not, we're not gonna make it so right.

So in my evaluation is between 0 and 99 cents,

we are fine.

Everything is gore is gonna happen.

But suppose that my valuation is between 0 and 1

and 1 cent.

So yours is 1 to 2, mine is 0 and

1 and 1 cent, right?

So basically the overlap.

Between how much you value it and how much what

value it is 1 cent, then the Myerson says as

theorem says that you cannot accomplish efficient trading without transfers,

right, so the two of us bargaining for shorts from

time to time, even though you value the pen more,

you're not gonna get it, or even though I value

the pen more, I'm not gonna get it without some.

Transfer happening that is without adding money into the system,

right?

So this is a beautiful theorem that shows that collapse

of trade can happen with uncertainty if there is just

a tiny bit of overlap between how much the seller

cares about the good and how much the buyer cares

about the good, so that is the type of things

that we have.

It's really incredible among like the thing that you see

in economic theory is among the most beautiful thing.

You can say, so what we're gonna do is that

we're gonna apply the revelation principle or some aspect of

it and we are gonna see that we are gonna

get a lot out of it.

So before we go into the model.

Is there any questions so far?

OK, take this as a no.

So we're gonna take the core idea and we're gonna

simplify it to the max, but again it's not so

simple, but it's really not so simple because we are

not solving anything, right?

That's why it's very different but at the same time

magical, right?

And without solving anything we're gonna be able to say

a lot.

So we're gonna think about one day again with a

mass one of potential allies.

Among these allies, the electorate, the autocrat must to choose.

A mass of people that will form this electorate.

This doesn't really matter much but like you know, the

more people you have in the electorate, the more you

are protected if someone challenge you and the probability that

someone challenge you is cut.

So that's, that's right.

So we are.

Among those mass n becomes select.

Yeah.

If Challenge arise to.

His rule.

He survives.

I'm even gonna simplify it even further.

With probability PA.

I'm never gonna remove the M because we don't even

need it, right?

So it's just greater and P.

This is strictly increasing with, right, so if there is

a challenge, the probability you survive the challenge is increasing

with the number of people you have in your selector.

This is an.

The probability of challenge is Q.

So let me just say one more thing, sorry about

this.

It's if and support.

Uh, in the challenge, that's very important.

Right.

So one important thing is that it's not enough to

have members in the electorate.

It has to be the case that they also support

you when there is a challenge, right?

So if you have any members of the selectorate and

they support you, then you survive with probability P.

If you're a member of the site, but K supports

you, you survive with probability PK, right?

So.

OK.

So I select the right member.

Face a cost see from supporting.

A in the charge.

So it's not like, you know, you can support it,

it's free.

You have to pay a cost.

But you have to potentially mobilise your own allies.

You may face a risk for your life, things like

this.

You may have to lend money that you know, like

most of the time we never out there back in

your bank account, things like this.

Yeah.

So, To obtain the support.

Of Selectorate.

Remember?

It pays.

A wage W and he pays this wageW.

Out of A budget.

B.

But this is not only when they always, yes, yes,

it's not condition on a challenge.

Very good.

Let me just add this.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Right, whether or not there's a challenge, you have to

pay it.

Also an important assumption.

OK.

So in Meyerson, the game is infinitely repeated, so it

doesn't assume that there is commitment to pain conditionally, but

it becomes an equilibrium behaviour.

In no world because we I want to focus on

the most important point, and this is just like, you

know, additional things that are less important.

I'm assuming the autocrat commits to PWN right?

And this is a commitment.

Right, so there is a commitment here.

Again, in the full game, the commitment arises undergenously.

We don't care because that's not our interest like why

wage are paid, so we are going to assume commitment

is possible.

So that's it, that's the game.

I just have to give you now the timing.

Hm.

So we're gonna first work.

And there are no parliament.

And the timing is gonna be one.

A chooses N.

He proposed wage W.

So every member of the electorate is the same, so

they will all get the same wage.

I should also commits.

2 WW.

The members agree or reject the offer.

OK.

3.

It can reduce the selectorate.

To any care.

Between 0 and N, so they can, if you want,

this is, can be zero, but if you can also

choose to touch nothing, right, in this case K is

equal to F, right?

So that's another possibility.

OK.

And this is not observed.

By this electorate.

Would be OK if some observe its probabil sticky, but

we're gonna assume that really covered purge can happen.

My talk, for example, you go in a province and

you remove a few people.

And nobody in other province knows it, right?

That's why network or communication autocracies are always going toward

the centre, where there's very few networks that do not

circulate via the autocrat and so for example, you could

add some learning probabilistically, but you know that will not

change the game.

What is so that we are going to take the

stark assumption that nothing is learned at this stage.

What happens if um they reject the weight?

So if they were to reject the offer, they will

not belong to the selectorate, yeah.

For Chau.

Yeah.

OK.

Uh, so once the challenge occur, the autocrats survive with

probably the PK, which is the actual size of this

electorate.

Yeah.

I see that if accept, you can think that they

commit to help and challenge.

Mhm.

And the equilibrium is so perfect Nash equilibrium.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Right?

Any question on the game?

This Char we occur in the in the group of

people who are kicked out for select.

You really the challenger is just a random draw of

nature, but it's like really, it's just to create some

threat for the autocrat.

This is where it needs this electrode basically.

Yeah.

So what we're gonna look for, and this is without

loss of generality.

I'm gonna look for an equilibrium where the equilibrium size

of the selector rate and star.

is such that there is no purge in stage 3,

right?

So when the autocrat has the opportunity to reshape its

electrode coalition, he chose not to do so.

It's without loss of generality because if N were strictly

greater than K, then you know, many members will reject

the offer.

Yeah, in fact, everybody will reject an offer that doesn't

have basically K equal to a stop.

And so it's K that matters for the electorate members.

Yeah.

OK.

OK.

Yeah.

Hey buddy There's me here.

OK, so.

The first thing we're gonna do, and then we'll do

a break because then it becomes a bit harder, is

to think about under.

This idea that you know there there's not gonna be

any purge along the process we're gonna think about the

wage that the autocrat must pay to the end member

of this electorate right so step one is gonna be.

But clearly we anticipate.

No purge.

Right, so we are building in our silo, right?

In our silo, there is no purge at stage 3.

Of course, we will have to find the condition such

that this condition is satisfied, right, this strategic behaviour holds

in equilibrium, but that's very important.

But we start with this silo, right?

We are in a world where there's no purchase at

stage 3 and we will look after for the condition.

What is the wage that the selector must pay in

this case?

So what does this electorate wants to do?

With the wage?

let me say, sorry, one last thing that like, importantly.

The wage is paid only if a survive, right?

If the challenge happened and A is overthrown, the wage

is not paid.

Just so I forgot to mention it, but you know,

I hope it was relatively obvious that this was the

implicit assumption, right?

So if you are a member of the coalition of

the autocrat and the guy, you don't get anything.

So what does the auto card wants to induce with

the wage?

To make just in different between challenging.

So remember, sorry, there's one thing I I confuse you.

The challengerris externally, right?

So there's no challenge from member of the electorate in

this case.

right point, this is more last week.

Here's like, this the challenge is coming from outside of

the electorate.

Right, but you're, you're on the right track though, right?

You're really very much on the right track, right?

What is the wage you must satisfied.

It's the cost when, when there's a challenge, there's a

cost for the select rate, but it's like it would

be Q times C with the probability that there's a

challenge times the cost.

OK, very good.

One thing that, you know, I wasn't clear and I

should be clear.

This is my fault.

Yes, no, that's correct.

OK.

The selectoride knows whether there's a challenge or not, right,

that I should have clarify, right?

But you're also in a very good track, no.

So there is a cost, but so there are two

possible events, right?

One is the event where there's no challenge and what

is the way that the elector member of the select

will accept in this case.

Everyone.

Yeah, there's no chance that they will accept any wage,

like, you know, even a wage of 0 in some

sense.

Suppose there is a challenge.

What is the wage that this electorate will accept, which

is basically the pivotal moment is that when there is

a challenge, what must be true about the wage.

It can compensate for the cost, uh, it must be

for uh fighting for, for the auto.

Yeah.

So indeed, in my, so the wedge.

This wedge.

And I'm sorry, I realised now that I'm not using

the same notation at the slides, so we have to

be careful that in the slide, this is a Y

and here it's a W, right?

OK, so if the member of the selector does not

support the autocrats, what would be a spare of them?

0 indeed.

This is no support.

And if we support the other craft, what will be

his spare of them?

What would be support is pay off if you support

the autocrat.

So first there will be.

It's not wedge minus cost, right?

Exactly.

It's the expectation of minus cost, right?

So the birth is gonna be probability.

Now the quite survive.

Time wage minus costs.

And so what must be true is that the wedge

is greater than C over PN.

And of course, among all the wages that satisfied this,

what is the wage that the autocrats takes equals, right,

the minimum wage in this range, right?

So now we know how much the autocrat has to

pay the members of this electorate.

Huh?

Now what we're gonna look at right the next stage

after the break.

But I gonna look at is Is incentive compatibility constrain

which is in this case, and I say he always

because you know, as we have discussed, autocrats tend to

be men.

Where's Aprils.

To Keep And members.

At stage 3.

Then To purge selector.

Right, so that's it.

So there's basically one stage 3 up to say I'm

better off.

Having a members rather than.

Purging some of those members, choosing a case that is

less than this.

So I'm gonna think about incentive compatibility constraint, but in

fact what really we're gonna get is incentive compatibility constraints.

So we're gonna get more than one.

So we'll do this after a break and we'll start

again at 5 at this watch.

Yeah, I'm still not sure I'm still not sure if

I understand why there no Q in the equation of

the H.

Why Because the, there's a challenge that occurs with a

certain probability.

Yeah, but the, the commitment is to support in case

of a challenge.

So I give you a wage, right?

And this with this wage, you will support me if

there is a challenge.

If I give you a wage where it's only QC

once a challenge occurs, right?

Q cost is not QC anymore, it's C.

And as a result, you know, you will not want

to take this wage and support me in case of

a challenge.

Right, so that, that's why it's important that it's really

conditional on the challenge occurring.

I.

The wage is a double commitment.

I was thinking about how to better answer your question.

The the wage is a double commitment.

On the one hand, the autocrat commits to pay the

wage no matter what.

On the other hand, the um member of the electorate

agreed to support the autocrat in case of a challenge.

Right?

Conditional one way maybe that would have been easier, and

I should have put it maybe to think that after

observing a challenge.

Yeah.

The members of the elector decide whether or not to

support the autocrats.

Right, I think that would have been slightly easier in

terms of timing.

So in which case, you have to pay a wage.

The wage is a commitment, but really it's only condition

on a challenge occurring that there's gonna be a tension

for this member of the electorate between supporting the autocrat

and not supporting the autocrat.

But there is a chance that a conflict do not

occur.

So basically I'm, I'm, I'm thinking about whether there is

a margin for the, for the supporter to get to

overpaid, to be overpaid.

They are overpaid.

Yeah, because their wage they receive it no matter what,

right?

So they are overpaid.

Indeed, they extract rents.

When the conflict doesn't occur, they get rents from the

autocrat for doing nothing.

However, the autocrat needs to pay this wage because it

needs to care about when a conflict occurs.

Right, so that's, that's the issue.

Yeah yeah, they, they are getting some like in this

world it's good to be in the electorate.

I mean, it's better to be the autocrat because you

have the budget, but you know, it's good to be

in the electorate.

So, as I was saying, it may be easier to

think.

Dot The members of the electorate when they see a

challenge, will decide whether or not to support the autocrats

based on the wages that have been promised to them,

right, in which case, really that's why the sea is

kind of like.

So yeah, it's, it's not a participation constraint, but it's

not that they get a payoff.

Right.

And when the autocrat make this pay off, they think

about what is my expected payoff from being in the

electorate versus what is my expected bill from not being

in the electorate, right?

It's really a contract where condition on the challenge they

are set to support the autocrat.

And so that's very important this thing.

Alternatively, you can think that the member of the electorate

decide after observing a challenge whether or not to support

the autocrat, and then you will get the same result.

Hm.

Everybody's.

Alright, now.

The incentive compatibility constraint, right?

So first, Let's think about the payoff of the autocrat

if he doesn't purge anyone.

Yeah.

We are always at stage 3 when I say this

before a challenge.

So with probabilityQ there's a challenge, OK.

OK.

The autocrat is going to survive with probability of N,

right, because he has 8 members of the electorate that

all support him.

If we survive.

Yeah.

He's gonna be paying.

It's gonna get B minus the wage bill, and the

wage bill is the wage to each member of this

electorate.

Yeah.

If he does not survive.

It's getting 0, right like.

Yeah.

If there is no challenge.

Then the autocrats survive for sure.

And he's paying.

The wage bill That he is getting his, his budget

minus the wage bill, right?

So what we have is it's.

Yeah.

This thing.

Everybody clear on this?

OK.

Yeah.

OK.

Mm.

OK.

Any question on this?

Let's suppose that A reduced to select the right now.

To K strictly less than N right then in fact

what I'm gonna do, no it's the beautiful plum.

K strictly less than N.

OK.

So let's do the calculation again.

With probabilityQ there's a challenge.

Now, what is now the probability that the autocrats survive?

Remember, any decrease of the selector rate is unobserved.

It's smaller, but uh what would be the value?

I mean, not the value but the expression, right?

It's like not really a value, but it would be

P of of K indeed, yes, exactly right, it's P

ofk now, right, because that's the number of people that

are in the selector.

What's the bill then?

Then he's gonna get B, but then what's gonna be

the wage bill?

Yeah.

So how many people does he have to pay now?

OK, and how much do they, do we pay them?

WN indeed, right, because these people have accepted the WN

wage anticipating there will be no purge, right?

So they he paid them WN.

This is kind of exactly very good.

Yeah.

Right, I put the deviations, you understood now that why

I'm using a different colour to put you the deviation

in the other colour.

Now we can do kind of like, what is gonna

happen?

Here there's no challenge, it's gonna get minus.

Yeah.

Everybody's clear basically what is happening, you reduce your chance

of surviving, but you're basically also reducing your wage bill

with the wage remaining constant because it has been agreed

in the anticipation there will be no purge of this

electorate.

So one must be true for.

The not to purchase the electorate indeed for kind of

like this to be.

And equilibrium, one must be true.

So that's the payoff when it doesn't purge.

That's the payoff when you reduce it to some K.

One must be true between the two.

The first one must be bigger than the second, right?

It must be that keeping this electrode constant must be

better.

Then decreasing it to some kid.

Right, but it's clear on this, that's, that's.

Yeah.

Right.

Now.

For which K this must be true.

No, no, not just it must be true fork, but

that will be inequality, so it'll be fine.

And so which case is smaller than one.

Which case is smaller than 1, than N?

So suppose N is 0.3, just to make up a

number, right?

For which K must this be true?

So for sure it must be true, let's say for

K equals 0.22, right?

That's for 1 K.

for K equal 012, for K equals 013.5.

So for which K does this have to be true?

And Between 0, all of them.

Right, this must hold for all K between 0 and

N.

That's how many constraints in countable many infinite, yeah, right.

This has to be true for all K between 0

and N, right?

So any possible decrease of the selector rate, this has

to be true, right.

Yeah.

Infinite number of constraints.

Now I hope that you realise the level of magic

we're getting towards.

Remember what I told you.

I told you we are gonna be able to say

two very important things.

We're gonna be able to say that we as a

parliament, the size of this electorate will be higher and

most of the time strictly higher, and the other court

would be better off and most of the time strictly

better off.

Right, and we are doing this in a world where

we have not one constraint that we have worked with

but infinite number of them, some magic is going on

somewhere and it's not mine it's Roger Myerson's.

Alright, so our last step.

Mhm.

OK.

You should definitely not have commit to something.

Apologies for this, but it's OK.

I'll correct it later.

Is the maximisation problem.

So let's denote.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

This function.

So this function is just basically What we have put

here.

Uh, that is just the function we have put here.

So what is the maximisation problem while the autocrat is

choosing N, such as to maximise this function subject to

the infinite.

Yeah OK.

Mhm.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And we're gonna call NSA the solution of this problem.

NStar is the solution of this problem.

Yeah OK.

Yeah.

Let's call also.

And not the solution.

To the unconstrained.

Problem I think constraint problem is just marks and.

Of VN WN.

right, that's, that's, that's what we remember.

We often use this concept of unconstraint problem.

How about we remove the constraint.

Well, if we have an unconstant problem, it's very easy,

right?

We take the first other condition, in our case, it

will have to be D.

The total derivative of this function.

And this is V of N.

Yeah.

Mhm.

And it's such that the derivative with the first element,

which is V of N, the derivative with respect to

N, so this is a partial derivative with respect to

N, evaluated at N not plus the derivative of V

with respect to a certain element, the wedge times the

derivative of the wedge with respect to N is equal

to 0, and this is just total derivative.

OK.

So, To add N star equivalent to a knot.

This is the case if an olive.

And for basically the two to be equivalent.

It must be that the constraints are not binding, right?

So that's this is just what it means.

The unconstrained problem and the constraint problem are equivalent if

the constraints are not binding, what does it mean that

the constraints are not binding?

The derivative of the objective function.

With respect to an evaluated star is also equal to

0.

That is just saying it's exactly what we do usually

it's a bit more complicated, but the idea when we

do maximisation under constraint is that we say, is it

binding, is it not binding?

And we start with the unbinding.

The unconstrained problem and then we check that the constraint

is binding or not and then we use that constraint

in case.

Here what I'm just saying is for the constraint problem

to be equivalent to the constraint problem, it must be

that basically the first, the first derivative of the objective

function is equal to 0.

Right?

That's just what I'm saying.

Now suppose that if we find that.

This.

Suppose we find that at the equilibrium value for the

constraint problem.

The function is strictly increasing, what does it mean?

What does it must mean?

Mm.

Right, so no constraint is binding.

We have to find that the derivative of the objective

function evaluated that the star is equal to 0.

Suppose that instead you find that the derivative of the

objective function evaluated and is strictly positive, one must be

true then.

And not smaller.

Yes, that's correct.

That's correct, right?

So that would mean.

Because the function we of course assume it's concave and

everything right?

so that implies an end star is strictly less than

a not.

And what else does it imply?

I mean for which region will N star be strictly

less than a knot?

So a not is what you do when you're unconstrained.

Can you do better than what you do when you're

unconstrained?

Yeah.

OK, suppose you have unlimited money and you choose something.

Right.

Now I tell you you have a budget of 100

pounds, right?

In which case will you be better off even without

solving it.

Is it a case where you have unlimited money or

in the case where you have a budget of 100

pounds?

Unlimited money.

I think constraint on behaviour is never good.

Why do you think you were such a pain when

you were teenagers, right?

Because you were kind of like showing your parents that

the constraints were not guns and compatible, right?

You wanted less constraint.

Well I mean, why can they see here, none of

us were real pain when we were teenager, but you

know, what were some of you afraid of pain when

they were teenager because they wanted to have less constraint

on their behaviour, right, to have more freedom.

Constraints are always bad.

You don't want to have constraint.

The unconstraint problem is the best you can have, right?

So basically, when you can choose and constraint is the

best you can do.

Right, and that would be that case if we have

this, which indeed Christian is right to indicate this, what

does it mean about the problem?

Does it mean is this, is it the same solution

and then constraint problem?

Now, however, if he could, what would the autocrat do?

He will choose the same solution, right, because you cannot

do better than the unconstrained problem.

It's very clear that you cannot do better than the

unconstrained problem.

This is the best you can do.

If he could, he would choose it.

If he doesn't choose it, it means what?

By contraposit it means that it he cannot and if

he cannot, that means what about the constraint.

There is one constraint that is binding.

At least one constraint is binding.

So one constraint is blocking the autocrat and 4th, not

going all the way that you would like to do

and constrained.

That is if you have full commitment at stage 3.

So there's one constraint that block the autocrat, right.

OK, let me try to repeat this, very important, but

remember what I told you.

This is hard.

And I know it's hard because we have never done

this logic before, right?

In a world where you are unconstrained, that's the best

you can achieve.

But if an unlimited money probably decrease my teaching hours

by half, reduce my admin to 0, and spend much

more time doing research.

Right?

Buying myself out of all the annoying thing of being

in academia, right?

No, I don't.

Therefore, I cannot do this, and therefore, I basically choose

something different that is less good for me because I'm

not constraint, right?

So the best.

world you can live in is the world where you're

unconstrained, right, at least in the show front and the

billionaire, they get crazy because they experience everything and they're

like, I don't know what to do and you know

and stuff but like supposedly the world is the greatest

thing that can happen to a decision maker and agent.

The economy is to do choices and constraints without a

budget without anything, right?

That's the best thing.

Constraints always reduce your choices.

So two things one, and remember we have done this

a little bit though in a different reasoning, right?

Two things can happen when you have a constraint problem

on the one hand.

The constraints do not bind, right, in which case your

choice on that constraint is the same as the unconstrained

problem, right, because that's really the best you could do.

On the other hand, that would mean mathematically that the

first order condition of your objective function, which is this

one, I mean the derivative of your objective function evaluated.

At your equilibrium value is equal to 0, right, that

because that's what is the solution to the unconstrained problem.

On the other hand, what can happen is that unfortunately

you cannot choose this kind of like optimal and constraint

values.

You're blocked by something.

And how does it represent?

It represents by the fact that your derivative of your

objective function.

Evaluated that star is strictly positive.

Indeed, if you do a Lagrangian, what is happening, it's

equal to the Lagrange multiplier here, right?

That's where the Lagrangian multiplier arrives and equal it to

0 for those who are familiar with using Lagrangian.

But in particular, what it says is what you would

like to do is to keep on increasing your optimal

choice, your end.

You would like to go further.

As you go up, you will gain from it.

What does it mean to have the derivative positive?

It means you want to go further.

You gain from going to push up your hand.

That's what it means.

This means, as Christian said that you are for you

are choosing something strictly below what you could choose if

you were unconstrained and what is the unique reason for

which you would do this?

It would be because one of the constraints is binding.

Right, so that's the thing so that's it's it's a

very bit clear about this now what we're gonna show

is that indeed that condition is satisfied without solving for

anything we're gonna show this.

OK.

Because that's the clip.

Is that this all true.

Hi, how are we gonna show it?

So, So if you remember, WN is equal to C

over PN, so this is gonna be minus C P.

It's gonna be this, right?

This is just the derivative of W with respect to

N is P minus and divided by PN 2 times.

This is just this, which.

We know to be negative.

Everybody clear on this.

But of course, the more people you have in your

selector right, the less wage you, the basically the less

the wage you have to pay to each people, right?

Now, just so you remember.

VMW is.

Mhm.

So, this is a cube.

Right, this is, this is the function, right?

This is the function is V of N and W

it's QPN B minus NW 1 minus Q B minus

NW, right?

We just have plug WN but this function exists for

all W's.

So what is V2 of NW it's equal to.

Minus QPN and.

N minus 1 minus Q N.

And that's true for every W, right?

As you increase W, what happened to the function?

What about to pay your payoff, it goes down.

What does it go down because your wage bill has

increased, right, so this is negative.

And that's true for every M and every W.

So what does it mean?

It means that.

Yeah.

The product of this tutor is going to be positive.

Right?

That, that property is true for every end of every

W.

So even when I evaluate it at one particular N

and one particular W, it's still old.

So we know.

We know that this is strictly positive.

So the next thing we have to do is to

show.

But this is at least weekly positive, right, because a

weekly positive plus a strictly positive term makes for a

strictly positive term, right?

Mhm.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But this is the IC.

This is the IC, right?

This, if you look at it, is actually equivalent to

say.

What are we doing here?

We are fixing the wedge, but changing the number of

people in the electorate, which is to say that rather

than having Nar number of the electorate, we have K

number of the electorate.

And what does it imply?

If you have something that is bigger than everything that

comes before.

The first order of the directive will be weekly weekly

positive, right?

Because it could be that every k after.

are also, are also smaller or it keeps on increasing,

right, but in both cases it would be weakly positive,

right?

So there are two possibilities here.

One is that if you keep on increasing, you will

still prefer VN WN to everything else.

Right?

That would mean that Which is to say that.

If you fix the wage at W and, the best

you can do is the is Nar number of individual,

or in other words, the first derivative is 0.

Oh Which implied that.

You would like to keep on increasing the size of

this electorate, yeah.

And in both cases, this means.

Mhm.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So what do we get?

We get from the IC that the first term is

weakly positive.

We get from looking at the value of the wage

and the objective function that the second term is strictly

positive, and therefore the claim is validated.

And this thing.

is weakly positive.

This thing is strictly positive, the sum is strictly positive.

And so what do we know?

We know that in the constraint problem of the autocrat.

One of the constraints is binding.

So we have learned that in equilibrium, one of the

constraints is binding without solving anything.

Yeah.

At least 1 could be 2, but they will give

the same, but at least one constraint is binding.

Mhm.

Let's call it Case, which is to say that V

and W and star.

He is equal to VKC.

W and that's what it means that one constraint in

binding, right?

So.

We don't know which one, but we know one is

binding and let's suppose it's a unique one but it's

not very important.

Everybody's clear on on this?

All right, so let's think about parliament.

It's gonna go very fast.

We don't need to do much, I reassure you.

Yeah.

Well I suppose that parliament has two effects.

At stage 3, everyone.

Observes a purging.

Select it, if you choose so.

OK.

Right, so the first thing is at stage 3, if.

The electorate is being purged.

Everyone sees it.

And just because I want to go fast, why we

say that.

If this is observed, let's suppose that everyone withdraws support

in this electorate, right, will be also the equilibrium behaviour,

but yeah, I just want to save time and focus

on the important part.

So if so, all members of the select side we

will do support.

Is that that clear what the parliament is doing?

Right, it's kind of like these two effects.

Again, that would be an equilibrium behaviour, but we are

going to just assume it to focus on the important

part here, right?

Just that I want to highlight, right.

So what is now, so the wage.

It's still the same.

Right, anticipating that the autocrat will not purge in some

sense conditional on the autocrat not purging and a challenge

arising, that's the way that the electorate will accept, right?

Same as before.

Now what is changing is the IC constraint.

Of a Now if he's respecting his end of the

bargain, he would still get.

So this is No perch.

But now what happens if there is a purge?

What will happen if there is a purge under our

assumptions on the effect of parliament?

How many members of this electorate will support the autocrat?

November, right, right away like for any decrease in the

selector rate, the support goes to 0.

Right?

That's what we have assumed.

So what would be ape Q of P 0 B

minus 0 WN.

Plus 1 minus Q B minus 0 W.

It's like Q P 0 B plus 1 minus QB

because this is for purge.

Because in which case all electorate members.

Withdraw support, right?

This was the assumption that we make, but it's also

an equilibrium behaviour.

So now many constraints are there for the autocrat.

Do we need to look at other constraints?

I just focus on 0.

Just this one, right?

Because it's basically each time you, even if you were

to remove one Fil and one member, your coalition will

collapse automatically.

So the only constraint of the autocrat is this one.

There's only one constraint now, right?

And it looks like terrible because you go from N

to zero, right?

So what we have is is maximisation problem.

It's gonna be Marx and of the same VN.

WN Yeah.

It's gonna be subject to the constraint which is this

is basically the same as this, and this is basically

the same function but evaluated at 0 in.

And let's And the solution.

And now we are gonna focus on 2 cases.

First is NP is equal to a not, that is

that constraint.

It's not binding.

In which case, what do we know in this case?

Is the Autocrat better off or worse off with parliament?

So N00 is the solution of the unconstrained problem.

Can you do better than the solution of the unconstrained

problem?

And constraint problem is the super top mega best not

possible to do better.

Right, you cannot do better than this.

Was the autocrat able to reach N not before?

Was N equal to Nno?

We knew that N star is less than a knot.

Right, which implied that A is better off.

With parliament.

The second case is NP is less than not, which

means.

The constraint.

His binding And here we have 2 subcas.

With the parliament, the binding constraint was the one where

basically you wanted to, the problem for the other court

was he wanted to purge completely this electorate, and that

was the one that was binding.

It's also the one that is binding in this case

and so in this case parliament.

And no parliament.

Ah, Equal For the autocrat.

And the other cases without parliament.

KC, the binding constraint was strictly greater than 0, right?

There was basically some other values that was constraining the

autocrat, he wanted to purchase some other values.

In which case that means that K equals 0 is

less binding.

Right, that means that like basically some other the value

was constraining the autocrat and I've removed this value and

it's only 0 that is the binding one, so I've

relaxed the problem of the autocrat.

Lecture 19:

We started with Evidence That institutions are also present in

autocracies, right, that there are medias that are partially free.

There are parliaments, there are parties, and there are elections

and we start trying to understand what is the role

of those institutions.

So we started with parliament and you know, after doing

a lot of different type of reason or logical reasoning,

we came to the conclusion that parliament can, right.

And what is the reason that parliament can add the

autocrat?

It's because absent parliament, the autocrat can tweak.

Is within coalitions in every way, it's she or EC

spit, right?

So you can tweak it by a little, you can

tweak it by a lot, you can like abandon like

kill everybody and stuff like this.

We say that with parliament what was happening, but more

general point than this, but in this particular model, it

was kind of like reducing the ability of the autocrat

to tweak the coalition.

In particular, the autocrat became in this particular model facing

a stark choice between keeping everyone or having no one

that will help him.

And the fact that the autocrat could no longer tweak

the coalition, which is basically the fact that the autocratie

this end to just basically a binary choice, either everything,

everyone that you have selected to begin with, or no

one.

Rather than potentially slicing it a little bit, slicing it

a lot, reducing the choice of the other part to

a binary choice.

In terms of reforming the coalition that she works with,

made it actually easier for the autocrat to kind of

like not want to reform the coalition, not want to

purge the electorate, and by making it easier for the

autocrat, not want to purge so we showed that the

protocrat was better, right?

So by relaxing.

The incentive of the autocrat to purge this electorate, we

showed that the autocrat was actually better off as a

result, and I was able to do more than what

she, he or she would do if she was to

have like any freedom to purge whoever and however she

wanted.

So that was kind of like the lesson.

That one which was like sometimes when you see someone

tying their hands, you know, it's actually for a reason

that can be beneficial for them.

So tying your hands with parliament if you are not

a girl can be a good way to do it.

So that's like the big lesson from the previous exercise

and there is.

Some limited evidence and again because evidence are very hard

to get by in autocracy due to the lack of

transparency, which means lack of data, right?

I think about trying those this eliminating data from governmental

websites.

It's hard to make some tests and there are some

moderate evidence that places where they are.

Elements see more foreign direct, more domestic investment, right?

So this electorate feel more secure and therefore invest more,

which is related but not a perfect test to this

model.

Now, what I want to do is to think about

censorship instead.

So, as we know, Censorship.

Us in autocracies, but there is some information that circulates.

And we've seen that not all media were absolutely censored.

The exception might be North Korea and Myanmar, right?

Everybody else let some information flow.

So what we want to understand here is how does

censorship work, right?

And why is the censorship with some information?

So we're gonna do a paper publishing in the EJ

uh micro I think Medihome and Bernard on this question.

So what do you think of a game, I mean,

the media really is just gonna be a medium, like

an intermediary, basically not being a strategic character, right?

And in this game, you're gonna be Represent the representative

citizen and an autocrat are gonna play with each other

as I'm saying.

The citizen is going to decide whether to revolt.

The autocrat is going to decide whether to censor, and

the media is either going to report the news if

it is not censored or to report nothing if it's

censored, right?

Doing nothing, it's really just like.

Mechanism in the system, yeah, so it is unbiased in

sense if it's if it's cens if it's not censored,

I was wanted to say uncensored but I had trouble.

If it's not censored, the media is unbiased.

It's just an information mechanism.

Mm.

Here, here we are.

Imagine this, we are weak 20 incredible.

One more lecture after this.

So we are citizen.

The revolts.

Not And we are the autocrat with sensors.

Or not and there's gonna be a cost of sunset.

Which I'm also gonna do equal to see all that

you know and we maybe change to this.

OK, it's like equals 0 equal 1 act to censor

what doesn't act to sensor sexual.

So, My notation is really unsuccessful in so many dimensions

basically using action and payoff and cost similarly automatic but

it's fine.

So wherein I assume that if the citizen does not

revolt, she gets a payoff of zero.

If she revolts, the revolt is successful with probability uh.

If it's successful, there's gonna be some payoff from having

a change of regime.

Like general minor kind of like whether or not it's

good for the city centre of this region.

And if it's not successful, there's gonna be a loss

minus kappa that you can think about it as basically.

Some of the citizens are being imprisoned or killed during

the failed reform.

So, what we get is.

It's really a game, but the main letters are A

and R and stuff is immigrate.

So if the citizen.

Choose no revolt.

Yeah.

Feel.

0.

If you choose revolt.

Then if it's a success, payoff is R minus epsilon

and that happened with probability.

OK.

Uh with probability 1 minus uh it's a failure and

the payoff is musk.

Now the problem for the citizen is that.

The citizen knows abstinence today she knows whether or not

it's a good time for her to have a regime

change or revolt in some sense.

But she does not know how, what is the value

of a regime change.

Inversely, The autocrats.

Those are.

But does not know.

I see, right, so the vote, the voter know whether

it's going to vote for them, but doesn't know the

baseline payoff from regime change.

The other part knows the baseline payoff from regime change,

but doesn't know exactly whether it's a good time for

the citizen to revolt.

So we did some prior, but the prior.

OK.

Uh is normally distributed.

So what about the media outlets?

OK.

OK.

Try just a little bit again, but the, the media

outlet is gonna observe.

A signal that can either nothing.

Or the value of R.

He observed the signal decide whether.

To censor.

In which case the outlet reports M is equal to

nothing.

Or to all not sense.

Yeah.

In which case, the outlet reports M equals and the

probability that S is equal to basically nothing is 1

minus Q.

in the right.

I don't want to spoil you too much.

Right.

So it's not always the case that journalists are able

to learn what's going on.

As a baseline.

So in probity Q they learn something and then the

auto call has to decide whether to censor it or

not, with probability 1 minus Q, they don't learn anything

and then they can report nothing.

And what is the censorship?

The censorship is basically The fact that, of course, you

know, if S is equal to the antiser, basically the

media cannot report R, right?

They can report R only if they observe it.

So what is censorship doing is making it seems that

the outlet has uncovered nothing.

I didn't understand the meaning for art.

What do we mean by the value of the regime

and how is it different from um Epsilon, right?

So, so basically the idea is you want, so the

idea that they have in mind is a very good

question is to separate, to think about the, the value

of regime change as being too.

One component that is specific to the citizen that only

the citizens know and one component that is more kind

of like about the regime in general that everybody knows,

right?

That's the other but will affect everybody the same way.

So you could think of it as Epsilon being that

there is a mass of citizen and every citizen has

an Epsilon.

That is different like independently drawn and R is the

value that will affect all citizens simultaneously here because we

have one citizen, it's also the idea is to induce

some um uncertainty for the autocrats if I.

Let the news go.

What are the chances that we get a reward?

If I don't let the news go, what are the

chances that I get a reform, reward.

So that's the idea to introduce some uncertainty on the

part of the bonded.

So, Mhm OK.

OK, to basically induce two sorts of uncertainty, one for

the autooid and one for the water.

Yeah.

Any other question on this?

So most of the interesting things are gonna happen on

the citizen side in terms of kind of like thinking

about what to do after observing nothing, right?

After observing something, it's quite easy.

We're gonna do it relatively fast.

What is more interesting is what happened.

If you see no information from the media.

Before I do this, let me say that this sort

of game is called the disclosure game, right?

So someone has information that is hard information and decide

whether to disclose it.

So it's not information because the only decision you have

is really to hide it or to disclose it.

The autoqua cannot kind of like pretend that the R

is, you know, -100 when in fact the R is

+ 100.

There's no ability to manipulate the R.

The only thing you can do is when R is

plus 100 is either you reveal it or you like

it, right?

So it's disclosure here.

In this sort of game, to make the game interesting,

it is very important that information is not always guaranteed.

So that Q 1 minus Q is strictly greater than

0.

Well, Q is strictly less than 1.

Otherwise, you get an unravelling argument and every information is

being disclosed.

So it's very important and we will see why that

there is uncertainty for the um.

Voters, in our case, whether the lack of information is

due to censorship, to hiding information, or is due to

the fact that the media hasn't cover it.

Very important as very important kind of like assumption in

this type of game.

They are not the first one to make it, but

they are not applying it to censorship, but they are

not the first one to make it.

So now you will have seen almost all games, you

will have seen Chito game, you will have seen, you

know, disclosure game, you've seen almost every type of information

structure.

Alright, so let's think about, so the timing is, sorry.

From nature.

Mhm.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That's uh nature draws the When the viable, the value

of the, the media outlet observe as that is either

nothing or are the other court decide whether to censor

after observing as, right?

And the citizen observe a message that is either nothing

or the signal.

Of course, if the signal.

Is the empty site, the only thing that can be

observed is the empty set, right?

The choice between empty set and empty set is empty

set.

And so that's.

And so in this case, the equilibrium concept is perfect

Beiges and equilibrium.

So working by backward induction, we start with the citizens

incentive to to report and we're gonna do two cases.

One when R has been revealed and one when R

has not been revealed.

OK.

Mm.

Wow.

Yeah.

So case one M is equal to R, right?

So then for the citizen it's very simple computing.

She knows everything.

There's no uncertainty because she observed on Epsilon that she

knows about MCL.

She knows how there's no uncertainty.

She's just gonna do a very simple you expected utility

comparison.

On the one hand, she's going to compare the utility

that she gets if she revolts, where is the utility

that she gets if she does not revolt.

Mhm.

So expected utility.

From revolting, it's gonna be very simple, it's gonna be

with probability are there is a success, in which case

she's getting R minus epsilon, which she knows both, but

she has observed R because that's the message that has

been revealed.

Mom saw there is a failure of the revolt.

And she's getting minus, which is the cost of sal

reform.

And as we said, the expected utility from the revolt

is 0, very simply.

So citizen.

Rewards if and only if little R times R minus

epsilon plus 1 minus R minus kappa is greater than

0, which is to say that.

But the very, we're gonna isolate the epsilon, so it's

RR plus 1 minus R minus kappa is greater than

R epsilon and so it is epsilon is less than

R.

M is.

Yeah.

That's here divided is all the minus I put it

in front.

1 minus R divided by 5.

Why do I put the epsilon on one side?

What do I like this basically what is why do

we need to do this observe Epsilon, right?

You were right.

Your intuition was exactly the correct one.

The reason why, why do we need to calculate this,

right?

So remember, it's a bit like you know probabilistic plotting

model in some sense.

The autoquar doesn't observe epsilon.

So the autoquar needs to think about what is the

probability of a revolt if I show if I display

R, if I let the R goes into the system.

OK.

So basically she has to think about what are the

chances that this condition is satisfied.

It's gonna be this.

The probability of revolt if the message is equal to

all is gonna be this one, which you know we're

gonna just call it.

Mhm.

So that was the easy case.

Any question on this because now we need to think

about the 7 case, right?

What the voters is nothing.

The citizen is nothing, sir.

If the citizen sees nothing.

Of course, she doesn't know that what the game is

not interesting, whether the absence of information in the media

is due to censorship or is due to the fact

that the media didn't uncover information.

So what she's going to do?

She's going to Think about the expected utility.

From reverting and is going to be probability, sorry, it's

gonna be probability there is a successor R.

Now she's gonna think about what is the value of

changing the regime given that I've observed nothing.

Mine is Epsilon.

Right, so the difference from before, right, is that before

I was equal to all, so we could just put

R here.

Here, M is equal to nothing, so the citizen has

to form an expectation about what can be the value

of R given that she has observed nothing.

And so that's the big difference.

Yes but it's clear on this.

Now the citizen, what does she understand?

She understands that observing nothing can be due to one

or two things.

On the one hand, it could be due to censorship.

On the other hand, They were exactly.

There was nothing to do, right?

So if we have two events that can explain the

same thing, what type of law are we using?

I like this.

We can see that like uh Julia has been with

me for so many months.

She was so prone to speak the gospel.

Very good, very good indeed, so we are going to

use the law of total probability.

That's the thing that there are two possibilities for this

happening is one, there was censorship.

This is censorship.

The other is there was no censorship.

OK.

Now to go a bit further, right.

We need to think about what's gonna be the strategy.

Of the autograph, what's gonna be a natural strategy we

should study for the autogra?

So if you were not in this domain and you

have to think about censorship of the media, what type

of kind of like strategy will you use?

So what type of arts are bad for you as

an autocrat?

it's good.

the autocrat then you want to censor.

Exactly.

So the, the higher are, the better it is to

censor the autocrat to to to revolt for a citizen,

right?

So what type of R is the autocrat wanting to

I, it's all that are above 0, right, that are

above a threshold.

So we're gonna think that a strategy is gonna be

a special strategy.

Which is to censor if and only if R is

above a certain thresholds.

Which of course is anticipated by the voter, by the

citizen, so the citizen.

Anticipates.

C equal to 1 if R is greater than R

and we're gonna put a little A to be not

anticipated, right.

Now, obviously, in equilibrium, what the citizen anticipate and what

the other part is doing are going to be the

same thing.

That's what there's an equilibrium.

This is anticipated threshold, so I think that even by

my standard, this is very probably.

Yeah, you also have an incentive to just like spread

out the distribution and just making the is always more

uncertain just by I don't know randomising the censorship or

is it so randomising the censorship, no, because.

The way the messages work, the structure is working is

if you see something and uh you know, you learn

the R.

So there is always been an incentive to actually censor

eyes to eyes.

So you cannot sustain this type of thing.

But there could be all the tools available to the

autocrat, and one of them is to gather information and

to create much more uncertainty in it.

He will not play such a big role because a

bit And a little bit you could, that could be

an alternative strategy for the other one, but it doesn't

have this opportunity to create a lot of noise in

the system.

It's either revelation or laughing.

So in some sense, you're right, but it's more outside

of the model than within the model.

It's another tool available.

It's called garbling.

So with this, we can start to think about the

different elements that we have here.

So we're gonna start.

With this, then with this, and then we're gonna do

this too.

So that what is the expected utility of all given

that you have nothing and there was no censorship.

That's the first thing which you know if there's.

What does it mean that there is no censorship in

terms of the media, and you observed nothing?

What does the media observed?

Nothing in it, right?

So basically, the fact that there is no censorship and

you observe nothing means that the media has observed nothing.

That's.

But if the media has observed nothing, can you learn

anything about the value of R relative to your prior?

No it's the same as for your prior, right?

It's the same thing.

So this has to be equal to ER because basically

it's by luck nothing was to be learned in the

system.

And so this is equal to 0.

I mean, if you remember at the beginning, it said

the expectation of R was 0.

Yeah.

Now what about?

Yeah.

You observe nothing but you know there is censorship, right?

I mean, you believe this, yes.

Yes, 0, like with a mean of 0 and a

variance of sigma square, I think so.

The other case is this one, right?

There is censorship.

So that means that you know, S was equal to

R, right?

That's the only case.

And what was the value that R was taken?

Above above the anticipated.

Exactly.

So this there was censorship, so basically it's equivalent to

saying that.

All has to be above the anticipated threshold.

And the reason you have censorship is because R is

above the anticipated threshold.

And so this is equal to, just to give you

the formula.

that's the formula of conditional expectation, right?

So that's if it's for minus infinity to plus infinity,

this term will be the formula for expectation, right?

It's the value of a variable and the probability of

getting this value.

Now.

Again, a PDF is not exactly a probability of getting

a value, but it's really the best way to think

about it, right?

So it's like really when you think about it, think

about it this way.

What is expectation is the sum if you have a

discrete viable if the sum of the value times probability

of getting that value that it takes for all possible.

When it's continuous, what is the sum when it's continuous,

it's called an integral.

Indeed, really this is the way you generate integral is

basically by this it's a sum where the interval between

the sum goes to zero, and what is the probability

of getting a value?

It's the PDF, right?

So don't say this to a mathematician.

But you know for the purpose of remembering things that's

like the best way for you to do it, right?

So that's that's it, but we don't want the complete

expectation that from minus infinity to plus infinity what we

want is the expectation conditional on this being greater than

the threshold so the lower value here is the threshold.

That is going from the threshold to infinity, but no,

that's why the have the lower value here.

But no, we are not taking the full interval, we

are taking less than the full interval and we need

to normalise by to this, and so you normalise by

in here should be obviously, sorry.

The 1 minus F of.

Uh lowerbo A, which is to say, no you normalise

by because you're above this, right?

So that basically if you were to take, you know,

the Integral of this thing from our lower bar to

infinity divided by this thing that will be one.

So that's that's the idea of like renormalizing this for

the domain that you are studying, so dividing by the

probability of being in the right range of parameter.

So that's what it is.

Everybody's clear with like the way this way.

Just wanted to show you this.

So that's done that we need to think about probability

of getting censorship given M is equal to 0.

So this is my bedroom.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So what is censorship, right?

Censorship is Two events Right?

Basically, what is necessary for censorship to happen?

So that's one event and what is the other event.

so that the signal is equal to all right?

So basically censorship is a double event.

And the probability of M equals 0 conditional on the

censorship is basically the probability.

Of this, right?

The, the fact that like probability of getting no single

nothing condition of not getting censorship is equal to basically

the fact that you have observed nothing.

And the only reason nothing is revealed when there is

no censorship is because nothing has been observed.

And if the media received the signal in these 2

als to 0, that's the auto parts still have uh

probability to send could.

We don't know yet.

OK.

So uh empty sets, right?

I thought this is not 0, that's the empty set,

but it's a different thing.

And the set is observing nothing.

0 is all is equal to 0.

Yeah, and if the media receive nothing, of course, we

still have a chance to.

I mean, it's, you know, censoring and observing nothing is

equivalent.

Given that censorship is costly, they will never censor a

nothing message, and I would be paying the cost to

accomplish nothing.

So the autocrat knows that the media received that signal

of them the same.

Yes, they didn't know the signal of the metre.

So that's like, yeah, yeah, they decide the censorship after

observing as equal out.

Yeah.

So basically the only case in which this Sensor given

that the message was the empty set is that there's

no, is there a possibility in itself?

No.

So this, this.

Yeah, because censorship is costly, you will never censor an

empty set message, right?

What you will receive as a, as a citizen is

the same, you'll see nothing.

What I will get as an autocrat is I will

have to pay C to censors.

Basically not change what you see.

So we'll never be willing to discuss C.

So there's never any censorship of the S equalm decent.

And there's also no censorship if R is.

Below yeah yeah.

Yeah, I think we should express this more better than

this.

Yes, this is because I've done my base work completely

or uh uh Laporte.

As we were saying in French, obviously this was like,

you know, the law of conditional probability worked the other

way around.

I, I, I, I, I'm not good at all, not

good at all.

I'm gonna blame it on the jet lag.

No, I we do it as well.

This is like crazy stuff.

OK.

Now this is correct, this will pretend it never happened.

And if someone says something, I'm gonna erase it from

the recording and our mistakes are good and should be

present even when they happen here up, look at this.

OK.

Let's see, hopefully this time works better.

Let's see if we manage it.

So this is probability equal 1 given and observed nothing.

That seems to be much better already because It's the

other.

Mhm, that's not gonna work either.

Because you should always have as a condition or what

you know, what not you don't know.

Fuck, I think the problem comes.

It was correct before, so you see we will raise

this last 5 minutes, not the 5 minutes before.

OK, so apologies for this.

OK.

Yeah.

Yes, that's better, right?

What is the probability of C equals 1 conditional and

M is equal to and he said, is the probability

that S was equal to R.

Conditional on the end that we care about, right?

Yeah.

Which is Probability that M is equal to the empty

set given as equal 1.

Yeah.

Mhm.

See I'm not happy with this sing it and it

comes from the slide.

It doesn't come from.

So the only case you have censorship is if the

signal was equal to R.

You will never have censorship if the signal is equal

to the empty set, OK?

So what we want to know is, what is the

probability to observe nothing after the signal was as equal

to R.

Where is the probity of that the sin was as

equal law given that we observed nothing, which is basically

what is the probity there was censorship conditional and observing

nothing.

And the only sensor if S is equal to R,

never if S is equal to the MTC because it's

costly to censor and you receive the same information in

both cases.

So that it is probability of getting.

The message and he said, given that the media are

information, time the probability that the media are information, right?

This is not the probability that of getting all but

the probability that the media has information, times.

Same thing divided by the same thing plus probability of

getting the empty message, given that the message was empty

by the media, time what is the probability that the

media had no information.

So this is probability.

The media are in for, and this is probability, the

media in knowledge.

Information, right?

That's what it is this one.

It's the value of S that matters here.

And S can take to value either there is information

or there is no information.

That's much better already.

So what is the probability that the media has information?

We know it's gonna be Q.

It's Q probability that the media uncover up.

What is the probability?

That after uncovering up.

The voter observes nothing.

After the media has uncovered R, the voters still observed

nothing.

It's the probability that R is above the sensor and

sat indeed.

Now what's the probability that the message is nothing after

the signal that the media receive is nothing?

Can you observe anything and nothing after message nothing?

So what is the probability?

One.

1 times 1 minus Q, which is the probability of

doing nothing.

So what do we get?

We get.

This thing.

So what is the expected utility of revolting?

Putting everything together will be all times.

Mhm.

The other time we know that this other expectation was

0, where we said nothing was learned in this case.

So this is 0.

And so we get that the citizen revolts if and

only if Epsilon is less than going a bit faster.

This thing, right?

So the reason here you can see that this one

and this one drove by, right?

And so that's why here we just have Q.

This thing, this thing comes out, we just have Q

and they integrate here.

Yeah, just one question, why is the integral, why does

it not have bound if it's normal.

Upper bone or lower bound, that's this one, yeah, that's

infinite.

Do not have a distribution to Oh sorry sorry no

sorry, but thank you.

You were very thankful for because I was not understanding

the question, so very helpful that you intervene here problem

resolved problem resolved fantastic.

Great, perfect.

Thank you.

So why would I call that the probability of revolt.

So for the autograph.

If he sent us that is basically if the message

was Nothing if we also get the same so that's

put it.

So if he send all if the message was nothing,

but in this case there is nothing he can do,

the probability of revolt is equal to probability of epsilon

less than this whole thinking that I'm not gonna rewrite,

which we're gonna call it.

Yeah.

This term is here, right?

Just don't want to rewrite this very long thing twice

before we do a 5 minute break, let me just

kind of like close the game and then we will

study this a little bit more.

We can think that about the autocrat decision to censor

and it's gonna be basically what is it gonna be?

He knows that to tell you that the autocrat gets.

Let's say Bit's in power, so B times 1 minus

is probability of revolt given equal 1 minus cost of

sun, which is basically B 1 minus P epsilon.

PM is a minus the cost of sun 3.

Yeah.

Expected utility.

I'm going too fast and I don't because I wanted

to not to rush before the break.

Let's do a 5 minute break and then we're gonna

do this this far slower because this is a mistake

of me.

You should not rush something.

This is a very bad idea.

Don't do this in when you have a teach.

Do not rush.

Rule number one.

So let's do a 5 minute break and then we

get going and 15 we restart and we do the

autocorre decision to censor, and then we do 1 case,

which is the easiest one, which is the case where

C is equal to 0, so there's no cost of

censorship.

Right?

And we're going to think about a question that you

implicitly ask, you know, is, should the other part censor

every bad news, which is every R above 0, right?

Because that's the interesting thing.

Yeah Yeah.

You tell me to stop.

Pretty much yeah.

Before I said let's do it slowly, rushing never a

good idea.

So autocart, what happened?

You get B.

If he survives, and he gets 0, if revolts.

66.

And so there are two possibilities that it can be

any survive and he gets and the other case, the

only case where he's overthrown is if the succeed.

So the expected utility from.

Censorship what is what is one is probability.

There is a revolt given censorship times probability of success

of the revolt.

In which case the auto card gets 0, plus probability

failed revolt in this case, the autograph gets B.

The second thing is plus probability.

No revolt condition on C equals 1.

In this case, the autocrat gets B again minus C,

which is the cost of censorship.

The probability of revolt we know is P of empty

sets, that's the way we have called this probability above.

B plus sorry 1 minus R times B because probability

form is 1 minus R plus P of M B

1 minus.

P 1 minus P M B minus probability no revolt,

1 minus PM times B minus 8.

And so this is.

P and the times 1 plus 1 minus P become

1 and then you just have this last term here.

The expected utility.

From the censorship.

He's gonna be doing the same reasoning 1 minus PRR

B minus 0 in this case obviously because there's no

cost of censorship.

So E sensors, if I only.

The benefit from the expected utility from sensoring is greater

than.

The expected benefit from non-censoring or equivalently.

This is true.

So if you bring this on this other side, the

one is gonna drop, you're gonna get this expression strictly

greater than C.

So what is this is basically that is obviously the

cost of censorship, right?

That's going to be just to be complete function of

our uh.

Of R as we call it.

That's basically probability of revolt when you give information, probability

of revolt when you don't.

So this is your game, which is that you are

decreasing the probability of revolt from this value to that

value.

And what does it gets you, it gets you, you

know, RB which is kind of like, like how much

more likely.

You expected payoff in a report.

So you're basically decreasing the probability.

Of a reward and the gain from decreasing the probability

of a reward is out there.

So cost, expected benefits, expected benefit, less revolt, this is

kind of like what less revolt give you.

Everybody clear.

So what is array, but what is the value of

a lower ball?

No, it's not what I want to do.

Yeah.

Alright, so that at a lower.

This equality is true.

So we can find it in general, but we're going

to do a special case that is probably the most

interesting case, and the most interesting case is to suppose

that C is equal.

to 0.

And in this case, we ask ourselves, should the autocrats

censor all bad news, right?

The bad news in our world is quick, it's easy

to determine.

It's all greater than 0, right?

Because when R is greater than 0, its the value

of the regime is worse than the non-regime.

In equivalence is basically is R equal to 0 then

I basically saying is the lower bound over which the

sun are equal to 0 in this case.

Hi everybody Susan.

So the special case is easy because it's basically telling

us that PR are lower bar has to be equal

to P and set to say that probability that epsilon

is less than R minus.

Has to be equal to probability that epsilon is less

than in this case it's the special value so that

to be equal.

So this is basically the PMD set is equal to

this, right?

Notice that here I'm removing the anticipated on our lower

bar.

Why?

Because now we are trying to determine the value of

this threshold and in equilibrium, what do we know about

the value of the threshold?

For the vote for the citizen, hm it's it is

well it's not it's not, but it's correct in anticipation,

right?

It's it's slightly different you just right, the anticipation has

to be correct.

A little bit like, you know, when we did it

for the political agency model where we said that, you

know, the voter put an anticipated value of effort, but

at the end when we look for the exact level

of effort, we said oh this anticipation has to be

correct.

So here we are looking for the exact value of

the threshold, so the anticipation has to be correct again.

That's not just.

So another thing about probability, right, is that we know

that there are strictly, but especially because epsilon is normally

distributed.

We know this strictly increasing, right?

This is the CDF it's strictly increasing, so we can

remove the function in some sense.

But we can just basically, why does these two probabilities

equal?

Well, when the value on the right hand.

The right hand side, I'm correct.

I always see the value in the right hand side

of this two is the same, right?

That's, that's probabilities very clear on this.

Julia, yes, right, so this is basically let's call G.

The CDF.

Of epsilon, the epsilon.

Random viable.

So what we have here is G of R.

Kappa is equal to G of.

Yeah.

Mhm.

Right, that's just rewriting it with the G.

What do we know about this G function?

What is the property of this G function?

Even more than this, because it's important that it's even

more than this.

We need to be just precise.

Exactly, very good.

The G is strictly increasing.

Because you know if it was flat, we will not

be able to to do this so that's why we

know that this function is strictly increasing, right?

So when can this equality be satisfied with the strictly

increasing function?

It has to be that this is equivalent to the

argument of the function.

Being equal, right, if, if your function is strictly increasing,

they can only be equal.

There's the same function here.

This can only be equal if the thing that you

put inside the functions are equal, right?

So that's, that's the.

Now we can see that we have this term here

and this term there.

And what I'm gonna do is that I'm gonna bring

also that um here.

This one is in the denominator, I'm gonna bring it

here.

So this and this are gonna drop by and we're

gonna get.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Mhm Mm.

Then I decided not to do it.

So that's kind of like it should be our boss,

sorry, because we are evaluating it.

Attabo, so that's the function that defined the value of

this, that's the equation that defined the value of the

threshold.

OK.

So we're gonna show.

That there is at least one solution.

Between 0 and infinity.

At least one solution between 0 and infinity, and that

this solution is strictly greater than 0.

What we're not going to show is uniqueness.

There is uniqueness, but we're not going to show it.

So this is also to practise, why am I doing

this?

Because I also want you to practise working with things

that are not in close form solution, and we rarely

do it in the lecture, right?

And I want you to be able to see.

Once in the lecture before I leave you be and

you go and roam free in the world, right, which

will be in 2 weeks from now, but before we

do this, I want you to think that this type

of objects are things we can work with, right?

We are not gonna find a close form solution of

this space.

Impossible, but can we say something?

We want to show that there is something that goes

that way.

So let me say.

And that, you know.

You can think of it as the problem that we

have is that this is this side, it's gonna be

strictly increasing, so that's easy.

This side is the nasty bit, right?

But we want to show that there is a solution.

So this is, you can see that what we have

is basically, this is strictly increasing.

Between 0 and plus infinity because we think about all

this.

So what we want to understand is what is happening

with this one.

So the question is.

What are the properties of RHS?

What does RHS stand for?

Right, and everybody is clear.

I don't want to use acronym that you don't know,

right?

RHS stands for right hand side.

So these bits, right?

Let's call this K.

No K is a but, of course, H.

Of our lower bar, right?

This is the right hand side is this edge is

this word function.

So the first thing you can ask yourself is what

is H of 0?

You ask yourself what is H of 0 here?

And H of 0 is QQ1 minus F of 0,

which are to be 1/2.

Mhm.

Integral from 0 to plus infinity of this thing.

What I've just done is we place the zeal bar

here by 0.

What is the sign of this thing?

I mean, is it 0?

It's gonna be negative first?

It cannot be negative, right?

This is going from 0 to + infinity, it's a

positive term.

This is a positive term.

It is positive.

Is it equal to 0?

So is this equal to 0 here?

No, this is not equal to 0, right?

But it's clear.

Is this equal to 0?

The integral, this is not equal to 0, right?

It's like basically integrating the Normal distribution between 0 and

infinity is not equal to 0, right, in fact it's

strictly positive, so this.

is strictly positive.

This is strictly positive, everything is strictly positive.

What about?

Let me abuse notation for simplicity.

edge of infinity, right?

Suppose that like, you know, technically I should write limit

of H R lower barr goes to infinity, but we're

gonna start to save time and we're gonna treat like,

you know, the limit as, as a number.

So it is.

Q of Q 1 minus F of infinity plus 1

minus Q Infinity, infinity.

This Again, I'm abusing obviously, right, because it should be

limit at our bar goes our bar goes to infinity,

but I hope you will tolerate this abuse.

So this is of course 0 because F of infinity

is 1.

So it's Q 1 minus Q.

Infinity, infinity.

What is the value of an integral from one number

to the same number?

It's 0.

It's always 0, no matter what this number is, right?

It's basically think about you know integral is like a

sum of very, very, very tiny slot.

but when you do integral from the cell number to

the cell number, you're basically collapsing to no number of

things at all.

And it doesn't matter whether this number is infinity, some

like any number you want will give you the same

thing.

So this thing is equal to 0.

So the limit of this function as we go to

infinity is equal to 0.

So we know two properties.

The last property we know that needs to be known

is, is this function continuous or the jumps.

So what is continuous is everything goes smoothly, right, you

know, you're surfing kindly on a nice wave, that's continuous.

This continuous is like, you know, turbulence in an aeroplane.

It's like boom, boom boom boom, boom, you don't like,

we don't like this, right?

Is this function continuous or they jumps in the function?

It's continuous, right?

This is the normal, the of the normal, so that's

a continuous.

This is an integral with continuous function.

The integral of continuous function is continuous itself.

So the function is continuous.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So we have done 3 things and we did 3

things, we know that the solution.

Mhm.

There exists at least one hour bar and we also

know that it is strictly positive.

OK, so why?

So that's what the intermediate intermediate value theorem will allow

us to say, but let's do it graphically.

OK.

This is a ball.

We're going to start by drawing.

Above.

Notice that this is basically the left-hand side of the

equation.

This is the left hand side.

No.

coming from this thing.

And now we can draw.

The other function.

So what do we know of this other function?

The function H.

What do we know at 0 for the other function?

It's positive.

It's strictly positive, right, so we can put it, let's

put it here.

Right?

Where does it we know it ends?

It ends at 0, so then somewhere there, so you

know, you can do whatever form you want.

They will always cross except that like you see this,

this is magic.

He didn't like this film.

OK, so you can do either film you want.

It could be something like if you don't like this,

you can do something else, you could do something like

this, right?

It doesn't matter.

What matters is that it doesn't up here, right?

In this case, for example, there's a unique solution.

In this other case, there will be 3, OK.

But what is certain is that they will cross at

a certain point.

Why?

Because you know you start above.

And you know you are below and you know this

is continuous and you can see why continuity is also

an important property, right?

Because if it was not continuous, we could imagine this,

you know, and then drop here and then we could

not conclude that they cross.

The continuity means that we have certainty that they cross.

So we are not have enough to determine that there

is a unique equilibrium, a unique threshold that requires additional

property, but we have enough to determine that there is

at least one threshold, and we know that this threshold

has to be strictly greater than 0, which is something

we wanted to know to begin with.

And so I noticed that it was not very hard

to prove existence of one threshold that is strictly greater

than 0.

We have, we needed to do three things.

One, we took it at 0, that was not so

hard.

So on, we did the limits in a nasty way

but this was the idea.

That was not so hard either and continuity was obvious

to see.

Right?

And that was enough to do so.

So you don't need to have close form solution to

find something, right?

What you need to do is to basically think about

the properties of the object that you studied and you

can recover quite a bit of information there.

So what did we get?

We get that.

Not all bad news will be censored.

Not all bad news for the autocrat will be censored.

Some bad news are going to be in the system,

but sometimes the media is going to reveal that R

is strictly greater than 0.

So why is it the case?

That's, yes, sorry, sorry, can we conclude that it doesn't

all bad news from this?

So we, so from the math or from the logic

we haven't done the logic.

I understand.

OK, but we haven't done the logic yet.

OK, right, so this is.

Yeah, this is where I was going.

So indeed it's normally you're confused because we haven't done

it the logic yet so.

Mhm.

What is the trade-off in some sense for uh the

autocrats?

The trailer for the autocrat is the following.

So what would, what would the autocrat like to?

Probably the good would like to censor as much as

possible, right?

Especially these things, right?

But what is the problem?

The more you censor, the more the autocrat sensor.

The more the voter is going to think that the

fact that she observed the citizen is going to think

that no message is due to censor.

You see the logic, this is basically what is happening,

right?

The more you censor, the more I as a citizen,

think that the reason why I see nothing is censor.

And if I believe that the reason why I see

nothing is censoring.

Is this side too.

This is.

The more I'm gonna to put weight on this expectation.

Right, I'm gonna start to think that I observed nothing.

It's very likely to be censoring and so it's due

to this thing, right?

That's, that's what it's everybody's clear on, on this, right?

So you are basically the voter doesn't know whether there

is.

Observing nothing is due to censoring all the media recovering

nothing.

But the more you censor, the more the voter is

going to believe, the city is going to believe that

observing nothing is due to censoring.

Is very clear on this.

Yes.

As she believes more and more than observing nothing is

due to censoring, she's gonna put more weight on this

expectation, which is basically the expectation that R is above

a certain thresh.

So if it fine.

So what is the property of this expectation, right?

The property of this expectation is that this is always

strictly greater.

And the threshold that you have with them.

Why?

Because you are saying, why is the probability that R

is above this value, right?

So you're always thinking about being above this value which

makes you strictly above this value.

And so that is a very, very bad expectation for

the autocrat, right, because it's basically believing more and more

about this.

So that is making for the autograph very costly to

censor.

That's why it's creating a bomb and almost the autocrat

can censor, even if censorship is free, rational citizen understand

that the more you censor, the worse it is there,

and the more you basically, the more weight they put

on this, and that's a bad expectation for the algebra.

So everybody is clear on this trade-off for the autocrat

and things like that.

So that has not yet answered your question, but at

least we are going there, right?

Do we see the logic here?

Is everybody clear on this kind of effect?

So why does it have to be that censorship is

above 0?

Now why is it like we know the constraint on

censorship, why it has to be that the censorship is

always above here.

Well, suppose censorship was, suppose this threshold was zero.

Now what is happening basically is that with censorship, what

is basically the expectation of the voter, it's a weighted

average of OK.

This expectation, which happened without censorship and that expectation.

We have with censorship.

But basically, and the weights of the posterior, we're getting

the likelihood of censorship.

Right?

This is if you want to see it.

It's it, right?

This is.

This is what happened whenovs have nothing, and this is

gonna be a weighted sum of these two terms.

Which we have here, here and here.

Everybody is clear on, on this.

What are these to term is a weighted sum of

0, and if you put the threshold at 0 here,

something strictly greater than 0.

This is 0.

This, if you put the threshold equal to 0 is

something strictly greater than 0.

So what is happening is I have an expectation between

the two.

0 something strictly greater than 0, and therefore, the sum

of these two term has to be strictly greater than

0.

So that is kind of like, you know, worse than

me revealing to you that R is equal to 0.

So that's why it has to be.

So what is happening is basically I'm gonna constrain I

have to be to sense or less, yeah.

This is going indeed to also increase the thing, but

the way that I put on this is gonna go

down.

To the point where basically I know that like you

know I can satisfy the fact that I mean different

between telling you what the R is and censoring it

and so that's the idea that is happening in this

type of game.

So let's do one more thing and then I, I,

I, I'll give you just one idea of what our

elections, but really just to tell you one thing.

Just one more thing is, if you think about it,

why I told you at the beginning that Q was

very important, that Q was not equal to 1, or

rather than 1 minus Q was strictly positive, right.

Suppose that Q.

is equal to 1.

That is the media always observe information.

OK?

So if Q is equal to 1, you can see

that this posterior here.

Is equal to one.

What it means is that you put all the weight

and censorship.

You always believe that censorship is the reason you've said

nothing, but if you put all the weight and censorship,

whatever the threshold that you choose, the expectation of the

voters regarding our strictly greater than this threshold.

What does it mean?

Whatever the threshold that you choose, you would rather reveal

this threshold to the voter and makes decision on this

quantity rather than either the threshold to the voter and

making decision on this quantity which is fiscally greater than

this yet leading to more.

Protests and stuff like this.

So you know, give me an hour bar and our

lower bar.

I'm always better as the autocrat to reveal it to

you than to hide it.

But of course that's unravelled until the unique bar that

is working is infinity, which means what everything is always

revealed.

And that is called the unravelling argument of disclosure again

if Q is equal to 1, if you know that

I, all the reason you don't see anything is because

I hide it from you, everything unravel and I will

reveal you everything all the time.

And in fact these are a very important principle for

the rest of your life.

Remember it.

I swear to you, remember it.

No news is bad news.

So when someone doesn't tell you something.

You know you're getting screwed.

I tell you that.

And that's like because people don't understand that you have

done against theory, so you should understand unravelling argument.

You know, if you know someone as a piece of

information and that person is not giving you that piece

of information, you need as people.

that have taken in C453 to remember that you are

getting screwed.

No news is bad news.

This is the principle of revelation dynamic, right?

So let me say one more word, right?

Two things very quickly.

Thing number one.

Why is there censorship?

Because, and why is this censorship the way it is?

Why is there free press in some sense, partially free

press, some information going on in autocracies, because if there

was too much censorship.

The autocrats would basically suffer, will not be able to

protect himself from revolt.

So what is censorship for?

It is in a way to control the likelihood of

revolt from the population.

You have a model of elections and the model of

election, what is happening is there is basically a challenger

that then comes in and If there is an election,

there is a chance that the value of the regime

or the value of changing the regime is is basically

revealed to the population.

So what is the work of the challenger in this

world to come and, you know, reveal to the population

the value of changing regime?

It's exactly the same as the value of the media.

So basically the way scholars have thought about the.

in autocracies are exactly the same way as censorship has

been sought in autocracy, which is basically you will say,

you know, you will be blocking elections when you think

really it's gonna be R is too hard, but you

will allow elections when basically R is a little bit,

you know, lower than the thresh even if you may

be.

Because of an election loses with more than 50% probability,

right, because if all overbo is is above zero, the

probability of a revolt is R minus epsilon could be

above is above 50%.

So you could be losing also in this type of

way.

So election and censorship, there's a huge similarities between the

two.

Right?

And that's basically what has been going on in more

types of elections.

They can be a bit different, but the basic principle

is the same.

It is a form of information control, right?

I will like an election in order that when you

don't see elections, it maximise my chance of survival.

So it is a form of information control as well,

right?

So that leads me to the more general point we

so election censorship and others.

That's why I don't feel guilty not showing them to

you, right?

That leads me to the more general point to answer

the question we ask ourselves at the beginning of these

two lectures.

I, I ask, why do we see institutions in autocracies

like parliament, like some partially free press, like elections.

And the reason is to the advantage of the autocrat,

it is for the autocrats that we see this, so

in some sense, whereas in democracies these things like election.

These things like the press, these things like parliament are

meant to allow voters to better control their politicians.

In autocracy, the principle is flip, and these institutions are

meant to allow autocrats to better control other and sometimes

to better control themselves.

Like in the case of Pa.

So who benefit from institutions in autocracies.

Surprise, surprise, the one we impose them, and surprise, surprise,

that's the autocrats, right?

So I want you to think that in autocracy institution

flip their role relative to democracies.

They are not meant to help voters, they are meant

to uh leaders.

Right, so that's the principle of this.

So next week, we'll do the uh last lecture among

us, which is like the democratisation lecture, and you know,

tomorrow Jim Robinson is talking in case you managed to

get tickets for this.

So.

All right, I'm kind of on time, so I'm happy

and that's it.

See you next week.

We do a bit of.

Lecture 20:

In this lecture, we are gonna.

I always have hope to do 3 things, but mostly

managed to do only 2.

So we are going to.

Go over quickly the Armolo and Robinson famous paper on

democratisation.

And the reason we go quickly over is because you

have to solve it in your last problem set for

Fridayon at 9 a.m., I'll be impressed by whoever show

up and be kind to Paul Louisa who, you know,

is gonna wait for you at 9 a.m. uh.

1010.

OK, slightly better, sorry.

The other thing we will do is I will spend

a little bit more time on a paper by Lizarian

Pacisco, and one of the reasons we will do this

as well is because this paper show you you can

use a probabilistic voting model even to study questions like

democratisation.

So it's it's pretty nice to do this so that

we remind you a bit about how we do probabilistic

voting model which we haven't seen for a while.

And then that's the hope that was that is always

getting dashed is the one where I hope I show

you some empirical evidence and one paper in particular using

Russian evidence, but you know we'll we'll see if we

even manage to glance over it before the end of

uh the lectures.

Alright, so any questions on anything?

No.

Why do we study democratisation?

Why do we, why do we study democratisation?

Why?

Because we have to finish on a positive note from

time to time, right?

If we think that there is a good thing happening

with democracy, for those of you who believe this, we

finish on a positive note.

For those of you who think democracy is crap, we

will finish on a negative note, you know, it is.

So the question.

That we want to ask is why the democratisation and

there is a popular view that it will come through

popular uprising and indeed we have many historical example, the

French revolution, I say revolutions in plural because we have

many, we did 3 in, you know, 70 years.

60 years event we are also of course Eastern Europe

in the 1990s and more recently we had the Arab

Spring happening and maybe you know today this week we

can see a revolution or at least an attempt that

revolution happening in front of our eyes through a popular

uprising in Turkey.

So this is but.

The popular uprising story is not really, you know, kind

of like necessarily appealing because it miss one element.

If I'm Mel.

And I find that there is a risk of revolution.

Why don't I manage to compromise with the kind of

like the leaders of the elite with the dissidents and

things like this?

Why is it the case that, you know, I let

the popular uprising happen?

Why can't I anticipating it burn my policies a little

bit to avoid the popular uprising altogether.

And so one question is, and given that the elite

should be smart, should anticipate the risk of uprising, under

which condition will there be democratisation in this case on

which condition will the elite be able to give a

bit of like uh to give a bit to keep

a lot.

Another case, the problem with the popular uprising view is

that that doesn't fit some patterns, right?

In particular, there is no democratisation happened in the US

and by this I mean the fact that the franchise

was extended to many citizens in the US when it

was very restricted to begin with.

It's not that it happened in England.

Right, kind of like, especially after 1689, most kind of

like democratic changes such as the Reform Act happened through

any decision, very little through a popular uprising, though there

is a paper in the slide by Toke Ait and

co-author that make.

That gives some role to threat in the democratisation in

England so you can check it out.

We will not have to see this one for sure

and maybe Spain more recently was not opening was more

happening through the king and the elite giving power than

through a pure popular uprising.

So what we want to understand is also when will

elite be willing to extend the franchise to give.

Some of that power away to other people, right?

And so that's the second type of question we're gonna

ask.

So what we're gonna do is we're gonna look at

what should be seen as not competive theories, even though

I think some of the scholars that are involved here

would see them as competing, but much more as complementary

theory.

One is democratisation due to threats or under the threat

that's the Robinson.

One is democratisation due to any division, and that's gonna

be Liar and Pacisco.

And then, you know, that's the optimist mistake would be

to look at empirical evidence that are linked to one

or the other, especially linked to this one that is

a much more popular theory than this second one.

All right, so any question now?

We're good.

So let me give you an overview, and by this

I mean I'm not going to solve it on the

uh electronic whiteboard.

I will just go through the slide with you and

that's because you are going to solve it with yourself

and it maybe in group I recommend in group because

you're going to bang your head against the wall and

with Louisa.

So they consider a repeated game, infinitely repeated game with

two groups.

The rich that are minority of the population and the

poor that are majority and the rich and the poor

are gonna differ in their productivity and we're gonna assume

perfect competition so rich are gonna be in power at

the beginning of the game and they're gonna make two

decisions one is going to the tax rates.

And then it's going to decide whether to extend the

franchise.

The ball can, so I can decide whether to extend

the franchise first.

The ball can then start the revolution.

And after this first kind of like exchanges, what is

going to happen is if the franchise has not been

extended and there has been no revolution, the rich are

choosing the tax rate, if the franchise has been extended

and there has been no revolution, the poor choose the

tax rate, and if there has been a revolution, the

poor grab all the goods from the elite.

And so the tax rates.

Is going to be constrained to be less than one

the the micro fund this in a very cute way,

but you know it's just like making things complicated.

So what we are gonna do it is like we're

gonna just assume that you cannot tax up to 100%,

and this tax rate give a transfer to all citizens.

What is the revolution doing?

So the revolution does two things.

One, there's going to be a destruction of resources in

the revolution.

Second, there is going to be control of all assets

by the poor.

So the revolution they have in mind is really very

much a Bolshevik revolution, right, but I'll I'll discuss this

assumption a bit more.

I used to very much dislike the way they were

doing it, but I think it really is not mattering

at all.

I'll discuss to you.

I'll tell you what is really the key assumptions for

the result to go through, right?

And that is not one of them.

The fact that revolution destroys some of the resources or

that revolution is costly is much more important.

And in particular the fact that revolution can be either.

A little bit costly, that is when you is equal

to mul over above or very costly when new is

equal to mu per bar which in fact is saying

all resources are being destroyed, right?

Again, the values do not matter.

What matters is that there is a state of the

world in which revolution can happen because it's not too

costly, and the state of the world where revolution will

never happen because it's too costly, right?

So that's really much more important, right.

In fact, even this could be relaxed.

What matters is that there's one case where revolution is

not so costly and one case where revolution is very

costly, even if this, you could still have revolution.

And we're gonna assume that this kind of like the

risk of revolution is I idea over time and the

probability that it's the risk of revolution is high, which

means the cost of revolution is low is equal to

cure right there's a very strange thing that new lower

bar says the cost of revolution is low, which means

the risk of revolution is high.

Low cost of revolution, high risk of revolution.

Yeah, I the IAD assumption maybe too strong or or

it doesn't matter.

I think it's, I think it's very strong.

I think it really helped the analytical uh analysis, but

I don't think it's changing that much, uh, any of

the results, so I'm not too worried about this.

So what are the payoffs?

So if there is no revolution, the rich gets their

income from wage, so which is their productivity, net of

taxation, plus some transfer.

If there is a revolution, they get 0%.

The post per pay payoff is their income net of

taxation plus transfer, there's no.

Revolution if there is a revolution, they grab all the

resources and they divide it between between themselves and they

pay kind of like a cost from revolution which is

there are some destruction of resources so that's kind of

transfers I equal to basically tax times.

Um, the amount from taxation and the discount factor is

better.

Yeah.

What is happening every period?

Nature draws the cost of revolution.

Is it low?

Is it high?

The rich decide whether to extend the franchise.

If the ris do not extend the franchise, they choose

the tax rate.

So are the poor decide to undertake a revolution if

the revolution poor control of resources in current and future

period.

If no revolution in franchise is extended, the port choose

the tax rate in current and future period.

So, and the equilibrium concept is our friend Markov perfect

equilibrium.

So Remember that in Markov, it's like a stationary game

that is the strategies are always the same, but not

always the same in every player, always the same conditional

on state variable, right?

So same state.

happening some strategies.

The past has no impact, but the future does, right?

So you do not care how you got there.

What you care once you're there is what you do

anticipating what people are going to do in the future.

Right, so it's not a story dependent from the past,

it's future dependent.

So, in this paper, what are the state variables or

valuables?

Mhm.

Mhm.

Exactly.

So one of them very good is who is in

power, right?

In particular, whether we are in a nearly dominated world,

which will be state of the world, in a democracy

world where the poor have control of the tax rate

which should bed or in a revolution revolutionary state right

which so there is indeed this, but it's not all

just this.

There's another state variable.

The cost of Indeed, the cost of revolution, that's gonna

be the other viable because that's gonna affect the strategies

of factors, right?

So strategies are gonna be basically dependent on if you

are eliting power.

The cost of revolution because that's the only time it

matters for democracy it's kind of easy.

The poor are going to put maximum taxation all the

time because they are poor and revolution is what we

call an absorbing state.

Once you are a revolution, nothing happens, so, so that's

it, right?

And that's it.

So we are going to assume.

That the poor prefer to be in power and control

the tax rate of our revolution.

That's uh that's kind of like something they want.

Otherwise nothing really interesting happened.

You can never get extension of the franchise if the

poor prefer revolution because they would rather do a revolution

that democracy and in fact you will always have revolution

in this case.

All right, so let's think about the player's objective.

What is the best option?

In this way.

What would they like best?

What is better for them?

If you were a member of the rich group, what

would you like?

That's true, but that doesn't tell me which one you

like.

Because it could still be D and E of no

revolution.

It's E, right?

What is best is always to be in control, right?

That is like common thing in the world.

The worst option on the other hand is exactly what

you said is revolution, right?

So what they're going to try to avoid is revolution

at all costs, and that is really the important assumption,

right?

It's not that revolution gives them a pair of zero,

is that they are worse off in a revol.

than in any other region.

And so that's really the key assumption for the model

to go through.

What is the best option as we know, is democracy.

So what is the basic problem, right?

That is that that this that the rich are gonna

face right in democracy, it's easy.

We get the tax rate, maximum tax rate because the

poor benefit from a distribution, so maximum tax.

So what is not extended the franchise, right?

What is going to happen is that the rich are

going to choose the tax rate to avoid a revolution.

So when the cost of revolution is very high, so

therefore there's no risk of revolution whatsoever, what is happening

is that the rich are going to choose a tax

rate of 0.

It doesn't have to be zero, it could be a

very low number, right?

Low rate of revolution that period, given that strategies are

only dependent on state variables.

We choose very low tax rate in this particular way

they model it, the tax rate is going to be

zero, but what matters that it's a very low tax

rate.

When the cost of revolution is low, so the risk

of revolution is high, what is happening is that they're

gonna try to find a tax rate to leave the

poor indiffer between revolution and no revolution that period.

OK.

So that's kind of like the idea of this game.

So one is like when there is no risk, when

the cost of revolution is very high, no tax rate

in this particular setting, zero redistribution.

When the cost of revolution is low, what the rich

are going to try to do.

is to find the tax rate today that leave the

point different between accepting the lack of franchise extension with

and you know, so different between revolution and keeping the

elite in power, but they also anticipate the pull that,

you know, in the future, the game is gonna be

played eternally in the same way, which is basically.

They anticipate that in the future next period, the cost

of revolution may be very large and so therefore they

are not going to get a lot of redistribution or

the cost of revolution may be low and that they're

gonna get redistribution.

So they anticipate that, you know, in the future, things

are going to be alternating between these two things, right?

And they need to be made indifferent with the tax

rate like this.

So that's basically the idea.

These alternates when the risk of revolution is high, the

cost is low, what the rich are doing is basically

saying I make you indifferent between keeping me in power,

anticipating that next period we might have very little redistribution

or starting a revolution.

Now if it proves to be impossible, so.

If it proves impossible for the rich to buy off

the poor today, that is, even if you give them

maximum redistribution when the cost of revolution is low, they

will still prefer the poor to start a revolution.

What do you do as a rich elite?

No, you will get revolution in this case, and you

do want to avoid revolution, right?

So let me rephrase.

What the rich wants to, everybody is clear that what

the rich wants to do, basically, I'm gonna cheat and

use the pot.

So what they want to do is like when.

New tea is equal to new bar.

Which Want to find.

To uh of me such that the poor with the

rich in power.

Where's Low revol cost of revolution are indifferent between.

Keeping the lead in place and keeping.

I'm starting a revolution.

That's what the rich wants to do, right?

The problem of the rich is that this thing, right,

is gonna, in the future, it can be that the

state.

Changes in fact with probability 1 minus Q, it will

become a high cost of revolution in which case the

poor are going to get a payoff of 0.

So one problem the rich are facing is going to

be this.

I'm gonna come back to this, right?

But you know, suppose.

So Suppose that if the rate of revolution is low.

Sorry, is high.

The cost of revolution is low.

The proposed maximum taxation this period.

Even then, the poor prefer revolution to this.

What should the rich do in this case?

No, again, that would be worse.

What the poor want is maximum redistribution.

If you don't tax, you're gonna get a revolution.

What do the rich wants to avoid at all costs?

So what do they do to avoid the revolution?

What is the last option you have?

Basically the nuclear option to avoid a revolution.

What can you do?

No, you cannot, you're at the max.

You have one more thing one more ace in your

sleeve.

You extend the franchise.

Right?

In that case you extend the franchise.

So when is the franchise going to be extended?

If one.

The cost of Basically, the cost of revolution is low,

the rich cannot buy off the people.

And that is like, you know, the insight here, but

before you just like say clap clap clap Nobel Prize.

Right, let's think about how this can arise.

Why can this arise in the in the model, right?

As I said, and we will see because I'll show

you in the slide in this thing, what are the

poor thinking about?

They are thinking that, you know, OK, today that's great.

I get large redistribution.

But tomorrow the state might change and it can be

that the cost of revolution becomes very high and I

will get no redistribution, right?

And that's why these things might happen, right, because if

the state if the cost of revolution is always low.

You know, given that You will never have this inequality

because that's like the payoff from democracies and we know

the payoff from democracy is greater than the pay from

revolution.

So you really need the thing that you know, next

per year there is a risk that the state change,

the cost of revolution become very high.

There's no redistribution and that's what can lead that situation

to emerge.

And that's the reason why.

But in fact, the problem that the rich face is

that they cannot commit.

To have a high tax rate in the future.

If the cost of revolution changes and become high, they

cannot commit to do this, right?

And so what is franchise extension do it it's basically

solving the rich commitment problem.

It's allowing to tell to the poll, I'm committing to

you that you will have a redistribution because you will

be the one deciding on redistribution.

Right, so that's kind of like the second insight of

Asimolo and Robinson, and this is what drives this potential

inequality, right?

The fact that like next period.

The state can change.

I will not be able to commit to give you

a redistribution, and that kind of like decrease the payoff

that you get as a poor from keeping me in

office, right?

That's the commitment problem.

And what a franchise extension is doing is saying don't

worry about commitment, you decide the tax rate.

I solved the commitment problem.

That's basically the insight club club, club Nobel Prize.

But there's one little problem with this.

I mean, that's correct in the mother.

There is one problem with this whole story.

Yes, yes, not in your problem set where they can

switch back and forth.

Yes, but in this version of the model, yes, it

happens it happens.

Doesn't matter.

What really matters is that what really matters is the

ranking of payoff.

So really what matters that the rich prefer to keep

power to democracy and they prefer democracy to revolution.

The poor prefer democracy to revolution.

That's really all that matters.

It doesn't the rest of it doesn't matter like besides

what we're gonna say no.

Right, so don't think about like the payoff as being

very important in terms of like they're important to give

us one condition, but they're not very important in terms

of giving us something, you know, more than illustrative, right?

What really matters is the ordering of payoff and the

additional thing I'm gonna put in front of you.

So that's what gives them their result plus the commitment

with the commitment from them.

So, The commitment problem come from this, right?

Like I think.

Low cost, high redistribution, high cost, no redistribution.

Again, no redistribution doesn't matter.

I just have to be some very low number, right?

That's, that's the commitment problem, right?

But why is this?

This is key for the commitment problem, right?

It's key that when the cost of revolution is very,

very large.

The rich puts no taxation, no redistribution, nothing.

Why do we have this?

What is it that they basically put into their paper,

notice that I said into that paper that lead them

to this.

To have this behaviour in equilibrium.

So let me put it to like, let me rephrase.

Why is it?

That, you know, we don't have an equilibrium where we

choose the same tax rate every period, right, no matter

the new, and when there is a deviation, at the

next kind of like opportunities, the poll do a revolution

if there's no franchise extension.

Why is this type of equilibrium with a green trigger

strategy of some sort, not a possibility.

At a tax rate constant, if the rich deviate, then

basically punishment with revolution that will lead to franchise extension.

Why is it not a possibility?

What do they do that make this impossible?

And in this world we will have commitment, right?

It will be the rich will commit and this commitment

will be sustained by the threat of green trigger strategy.

Why can this happen?

What is it that forced the equilibrium to always be

a function of state valuables?

And not pass this story.

Why is it that the poor cannot punish a deviation?

So for example, where you know, you sustain a constant

tax rate and if the rich suddenly deviate, you punish

them with.

It's the fact that you don't know if in that

scenario.

No, it's even deeper than this.

They will deviate in a world where you know the

cost of revolution is high for sure, but what is

sustaining this, making it impossible to have a scenario where

the tax rate is constant, the rich commit and this

commitment is sustainable through grim trigger strategy is the choice

of mark of perfect equilibrium.

Mark of perfect equilibrium means that doesn't matter deviation, the

past has no impact.

Only the strategies, only the present and the future does,

right?

And the present and the future means that when the

cost of revolution is very large.

The tax rate has to be 0.

That's basically the.

What is driving this, right?

So where is this?

Kind of like alternating things coming from it's coming from

the use of Markov perfect equilibrium as an equilibrium concept.

And so why do we have a commitment problem in

this game?

Not because of the setup, but because of the choice

of the equilibrium concept.

So the commitment problem is a fake one.

Does not exist.

It is a feature of a choice of an equilibrium

concept, but it didn't matter because the story was so

good, you know I talked to so many people about

this problem and every people say, oh yeah, you're right,

but it's still a great story and this is driving

me completely mad.

Right, it's basically cheating.

You make it you make a commitment problem appearing because

you force the rich to be unable to commit.

Of course if you cannot commit a commitment problem can

appear.

A very interesting question is, suppose you could commit.

And still then you're not able to do so there

you have a very kind of like you know real

commitment problem.

It's like, well, suppose the rich cannot commit guess what?

There is a commitment problem now and you're like, oh

yes, that's kind of like obvious to happen, right?

This is like this is kind of like the whole

model, the whole story.

Is built on the equilibrium concept.

Right?

So the franchise solved the commitment problem that exists because

of MPA.

Change the commitment, the thing, then you will know whether

commitment is really at the source of the problem.

I haven't done it, but you know this is like

you could probably better use of your time, but you

know this is, I don't think so.

Everybody use this this equilibrium concept drives me mad, drives

me mad.

Yeah, Especially for the problem they want to make, right,

which is commitment drives franchise extension, commitment problem drives franchise

extension, but they, they kind of like artificially created that

commitment problem with Markov perfect equilibrium.

All right, so like this being said, this is, you

know, what I told you is if you can.

Suppose that you know we are in a case where

the rich are always in power.

If you can't buy off the ball when the cost

of revolution is low.

That is, give them a greater pay while remaining in

power than revolution, then you're basically going to not have

a revolution by offering tax in acceptance.

And if we are in this case, as I said,

what is going to happen is that we are gonna

get franchise extension.

I think this.

Yeah.

This is always going to be the maximum tax rate

in the first case.

So no, no, no, if, if this inequality is strict,

they will choose the tax rate that equalise these two.

But what we want to check is that like, sorry.

What we want to check is this because we know

that if this happen, we will have to have franchise

extension at least with positive probability.

Right, so that's.

That's the same.

They also solve the model wrong.

Which is quite something, right?

And that to issue a correction recently that they didn't

realise that one the equilibrium about to be in mixed

strategy at some point.

So, but like here you will have to have franchise

extension with positive pro.

So that's kind of like, because that's the case where

you can buy.

If we are here, you know, then you can avoid

and the tax rate can be lower than that.

So the question is when do we have this?

And that's the question.

So to do this, you know, you think about the

continuation value if, and that's the same thing you're gonna

do in your problem site with the tweak that you

can have back and forth.

You do the continuation value where you think about if

you know daily time power, the cost of revolution is

low and there's maximum taxation.

Which is the one we want to compute because you're

gonna get this is the pair of today for the

pole and then tomorrow what can happen with probability Q

we are back in the same state, so we get

the same thing with probability 1 minus Q, we move

to the state where there is no risk of revolution,

right?

And if in your point, what you will change is

this Q, which will be like different, but other than

this, nothing will change.

What happened when you know, the cost of revolution is

very high, so there is no tax rate, while today

they get just an income from wage because there's no

redistribution, and tomorrow we get the same thing.

So what you can do kind of like combining 3

and 4, you get these values of like, basically, what

is the value of always having the rich in power

when there is a low cost of revolution will implement

maximum taxation.

This is just kind of like what you get from

this.

Now, what you can do after this is that you

compare this to the pair from revolution and you get

this inequality, right?

And that's basically when this inequality.

Then we know that there will be franchise extension with

positive probability.

And one very important thing about this remark, let me

remove all the things, one very important thing is that

This left hand side, so these values is strictly increasing

with Q.

Which made usque increases.

It becomes easier to avoid franchise extension.

When Q increases, franchise extension becomes easier to avoid.

Why is it the case that when Q increases, franchise

extension is easier to avoid?

Let me just like not give you the answer from

the slide.

So why is it the case that as Q increases,

in fact, it's easier to see it from here intuitively.

We get to see.

Less chances of franchise extension.

So let's rewind and let's think about the commitment problem

that the rich are facing, right?

Remember, franchise extension is a way in this model to

remove commitment problem by giving control of taxation to the

poor, right?

That's the way it works.

Now, what is this commitment problem?

This commitment problem is when The cost of revolution is

very high.

There will be 0 taxation.

That's the commitment problem.

What are the chances that basically we arrive here?

But we are in this state where the cost of

revolution is very high.

It introduces because is.

What are the chances?

1 minus Q, right indeed.

So basically as Q increases, there are less and less

chances that we will be in the case where the

rich are putting lower redistribution and more chances that we

are in the case where the rich are redistributing because

of the threat of revolution, right?

So as Q increases, the commitment problem of the rich

decreases.

And if the commitment programme of the rich decreases, there

is less need to do franchise extension to solve this

commitment problem.

So that's why Q is basically that's also another point

that people don't understand very well, and you can talk

to including many academics.

Is that in Asimolu and Robinson model, the high threat

of revolutions and the high risk of revolution IQ are

actually a good thing for the rich up like up

to a certain point, but like in general it's a

good thing for the rich, right, because it helps them

staying in power but helping them to commit.

To commit to high redistribution very often, right?

So the high risk of revolution, the high probability of

revolution in the future is actually good news for the

rich, not bad news for the rich, right?

So sometimes if there is some stickiness.

It's actually good for the rich, not bad, because that

means it's equivalent to an increasing cheer, and so that's

kind of like the, the lesson of this paper, right?

So that's something we need to remember when you think

about Asimolon Robinson is one.

What is the problem that the rich rates they face

the problem of commitment problem of not putting I distribution.

When there is low rate of revolution, when the cost

of revolution is very high, right, that's the one thing.

Where does this commitment problem come from?

Mark of perfect equilibrium as an equilibrium concept.

That's Stefan's a side parenthesis, OK.

What is kind of happening with the franchise, it's a

way to solve.

Commitment problem by giving control of the tax rate to

the poor rather than keeping it for yourself.

Why is this commitment problem very, very strong when Q

is very, very low, when really your chance of getting

power of the revolution is almost just today and never

in the future.

Right, so that's kind of like when that this case

really, you know, it's if it's a one-off as the

poor like nowhere again you're gonna get a chance for

the foreseeable future, you really want to do the revolution,

the rich, no, no, no, no worries, we give you.

Power, right?

So there's this really kind of like strange aspect that

it's really the less strong you are, revolutionary in type

of future, the more likely you are to get the

franchise extension in this moment.

All right, so.

I think it's best to do a 5 minute break.

To be uh restarting at 5 and so we are.

Very much on time not to do the part 3.

But I'll try to uh do the part two in

a way that is uh relatively unnatural.

So, This is gonna be a model where We're gonna

return to one of our first love, probabilistic voting model,

as I said, and here we're gonna have like 3

groups and two parties, I call him L and R

but it could be A and B.

And we are going to start with the idea that

two groups are enfranchised, group 1 and 2.

And they can decide whether to extend the franchise to

group 2 by majority vote.

So parties are going to propose an allocation of a

budget between targeted transfer to group J and it's going

to be actually targeted transfer to individuals from Group J.

So transfer are gonna have to be multiplied by the

number of people in this group and public good provision.

Which for some reason they could uh they called I.

And then their franchise group votes.

Vote sincerely for one of the two parties.

So, So this is Lizzie and P persica.

So we have 3 groups.

Of size.

N 0 and 1 and 2, and we're gonna assume

that.

Basically, group 2 is the biggest, Group 1, group 0.

We're gonna have like office motivated.

Candidates.

And then I choose.

Transfers.

And again it's individual transfer to Guje.

And just to be clear, you cannot choose how many

individuals you pick in group J.

So, if I give you 1 pound, it's 1 pound

multiplied by the number of people in the room, all

of you will get 1 pound.

OK, so it's like.

And probably good eye.

The utility.

For voter I.

In Group J From Voting For candidate.

Capital J is going to be.

How much they get as transfers.

Bless you.

Plus, The value they get from public good, which is

V, that's a scale up, G of I and G

is gonna have all the nice property we love.

I'd like, you know, concave in another condition, everything.

Plus A violent shock.

For help.

So we return to our idea of violent shock.

So this is.

And we are going to assume that It's uniformly distributed

over -1 over 25G.

Let me see if yeah 21 over 25G.

And we're gonna assume that.

Phi 0 is strictly greater than P1 and P2.

Yeah.

What does it mean that P 0 is strictly greater

than P1 and P2?

It means that group zero is more homogeneous.

Now, how do we Think about this in the, in

our settings.

So let's take the case of England, because it's quite

inspired by this.

You can think of Group zero as being the landed

elite.

And these are like basically the gentry.

And indeed, they are like, basically they were just doing

like lamb stuff so they just had the same type

of like objectives, tariff to be able to sell the

agricultural products at a high price.

The one, you can think of it as the industrialists

that were rising across the period.

But of course, they were industrialists in different kind of

like domains, textile, mines and stuff like this.

So they are quite divided.

And as a result, you know, P1 is greater than

it's less than 0, which means the violent shock is

more spread out than for the landed elite.

P2 could be understood as, you know, workers, urban workers,

agricultural workers, and things like this, right?

So it's the rest of the people.

Right, this is, this is the idea.

And so, If voter I From J can vote She

was.

For all if an only.

Let's put it like this.

If what she gets from L.

Plus The violent shock that she receives is greater than

what she gets.

From up.

And with this, let me say that they can maximise

vulture, not probability of winning.

With this, we can get.

The board chair of Canada A in Group J, if

Group J is enfranchised.

Right How do we do this again?

So, of course, the candidate doesn't know.

Right, the delta IJ this is drawn after the proposed

the platform.

We are really in the typical probabilistic voting model, right?

This is candidate proposed event first.

The group decide whether to extend the franchise.

Candidate propose their platform voting happen.

The citizen observed the delta voting happen, right?

So this is, this is the way, right?

So the problem of the candidates that they don't know

delta, OK.

This is a random variable from their perspective and from

this pro this condition, we can determine the vote share

of Candidate L in group J.

If Group J is enfranchised, what is it gonna be?

The probability that they win, which is the probability of

delta being bigger than what we arrange.

So it's the so it's gonna be equal, not the

probity that they win, but this the reasoning is correct,

it's gonna be equal to the probability that one voter

from Group J votes for her, right, because we have

this mass of voters, right?

So it's understood in the poverty they win voter a

vote which is like the same thing, yeah.

Right, so I'm gonna call it It's gonna be this.

This thing, right?

It's like again thanks to the math, the vote is

equal to the probability that one voter cast a ballot

for that candidate in that group.

Yeah, in this case they're maximising share I think they

didn't want to bother with double.

Did you say like an idiosyncratic cost and the cost

of.

Of like that is common to they just wanted to

make it simpler.

That's the reason, right?

It's not really important, but uh that was the reason.

I think all that will go through if we were

to.

Do it the way we usually do it.

But it's a way to kind of like skip one

step and get the same type of result.

So using the uniform distribution, I'm going to.

Not do it.

Because we have done it many, many times.

And also because remember if you have a probabilistic voting

model.

With the uniform distribution, you will not be given the

uniform distribution in the in the exam.

If you have the normal distribution, you will be given

the normal distribution, right?

But not, I'm assuming you know the uniform distribution.

In your exam.

So with this, Right, this is like pretty we're gonna

think about kind of like two cases.

I don't think I'm gonna be able to make them

run in parallel.

Maybe yes.

So there are 2 cases.

Case one is no franchise.

Extension.

In which case it's only Groups 0 and 1 were

enfranchised.

So what is gonna be as vote share.

What is gonna be the.

The voucher that he gets in Group zero.

Time the number of people.

The proportion of the electorate that belongs to Group zero.

Plus The voucher that.

I'll get In group 1 times the number, the proportion

of people that are in group one.

So weighted sum of 2 votes with the weight depending

on how many people are in each groups.

Is it OK.

So this is going to be So.

So this is, sorry, this is The sum from J

0 to 1.

Of NJ times VJ, right?

It's basically coming from N00.

And that 0 is being 0 here.

So it's Anamfi.

Of CGL minus CJR plus V GIL minus GIR divided

by the total population.

And so what is the candidate's problem?

Is to marks you're choosing.

The voucher subject to the budget.

As to equal the spending.

And Every transfer has to be.

Greater than 0.

You cannot like take money away in this model.

So, for that also the C2.

Now, we can already eliminate one choice viable.

Which one can we get rid of immediately?

Who doesn't matter for oil in this world?

Now I is gonna be very important because the G

satisfies the other condition, you can be sure that's gonna

be interior.

C2 So the group 2 is not enfranchised, so why

would you waste money on them if your office is

motivated?

Right, so, C2 is going to be for sure equal

to 0.

Yeah.

And so we will kind of be able to not

consider it in the future, right?

You don't waste money transferring using your budget on people

that cannot vote for you.

It's useless.

So what we're gonna do is, we're gonna do a

mixture of substitution and Lagrangian.

Mhm.

We're going to do the substitution to this.

We're also going to do something which is just equivalent

because we're going to multiply this by NG just because

this is going to make our life easier, right?

That doesn't matter because that's just a number that's a

choice valuable, so we can always do this.

Just I'm multiplying both sides by NG but this is

by 0, so this is still 0.

So we are gonna do the substitution of I by

this kind of like reining of the budget and we

are going to use this one as kind of like

a Lagrangian uh constraint.

So the Lagrangian.

Is.

OK.

It's The tricky thing with the Lagrangian is always to

remember whether it's plus, minus, because Lagrangian multiplier have to

be positive.

And I must say I never remember where, I think

you should put it as a negative here because we

have a greater than equal thinkers, but we will see.

What do you say suspenses.

And so we're gonna take, you know.

The first other condition with respect to C0 and to

C1, and there's two variables that are left today.

So C0 is gonna appear here through this one.

And it's gonna appear here as well.

And of course he's going to appear here.

So the first other condition with respect to C0L is

gonna be 50 and 0.

From here Plus this one.

A twice, it happens for 0 and it happens for

1.

Right?

Because that is, this is the public good, so it's

happening this.

Quantity inside is always there, whether it's for group zero

or whether it's for group 1.

So it's.

OK, sorry, apologies.

This is, I'm gonna do just a slight addition, just

to make the first order condition nicer.

It's really not changing.

Much of the problem, so it's just really.

To make everything look better.

The reason I'm doing this is because I want to

get treat.

Of this denominator, right?

So this is gonna drop everywhere and it's gonna be

better.

And so we have.

You can see the N 0 is also dropping.

And you can see that I got my Lagrangian wrong.

As I always do because I really.

Get it wrong all the time.

This should be a plus.

If we want the there should be a plus, they

should be a plus, they should be a plus, and

they should be a plus.

What?

You always correct your Lagrangian at the end because it's

not really important, the plus and minus sign.

What matters is.

Yeah Derivation of the second term of the this this

one so.

So, yes, I'm trying, which I should I'm trying, so.

OK, these two greats multiplied by both, right?

Right.

So that comes from the fact that it's happening twice.

Then we have the derivative of this as a minus

NG that that comes in front.

Minus 0 so that come in front.

So this is the N0 that is the minus.

And then basically, what I'm doing, and I should have

been a bit More careful is that this is 1

minus.

This thing.

So I is equal to 1 minus this, so I'm

replacing it.

You're right, I should have been like, uh, yeah, yeah,

yeah, so does this substitution come from the fact that

these two things are equal.

And so we get the idea and we get this

thing.

No, I think.

Get this thing Alright, so let me just redo it.

We want see 0, right?

So what we have is this one that only appears

when J is equal to 0, and that's going to

be that, right?

It's like C 0 N 0 times 1 divided by

N0 + 1.

Right, so that's gonna be that.

Then we have the one that is here.

This one is actually operating if J is equal to

0 and if J is equal to 1, both time,

right?

So we're gonna get 50 and 0 plus 1 and

1 coming.

It's a good dimension, right?

So everybody gets it.

Right.

Then the derivative of that is gonna be minus.

N 0.

So the N 0 is here, the minus come from

here, and then we have G of this quantity.

But that quantity is in fact I, right, that's the

that's the substitution basically.

So rather than writing that quantity inside, I'm writing I

but that's the same, these two things are the same.

And then the last one comes from this one, that

is the Lagrangian correctly put now.

And that gave me that quantity.

And then what I can do is I can see

that.

The ends this.

Numerator is everywhere presented disappear and you can also see

that the N 0 is everywhere presented disappear.

So there's not much difference with C01.

So C1N Yeah.

Yeah.

OK.

So let's take this expression, what is gonna change, basically.

When we do see one, if we were to take

the first other condition, I'm trying to also teach you

to see something so that in exam, though you know

this is harder than what you get in exam, you

save time by seeing similarities in things, right?

So what is going to change for C1L?

So for example, on the left hand side.

What's changing.

Exactly, it's gonna be P1 plus lambda one.

Right.

Right?

And on this side, what is changing, nothing, right?

This is still coming from the public goods dimension.

Now Why did we do the Lagrangian because we have

a nice equality and we like to have equalities and

not inequality.

On the slide, if you look at it, I solved

it with a Lagrangian, so you have the inequality possibly.

So, We know if you remember this wonderful thing called

the Kun tucker.

Condition Which is to say that lambda J.

To Mm So the Lagrange multiplier and the inequality has

to be equal to zero basically.

So either this is equal to 0 and this is

strictly positive, or this is equal to 0 and this

is strictly positive.

So just So we can have 3 cases.

One is.

And actually 4 cases.

Both are positive, which imply.

Now the Lagrange multiplier has to be zero for both.

Mhm 01L is positive, 01 is 0.

One To The reverse.

And then the last one is which imply.

Right?

These are the 4 possibilities, right?

Either They are both positive, in which case the two

Lagrange multiplier has zero to satisfy the condition.

One is positive, one is 0, so one is 0,

the other Lagrange is strictly positive, vice versa, or are

both 0 and in which case the two Lagrange multiplier

are strictly greater than 0.

So that's the different cases.

I claim that 1 and 2.

are impossible.

So to see this.

Take Case One where we have to have.

Which remember I implied.

Both like multiplier and so it must be that.

Right?

Once you take the first order condition here, and you

put the lambda to zeros.

You are left on the left hand side just with

the 5s.

So it must be that we have this, and why

can't this be true?

If you want, let's basically subtract them.

Right, this is the same thing on both sides.

What do we know about the fees?

So that's not possible.

You can check that for the same reason 2 is

impossible.

What you will get with 2, you will get 30

plus lambda 0 because you suppose that C0 is 0

and P1 here, but that is strictly greater than this

for sure, so that's not a possibilities.

So basically we have two possibilities.

Mhm.

In which case.

We get equivalently.

Bless you.

Sir Goes.

In which chairs.

All the money is spent.

On public good provision.

Right, so this is basically saying there's no transfer being

made, all the money is spent on public good provision.

And this up if.

This will happen if basically the value.

On the public good is very high.

So to summarise, what do we have?

Let's put it as no I sorry.

No franchise.

Here below we know if we have.

The amount of public good, of course they both do

the same, is defined by.

And above this threshold we have I is equal to

Z1.

And 0 Z.

And so we have 2 cases.

If there is a lot of value for public good

by citizen.

Then all the money is going to be spent on

public goods.

Nothing is going to be given to the private transfers.

If there is so low value on public goods, some

money is going to be transferred to group zero.

And you know, the, the amount of public good is

going to be defined by these equations.

And VF is defined by this.

VNF sorry.

Is it kind of like.

This is basically, you know, the.

Probabilistic voting model with a bit of twist because we

have to use the Lagrangian.

So now let's think about what happened with franchise extension.

Back here.

Let me write it in Parliament.

Can you kind of see it?

And so Or should I zoom in on this part

of the whiteboard?

Zoom in on this part of the whiteboard.

So now we have like the 3 groups are in

franchise.

And as the voture of L.

It's going to be one of.

Plus, go less fast.

It's gonna be The vote gets.

In group zeros, plus the vote it gets.

In group one, Plus the voucher it gets.

In group two, right?

The 3 groups are not there.

So the maximisation problem.

It's going to be shoes.

The amount of private transfer.

The amount of public goods.

So as to maximise voucher and the constraint that The

budget Needs to be And But the lands and the

transfer have to be positive.

Let me just write what SL is here.

SL is 1/2 plus.

One of the population.

Um, all group are enfranchised, so we go to 2.

Yeah.

And then it's the same thing.

Right, same thing as before, except that the one difference

is that we go to two and another is this

population that is a bit larger to think about in

terms of vulture.

Right?

We can set up again or like grand.

Still we have about 2 here.

This time not making the same mistake twice, always good.

So now thinking about a C0, right?

It's gonna be here once, only when the group is

equal to 0.

And it's also going to appear here.

And this time, how many times is it going to

appear here?

3 times.

It's going to happen for group 0, it's going to

happen for group 1, it's going to happen for group

2, right?

And then it's also obviously going to appear here.

So if we take the first order condition.

We're gonna get the first one that comes just from.

This termite, the one that appears only when J is

equal to 0, then we're gonna get the one that

appears here.

So it's gonna be minus N0 V of G.

Of just to.

This is gonna be equal to I this time I

do it the other way around because I think it's.

Here and this term here.

That comes from here.

How many times it's going to appear?

Just I know I'm repeating myself, but I want to

be so.

It's gonna happen when the group is 0 because the

public good is experienced by this group, when the group

is 1 because it's also experienced by this group, and

when the group is 2, and so we are going

to have this term for each group.

So this is going to be.

Multiply by N050 plus N11 plus N22.

And then we're going to get our last term which

is lambda 0.

Equals 0.

And so when we rearrange, we get.

Then same thing for.

C 1 L.

And same thing for.

C2, right?

The term on the right hand side is always the

same.

The only thing that varies as before is here.

Now which one of these 3 is the greatest?

It's 0, so if there is one group that receives

transfer it which group.

Right?

Basically, this group and this group never receive transfers.

Right, or only this group is going to receive transfers.

So it's by the same reasoning as before.

Which is here, you see, it's kind of like neat

because that's like by design, not by mistake.

The same reasoning as before that we are here, we

know that.

There are only two possible cases.

One is.

C 0 L is greater than 0.

And C1L equals C21 is equal to 0.

And 2 is C0L is equal to 0, as are

the other two.

Hi.

And then what do we have in case one?

We get that.

So physio.

My Uh 5 Plus V1N1 plus V2N2 V.

And C1L is equal to 1 minus IL.

Case 2 I L is equal to one and this

up if.

V is greater than.

So now Which we are gonna call VF because there

was a franchise extension.

We can do the same thing.

Here.

Where above the earth we have.

Let's create IF is equal to 1.

C0F is equal to 0, C1F equals C2F is equal

to 0, and below it we have.

G of IF is equal to 0.

C0 is 1 minus IF.

Alright, so what have we done?

All this boring math.

For many reasons.

It doesn't look like it, but there are many reasons.

One was to work with Lagrangian for months.

Right, that's done.

So now, there are gonna be several reasons.

One is of course to do this comparison.

Which we're gonna do and we're gonna try to understand

why the franchise can be extended, right?

By daily themselves.

Second is because all the reason why.

Like what is the act or the intuition why are

absolutely 100% related to things we have already seen.

There's no new intuition there.

And just to show you where you can reapply similar

intuition to such a different setting than the one we

have seen.

OK.

So what is happening behind the two?

Between the two, right?

So let's suppose.

The first thing to notice is.

Which one of VF?

And VNF is bigger.

VNF is bigger, right, everything is the same, except that

here there is 52 plus 2, right?

So one thing to notice first is VF is strictly

less than VNF.

Which means that.

You go faster to franchise like to basically full public

good provision with the franchise extension.

What about the difference between.

I have and what I've got the Isar.

Which one is bigger?

The right one, I have, right?

Why is I have bigger?

Because G is a strictly concave function would mean G

is a decreasing function, right?

So what your view is.

Very good.

Think about it this way, you have two values.

One is.

30 50 and 0.

Plus V11 times V, and the other one is 500

and 0 plus V1N1 plus V2 N2 times V, right?

These are the two values here and here.

Everybody is clear.

That this is this value and that value.

And if you take our function.

You don't want to be This is a GFI function.

And as you can see G 5 functions, sorry, of

course, and as you can see because It's decreasing, we

indeed have that I is strictly less than IF.

So what is the benefit of franchise extension?

One You get to full public good fucker in terms

of it.

Because of it.

Second, when you are in an interior solution, you get

more public good with the franchise than without the franchise

extension.

Is it, is it clear who is to gain from

this?

For sure.

Huh?

The middle group, Group one, indeed.

Group one is to gain from this.

They receive zero transfer in all case, but more public

good with franchise extension.

Most of the cases and as a result, group one

benefit from with the majority group in the elite.

Group one, we're assuming it's good one.

So basically what is happening is Yeah.

Because he gets no transfer.

In any case, And more public goods.

With Franchise Extension.

Right, so that's like the big beneficial.

So when do we get franchise extension?

With the division is if basically the less it, the

less homogeneous group.

Group one is a majority of the elite.

Which is to say that as the industry grew.

In the UK that you got the franchise extension because

of the alignment of interest between the workers and the

industrialists in terms of the provision of public good and

indeed you know the cities in the beginning of the

industrial revolution were an awful place to be.

The mortality rate was something like really crazy like this

was really like a cespolar thing, right?

So this is kind of this now.

What of?

Li and Pacisco played with.

They have played with two things that we already knew.

In probabilistic voting model, which group is always getting the

most transfer?

Private transfer like not public good but which group is

always getting the most targeted transfers.

that No, the one that is the most homogeneous.

Right?

The most emergenous one is always the one getting the

most transfers.

Right.

We saw this when we were doing comparing institution looking

at probably voting model and in this comparing institution we

also saw that there was more public good provision with

proportional voting than plurality voting.

Right?

And what was the reason that there was more public

good provision with proportional than plurality?

Remember the plurality you were targeting one district and the

proportionality you were targeting the whole country.

Why was the world probably good under the proportional voting?

Because public good is really good.

When you want to target many voters, right, because every

voter benefits from it.

And on a priority where there's only one swing district

is not so great because basically there's only very few

voters who care on the proportional, you care about everyone,

so really you like public good.

What is franchise extension doing here?

It's increasing the number of voters the candidates should care

about, which means automatically what?

It means automatically increasing public good provision.

It is exactly the same logic, but that same logic

is not used to compare.

To electoral setting, it's not used to explain franchise extension

and so that shows you one the power of the

probabilistic voting model to the power of this logic which

is, you know, transferred to the most homogeneous group.

Public good to reach the maximum of voters.

The more voters you want to reach, the more public

goods you invest in, and that creates some insurance for

some people to extend the franchise.

I think it's a beautiful case of using a well-known

intuition in one domain.

And you know, transposing exactly almost like copy pasting it

to another domain but still in this world telling us

something true, not true, but new at least, which is

franchise extensions arise if the less homogeneous this group is

a majority of the elite, and that's basically the lesson

from that model, right.

So that's it.

You, as you can see, I've really managed to do

all my kind of like empirics.

So.

Thank you everyone.

There are 2 things.

I have to set up a mock exam.

It's not set up in nanny room, but I will

do it.

It will be in week 1, and we will have

a revision session as well in week 1, probably with

me, maybe with Louisa if I cannot make it, but

most likely with me to talk about.
