Lecture 1:

Champion.

Matt.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That was crazy.

Yeah.

Forget it.

I was trying to be nice.

You're too tall.

I don't think you were.

I think you forgot.

I'll tell you.

Okay.

Go ahead.

I mean, it would be fine.

Yeah, sure.

No.

Hello?

Hello?

Yeah.

So for us.

Yes.

Before class and.

Lunch at 2:00.

Hello, Mads.

What are you doing here?

I'm in those classes.

It's wonderful to see you.

Here.

You are.

Oh, you are behind.

No, I'm not very great.

Wait, wait.

Ha ha!

Ha!

That's weird.

I don't have an explanation.

Right?

Right.

I.

Okay, we may have to get started.

But that is a lot of.

Work.

That worked.

Okay.

Looking good.

Right.

Welcome.

So this is easy.

Five.

Four.

Three.

It came to the number this year.

Um, and the reason they changed the number is because

we split the, um, second year of 50 option courses

into half units.

So this is the half unit of the international economic

sequence that is devoted to getting that right, which is,

uh, that is devoted to international trade.

And then kind of part two next term is going

to focus more on international, uh, macroeconomics.

Um, so I mean, more specifically, there's going to be

three of us teaching the course this term.

So I'm Thomas Sampson, I'm teaching, uh, weeks 1 to

4.

And then week seven, we have to shift the teaching

around a bit to fit in with everyone's schedule.

So I'm doing the first four weeks of term, and

then I'm coming back for a week lecture in week

seven.

Uh, Katherine Thomas will be teaching in weeks five and

six.

And then Daniel Sturm is going to do the last

three weeks, week 8 to 10.

Um, you know, in very broad terms, the goal of

the course this term is to provide you with a

sort of introduction to some of the research that's going

on at the kind of research frontier in international trade

currently.

Um, my part of the course the first two weeks.

So today and next Wednesday we're going to cover sort

of canonical models in international trade.

I think anyone that is interested in trade should be

familiar with.

So we're going to do the sort of first two

weeks, uh, really looking at some of the kind of

key models in detail and understanding how they work.

Um, and these are, you know, models that are not

just useful because they come up a lot in the

literature, but also models that we will pick up at

various points.

Uh, you know, that will form the basis for other

papers that we look at at later points during the

course.

Um, and then after week two, it's kind of mainly

a topics style course that we will typically focus on

a different, uh, topic, uh, within international trade each week.

And we will look at a selection of kind of

recent papers that focus on that topic.

So I'm going to do, I think a lecture on

probably trade and Labour.

And I'll do one on trade and growth.

Um, and then I might use the the week seven

lecture that I'm going to give for student presentations.

So I'll get you to kind of, uh, probably in

groups, given the number of people to kind of read

a paper and present a paper.

But we'll talk more about that, uh, near the time,

um, Catherine, when she lectures in weeks five and six,

is going to focus more on empirical methods that are

useful for international trade.

So I think she's going to do one lecture on

productivity function estimation, which is useful for trade, but also

just more broadly in in economics, if you want to

kind of do modern methods for estimating TFP at the

firm level, she's going to talk through some of those,

and then she will also do a lecture looking at

the use of or specifically the estimation of discrete choice

models and how they can be applied to questions in

trade.

And then, Daniel, in the last three weeks, we'll shift

the focus more to his speciality, which is urban and

regional economics, kind of economic geography type type topics.

He will talk about the some of the work he's

been doing on, you know, city structure, quantitative models of

commuting and kind of where, where cities, um, locate.

So that's the broad picture of what we're going to

try and do this term.

Um, then just to say something I guess, about, you

know, next term, which is a it is now separately

a technical, uh, technically separate course, but is, you know,

linked in it is also on international economics.

So next time there'll be two lectures, there'll be, uh,

most of the course will be taught by Dima malkin,

who will do eight weeks on international macroeconomics and international

finance topics.

So sort of the essentially the international part of macroeconomics.

So if that's the topic you're interested in, that's when

that will be focussed on.

There'll also be uh, two weeks by Isabella Manley who

is a, a trade economist and would normally lecture in

this part of the course.

But she's on leave at MIT at the moment.

So her teaching is going to be done next term,

and she is going to do a couple of weeks

on, uh, FDI and on kind of multinational supply chains,

thinking about technology transfers within, uh, multinationals and the role

of, of multinationals in the global economy.

So we're not going to do anything about, uh, we're

not we're not going to focus on FDI this term.

But there will be some lectures on FDI next term

by is about, um, other logistical stuff if you are

taking the course for credit.

Uh, the assessment for this term has two parts.

You have to write a referee report and you have

to do a research proposal.

So I think it is a relatively light assessment.

They will both be due, you know, after term is

over at some point during the uh, Christmas holidays.

Um, they are both designed to be quite short pieces.

So there's a 2000 word, uh, 2000 word word count

limit on each of them.

Um, for the referee report.

Um, it can be, it can be on any paper

on international trade, but we choose the paper.

So the idea is you send us a, you know,

when you want to pick a paper for the referee

report, send us as in one or more of Daniel,

Catherine and me, um, an email indicating kind of what

areas within the course you are most interested in.

And we will pick a paper from that area for

you to write a referee report on.

Um, and then, you know, the research proposal is entirely

up for you to, to choose what you want to

write about, with the proviso that it does have to

be linked, at least in some way, to international trade.

But the idea of the research proposal is to kind

of try and get you thinking about if you were

to do research on trade, what might be a topic

of interest to you, and how might you go about,

you know, how might you propose to go about answering

that question on whether that be theoretically or empirically or

quantitatively or a mixture of of all three?

Okay.

Any questions on course logistics or organisation?

Is that.

No no.

No okay.

Sorry.

All right.

No, no that's okay.

Good.

Um, okay.

Well, why don't we start with a round of introductions

so I can kind, kind, try to kind of get

to know you, um, a little bit.

So maybe we could all say who we are, uh,

where we're studying, because I know we have kind of

cross registrations from UCL.

Certainly here.

Uh, what point of the program we're at?

Um, and anything else you kind of want to add?

Should we start?

Okay.

Yeah.

My name is Gelson.

I'm a mrs. year two student in LSA.

My research interest is, uh, monetary economist.

Okay.

Fantastic.

I am, uh, David.

I am a third year student in the economics and

management program here.

Um, Zadora and a student here in economics.

I am I'm in the second year of a PhD.

In economics.

And I, uh, I'm interested in trade and marketing.

My name is.

Marie.

I'm also staying here at LSC for econ.

Um, and I'm interested in macro monetary, but, um, trade

is also quite cool, so.

So I'm Changjiang, I'm a second year student, and, uh,

I'm interested in, uh, development and economic history and, um,

urban and economics.

Okay.

I'm also in the same year because you're a student

and.

Yeah, I'm interested in developing international studies.

Great.

Yeah.

I'm tall and I'm also in the second year MBA

program, and I'm interested in the monetary economics.

And also the international market.

I said the students.

Had some comments.

And I'm interested the.

The intersection.

Between the countries.

Uh.

Yeah.

Hi.

Yeah.

Hi.

I'm also in a second year here at LSC.

And I'm interested in development macro trade.

Okay.

Um, I'm Dimitris, I'm in the second year of interest

in economics, and I'm interested in behavioural and macroeconomics.

And I'm in the second year of planning, and I'm

interested in urban and public.

Okay.

So this includes, um, which is an ILO and organisation.

Great.

Hey.

Hi.

I'm not.

I'm in the third year, and I'll pick Nomics.

And I'm not in trade typically, but I thought it

was interesting.

Okay, great.

Okay.

Hey, uh, I mean, I'm also a third year.

Uh, my MLS had some regional trade.

Realised I didn't know much about it, so he had

to learn.

Right.

So everyone's from LSA, right?

Okay.

So the.

People.

Who emailed me from UCLA, of course, probably not here,

but maybe they will join us, uh, next week.

Okay, good.

Um, you know, also what I'm saying, that obviously this

is a three hour lecture, three lectures, very long and

tiring for all of us.

Will take a couple of breaks as we go through.

Uh, but I think the lecture will also work better

if it's not just me talking.

And we can try and make it as much as

possible a, uh, a discussion.

So I do encourage you both to, you know, intervene

whenever you have questions or thoughts or comments.

Uh, but also, you know, and don't hesitate to tell

me if you think I am, if you are getting

lost or you think I've gone off on kind of

an irrelevant tangent, or I'm not being, uh, not being

clear.

Good.

All right, so before we got into the material for

today, who's taken a trade course before at any level.

Hands on.

Anyone.

One half.

And I've audited this course before, but only the trade

part.

Okay.

All right.

So you.

Yeah.

Okay.

And if no one else.

Okay.

That's interesting.

Um, okay.

So that makes what I want to do for the

first two slides very relevant, which is to give like

a brief overview.

Um, basically everything we're going to do in this course

is 2000 or later, right?

It's happened in the last 20 years because we're looking

at recent work.

But if you want to understand, you know, the contribution

more recent work makes and the literature it speaks to,

it is useful to have some under, you know, at

least a broad brush understanding of what came before of

the year.

Um, 2000.

So I like to start this course with a very

brief, you know, kind of in some ways, uh, far

too brief overview of kind of the history of where

ideas came from in international trade and the kind of

ideas people were thinking about and focusing on different periods,

uh, through history.

So we start we go back about 200 years to

David, uh, Ricardo, who I would hope most of you

have heard of.

Um, so, you know, why is Ricardo still famous today

is because he was the first person to articulate, at

least verbally, uh, one of the key ideas in international

trade, which is the idea of comparative advantage.

What is the idea of comparative advantage?

It's the idea that what shapes patterns of trade.

Right.

And classically this would be, you know, what shapes which

countries are, which industries a country exports versus imports is

its relative opportunity cost in producing, uh, different goods.

And the the key insight Ricardo had, right, is that

what matters for trade patterns is not absolute levels of

anything.

It's always relative comparisons that that matters.

So to make that a little bit more concrete, the

particular example of Ricardo game was a two country world

where you had England and Portugal and they were trading

two goods, which he called cloth and y um, and

this was the kind of period, you know, we would

just be going through the first industrial revolution.

So England was the world's kind of leading industrial power.

It was was Portugal with more of a kind of

a bit of a backwater.

So England was kind of a much more, uh, much

richer, more successful economy than Portugal at this period.

Um, and the question sort of Ricardo posed is, okay,

so if we've got this trade between sort of one

more productive economy and one less productive economy is the

the output from the more productive economy simply going to

kind of drive out all competition.

So, you know, our English producers simply can outcompete Portuguese

producers across the board.

And if that's the case, wouldn't we be worried that

Portugal would simply lose from participating in international trade because

it wouldn't be able to sell anything?

Right.

And so Ricardo was articulating that idea 200 years ago.

You know, fast forward 200 years, and if you listen

to, you know, many people talk about trade between sort

of the global north and the global South.

You will hear echoes of similar concerns.

How can developing countries compete on global markets when they're

far less productive?

Um, Ricardo's answer to this question is an answer that

stood the test of time is that, you know, what

matters is not the absolute productivity of England and Portugal

in coffee and wine, but their relative productivity in the

sense that England will have a comparative advantage in cloth

if it's productivity in cloth relative to wine is higher

in higher than Portugal's productivity in cloth relative to wine.

So England could be more productive in both cloth and

wine.

Ah, but once you put things in relative terms, it's

kind of a mathematical identity that one country will be

more productive and 1 or 1 country will be more

productive in the other, meaning each country is always going

to have a comparative advantage in some good.

And this opens up the possibility of kind of mutually

beneficial trade, where in this case, you know, England would

export cloth to Portugal in exchange for wine.

And in Ricardo's framework, both countries are going to gain

from that exchange.

So this, you know, idea of Comparative advantage based on

relative productivity or relative opportunity cost differences is is a

very old idea.

Um, it's kind of the first thing we teach in

an undergraduate international trade course, which I asked if people

had taken the trade, of course, previously.

Um, it's what it's also, you know, can in some

ways be quite a difficult idea, which is why I'm

kind of dallying on it slightly.

Paul Krugman, one of the kind of most famous modern

trade economists before he became a New York Times columnist,

wrote a kind of old paper where he called it

Ricardo's difficult idea.

And the reason he was saying it's a difficult idea

is because it's fundamentally an idea for which you have

to think in general equilibrium for it to make sense,

because the reason that what ends up managing a relative

productivity is not absolute productivity, is that your absolute productivity

is affect your factor costs endogenously, and that ends up

affecting kind of where you are the lowest cost producer,

right?

To put that another way, if England is more productive

than Portugal in both cloth and wine, the consequence of

that is that English producing English labour, if we just

assume labour is the only factor that English labour is

going to end up being more expensive than Portuguese labour.

And it's these labour cost differences across countries that will

mean that England doesn't end up being the cheapest producer

in in both sectors, and that's what ends up shaping

comparative advantage.

So you know what one thing to to take from

that, and which is always worth bearing in mind when

you're thinking about international trade, is that most ideas, most

mechanisms we think about in trade are really about general

equilibrium, right?

We're interested in thinking typically at the level of of

whole economies or I mean, Daniel's part of the course.

It might be, you know, whole cities or whole regions,

but we're not, you know, whereas in a Labour course,

you might be thinking about how an individual behaves here.

The focus is really on kind of aggregating up to

a more of a macro level, and therefore the kind

of general equilibrium interactions become important in the same way

they do in, in macroeconomics.

Um, so that's, you know, that's kind of what the

legacy we owe to, uh, Ricardo.

Um, initially he was writing.

People didn't write down mathematical models back then.

They wrote it down in words.

Uh, but people formalised his idea at a later date.

Um, until relatively recently, though, it was kind of only

formalised in a two country, two good, uh, world.

Then in the late 70s.

So Fisher and Samuelson were successful in kind of developing

a way to extend it from two goods to, uh,

many goods.

So that was a breakthrough, it turns out.

But this is a this Ricardian framework is one way

going from kind of the two by two world to

more goods and more countries is difficult.

And we'll see a bit more why that is later

in today's, uh, in today's lecture.

But, you know, essentially throughout the 19th century, this is

kind of one of the the main way people think

about trade and why countries, uh, trade.

Then in the 20th century, uh, two Swedish economists, Hesher

and Olin, develop an alternative framework for thinking about international

trade, where the, uh, source of comparative advantage is not

productivity differences as it is in the Ricardian models, but

factoring down the differences.

So Hecker and Olin are responsible for kind of the

factoring downward view of trade, which says, you know, to

sort of simplify it massively.

If you are a country that has relatively more safe

capital relative to Labour, you will tend to have a

comparative advantage in and export those goods.

Um.

Those goods that intensively use.

Uh, the intensively used capital.

So this is still very much kind of sitting and

within a comparative advantage view of, of international trade.

But what they're saying is, okay, well, Ricardo says productivity

differences, technology differences might cause comparative advantage.

Heck, surely an old can come along and say, okay,

well, factoring downward differences, uh, might matter as well.

Um, and basically, until Krugman's work in the late 70s,

this is how everyone thought about international trade.

It was either through kind of Ricardian models or actually,

uh, type models.

Um, and all these models, as well as being about

comparative advantage, were, were essentially also about competitive economies.

So there was no role for imperfect competition.

There was no role for scale economies in these models.

Uh, the contribution Krugman then makes in the late 70s,

uh, and which he eventually ends up winning the Nobel

Prize for, is to say, okay, if you think about

these comparative advantage trade models, they're all about having a

comparative advantage in one industry relative to another.

So in the Ricardian model, it's having a comparative advantage

in cloth relative to wine, meaning you export cloth and

you import wine.

So it's all about what we'd call inter industry trade,

or exporting the output from one industry and importing the

output from another industry.

Right.

There's a problem with this, which is if you actually

go to the trade data, um, and look at do

we see this type of inter industry trade or do

we see intra industry trade where countries, you know, maybe

export some varieties of cloth and import other varieties of

cloth, or to pick a kind of more modern example,

they export some types of cars and they import other

types of cars.

That type of intra industry trade tends, you know, ends

up accounting for a much larger share of overall trade

flows than into industry trade.

So this is an obvious problem for comparative advantage based

trade models because they simply can't account for that kind

of behaviour.

So what Krugman does is he develops a theory of

intra industry trade, um, where the basic idea is that

there are increasing returns to scale at the firm level,

which allows firms to specialise within industries in particular varieties.

Um, and.

By then introducing kind of love of variety into a

preferences.

So you will have seen this in macro kind of

series style preferences where there's love of variety and preferences.

This provides a rationale for kind of different firms in

different countries producing different varieties and getting two way trade

in these varieties within an industry.

So the combination of kind of increasing returns to scale

and love of variety and preferences generates this intro industry

trade.

And it provides a kind of different framework for thinking

about international trade from, uh, the classical or the neo

classical comparative advantage.

Um.

What happens after Krugman?

Well, then, you know, throughout essentially following on from Krugman,

there's a lot of work in the 1980s on trade

under different types of imperfect competition.

As we know, the kind of thing with imperfect competition

is, you know, markets can be competitive in one way,

and they can be imperfectly competitive in many, many ways.

So everyone wrote down kind of every version of this

in trade models.

That turned out not to be a very productive literature,

because essentially the kind of results you got from one

form of imperfect competition didn't tend to be robust to

say, you know, if you went from virtual to corner

or free entry to no free entry, the models tend

to give different results under each of these different, uh,

circumstances.

So I'm not sure we learned a huge amount of

that literature.

Um, Then once you start to have these kind of

returns to scale in trade models, it also leads naturally

to thinking about agglomeration economy.

So the other direction that literature went was more in

the economic geography sense of thinking about, okay, well why

does economic activity agglomerate in particular?

Uh, location.

So that was the kind of birth of the new

economic geography literature, which was, uh, influential in the 90s

and has come back, uh, recently.

And, you know, Daniel will talk about that in his

his part of the course.

Uh, so that's a sort of very brief history of

trade theory up to the year 2000.

Any questions on that so far?

Um.

That was all theory, right?

In conjunction with the theory, obviously, people are also doing,

uh, empirical like many other parts of economics trade Historically

has been more theoretical than empirical.

And that has changed probably in the last.

Yeah, also in the last 20 or 25 years or

so.

So now most research and trade is kind of, uh,

starts from data rather than starting, uh, from theory, um,

reflecting the kind of increased availability of different types of

data and meta computing power.

But what did we know kind of empirically, before we

get to that, the more recent period.

So obviously a lot a lot of the empirical work

was doing was essentially testing these Ricardian and rolling models.

So if these are if the reason you think countries

trade is because of comparative advantage, what you want to

ask imperatives, okay.

Do we see that actual patterns of trade follow, you

know, what these models are predicting, which is to say,

do we see that, uh, productivity differences are shaping trade

in a Ricardian sense?

Or do we see factoring downward differences of shape and

trade in actual incentives?

Um.

Long story short, yes, but there's a lot of unexplained

variation, right?

A sort of crude way of thinking about that is

these factors matter, but they have a relatively low R-squared.

Um, probably sort of casual inspection of the data sort

of tells you this, right?

If you think about, say, trade, uh, between the US

and Australia or what is Australia have a comparative advantage?

Well, it has a lot of land, so it tends

to have quite a strong comparative advantage in agricultural goods.

It also has a lot of mineral resources.

So its exports tend to be uh, in kind of

agriculture and mineral resources, which is consistent with a rolling

theory of comparative advantage.

But at the same time, Australia is also going to

export a bunch of industrial goods.

It's going to export some some services which comparative advantage

based trade models are going to find harder to harder

to rationalise.

So there's a lot of stuff that's unexplained by the

comparative advantage Models we've already said, kind of alluded to

one part of that, which is the entry industry trade

that Krugman, uh, Krugman focussed on.

And then the final thing we know empirically, um, is

that trade follows a gravity equation.

Right.

And I will if you haven't seen a gravity equation

before, it will be much more specific about what that

means later in the lecture.

But it's safe to say this is the kind of

strongest empirical regularity in international economics is that essentially whatever

type of cross-border exchange you look at, whether it's trade

in goods, trade in services, FDI, migration, measures of knowledge

flows, if you regress the kind of magnitude of the

flow on some measure of kind of distance, which could

be pure distance measure, or it could be kind of

augmented with, uh, things like, did you used to be

in a colonial relationship, other measures of social and cultural

distance.

So that's the kind of friction.

And then there you have you regress it also on

size measures like economic size, those kind of two things.

The size measures and the distance measures are strongly predictive

of, uh, bilateral uh flows.

And this is always a useful thing to keep in

mind, because if it means that if you want to

write down a kind of empirically successful model of international

exchange somewhere embedded in it, you're going to want to

have a gravity equation.

And traditional comparative advantage models do not match naturally, or

at least in their in their classical forms, do not

map naturally to a gravity equation.

The type of Krugman intra industry trade models do matter

more naturally, but it took a while for people to

to realise that.

Okay, so that was the preamble.

What are we actually going to do now?

Um, What were we going to do this week?

And next week is we're going to look in detail

at two very important papers in the trade literature, both

of which were published in the early 2000 and which

many of you may have come across in some form

or another previously.

So we're going to look at today at this paper

by Eaton and Cottam.

And we will look next week at a paper by

Mark Mellett.

Um.

In broad terms, the way to think about these papers,

I mean, the Ethan and Gordon paper is a paper

that is very much in the Ricardian tradition.

Right.

So we've kind of talked about Ricardo initially think about

a kind of two good two country world.

Donald Bush, Fisher and Sammy take 150 years later dawned.

Bush, Fisher and Samuelson extend that to many goods.

Two countries.

Uh, what each and Corton do is then they also

extend it to many countries.

So that sounds like a relatively trivial extension.

Um, it's not it was difficult to do.

And the reason this is sort of a famous and

influential paper is they found a neat modelling trick to

make a kind of multi-country Ricardian model, uh, tractable.

And when we look at the model, we're kind of

think a bit about why that is difficult to do.

Um, and the reason that's kind of an important thing

is, you know, by, by producing a kind of workable,

quantitatively tractable version of a Ricardian model with multiple countries,

multiple industries, it opens up the possibility of allowing the

model to speak much more directly to the data.

Classic Ricardian model has had some very nice intuitions about

how comparative advantage predicts trade, but if you actually tried

to estimate them, or heaven forbid, actually do quantitative work

with them, they just weren't well suited to that task.

Whereas the Eastern Quarter model speaks much more closely to

the data, and therefore it's kind of become the workhorse

for doing Quantitative, uh, trade analysis.

And we'll see some examples of that.

Um, and then next week we'll talk about this.

This merits paper where kind of molasses, uh, key contribution

is to build on the Krugman line of trade research,

but to take firms more seriously and in particular where

it's kind of incredible that there were firms, they were

all homogeneous.

You know, in practice, we know firms differ greatly along

many dimensions.

Metrics shows how we can incorporate that into the model

and therefore provides a kind of canonical framework from which

using which we can start to think about the role

of firms in international trade.

But we'll come back to that, um, next week.

Yeah, not 100% related.

But if we're talking about like the research frontier and

trade, what are like questions that people currently think about,

like if you were to now write a paper about

some unresolved question and trade and I don't know, present

at the NBA.

Yeah.

That's a I mean, that's a very good question.

Hopefully we will kind of speak to that at different

points as we, um, go through the, the course.

If you look at kind of, I mean, to sort

of directly answer that, if you look at the papers

that had been presented at the NBA trade meetings over

the last few years.

Um.

As with many parts of economics, there is a massive

wave of environmental work at the moment, so people are

very interested in understanding the relationship between trade and environmental

issues, particularly thinking about, like cbam, carbon border adjustment mechanisms,

carbon leakage, pollution havens, those kind of issues.

Also for trade, specifically the kind of carbon emissions that

are embedded in international trade.

How much carbon emissions does international trade actually create is

a topic people have been working on, uh, recently.

So there are those kind of questions.

Um.

Perhaps more closely related to the sort of quantitative trade

models we're going to look at today.

Um, people have sort of built on these models to

think more about the network structure of trade and value,

global value chain.

So the sort of the most recent generation of kind

of quantitative trade work.

And here we're looking at the kind of work people

like Becky and Fahy do, um, is kind of going

beyond what Eden Cordon do to think more seriously about

input output linkages and how you know those, how what

the consequences of those are when they cross, uh, when

they cross borders.

Um, and then maybe just highlight kind of a third

area at the moment is there has been a recent

resurgence of interest in specifically studying different trade policy Instruments.

So this is partly prompted by the US-China trade war.

Right.

So one way of doing that US trade a trade

or it's been some nice exogenous variation in tariff levels,

which trade economists can use to estimate the effects of,

of tariffs.

But also, you know, in the UK you have similar

stuff with changing trade policy due to Brexit.

Um, and you know, more broadly, you have kind of

concerns about are we entering an era of globalisation.

So that's stimulated a lot of work on trade policy.

Um, yeah.

Any other questions that at this point?

Okay.

So let's talk about the let's talk about the Eastern

Quarter model.

And to kind of get us starting to think about

that.

Let's start the question for you, which is, you know,

suppose I say go away for your homework.

Write down a quantitative trade model.

I'm not going to do that.

Don't worry.

But if that was your assignment and you were thinking

about what features this model might want to have, what

would you like the quantitative trade model to be able

to do?

What in both in terms of, you know, what what

modelling, uh, what assumptions might you want to put into

it, and what would you like to be able to

do with it?

Any thoughts?

Might have some predictive power about the impacts of changes

in differences on trade flows.

Okay.

Yeah that sounds desirable.

Right.

So and are you thinking of that as kind of

a validation check on the model essentially.

Right.

That it can.

Yeah.

It can match moments that we might think is relevant.

Right.

Or like, you know, if I want to simulate how

understand how the policy counterfactual would affect outcomes.

We want the model to.

Yeah, like a validation so that I know that I'm

not, you know, completely off the range when it comes

to the virus and stuff.

Okay.

Yeah.

So I mean, that definitely seems desirable, right?

That it is in some way grounded in reality.

And then we can discuss what it means to be

grounded in reality as a basic aim.

That seems sensible.

It's maybe a better measurement compared to the military benchmark.

So unfair measurement comparison with low benchmark.

Okay, yeah.

So we might want it to be able to if

we think about the kind of outcomes we want to

be able to produce, we might want to be able

to talk about welfare.

Right.

Which means we need to it needs to be in

some sense, kind of a fully specified, well-defined model that

speaks to the kind of general equilibrium welfare effects.

I think that makes a lot of sense when you're

thinking about trade, because, as I said, you are you

want to be thinking in a kind of general equilibrium

way.

What?

Well, that's easy to solve.

Yeah, I mean, let's.

I mean.

It seems kind of, you know, simple.

But this is important, right?

I think.

When, when you see kind of first year PhD students

present a model in the work in progress seminars, the

most common mistake people make is to make the model

too complicated.

Right.

To the point where either it's completely unsolvable or it's

just a complete black box.

What's going on?

Right.

A good model.

We want it to be empirically grounded, but we also

want it to be simple enough that we can understand

how it works.

And, you know, striking that balance is, is difficult.

And it's always going to be somewhat subjective how we

do it.

But an important part of kind of if you're thinking

about writing either writing theory or writing quantitative model, is

knowing when to to simplify.

And most people tend to complexity rather than simplify.

So that's something we are going to look for.

Anything else?

Give a prediction about what happens if we undertake a

given policy rather than another one.

And maybe be clear on the transmission channels that the

model displayed.

Yeah.

So we want to be able to use it for

counterfactual analysis, which is kind of what I would call

that what you've just done here.

You know, do we want to be able to do

policy counterfactuals in it.

And we want to understand why they have the effect

they have, which, again, is another way of saying we

don't want it to be a black box.

You want to know if you have policy A and

policy B, and they have different effects.

You want to be able to use your model to

understand why that is.

I'm just saying, well, they have different effects.

There we go.

Any other anything else anyone wanted to to our.

Assumptions need to somehow induce history.

So like putting differences or different capital intensities across countries.

Yeah.

So now we're kind of getting more into the sort

of, I guess more, more the detail of what specifically

do we want to put in there as assumption.

So this is going to be, you know, thinking about

we're doing a trade model.

Um, I mean, I just told you that the kind

of important thing is the multi-country.

So let's assume we want to have many countries.

We want to have the possibility in many sectors.

We want to be kind of empirically realistic in that

sense.

Then the question is, you know, how are these countries

and sectors going to to differ?

Right.

And here's the point where we're trying to choose what

are the what are the key dimensions along which differences

matter?

Clearly in in practice countries differ along thousands of different

dimensions.

We don't want all of them in the model.

So what dimensions might matter.

Right.

And you kind of said one which is technologies.

Right.

I think that's potentially going to be important.

Um, another could be something to do with factor at

the country level, factor endowments or the industry level factor

intensities.

Certainly important.

It's not going to be in our baseline, the standard

quarter model.

It is relatively easy to extend it to incorporate those,

but they're going to start off with the key differences

being technological rather than, um, factor endowment based.

Right.

What else might we think is going to be important

to have in there.

Right.

Another thing could be firms.

Clearly the the agents that actually undertake almost all trade

in the global economy are firms.

So it is very natural to think about the role

of firms in trade.

They're not also not going to be in the East

and Cornwall.

So that's another dimension where we're going to simplify today.

And then next week we'll see how kind of deals

with this firm problem.

Um, but one thing we are certainly are going to

want to do, and this kind of speaks to the

empirical realism of the model, is we're going to want

the model to be kind of consistent with this idea

that trade follows the gravity equation.

So we're going to want to make a set of

assumptions that deliver a gravity equation.

And we'll see how they.

We'll see how they do that.

Okay.

So let's let's actually now you know we've I've kind

of we I have talked for quite a while about

actually getting onto the paper.

So let's actually now start to look at the paper

in a bit more, in a bit more detail.

So.

Broadly speaking these are the kind of four key components

they want their model to have.

They want to have a framework where trade falls with

distance.

So this is the gravity idea.

They want to have a framework where prices differ across

locations, which is to say that the law of one

price doesn't hold right.

So if you have a very, you know, essentially a

frictionless macroeconomic model, you're going to have that the price

for the same good should be the same in different

locations.

If we look at the kind of data we get

from things like the UN's, uh, International Comparison Program, which

collects data on the prices of a comparable basket of

goods in different countries.

Or if you just think of that sort of blasé

Samuelson type ideas, we know that price levels differ dramatically,

uh, across countries.

So we want to allow for that, uh, allow for

that possibility.

Okay.

Uh, and, you know, another way of saying that output

or a corollary, basically.

Well, related to the idea of output prices across countries,

the idea that factor prices also differ across countries.

Wages in the US are not the same as in

Europe, and they're certainly not the same as they are

in, you know, South East Asia or in Africa.

Okay.

So we're going to wonder how factor rewards differ across

countries.

And we're going to want to have technologies differing both

across countries and across industries, which is the basic Ricardian

idea.

So what is an economist going to try and do

is develop a simple in the sense of being quantitatively

tractable model, uh, that captures all these, uh, features that

we think are empirically relevant.

Sorry.

Yeah.

So on the price point.

Yeah.

Um.

What about arbitrage?

And then, like, if you consider trade cost and, you

know, all of the other things that are in equilibrium,

but it adjusts to this like the same price with

all of the factors considered like effective price in a

sense, because otherwise.

So the way they are going to kind of end

up generating price variation is going to come through the

fact that there are trade costs which limit the ability

to do arbitrage.

So I think what you're saying is, correctly, that you're

kind of saying, you know, if we ignore or conditional

on trade costs, you kind of have a low of

one price holding.

But there are these trade costs that generate wedges Wages

across in prices across locations.

That's essentially what's going to go on here.

Is that what you were thinking of?

Yeah, that's what I'm thinking.

So about that if you adjust by trade cost, then

this variation of price is no longer like a driver

of what creates trade, right?

It's not like difference in price is not going to

make me want to move good from one place to

another.

Because if I count the exportation cost, then I'm actually

not making money.

Yes, in a in a certain sense that we will

let, let kind of let us see exactly how that

works in more detail as, as we, as we go

through.

I mean, I think we need to we just need

to be careful in our reasoning because obviously the prices

themselves are endogenous.

So they're not the kind of fundamental thing that, uh,

that differs.

It will certainly be the case here that if if

you can buy a good more cheaply from abroad, then

you can buy it domestically.

Once you, you know, once you include the transport costs,

you will choose to do that in equilibrium.

There is going to be some kind of arbitrage that

balances out those differences.

So.

Okay.

So you know big picture.

We're going to have Ricardian productivity differences which are going

to be going to generate comparative advantage.

We're going to have geographic barriers in the form of

trade costs could also be tariffs which will generate the

kind of gravity trade diminishing and distance and the price

differences.

Right.

And on a technical level their contribution is in how

they formulate the productivity differences.

So they're going to have a particular stochastic formulation of

how productivity varies across products within a country.

That is extremely non-intuitive when you first see it, but

turns out to be a very convenient modelling assumption for

making this kind of multi-country version of the Ricardian model,

uh, model, tractable.

So we will look at exactly how they do that

in a in a minute.

And, you know, the model is kind of tractable in

a couple of different senses.

It's it's not the kind of model where you're going

to get analytic, closed form solutions for all the equilibrium

variables, but it is one where you can kind of

write down the equilibrium conditions in a relatively, you know,

the relatively few equations that end up characterising the equilibrium.

And probably more importantly for why this paper became very

influential is once you've written down the equilibrium conditions, they

map very naturally to observable data on bilateral and trade

and prices, which you can then use to estimate the

key parameters.

And once you've estimated the key parameters, you know you're

calibrating the model.

And then you can do the kind of counterfactual analysis

we might be interested in.

And that's why the paper ends up being useful for

doing the type of trade policy counterfactuals that you might

want to answer.

If you want to say, okay, if Trump increases tariffs

on all US imports by 20%.

What would the consequence of that of that be?

Um, as a further flag for why this is a

kind of useful model to know.

You know, it kind of started off as a trade

policy model, but particularly this kind of modelling trick, this

probabilistic modelling trick we use that in a moment has

turned out to be very useful in lots of other

settings.

So it turns out you can use kind of a

similar, similar formulation to model, um, worker productivity in labour

markets and how workers select into different uh, occupations or

match with different tasks.

You can use it in macro to think about various

types of contractual, uh, incompleteness and to sort of do

various, uh, cross-sectional modelling stuff in macro.

And it's also the basis for the kind of recent,

uh, wave of urban economic models where we think about

workers sorting across locations in, in, in a city.

So you will see elements of this Eaton quarter model

when you get to Daniel's part of the course as

well.

All right.

So central is going to be this this sort of

probability way of modelling productivity.

So to do that we just need to do a

little bit of a review of probability theory and in

particular the distribution of the minimum.

So suppose we have needed random variables.

So x one to x and our independent identically distributed

they have CDF big f and PDF little s.

And then the statistic we are interested in is the

minimum of these variables right.

Anticipating y.

This is going to be relevant.

Think of each of these random variables as representing the

price at which a different country can provide a product.

So we're kind of like X1 might be the the

price at which country one can supply a product to

the US, for example.

And that's going to be stochastic in a way we

will see in a minute.

And then if you're thinking about the optimal sourcing decision,

right, you sourced from the country, that's the lowest cost

supplier.

So you're very naturally interested in what the minimum of

these random variables is.

Um, so let's talk about the uh, distribution of this

minimum.

So the CDF of the minimum g of Y, which

is going to be the probability that y is less

than y, which is one minus the probability y m

is greater than y.

And then just the kind of key thing we want

to know and keep in mind is that the minimum

is greater than y if and only if each of

the individual random variables are greater than y, and therefore

the distribution g of y is equal to one minus

the probability of A each individually are greater than y.

Now here's where we use the fact that they are

independent random variables.

So since they are all independent, the probability that all

these events happen is just the product of the individual

probabilities of the events happening.

Um, so we can simplify that to this probability is

equal to product that x one is greater than y

times x two is greater than y, and so on.

And then we use the fact that they're identically distributed.

Uh, to say that this product of probabilities, each individual

random variable is greater than y, is simply equal to

one minus f of y for each individual random variable.

And we end up with this expression here one minus

one minus f of y to the n.

Okay.

So that's just uh, so kind of reminding you of

some simple probability theory.

And we're doing that because when it comes to solving

the optimal sourcing decision in the model, we're going to

use that.

So everyone happy with that.

Good.

So now let's actually introduce the formal setup of the,

uh, model.

So we're gonna having told you that general agreement is

really important.

We're going to start in partially equilibrium.

And we're just going to do that because we're going

to start by solving the sourcing problem in partial equilibrium.

And then we will introduce the general equilibrium, uh, interactions

once we've done that.

Um, to be specific, the sense in which we're going

to start impartially is we're going to take input costs

given as given.

So production is going to use a bundle of inputs.

For now we're just going to assume that bundle of

inputs has some fixed cost.

And we will endogenous that um later okay.

So we've got lots of countries.

Countries are indexed by I, we've got n of them,

uh, we've got lots of goods which are indexed by

J.

Uh, we don't have a finite number of goods.

We have a continuum of goods.

So goods J belong to the unit interval, um, zero

one, as in, uh, many cases in economics, it turns

out in this environment to be easier to work with

a continuum than a finite number.

So that's another convenient modelling assumption.

And then, you know, as we said, there's a single

factor of production which has this fixed, uh, cost.

You can think of this factor of production as being

some combination of labour and intermediate inputs for what we're

doing right now.

It doesn't matter exactly how it is, exactly how that

aggregation works.

Um, and then so each country's factor endowment is just

how much labour it has.

L I, um, and the labour market here is really

boring.

So this is another dimension along which we would simplify

here.

Um, labour is going to be homogeneous.

Um, it's going to be uh, in elastically supplied.

So there's going to be no unemployment here in a

couple of weeks.

We'll start maybe talk about some unemployment, but not now.

Um, and the labour market is going to be competitive.

So each each identical worker will just be paid, um,

their marginal uh product.

There's also going to be no international migration.

Um, so you can see this is not a model

that's designed to think about the distribution of income within

countries.

It's not a model that's designed to think about different

skill types, or the role of education, or about frictions

in the labour market.

You can think about how to extend it to all

those circumstances, but for now, we're assuming them assuming them

away.

Um, and then this, this input cost that we said

would be fixed.

That's going to be um, see, see.

Okay.

So technologies.

So output production is constant returns to scale.

Right.

It uses this bundle of inputs that has Cost.

Marginal cost psi.

Right.

And then output is produced from that bundle of inputs

using a country product specific technology.

So the country specific product specific technologies that is z

ij.

So this is the productivity of country I in producing

good in good j right.

And this is going to be the thing that is

probabilistic.

That is we're going to model stochastically.

Right.

In particular, we're going to assume that country I draws

its productivity for each product J.

As the realisation of a random variable z I.

And these productivity draws are drawn independently for each good

within a country.

And they're also independent across countries.

So what is this saying?

Imagine, you know, there's there's a large number of goods

that can be produced in this economy.

But rather than saying in this sort of a classical

Ricardian world, you would say, okay, you've got productivity three

for good one and quality five for good two, and

productivity seven to go through.

The way we're saying here is like each of these

activities is, you know, some realisation of a random variable,

um, z I so there's kind of, there's chance in

what your productivity is for these different, uh, goods.

Okay.

Note also that since we have a continuum of goods,

we're repeatedly going to be able to kind of think

in terms of the law of large numbers in this

type of economy.

So the distribution function phi of z, which gives the

probability any one random variable drawer is less than z,

is also going to give us the fraction of goods

for which a country's inefficiency, the country's efficiency is below

Z.

So this this random you know, this distribution function f

gives not just the the distribution function for each individual

drawer, but it's also the distribution function for the set

of drawers that the country gets over overall goods.

And then the key thing that gives tractability is the

particular functional form assumption made about f, which is going

to be the f is a Fréchet um distribution.

So I would guess that most of you have probably

seen a Fréchet distribution at some point.

Right.

Because it is now pretty widely used in economics.

Um, go back to, you know, 20 years to when

this paper was being written, nobody had seen the Fréchet

distribution.

It wasn't kind of a commonly used distribution or one

that you really came across the, you know, most important

technical contribution of this paper was essentially saying that if

you model these kind of probability draws as coming from

a fresh air distribution, it has lots of nice properties

that ends up giving us a quantitatively tractable model.

Um, so.

You know, why do we make this Fréchet assumption?

Fundamentally, it's an assumption of convenience.

It's about buying, um, tractability.

Right?

That said, there is kind of one other rationale for

which I'm going to come to in about a couple

of minutes.

But for now, let's just think of this as an

assumption of of convenience.

And what does it mean specifically?

It means that this is the functional form that f

of z is e to the minus t, z to

the minus theta, which is a bit of a mouthful.

Um, but it's actually not that complicated because there are

just two parameters in this distribution.

Right.

So it's a you know, it's a parametric family of

distributions with two parameters t and theta.

So T which is positive is the scale parameter of

the distribution, and as you increase t, your average draw

is improving.

So you can think of of T and note that

T is country specific.

Here you can think of T as measuring the average

technological level of the country.

Countries that are more technologically advanced are going to have

a higher T, um, and then theta theta is the

shape parameter of the distribution.

Um, and what theta does is control the dispersion in

the distribution.

Specifically it controls the inverse dispersion.

So as theta gets bigger, the distribution becomes more concentrated

and its variance, um, declines.

So the way to think about theta intuitively is telling

you how much difference across different products there is in

the productivity draws.

So when theta is very small, which is when you've

got a lot of dispersion, then you're going to get

some products with extremely high technologies and some products with

very low technologies, whereas when theta is really big, it's

a much more concentrated, um, distribution.

So let's look at a few pictures to just kind

of give us a sense of what this distribution looks

like.

So these are graphs of um, not the CDF but

the PDF.

Right.

So we've differentiated f to get f prime of Z.

Right.

So we're looking at the density function of the distribution

uh now.

And we're going to look at it for different values

of t and theta.

Just to get a sense of what this distribution looks

like.

Okay.

So we're starting off here with t equals one and

theta equals two right.

So what do we know here first thing.

The the the domain of this function is the positive

real numbers.

Right.

So this is defined over positive values okay.

Um and it is it is hump shape right.

It has this hump shaped uh flavour with a long

right hand tail.

And that is that's going to always be true of

the distribution.

And then what happens as you change T and to

is you you move the location of the hump as

you change T and you kind of move, you compress

or you elongate the hump as you change data.

So if you quadruple t from t equals one to

t equals four, you can see what you're doing is

you're moving the mass of the distribution out towards the

right here.

So you're more likely to get, uh, higher draws.

Right.

By contrast, if you increase theta, what you're doing is

you increase theta as you are compressing the hump so

there's less dispersion, uh, in the draws.

And we're happy with that.

Um, so that's the Fréchet distribution, very useful distribution to

be, uh, familiar with.

Now, I said, it's primarily kind of an assumption that

we make for convenience.

But there is one kind of more, uh, sort of

stronger rationale for assuming the Fréchet distribution, which is the

the Fréchet distribution is what's known as the type A,

type two extreme value distribution, which means it is one

of the, uh, type of distributions which you can get

if you take the limit of other distributions that.

Sorry, that wasn't very clear.

But if you take a series of independent draws from

some distribution and we're not specifying the form of that

distribution.

Right.

And then you take the kind of the max or

the min over those draws here.

It doesn't matter if we're taking the max or the

min and you ask, what is the distribution of that

max statistic right Under certain conditions.

The limit of that, the limit, as we take kind

of many draws of that max statistic will converge to

a Fréchet distribution, right.

So there is a sense in which if what firms

are doing, is there a repeatedly each individual firm is

repeatedly getting a productivity draw and then it's using the

best productivity draw.

It gets under regularity conditions.

The distribution of those best productivity draws will be pressure.

Right.

So quantum has an earlier 1997 paper showing, you know,

how that how that can happen, how you get this

sequence of productivity draws, you can converge to your distribution

of productivity being Fréchet.

So this is an alternative rationale for why it's not

completely crazy to think that this distribution might be, uh,

might be fresh.

Ade, it's not a purely it's not kind of purely

picked out of thin air, but it can actually be

thought of as the limit of a kind of well

defined, uh, sequence of productivity tools.

Any questions about Frechet distributions at this point?

Yeah.

Is there any requirement to the, um, primitive distribution we're

drawing from or.

Yes.

Um, so, so yes, off the top of my head,

I don't, you know, I don't have in my head

exactly what the requirement is.

Um, the reason it's called the type two is because

there's also like type one and I type three, maybe

others.

I can't remember exactly how many types.

So depending on what the primitive is, you might get

end up in a type two or type three or

type one depending on the characteristics of that primitive.

Right.

So it's not it's not the only possibility for what

you can end up with.

Um.

Anyone else at the moment?

All right, let's take a break there, and then we'll

come back and, uh, continue setting up this model.

Cool.

Oh, wait.

You want.

This?

Yeah.

Oh.

Yeah.

Hi.

Hi.

You must be interested.

I would continue.

I thought you said you wanted.

I thought it would be good to have someone else.

Yeah I was.

Okay.

Yes.

Yeah.

I think.

So.

Yeah.

Okay.

Wouldn't you.

Believe.

That if.

I could get the.

Team.

Yeah.

It's easy.

To do.

Just.

About.

Everything.

Which.

I am mostly doing because of.

Gender.

Oh, yeah.

More than that.

Second part.

Yeah.

Hey.

Quick question.

Yeah.

I don't know if this is super like critical, but

in this slide.

Yeah.

Then you're showing basically how as you can increase T.

Yeah.

Like you get a shift to the right.

Yeah.

If you're also holding a theta constantly.

So why is it also.

The same time.

Um, this is just about the interaction between the.

Two of these okay.

Yeah.

Like it's.

The sort of primary, the primary effect of increasing T

is to kind of shift.

Yeah.

Rightwards.

Yeah.

But it is also it does sort of also play

with the shape a little bit, right.

You can see it's because it's this sort of e

to the minus t, z to the minus theta.

It's kind of quite the two do interact.

Yeah okay okay.

But yeah.

Thanks.

On the.

One.

Hand on.

Know why?

Just yesterday.

So I guess the services.

I usually.

Give him.

At the station.

So.

This is my.

Thank.

You.

Very much.

It's great.

To have.

You and.

I think that.

That was.

All right.

I think we should.

Probably get going again.

Too much time.

Elapses.

So, just to recall, what are we doing?

We are working through the assumptions of each and quarter,

our model to remind ourselves of the key ones we've

looked at so far.

So we have this environment in many countries and many

goods, single factory production.

Each country has labour endowment.

And then we have these stochastic technology draws for each

product, which are independent across products and independent across countries.

Um, and come from this, uh, random variable which has

this Fréchet, uh, distribution with these two parameters T and

theta.

Okay.

What else?

Um, so trade costs are an important part of this

model.

So the way they are going to model trade costs

is they're going to make this assumption that trade costs

take the the iceberg form.

So this is another convenient modelling assumption that you will

show up see show up in lots of different places.

So the assumption is that to deliver one unit of

a good from country N so from country to country

N so the eaten quarter convention is that it's the

subsidy.

The subscripts are importer and then exporter.

So here n is the importer and I is the

exporter.

To deliver one unit from I to n You have

to send DNI units from country R, so it's as

if DNI minus one units of the good melt away

in transit.

Right.

And that's why they're called are iceberg trade costs.

Um and then for country I itself which you know

here we're assuming there are no internal trade costs.

So we're kind of abstracting from the internal geography of

countries.

Um.

Why is this a convenient model way to model trade

costs?

What's the advantage of modelling trade costs in this way?

Right.

Because there's a cost, which is that it's not really

realistic.

Um, unless you if you're shipping LNG, it turns out

if you ship liquefied natural gas, what happens is you

ship it is some of it evaporates.

So for LNG this is actually quite a good way

of modelling trade costs.

But for most other goods obviously that isn't the case.

But why is this what you know?

You will see this as the most common way of

modelling trade costs in trade models.

There's also, you know, equivalent assumptions are made in economic

geography models that say commuting costs.

Why is it so convenient?

Thoughts on that?

It's a real term.

So let's use real terms.

So the measures include uh the export cost just disappears.

So it's relatively easy to model.

Yes.

So that's definitely part of it right there.

No it's it's a real resource cost.

So the price kind of doesn't come into this, which

is going to end up meaning that the kind of

trade costs and the prices end up sort of interacting

in a multiplicative way, which makes things are easy.

There's another component, though, to why this kind of iceberg

trade cost assumption is very convenient.

Like we are assuming a way in transportation sector, right?

So we're embedding it into.

Yeah, exactly.

Doing it in this way where it just melts means

that you don't need to model the transportation sector as

a separate part of the economy.

All right.

So obviously that has kind of advantages and disadvantages.

Uh, the disadvantages, if you want to say something meaningful

about how transportation works, this is obviously not a good

way to do that.

Another thing that people have been working on recently is

thinking about the structure of global transportation networks in particular.

You know, a lot of trade happens through container ships

or how those container ships move around the world.

You have to have a much richer model of trade

costs to do that.

But for our purposes here, where we're not interested in

the transportation sector per se, but we are interested in

there being some trade frictions, this is just a very

convenient way to, uh, to model it the way you

see it come up so often.

Um, and then we're also going to have an arbitrage

condition, uh, which is essentially a triangle inequality that the

the cost of going directly from I to n must

be weakly smaller than the cost of going from I

to k, and then from k to n.

This is just kind of saying if I want to

send goods from the UK to the US, it cannot

be more expensive than if I send the goods first

to Canada and then on from Canada to the to

the US.

So this is in that sense a pretty weak, uh,

a weak restriction.

Okay.

Now, you know, the other thing you're not capturing here

is these you're not capturing the transportation sector.

You also if you wanted to think directly about tariffs.

Right.

So tariffs are in some way similar to the iceberg

trade costs.

And they create a wedge between countries.

They create a cost of trade.

But the big difference with tariffs is that whereas here

the kind of the trade cost it's just melting away.

Tariffs actually generate revenues.

And then you have to think about where those revenues

go.

So if you want to do trade policy in the

form of tariffs, you need to kind of model them

separately from these iceberg trade costs, which is very straightforward

in this framework.

But it is they are different, not simply the same

thing.

Okay.

So that's we've done kind of supply side.

We've done trade costs.

What about preferences.

The preference side is very straightforward.

It should look familiar to all of you.

We've got this continuum of goods indexed by J.

We have a cis utility function defined over consumption of

this mass one of goods with elasticity of substitution uh

sigma uh between goods.

So this is probably the most common utility or aggregation

function that's used in almost any macroeconomic, uh, setting.

So there's nothing exciting here going on on the, on

the preferences.

Uh, side note also that these preferences are homophonic.

So, you know, you're just going to get linear income

effects.

The in terms of solving the model, which we're now

going to start to do.

The key step in solving the model is solving the

sourcing decision, which is to say where for each country

n where do they source each good j from?

And the first step in doing that is to think

about the price at which country I can supply.

Good j to country N.

So this is if country N buys good j from

country.

How much does it cost?

Well it's the uh, production cost in country I, which

is key.

Remember that was our exogenous cost of the factor input

bundle which we're just holding fixed for now.

And then that's multiplied by the iceberg trade cost.

So this is where the kind of iceberg trade costs

assumption is pretty convenient.

So it just shows up multiplicative here.

And it's divided by the productivity z.

So we just get the price depends on these three

terms.

And then which country do you buy goods from?

Will you buy it from?

Whoever can supply cheap most cheaply.

Right.

And remember you know production within each country product is

competitive.

So there's no products here.

There's no meaningful sense of firms.

It's just about who is the lowest cost supplier.

Um, so we're buying from the lowest cost supplier across

all potential suppliers I which means that the the price

of good n in country J is just going to

be the minimum over I of all the ni J's.

All right.

So now you can see what kind of coming back

to this minimum statistic that we looked at at the

the start.

We want to take the minimum of this thing over

I.

Right.

And it's probabilistic because the Z is is drawn from

this Fréchet distribution.

Well happy with that.

So the next step is to characterise, uh, this, this

price function here, right.

By taking the minimum across the countries and also to

solve for kind of what, which goods we get from

which countries.

So we're going to introduce this distribution function g g

will be the distribution of uh of prices.

Right.

Specifically it's the distribution of prices, um, across goods provided

by I to n.

So we've done a slight kind of switch of emphasis

here.

And on the previous slide we were saying, okay, this

is specifically for good J.

But remember here, each good day from a supply side,

it's identical up to the value of z.

Right.

So the the trade costs and the production costs are

not good specific.

All that's good specific is these productivity draws.

Uh z.

Right.

And because each good is drawn from the same Fréchet

distribution and the draws are independent, we can think about

the the price distribution across draws as also being a

a random variable.

That's what we are are doing here.

And we're characterising that random variable.

So we're now interested in the the distribution function of

the price draws.

Right.

So this is going to be what's the probability that

z is less than equal to p.

So that's the probability that this Sydney over our random

variables.

That is listening to p which probability z is greater

than this stuff.

Just rearranging which is one minus the probability z is

less than this stuff, which is, you know, the the

rationale for this kind of rearranging we're doing is now,

once we've got it in this form.

Well, this is just the, uh, distribution function of our

random variable Z, which is our Fréchet distribution function f.

So if we substitute the functional form for that, we

get this expression here.

Right.

So what we've now got is an expression for the

distribution of prices of goods that country I could sell

to country N in terms of the uh productivity parameter

in country, it, the production cost parameter in country I

c and the trade cost d, as well as our

shape parameter theta.

Questions on that.

Sorry.

Yes.

What c I again c.

I is the unit cost of a bundle of production

inputs in country I.

Right.

So we're being a bit vague about exactly what a

bundle of production inputs in country is so far.

But you know, if we if it was just labour,

if the only production input was labour, it would be

the wage, right?

In practice we're going to allow production to use labour

and intermediate inputs, which is why we've got the C

rather than the wage.

Okay.

Thank you.

But also the you know, the other thing to note

at the moment is for current purposes we're taking this

exogenous.

So we're saying given CI what does the equilibrium look

like.

And then we'll come back to see.

Yes.

Uh in the competitive uh like in the competitive market

the price should be equal to cost.

So why do we need to divide C by the.

Yeah.

So H sorry I think probably this is just me

not being clear.

So the like the implicit production technology here is going

to look like what output of good j in and

country.

I is going to be your productivity XJS times like

x I j where the x is inputs used to

produce j in I.

And each of them the unit cost of these inputs

is the CI.

So then your unit cost of production of producing y

is going to be psi over z I j.

Right.

So another way of saying that is psi is not

the unit cost of producing Y, it's the unit cost

of producing the X.

And then to produce the y you multiply the x

by the z.

So you end up dividing the cost by the z.

Make sense?

Yes.

Sorry, I should have been clearer than that.

Okay.

Any other questions at this point?

So this is our kind of country specific price distribution.

And we're now going to move to solving for the

distribution of the minimum price.

Okay.

So the distribution of the minimum price which we're just

going to call PN right.

Uh, the probability that the price in country N is

less than or equal to P is just one minus

the price probability that the price coming from each of

the individual countries is greater than or equal to p.

So this is the same kind of switch, the same

rearrangement we did when we were looking at the kind

of probability theory for the distribution of the minimum at

the beginning of the lecture.

Right.

Because each of these, uh, price draws from each country

is independent.

Right.

We just have this product of the individual probabilities.

And what's the probability that, say, the price coming from

country one is greater than or equal to P.

Well it's going to be one minus one and p.

So we end up with one minus the product over

all the origin countries of one minus p of p.

So that's why we solve for NI on the previous

slide because it's now showing up here.

Right.

So what's one minus ni of P.

Well it's from this.

It's from here.

Right.

So one minus near of P is just going to

be this exponential.

So we can substitute that in here.

So we've got one minus the product across all origins

of the exponential of the the term involving the kind

of production costs in the origin country.

Right.

And then our final step is to note that, you

know, the product of a bunch of exponentials is the

exponential of the sum of the terms here.

So we can rearrange this as one minus e to

the minus five and key to the beta where phi

n is just the sum over all origins of the

t Sydney to the minus theta.

So we just, you know, last couple of lines we're

just doing that.

There's no economics in there.

So what we've now got right is an expression for

the distribution of prices in an importer N right.

And the thing that you hopefully now note is that

this distribution function, we've got this functional form here.

This is a fresh functional form.

So this is where the kind of Fréchet ends up

being tractable.

Right.

Is that we go from having fresh productivity draws to

having that.

When we solve for the distribution of prices in a

given country, that price distribution, it's actually one over the

it's the one over the P's is pressure.

Right.

Because if you remember the let's just go back to

it to make that clear.

Right.

The Fréchet distribution is E minus t z to the

minus theta.

Right.

And we've got that same functional form showing up here

E to the minus phi n p to the theta.

So this would be one over p to the minus

theta to one over.

Uh the price ends up having that Fréchet functional form.

And so that's one nice thing right.

We're kind of doing these transformations.

And we're preserving the functional form which kind of keeps

the tractability.

The other nice thing is this term phi n, which

is now the kind of scale parameter of this price

distribution.

It depends on the scale parameter in each individual country

and the production costs.

You know, multiplied by the, the the the the trade

costs.

Right.

So it kind of depends on the primitives of the

model in a particular way that is going to end

up being useful for us.

Well happy with this.

Good.

All right.

So what we do is we now take this.

So you know, up to here we kind of basically

be doing math statistics.

Right.

We're going to take the fact that we have this

expression for the price distribution.

And then the next thing we're going to do is

kind of interpret economically what that means.

What do we actually learn from that.

And in particular we're going to highlight that there are

are four properties this price distribution has which are useful

for understanding, uh, the kind of economic equilibrium here.

So first one which we've already mentioned, is that this

price distribution has a scale parameter phi, which is simply

a function of technology in all the countries around the

world, input costs around the world and geographic barriers.

Right.

And that's going to be important because this this phi

parameter is going to end up being key to the

equilibrium of the of the model.

So it's going to kind of give us the mapping

from the primitives, which are technologies and input costs and

geographic barriers to the equilibrium.

It's kind of like a sufficient statistic in a certain

sense.

Second point.

And now we're going to kind of see why we

care about the phi n, right.

If we now solve for the price index in country

N.

So previous slide, we solve for the distribution of prices.

Um, given that distribution of prices and given that we

have this utility, we can do a little bit of

maths and solve for the the price index.

The price index simply depends on, you know, parameters.

So it depends on this kind of gamma function here.

It depends on the theta.

And it depends on our familiar friend, this uh, fighter.

Right.

So now what we've got is a mapping from how

technologies, input costs and geographic barriers affect the price index

in a given country.

And if you recall, at the start, we said that

one of the things we were hoping to do is

to kind of rationalise why we see price differences across

countries.

Formally.

This is how the model is going to end up,

uh, doing that.

Obvious question to ask here now is kind of if

we do comparative statics on this price index, are they

sensible.

So how does the price index depend on technologies input

costs and geographic uh barriers.

Well if we the increase t so that's a technological

improvement in country AI that will raise phi N, which

will decrease the price index.

So better technology, lower prices.

That's sensible right.

Likewise, if you increase input costs or you increase trade

costs, the comparative static goes in the other direction and

prices increase.

Okay.

So that's also fairly, um, fairly intuitive.

Moreover, and this is the bit that is a kind

of a little bit more involved if you start thinking

about the kind of magnitude of the effect of, say,

technology and country on prices in country N, it will

depend on the Sydney terms.

And in particular, if you think about the limit where

two countries don't trade.

That would be the limit.

Taking DNI to infinity, right.

That's essentially setting trade costs so high that there's no

trade.

If you do that, if you take DNI to infinity,

then phi N will become independent of Ty.

And changes in technology will not affect prices in country

N, right.

So again that's intuitive.

It's kind of capturing this idea that the, the extent

to which technology in one country affect prices in another

country depends on how much they trade.

Right.

And what's capturing how much they trade is the Sydney

item.

So that's the second property, the price index.

Third one, um, is how much trade are we actually

seeing between country and country.

And, and here again we kind of appeal to a

law of large number type world which tells us that

the this this fraction pi and I, which is going

to be the probability that country is the lowest cost

supply to country N, will also be the share of

goods that country enjoys from country.

Country I and it's given by this expression here where

you've got the fire now in the denominator, and you've

got this T side and the minus theta term in

the numerator.

Right.

So recalling that the phi n is just the sum

of these TCD terms over all countries.

What that's telling us is the kind of each country's

contribution to the phi N is also telling us how

important a source of exports is for country F.

Just to say that another way, if this T Sydney

term is kind of big for country I then that's

telling us that country has this.

It accounts for a larger share of the imports of

country N.

So we're now seeing that kind of embedded in this

file, and the kind of terms that that make up

the fire is information not just about price indexes, but

also about the trade flows.

Everyone happy with that.

And then final observation is that if we look at

the distribution of prices of the goods that country N

actually buys from country ie that also has distribution GNP.

So let me just be clear what I mean by

that.

We showed that the the distribution of possible goods or

the distribution of all goods that country n could buy

from country I has this GNP form, but in practice

country N will only buy some goods from country I'll

only buy those goods for which country is the lowest

cost supplier.

So if for goods where country has a very high,

uh, cost of supply, which will be those goods where

it has a very low Z, it they won't be

sourced from countries, they'll be sourced from elsewhere.

Um, so this distribution is not the distribution of prices

for the goods that are actually bought from country.

But if we look at that distribution of prices for

the goods that actually bought from country, it is equal

to this distribution of P, which remember, is the distribution

of buy of all prices in country.

To put another way, what that is telling you is

that the distribution of prices of goods that come from

each country and are actually traded is the same.

Which is to say that countries that are.

Kind of account for a higher share of exports in

the sense of, you know, countries for which piracy is

higher.

They sell more goods to country end, but the distribution

of price of the goods they sell is the same.

Another way of putting that is that all the adjustment

here is on the extensive margin and not the intensive

margin.

Okay.

If you think I'm in the UK, I'm buying goods

from the US and from New Zealand.

And if I think the US on average is a

cheaper source of inputs than New Zealand in this model,

what will happen is I'll buy more goods from the

US, but conditional on buying goods from the US, their

distribution of prices will be the same as the goods

from New Zealand.

Okay.

So at various points you will hear people talk about

oh well in the eastern quarter model or related models

All the adjustment is on the extensive margin.

That's what they mean by this, right?

Another possibility would be that the on average, the goods

that I actually buy from the US are cheaper than

the goods that I buy from New Zealand.

That's not the case in this model.

And the reason is that the fact that the goods

from the US are cheaper just means I keep buying

more and more of them.

And as I keep buying more and more than the

marginal good I'm buying, the US gets more expensive.

And with this particular set of assumptions, this is by

no means a general result.

But with this particular set of assumptions, that continues until

the distribution of goods that are actually bought is the

same regardless of the origin.

And again, it that fact contributes a lot to the

tractability of the model, because it means that kind of

when we end up characterising the equilibrium, regardless of where

goods come from, they have this same distribution process.

Yeah.

Is that a consequence of having the to sing, say,

in those countries.

So yes.

In the sense that it has it does depend on

that fact.

Because if you go back and you look at the

distribution of p, you can see theta is a parameter

that enters that distribution, right.

This is the the distribution GNP.

So theta differed across countries.

That distribution would also differ uh differ more generally.

And.

People have done versions of this model where theta differs

across countries.

But it gets a little bit messy.

It's kind of not it's not one of the easier

assumptions to relax that we're making here.

Yeah.

I missing something in the model because as far as

I understood, it's recent exporting country that is exporting the

same good towards different countries, and it's telling a different

practice in each of those countries, right?

Yeah.

So it's making some profits in some countries and not

in some others.

So.

So no, because the only reason those goods from the

same countries sell at different prices in different countries is

because of the differences in the trade costs.

Okay.

So it's the, you know, the reason good safe and

France are cheaper in the UK than in America.

It's because it costs more to send them to America.

But that doesn't map into additional profits for the French

producer.

Is that.

Yeah.

I.

Mean, the other thing to note, right.

It's kind of we haven't said this explicitly so far

is that.

Each importer sources each product from whatever country can supply

that product most cheaply to it.

And it may be that for the UK we buy

product one most cheaply from France, whereas the US buys

that product most cheaply from Germany.

So it is definitely the case in this model that,

you know, you're going to have multiple countries exporting the

same good to different destinations.

What you won't get is multiple countries exporting the same

good to the same destination, each by which each importer

imports each good from only one country.

But you can have multiple exporters exporting the same good

to different countries.

So one of the assumptions is that okay, so I'm

country X and I'm importing everything from good one from

another country.

So one assumption is that this country which is the

lowest price that I could get.

Yeah, we'll be able to produce everything that I need

for my country.

Or you have to have a capacity constraint.

Yeah, there are no capacity constraints here are formally where

that's coming from in the model is because because you've

got a continuum of goods, each individual good is so

small that it's never going to hit any, um, capacity

constraint.

Um, more broadly, because you have these linear production technologies,

you can always, you know, keep expanding without running into

decreasing returns to scale.

But you know what would happen if at a macro

level, a country faces excess demand is it will drive

up its factor prices, it will drive up CI here

is fixed, but CI will end up being endogenous.

So if you turn out to be a low cost

supplier for lots of goods that will drive up CI,

and then you won't be the low cost supplier for

so many goods and that will kind of equilibrium leak.

Uh the model.

Any other.

Questions on.

On this at this point?

Can you repeat again what you said earlier?

You said each exporter can export to many different countries

but importers or.

Yeah.

So from the from the perspective of the importer, an

importer will only buy each good from one country, whichever

country is its lower cost supplier.

Now there are many different goods so it will buy

different goods from different countries.

But you know, if, say one good, here is shoes.

The UK will only import shoes from one other country

in this model.

Okay.

But if we look at which countries export shoes, there

may be many countries that export shoes.

It's just been it might be that say Germany exports

shoes to the UK, the US export shoes to Canada

and so on.

The other thing to note is, you know, I've been

talking about this in terms of, you know, exports and

international trade.

Obviously, one of the possibilities is always that you can

source the product domestically, right?

So for some products it will be the UK sources

that from domestic producers and doesn't import at all.

So in that sense some of the products are going

to be non traded.

But the set of products that is non traded will

differ across countries.

It's just those products which each country can source most

cheaply from itself.

And note that because we've assumed that there's no internal

trade costs, that does give domestic producers a cost advantage

all else constant.

Because when you buy from the domestic producers, you don't

pay.

The DNI is equal to one.

So that will tend to bias us in terms of

buying a higher share of our our production domestically, which

is how this model is going to end up being

able to match kind of macro level facts about the

fact that trade is home buyers write.

Anything else for now?

All right.

So we may be one.

Yeah.

Is that also what we see in the data that

countries import like the cheapest good.

Or is there also like political considerations where I don't

know, maybe if Germany imports from France because they're close

to one another and friends even though they could cheaper

import from Poland or whatever.

Um, I think it's going to depend a bit on

kind of how you frame the question, right, in that

if, say, say, if you're a German politician and you're

interested in producing policies that will make it more likely

that Germany imports from France than the US, the way

you can do that is import tariffs on US imports.

So to the extent that we don't have tariffs in

the model, we're missing that channel, but it is very

straightforward to add tariffs in this model if that's what

you are.

No.

But I mean even in the absence of tariffs, is

there like something like preferences that firms have in a

way.

Okay.

Um.

I think the way you would want to model that

is if we come back to a so I mean,

that's that kind of idea is not in this model.

And the reason it's not in this model is that

if we go back to our sorry we have gone

past, we go back to our preferences here.

Like these preferences are symmetric across goods and they're also

symmetric across countries.

You could imagine putting in like a lambda any term

here.

Or it could be in fact it could be lambda

I j if you like, which would be like a

product country specific term which would say people in Germany

prefer goods that come from France when their shoes, or

they prefer goods that come from America when they're peanut

butter or whatever.

I like that, so that would be the kind of

simple way to incorporate that in a way that is

consistent with this model.

I think you would then face the question of, okay,

why do you think that type of preferences exist?

But, you know, it's certainly something that the, the broad

framework can handle.

Yeah, I mean, this this but uh, iceberg costs are

essentially just like a function of distance between.

The two countries.

What are they.

So we we haven't said like we haven't specified that

yet, but yeah, like I think at the back of

your mind, think of these these are going to be

larger when countries are further apart.

They're going to be larger when countries don't speak the

same language because that creates trade frictions.

They're going to be larger for landlocked countries because shipping

is more expensive by road than by sea.

So it's kind of all those factors.

It's like distance in a physical sense, but distance also

in a broader sort of cultural and social sense also

matters for these trade costs.

Yeah.

So on the fourth point of the fourth property prices.

Mhm.

Um, so for that one we're thinking about that country.

And actually if country, if I say for goods from

country that this distribution that you're talking about is not

the distribution of the realised, the realised um, productivity for

these four goods, right.

Because that would be a different distribution than like.

It's the distribution of the prices for those four goods.

Right.

The price competition that it comes from, said I.

The small ones that I like the best realisation.

Well recall, I mean if we go back here, right?

This is the expression for the price, right?

So it depends on the Z.

But it also depends on the C and the D

okay.

And then which for goods those are is not random.

It's selected.

Right.

And really the key result is that those four goods

that country N is choosing to import from country I,

because country is the lowest cost supply of those four

goods.

When we look at the distribution of the prices for

those four goods, it's the same across all origins.

And the reason it ends up being the same, it's

the selection mark margin that is key there.

Right.

And the fact that this selection margin results in the

distribution being exactly the same across all origins is they

almost like a coincidence of the particular functional form assumptions

we've made?

It's not like a general result that is going to

hold in any setup.

It's a something the whole because of this Fréchet distribution

where issue.

Version.

So everything.

So just.

Yeah, it's it's not like this person you're talking about.

It's not a distribution made of four points.

Well, remember.

Everything's a continuum here.

So in practice, what it's going to be is I

import, say, 4% of my goods from country say the

US imports 4% of the product from the UK.

It's the distribution of prices over those 4% of products.

But even within that 4% of products, there's a continuum

of goods, right?

So that's why you don't need to worry about sort

of discreteness, which I think is what you're worrying about

there.

Everything is smooth because we've always got these continuums.

All right.

Moving on.

Um, so the next thing I then kind of want

to show you is that this equilibrium we've now started

to characterise in terms of the price distributions, does indeed

deliver a gravity equation for trade, which I said was

at the start, was kind of one of the features

we would like the model, um, to have.

Okay, so.

Recall that Pi and I is the probability that country

AI is the lowest cost supplier to country.

Right.

Because that's true.

Because we have this expression for pi and I, and

because it's also true that the distribution of prices is

independent of the origin country Pi.

And I is also the fraction of country and total

expenditure that is spent on goods coming from country.

All right.

So we're now leveraging these price facts to turn to

say something about things that are observable.

Right.

The price distribution itself is not typically observable.

But this expenditure share is because this expenditure share is

just, uh, expenditure by country n on goods from country

I relative to country and total expenditure.

So this thing in the numerator that bilateral trade between

iron and the thing in the denominator is just total

expenditure in n.

So that's observable in any standard uh data set.

All right.

And we now have this expression for that in terms

of our, our primitives of the of the model.

So we're now going to observe a bunch of things

about why this is a gravity equation.

So first thing is if you stare at this equation

nine note that the bilateral trade the x and z

can be written in this form.

It depends on a supplier specific term s I an

import a specific term, and a bilateral term.

Right.

So in particular, the supplier specific term c is t

c to the minus theta.

Uh the importer of specific term is just our r

phi n or its x n over phi n in

this case.

And then the bilateral term is the DNI.

So the reason for making this observation is that this

is the general structure.

This is a sort of generalised structure of a gravity

equation.

Bilateral flow depends on export a fixed effect, import a

fixed effect and bilateral friction.

Right.

Note the bilateral friction here is just the trade cost

to the power of minus theta.

So the exporter fixed effect size.

That's going to be big for countries that have high

technologies T and low production costs.

See the import of fixed effect will be high for

countries that have high expenditure and low prices.

So this is kind of a real expenditure term.

And then the bilateral friction depends on the trade costs

okay.

So that's kind of one way of writing this bilateral

trade in terms of gravity equation.

But we can kind of go go further.

Right.

Because we can now, you know, re express, uh, the

import and export of fixed effects, uh, in terms of

sort of alternative ways of writing, uh, the model outcomes.

In particular, note that the exporters total sales to all

destinations are given by summing the x mes across em.

So that gives us total sales to all destinations which

we call q r, right.

If we then substitute for x mi in terms of

sorry this expression here right.

And sum up across origins, we're going to get a

total sales depend on the t I c to the

minus beta times something which is a sum over destinations

of this term.

Right.

Why are we doing that?

Well, that's going to allow for us to substitute for

the t c to the minus theta in the gravity

equation in terms of the exporters total sales.

So what we're working towards here is kind of writing

a version of the gravity equation where instead of just

having C and D in terms of, you know, parameters,

the model, but not necessarily things that are observable, we're

trying to rewrite them in terms of things that are

in principle, observable.

Okay.

So if we make this substitution for t c minus

theta in terms of QE, what we're now going to

get is that the bilateral trade depends on the exporters

total sales.

And it depends on kind of these terms, which are

like real demand in each location multiplied by a measure

of the trade frictions relative to that summed up across

all destinations that country I, uh, cells.

Okay, so this is now another way of writing, um,

the, uh, gravity equation.

Right?

Where you've got kind of intuitively, countries that have bigger

total sales are going to export more.

They're going to export more to countries that have higher

demand, which is what this term here is capturing.

And then this thing in the denominator, which is a

little bit kind of less intuitive.

What that gets referred to is in the literature is

the outward multilateral resistance term, because it's a measure of

what is the kind of total export, total size of

the export markets that country are country faces.

And what this is kind of saying is that if

you are a country that has access, kind of better

access to markets with higher demand, Then, conditional on a

given level of total sales, you will export less to

any given destination.

Questions on any questions on that.

Okay.

So I mean the key takeaways there right I mean

one.

This model delivers a gravity equation.

And the kind of key components of gravity equation are

exporter fixed effect importer fixed effect bilateral term right where

the bilateral term depends on the trade costs.

Um two if you are ever doing work kind of

that requires you to kind of estimate gravity equations, you

can start to manipulate them in ways that kind of

expresses these trade flows in terms of kind of potential,

you know, observable or kind of a meaningful equilibrium of

objects.

And once you do that this kind of multi.

Idea of multilateral resistance is key.

And I'm not going to say more about that today.

But there's a you know, there's a good recent handbook

of international economics chapter on kind of gravity equations in

international trade.

That is it's kind of like a cookbook for how

to estimate gravity equations.

So if that's ever relevant to you that's where I

would start looking.

The other thing to kind of note from that is

that if we now compute the elasticity of trade flows

to trade costs, it's just simply given by this parameter

theta.

So this elasticity, the elasticity of of trade to trade

costs.

Um it's important in international trade.

Right.

And it will start to become obvious why it's important

later this week or later in this lecture.

It will become more important next week.

Um, it turns out to be a parameter that is

really important for understanding the magnitude of the welfare gains

from trade.

So we care about this parameter, this, uh, and we

give it a name.

We call it the trade elasticity.

Um, and a common question in any model of international

trade is, okay, what does that model imply about the

trade elasticity.

So what this particular, you know, Asian quantum model implies

is that the trade elasticity equals the, uh, shape parameter

of the, uh, Fréchet distribution.

Okay.

And what is you know, I think if you.

Think about this model for a while, what you will

probably be surprising is that this elasticity depends only on

the theta and not on the sigma.

Right.

Because remember the sigma is the demand elasticity.

Right.

So it is very natural to think that the kind

of elasticity of trade to, to costs, which is this

trade elasticity is likely to depend on the demand elasticity,

because the demand elasticity is telling you how sensitive demand

is to the prices of individual goods.

Right.

Ah.

And we will look at other models where that is

indeed the case.

What's slightly surprising about the ease and quarter model is

that Sigma doesn't show up here at all, and it's

all about data.

And the reason for that comes back to this point

that all the adjustment is on the extensive margin, right?

Remember, this is the point I made about the distribution

of prices being the same across all origins, because all

the adjustment was on the extensive margin, which is to

say, when you shock the trade costs, right.

If I make it more expensive for N to import

from I, n is going to import less from I.

But that adjustment is purely going to happen along the

extensive margin of of importing fewer products.

Right.

And the the elasticity that governs how that happens is

the theta, because that theta is telling us about how

dispersed our productivity draws are in this ratio distribution.

I think it typically takes sort of a bit of

thinking about and playing around with this Fréchet distributions before,

but this becomes intuitive.

But this is kind of a property that is well

worth flagging.

Any questions on that?

Yeah, I was thinking, um, the reason why we don't

have demand as such, because we're kind of like ignoring

demands in terms of quantities like, um, we we just

used prices to derive all the results is more or

less.

Right?

Yeah.

And it's like we are implicitly assuming that country.

So including every country, will only import given good from,

uh, one context.

Yeah.

So we're assuming that the demand and known country can

be satisfied by by output in some export source, like

we are ignoring or not, or we are assuming that

in equilibrium.

Yeah, I wouldn't put it that we were ignoring quantities.

I mean, I think it is that we are, you

know, kind of related to a question earlier.

There is no capacity constraint that is going to limit

the ability of one exporter to fulfil all import demand

in a given country, which, you know, formally, because we

have the continuum, that's going to be true.

But you might worry in other circumstances it it isn't.

Um, but I don't think that's quite the same as

ignoring.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But I mean, I think where the kind of thrust

of your question is correct is this is a model

specific result, right?

There are going to be other models in which that

demand elasticity.

Sigma is key to the trade elasticity.

What's kind of interesting in this model is that, you

know, once you have this extensive margin adjustment that completely

dominates and is what determines the trade elasticity.

What you're seeing is a bit cautious.

I mean, to to to read it more to to

understand whether it's like we really didn't use the utility

function.

Right.

Like what we.

Yeah.

So what is it's a good way we used it

here.

Right.

Which is you know, this is maybe my mistake for

going, you know, not going over all the details, but

when we converted the distribution of prices across goods to

the country level price index, that depends on the utility

function.

And you can actually see that the sigma does show

up in this parameter gamma, which is kind of a

constant in front of the price index.

So that's where it's showing you.

But it doesn't show up in terms of the trade

elasticity.

Okay.

Yeah.

And if we look at trade elasticity but at a

variety level is infinite.

So ask the question.

Again if we look at this elasticity.

But instead of x I we have x and I.

For a variety j.

Um you know we.

Know it would be.

So for certain shocks you wouldn't change who you sourced

from.

And then it would actually depend on sigma uh, when

to the extent you don't change your source and then

when you change then is when it will become infinite.

So it would depend on is the shock big enough

to change who you source from, which depend depending on

the particular good, the magnitude that it's required for that

or different.

Hi.

Um.

So we've kind of done the main steps in solving

the model now and then.

All we need to do is close the model, which

is to say we need to remember that this PSI

we've been treating as exogenous, but actually it's it's endogenous.

Um, so we need to specify how that PSI is

determined.

And then we need to solve for that.

Uh psi.

So what we're going to assume is the output is

a Cob Douglas aggregate of labour and intermediate inputs.

So that the cost of a of the input bundle

is just a unit elasticity aggregate of the wage we

and the input bundle price pi.

And here we're assuming that the the input bundle is

produced using the same aggregator as in preferences.

Right.

So it's kind of one of these sort of roundabout

production networks that you often see in macro where, uh,

all the individual varieties are aggregated to a single final

good, and that final good goes both into consumption and

then it is recycled as an intermediate input into production.

Right.

So the price of the input bundle is the same

as the overall price index.

Then to kind of pin down uh, the wage and

therefore also what the price index and the see, we

need to make some assumption about what's going on in

terms of sectors and kind of EC.

Consider two different cases.

You can call and consider two different cases.

Uh, they consider one case where you've got one manufacturing

sector where everything we've been talking about so far is

what they call the manufacturing sector.

And there's also a non-manufacturing sector which produces a freely

tradable homogeneous output under constant returns to scale.

So it's a very boring sector in that sense.

Um, so you've got these two sectors, the kind of

eke sector, which is the manufacturing sector, and the Non-tradable

sector, which is a classical linear production technology with free

trade.

Um, and they consider one version of the model where

Labour's freely mobile between the two sectors and another case

where Labour is sector specific.

Right.

And you're going to get slightly different general equilibrium conditions

to close the model in the, uh, in the two

cases.

But, you know, in either way, what you end up

with is a system of kind of the price equations

that we've characterised the trade equations and then market clearing

conditions that pin down, uh, the equilibrium.

Right.

And at this point, that's kind of the limit of

how much analytic process, uh, you know, how much we

can solve the model analytically.

And you then need to at this point go to

the computer.

Right.

So you end up with a system of equations in

the wages, uh, and the prices which you solve on

the, uh, on the computer.

Um, So just to sum up what we've done before

we take a break, right.

We've kind of developed this EQ Ricardian model, which has

a bunch of nice features that we're going to leverage

for quantitative work, uh, in the next hour.

We've got many industries, many countries, we've got these country

specific trade costs.

We've got these fresh productivity draws.

It generates a gravity equation, it generates endogenous factor price,

uh, price and factor cost differences.

Uh, but we do need to kind of solve it

numerically, which means to kind of characterise its properties.

We need to, uh, estimate and calibrate the model.

So we'll take a break now, and then we'll come

back and we'll talk about how we can go about,

uh, calibrating this model and actually doing counterfactual analysis.

Okay.

Yes.

Yes, we like it.

Yeah.

Maybe.

Yes we can.

That's what she wants.

That's not me.

Oh, then that's my channel.

It's worth it.

One change.

You tell your girlfriend that you made my name.

Yeah.

But she's here right now.

No, no, no.

It's not.

Because it's not.

Oh, was it the intro?

So why is so good?

No problem.

So you.

Said you probably want to work.

On.

The next schedule.

Oh, right.

Yes yes, yes.

So you say it's 4:30 p.m.?

Yes.

Do I know?

Yeah.

So I don't know.

It's okay.

Sorry.

No, I just want to know.

It's fine.

Okay.

I've got that on my calendar.

Okay.

No worries.

Thank you.

Yeah, absolutely.

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah yeah.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah.

So this.

Is actually sort.

This is.

Serious.

Advice before last flight.

No.

No.

No.

So yeah.

So I.

Think the graph region is good I know, but it's

not.

Like this you.

Know.

We just take.

A break.

Like it's really not.

Look at this.

Did you go yesterday?

Yeah.

Okay.

Let's continue.

Um, so before we kind of basically our goal now

is to think about how we can actually calibrate and

quantify the model.

Before we do that, I want to point out one

more useful property of the, uh, model, which is what

does it have to say about welfare?

So for doing welfare analysis, let's simplify our life by

dropping the non-manufacturing sector.

So let's think about a single sector version of the

model where we just have this single column sector, right.

Now how do we measure welfare in this model.

All right.

But this is a model where there's no profits.

There's nothing dynamic going on here.

So the real way to await wages and labour is

the only factor.

So the real wage is a measure of of welfare,

welfare talking about welfare.

And it's the same story that the real way.

So we want to solve for the real wage.

If we back up a little bit and we look

at these expressions we had for the price index P

and for the expenditure shares Pi and I.

Right.

So.

We can substitute for phi n in terms of the

price index.

We can substitute for psi in terms of the wage

and the price index.

And we're going to do that.

And that's going to give us this expression here okay.

So the share of expenditure that is on domestic production,

which is kind of like the domestic absorption ratio, right?

It depends on technologies.

It depends on the price index and also constant gamma.

That's not very interesting and it depends on the C.

And then we substitute for the C as well in

terms of the weighting prices.

And we rearrange.

We get this expression here for the real wage.

So we get an expression for the real wage.

That depends on the countries technology.

Countries with more advanced technologies are going to have higher

real wages.

That's sensible.

But the key point here is the only endogenous variable

in this expression is the Pie.

So what this is saying is that in this model

the domestic expenditure share which is the pie I remember

pie is the share of total expenditure by country I

that is spent domestically.

So it's like one minus the import expenditure, the import.

Ratio.

That domestic expenditure ratio is a sufficient statistic for for

welfare.

So any change in welfare in this model comes through

changes in the uh, in the pie er, which makes

kind of welfare analysis in this model very uh straightforward

because everything reduces to saying what happens to the pie.

Right.

And that enables us in a relatively simple way to

think about, uh, gains from track.

Right.

Why is that?

Well, in autarky with no trade, pie is equal to

one.

Whenever there's going to be any trade pie is less

than one.

So the effect of trade is to reduce pie which

increases welfare.

So that gives us a very simple result that there

are gains from trade in this model in the sense

of, uh, trade increases welfare.

Moreover, if we want to understand the magnitude of welfare

effects, all we need to know is what's the change

in PII.

Right.

And then we need to know two elasticities, the beta

and the theta where recall beta was Labour's share production

cost.

So that's like the value added share of production costs

here.

So that's a fairly standard parameter to calibrate.

And then our other parameters are theta which recall was

the trade elasticity.

So when we talked about the trade elasticity I said

this matters because it controls the welfare gains through trade.

This is the formal sense in which that is true.

The elasticity of welfare to changes in the, uh domestic

expenditure ratio.

Pi io depends on the uh, theta and in particular

because it's one over theta here the larger theta is,

the smaller the gains from trade.

Okay.

Intuitively, why is that?

A larger theta is telling you that there is a

high trade elasticity, which is saying that there's kind of

a high degree of substitute ability between the output from

different countries.

When you shop trade costs, you get big changes in

trade flows because output produced in different places is highly

substitutable for the lens of the model.

Right?

Um, which means, you know, when output produced in different

places is more substitutable, the gains from trade are going

to be smaller.

So we get this inverse relationship between the magnitude of

beta and the size of the gains of trade.

Now, you know this.

We've derived this equation.

We've been this particular kind of Eaton Cordon model.

It turns out.

And we will come back to this, that similar equations

end up holding in a kind of broad class of

trade models that satisfy a particular type of, of gravity

equation.

So this kind of expression where we get, you know,

welfare depending on some measure of how much trade is

going on, which is the pi and a trade elasticity

theta with also the the beta coming in there.

That's common across a wide range of of trade models.

And it gives a very simple way for thinking about

the welfare effects of trade.

Any questions on that.

Okay.

So let's move to quantification.

Um.

So.

We now want to use this model to do kind

of counterfactual analysis.

Right.

We want to say if there's a trade policy shock

what are the welfare effects.

Or if one country becomes more technologically advanced.

How does that affect other countries.

So to do that we need to kind of calibrate

the the model.

And then, you know, the big question is how do

we do that calibration, which is to say, you know,

what are the parameters we need to know here.

We need to know the technology parameters.

T we need the bilateral trade cost D and we

need the Fréchet parameter theta.

Those are the key parameters of the model.

And then you know, other parameters like the beta or

the sigma is kind of more standard.

So we can take that some kind of standard estimates.

But it's really these technologies t trade cost d and

pressure parameter that we are interested in.

So what I'm going to show you is first we're

going to look at how EC calibrated those parameters and

their original paper and the approach they took and how

you can use the structure of the model to back

out those parameters.

Um, and then either at the end like this time

or maybe at the start next time, depending on whether

we get there, we'll look at a another paper by

Caliendo, which provides an alternative way to calibrate the model,

which has the advantage of being kind of less informationally

intensive.

So they found a way to do the counterfactual analysis

without needing to calibrate the full set of parameters.

So we'll see the advantages that method has when it

comes to it when we come to it.

Okay.

So start off how do we calibrate the Fréchet parameter.

Right.

Well here essentially we're going to use the fact that

as we've already shown, the Fréchet parameter is the trade

elasticity.

So if we can estimate the elasticity of trade flows

to trade costs, that gives us uh, that that gives

us theta, right.

So in particular, the way that Ethan and Gordon go

about that is they, you know, they do some rearrangement

of the equilibrium equations.

So they're going to look at the, you know, bilateral

trade relative to, uh, country and imports relative to x

I over x I and this depends on, you know,

the prices in the two countries and, uh, trade costs

to the power of minus D to.

Okay.

So the idea is this thing on the left hand

side is observable.

If you have a data set that contains bilateral trade

and also total expenditure, that gives you the left hand

side.

So what they're going to then do is try and

measure the right hand side.

And then by looking at the correlation between the left

hand side and right hand side, that gives us that

gives us theta.

That's the objective here.

Um, so this is a plot of just the left

hand side against, uh, distance between the two countries.

So effectively, if you ignore the fact that there are

prices in this right hand side expression, and you just

assume that DNI is equal to the distance this gives

us, you know, this is the scatter plot of that

relationship, right?

But they want to do a little better than that.

They want to account for the fact that there are

also prices, uh, in the, in the right hand side,

Uh, the challenge then is kind of, you know, how

do you measure these price differences?

Um, this is the approach they take.

Okay.

Um, so they're going to use data on retail prices

for 19 countries for 50 different products.

So the basic idea here is to have a price

measure where you're measuring the price of the same product

in different countries.

So that then gives us the price gap for each

product between countries, which is what this R&D is.

And they use the average price gap as a measure

of the differences in the price indices.

And then they observe.

And this comes back to one of the questions we

had earlier about kind of arbitrage in this model that

the price gap in equilibrium, the price gap between countries

has to be bounded above by the, uh, trade costs

between countries, because if the price gap is bigger than

the trade costs, it creates an arbitrage opportunity.

Okay.

So they then use the kind of upper bound on

these price caps across all products as a way to

estimate the magnitude of the trade costs between countries.

So broadly speaking, here, you're just kind of using the

idea that trade crosses create price wedges.

If we observe those price wages, we can back out

um, the trade costs.

Right.

Specifically, they use the you know, they're worried about outliers.

So they use the second highest value of this price

gap to give them the measure of the trade costs.

Right.

And then combining all this, they then have a measure

of this p dni of a term which was on

the right hand side here.

Uh, and then this is now plotting the observed left

hand side against this measure that they've constructed.

On the right hand side.

You run a central bank, just run a linear regression

here.

just looking at the correlation.

And they use the slope of that relationship to back

out theta, which gives them a feature of about 8.3.

So couple of things to note.

One is kind of what's nice here is they are

using the kind of structure of the model and the

equilibrium relationships in the model to calibrate the parameter.

Right.

So that's kind of always good practice in quantitative work.

They're calibrating the parameters in a way that is consistent

uh with their model.

On the other hand.

We haven't talked here at any point about kind of

identification or causality or trying to find some kind of

exogenous variation in one side of this equation that would

allow us to identify this elasticity.

Right?

So it's a very sort of structural approach in that

way.

They're not trying to kind of think about can we

find some exogenous variation that would allow us to identify,

uh, beta?

So there has been a lot of work since this

original paper thinking more seriously about how can we credibly

identify the, um, beta parameter?

The main thrust of that work is to try and

find you can see, you know, because it's the trade

elasticity.

If you can find an exogenous shock to trade costs,

and you can observe how that affects trade flows, that's

going to give you an estimate of theta.

The takeaway from that literature is that today people probably

believe this elasticity is lower than eight, maybe somewhere between

2 and 2 and five.

So this kind of original eastern quarter estimate is probably

higher than most people would think.

The trade elasticity is uh, is now.

But that's what kind of that's how they calibrate it

in this kind of original paper.

Any questions on the calibration of data.

All right.

So we've got theta.

Next step is we want the TS.

Uh all right um so the question is how are

we going to get the how are we going to

get the TS, and how are we going to get

the, uh, the DS.

Right.

And we already saw one way of getting the DS

in the process of getting to TS, but we're now

going to get the back out the DS in a

different way.

Um, so again, basically we're going to take the structure

of the model and we're going to show how we

can estimate it to back out the TS and the,

the DS.

And we're going to do that by kind of manipulating

gravity equations basically.

So you've got this expression for the the trade shows

in terms of this bunch of stuff we rearrange a

little bit, uh, we show how the price index can

be written in terms of these trade shares.

So I'm going through quite quickly here, but if you're

interested in the details you can follow the exact derivations

in the paper.

But if you do this, what you end up with

is an expression for, uh, imports of n from I

relative to imports from n from n, where this is

a kind of adjusted import share, which adjusts for, uh,

domestic expenditure.

And we can write that as a function of the

trade costs, relative technologies and relative wages.

Right now, note that the trade costs are the only

bilateral term here.

And then we have kind of an import and an

export a fixed effect.

So we can write this as a kind of ter.

Or we can write this with the trade cost and

with the importer and exporter fixed effect.

And then what they do is they, uh.

Parameterise the training course.

So up to now, the trade costs have just been

DNI, and we haven't said exactly what they were, but

as you said, are they just distance?

So when it comes to parameterising them, they're going to

parameterise them in terms of distance.

Indeed, they use distance intervals particularly, but they also allow

the trade costs to depend on whether countries share a

border, whether they share a common language, whether they're in

the EU or the EEA.

Um, and there's also an import, a fixed effect in

there.

So these these terms here, they're kind of saying distance

depend on your trade cost, depend on these different measures

of how closely integrated countries are.

And we're going to, you know, estimate, uh, a gravity

equation to back out how important these different factors are

in affecting, um, trade policies.

So what they were going to end up doing, they're

going to, you know, estimate this equation with this parametrization

of trade costs, which will recover, allow them to recover

both the trade costs and the import and export of

fixed effect.

And then once you've got these fixed effects and you

observe the wages from the data, you can back out

the technology level.

So that's how they're going to use this gravity estimation

to back out both bilateral trade cost DNI and the

technology parameters T.

And right.

And again, the kind of key thing they're really trying

to do is do everything in a way that is

more consistent.

Any questions on thoughts on that.

So with that I would like 2 or 3 things.

Sorry I somehow get yeah I.

Know that's I think that's a reasonable question because it's

it's kind of We've already got the theatre, so we

know the theatre already.

What we're trying to get now is the tease and

the noise.

Right?

And we do that by, you know, estimating this equation

to recover the noise.

And the at this point we recover these fixed effects.

Right.

But because we know the fixed effects depend on the

toys and wages and wages are observable, then we you

kind of infer the T from the estimated fixed effect

and the wage.

Yeah.

So.

We do require beta as well.

Um, but remember beta is the share of value added

in production costs.

So that's something you would just read off a standard

input output table.

So they're calibrating that as well.

But it's kind of not.

There's nothing about the beta that's novel to their model.

So they just do that in a standard way.

A bit of a random question, but when estimating these

gravity equations, to what level of R-squared are people getting

like purely predictive?

Um, it's they generally fit pretty well.

So it's going to depend on exactly the level of

aggregation your sample is, but it wouldn't surprise you to

see like 0.7.8 in these kind of in a gravity

equation that has like distance and some kind of important

export of fixed effects on that.

So yeah.

Let's use.

Two different kinds.

Of measurement for the distance in the estimation for data.

So we can just use this regression result for the

previous estimation.

That's a good question.

So the challenge of doing that right is that note

that on the right hand side here the DNI is

multiplied by the theta.

So in practice, when you estimate this equation, right, you

you replace the DNI with all these terms.

And then you're going to, you know, this say the

border dummy.

You estimate a coefficient on the board of dummy.

And that coefficient on the border dummy combines theta with

the effect of the board of dummy your distance.

So to then separate out the distance effect from theta.

You need to already know theta.

So the reason they don't use this method to get

the noise which they use to get the theta is

that would kind of be circular.

So I think your comment is a good one in

that they when getting theta they measure DNI one way

and now they're measuring DNI another way.

They're doing that to avoid this circularity.

But it is you know, it is a little problematic

because potentially they're two measures of DNI and not necessarily

going to be the same.

I don't think they actually report whether that is true

or not, but I'd be very surprised if they were

exactly the same.

I don't know about convergence, but could you?

Couldn't you just now use these new DNA estimates to

get another theta?

So yeah.

You probably could.

So they don't do that.

But yes, in assuming that yes.

Assuming that it's a fixed point.

The fixed point is this.

That might well.

Work.

Okay.

Um, so we're going to look at some results now

just to get a, you know, we've done quite a

lot of hard work in setting up the model and

talking about how we calibrate it.

So the payoff is actually looking at what do we

what do we estimate and what does it tell us

if we do some simple counterfactuals.

So first set of results.

These are just a summary of the estimation results they

actually get When they do the, uh, the gravity equation

to estimate the technologies and the, uh, distance terms.

There's not a huge amount you can read off this

table on its own.

But what you do see in this top panel is

estimates of the kind of how these different distance variables

affect, um, trade.

So they break distance up into different, uh, intervals.

Um, so from 0 to 375, 375 to 750 and

so on.

And what you can see, if you look at the

estimates as you, as countries are getting further apart, trade

is indeed getting more negative.

So that's consistent with the idea that distance matters for

trade.

Then you see the border effect and the shared language

and the uh, positive, uh, the after effect is also

positive.

So this is almost just like a sense check that

the gravity variables are affecting bilateral trade in the way

we would, um, expect.

And then they're also reporting here the, uh, the fixed

effects they estimate.

But, you know, these aren't meaningful on their own because

they, they, uh, come combine the technology and the wage

effects.

Okay.

Um, these are the other parameters they use, right?

We already talked about theta.

Uh, they need alpha, which is the share of the

manufacturing sector in, uh, demand, which is 13%.

And then the beta 21% is labour sharing, uh, costs.

So now I want to just show you kind of

a couple of the counterfactual exercise they do, just to

give you a flavour of the kind of counterfactual analysis

that this model can now, uh, do.

So the first counterfactual they consider is what happens if

you go from the baseline calibrated equilibrium to autarky.

So we just shut down trade entirely.

Okay.

Um, and then they're reporting the results for each of

the countries that they have in their, uh, data set,

which is basically the OECD.

And they're reporting welfare changes, price changes for manufacturing, uh,

employment changes for manufacturing.

And they're doing this both for the case.

Remember we said that there were two cases, one where

Labour was mobile across sectors and one where it was

sticky and stuck in a particular sector, which is a

bit like a kind of short run, long run.

Uh, comparison.

The main things to focus on here probably are just

the welfare effects.

Um, so what do we see if we look at

the welfare effects?

Well, they're all negative.

All right.

This is consistent with the idea that there are gains

from trade, which we've already observed.

Um, they're also not huge.

All right, so the welfare costs of shutting down trade

in this model are not large.

They range from 0.8% in the US to 10.30.

No, sorry, 0.2% in Japan.

That's the smallest to 10.3% in Belgium.

So I think there's a relatively small welfare costs of

what is quite a dramatic shock to the model shutting

down trade entirely.

Um, two questions for thinking about how this model works.

One is what explains the heterogeneity in welfare costs across

countries.

Can you kind of by looking at that table, see,

you know, what are the factors that are predicting why

some countries lose more than others?

Two how would you change?

How could you change the calibration of the model in

a way that would increase the welfare costs in moving

towards Aki?

Any thoughts on either of those questions?

Depends on the change in domestic expenditure shapes some countries.

Their technology level is high.

So they don't need to like the change of pi

for example.

Yeah.

All right.

So this is the right lines to be thinking right.

Remember when we looked at the welfare formula we said

that what matters is the domestic expenditure and big changes

in the domestic expenditure are going to lead to big

welfare gains.

Right now here we're going from the baseline to autarky.

So the endpoint is going to be pi equals one

for all countries.

So the variation is coming from where Pie is in

the initial equilibrium.

And the key point to note is that in general

larger countries tend to trade tend to be less open.

Right.

Which is another way of saying that pie is higher

for larger countries.

So for this country, like, you know, you can see

the US and Japan have the smallest effects here.

That's because in the initial equilibrium, the share of domestic

expenditure spent on domestic output is going to be much

higher in the US and Japan than it is, say,

in a country like Belgium.

Smaller countries are simply more trade dependent than larger countries.

So in any model where the welfare gains from trade

depends on this, this domestic expenditure share, the gains are

going to be much bigger for smaller countries than for

larger countries.

So that's it's a pattern that comes out here, but

it's going to be a common pattern that will come

out of essentially any realistic quantitative trade model.

Okay.

So that was question one.

Question two was what would if I let you play

around with the calibration of the model and you just

want to change something to generate bigger welfare effects, what

could you change that would generate bigger welfare effects?

It's that right?

Yeah.

And what do you want to do to Peter?

Oh, shooting priest data to make the distribution more disperse.

So there are higher gains from trading, I guess.

Almost.

But the other direction.

If you make them, the smaller, you make feeder smaller.

Um, which makes the distribution more dispersed.

This is the inverse.

So you were kind of right.

You want to make the distribution more disperse.

Right.

Which is kind of like saying that the forces of

comparative advantage are getting stronger.

But you do that by making data smaller.

And as you make theta smaller, then for any given

change in pi, you're increasing the elasticity of welfare to

that pi.

And that gives you bigger welfare gains.

Right.

So recall that I said a moment ago that, you

know, this is an important calibration is theta is about

8.3.

It's 8.28 in this calibration.

But that, you know, people who've calibrated beta more recently

think it's smaller, maybe somewhere between 2 and 5 that

is mechanically going to boost the the welfare gains.

So one reason the welfare gains are relatively small there

is that exactly.

Is that that calibration feature.

Um, another way you could increase the welfare gains will

be by playing around with beta.

Because remember beta the beta was multiplying feature in the

welfare form.

But let's just go back to that just to make

sure everyone's here.

Right.

The, uh, it's one over beta times theta so you

can make it a smaller.

You can also make beta smaller, right.

What's happening if you're making beta smaller is you're increasing

the importance of intermediate inputs in production.

And in these models with this round about production, using

intermediate inputs in production is like a magnifier for welfare

changes because the welfare effects, you know, increase efficiency, which

reduces the cost of output.

And if you then use that output back as an

intermediate input that has a magnifying force.

So these models will also predict that when the share

of intermediate inputs is higher, you get bigger welfare effects

from a given, uh, from a given chunk.

Okay.

So that was one set of counterfactuals just to kind

of show you one more, which is kind of the

opposite case.

Previously we went from equilibrium to autarky.

Now what we're doing is we're going from the equilibrium

to free trade.

So what happens if we reduce if we remove all

the trade offs, which is to say we set all

the noise equal to one?

Okay.

Right now we are um, reducing trade costs.

So we're getting positive welfare effects.

Um, and you can see these positive welfare effects are

typically, um, much bigger than the negative welfare effects we

saw, uh, previously, which is kind of interesting in the

sense that it suggests that the.

Amount of trade liberalisation or trade integration that has occurred

to date is relatively small in terms of the wealth

they're going to generate relative to potential gains from future,

uh, trade liberalisation.

So it kind of speaks to this question of how

globalised is the world?

Are we close to a free trade world?

At least based on these results, the answer that this

paper is given is not really that there's a lot

of scope for further gains through reducing existing trade costs.

That said, we need to be a little bit careful

about how we think about this counterfactual because no, the

you know, what we're changing here are not just policy

barriers to trade, which are some things that governments could

trade.

These DNI are capturing all the kind of geographic frictions

that exist and not something that a government can just,

uh, wish away.

So this is kind of, you know, if there was

a transportation technology that was introduced that remove trade costs,

call it teleporting, what would the gains from that be?

But it's not necessarily the most realistic counterfactual.

Any kind of.

Questions on these counterfactuals before we move on?

Okay.

So that's what I.

Wanted to say about, um, the Ricardian model, uh, developed

by Ethan Gordon.

Good things about it.

Um, it's very, you know, relatively straightforward to work with

from a quantitative perspective.

It's delivers nice equilibrium conditions that you can use to

back out the parameters of the model and do counterfactual

analysis.

It's reasonably, empirically realistic in that it captures the fact

that technologies differ across countries, and this generates price and

wage differences and it generates trade flows.

But the trade flows are impeded by geographic barriers to

trade.

So in that sense it is a big advantage.

It's a big kind of advance over the work that

came before it.

But you know, if I asked you to, you know,

critique this model, you know what's missing from it.

What don't you like about this model?

I've just said kind of here's some good things about

the model.

What are the what's missing from it?

What would you like to see in this model that

isn't there?

Or what do you think its limitations are?

Or are we done with a perfect model we can

solve?

Like, every country can produce every good and then adding

like limitations in that way.

Okay, so that's one thing where I might be, you

know, it's a good question is I'll say this is

not very it's not going to be a very realistic

way of modelling trading for.

more so.

There's certainly, you know, issues to be raised that there

isn't maybe another weapon there is.

There is not much we don't know really disaggregate about

what are the differences across different industries.

We just treat each goods symmetrically.

And you just get this random productivity tool.

It's that.

There's also no non-manufacturing sector where in practice you can

have productivity effects of expansion and manufacturing production onto the

service sector like Spill-overs.

And yeah, I think that's fair, right?

We do.

You know, here we've done a lot of work on

the manufacturing sector.

And then we just say in the non manufacturing sector

that's a linear production technology and trade is free right.

That's we're not working very hard that we could do

better and think about how might we want to model

services or you know agriculture or minerals.

That's fat.

What else?

So I think I mean, other things, you know, you

might worry about, um, labour is the only factor.

There's no role for capital here right now that might

not matter for some of what we're doing.

But, you know, there's going to be a bunch of

questions we're thinking about where does capital come from?

What is the investment decision.

What are the dynamics are important.

So we're missing that like equally you know all the

labour's homogeneous right now I don't think it's really fair

to criticise the paper for that because it's not about

that.

But if you want to think about how trade affects

the distribution of income, you're clearly going to need to

go further than that.

And when we look at when in a couple of

weeks, we'll have a lecture on trade and labour.

Well, one of the papers we'll look at, we'll see

how you can kind of build on this framework to

think about labour more rich or labour market effects of

uh, of trade.

Another kind of big thing.

There's no firms here.

Everything's competitive.

Right?

In practice.

Perfectly competitive markets are a useful simplification in many cases.

But there is imperfect competition.

There are profits paid on paper has nothing to say

about that.

So that could be another dimension where we might want

to to go further.

There is a almost like a companion paper to this

paper by Bernard Eaton, Jensen and Cortland, which came out

about the same time, where they show that you can

take a very similar setup and you can introduce Bertrand

competition into it by assuming that, um, the when you're

getting the productivity draws, kind of each firm is getting

a different productivity draw in a country.

And then you look at competition between the firm to

get the best productivity draw and kind of the second

best producer, and that will pin down the mark-up and

you get profits in that way.

And what's interesting is if you model imperfect competition that

way, you actually get a system of equilibrium conditions that

looks almost isomorphic to this, except there's now also some

profits floating around.

So I think that sort of first glance, the fact

that there are no profits or imperfect competition here looks

like a big drawback of the model.

There is at least one way to incorporate them in

a way that doesn't change much, which is sort of,

uh, interesting.

And that that set up with the Bertrand competition is

often used by people who kind of want the tractability

of the encoder model, but also want to introduce profits

for some, some reason.

Yeah.

I also think just with, uh, like kind of random

productivity draws across products.

Yeah.

Um, so they're random.

But then I guess they're also kind of correlated with

in country.

Right.

Because like the country gets like a overall kind of

productivity growth for itself.

Mhm.

But I think kind of a more realistic way to

think about it is like like even kind of across

countries they're also correlated.

So you think about like a big technology that comes

along and everybody gets a big boost as opposed to

just one company.

Think about that.

So I think kind of even going one step above

that.

Uh.

Yeah I think that's a.

Very fair point.

Right.

It's.

If we think about shocks that are in some way

correlated across countries like that.

And while isn't directly speaking.

To that.

And sort of, you know, relatedly, there's no dynamics here.

You were trying to think about a growth process, or

you're trying to think about where the technologies come from.

We'll do a literature on trade growth.

But, you know, here technology is just something that's in

the in the aether, which is useful in some circumstances.

But we might also care about, you know, why do

some why are some countries more technologically advanced than others.

This model.

Has.

Nothing to say about and nothing to say about that.

Any other thoughts?

Okay, so what I want to then go on to

do is show you one other, slightly more recent paper

that builds on the 18 quarter model and develops a

slightly different way of calibrating the model, which is, as

I said, is requires less data, and therefore it's in

some ways a sort of slightly more robust way of

doing the calibration.

But I'm also aware that it's like 5 to 5

now, so I don't really want to start a whole

new paper right now.

So I think what we'll do is we'll wait.

And next time we'll start off by talking about the

Caliendo version of the model before we go onto to

market, but we'll stop there for today.

Thank you.

Oh, I should have said I mean, obviously all the

course material is on Moodle as usual, as usual.

And there's a reading list on there two, which has

both the kind of main papers will focus on, but

for each topic also has a bunch of other papers

that I think are interesting if you want to go

into it in more depth.

Yeah, I think I wanted to ask you what.

What time is the.

Drop off?

Um.

Do we have a list of.

All the references?

Um.

It will most likely be one of the papers that's

on the reading list.

But, I mean, if you want, we'd like to if

you send us an email saying, broadly speaking, here are

the topics within this course I'm interested in.

We will select a paper for you to read.

It will probably be one of the reading list, but

it might be quite all right.

Thank you.

It's quite high.

Assessment.

There is a research proposal as part of the course.

Yeah.

And uh, we are actively learning like quantitative treat model.

And there are very there are a lot of modelling

components.

So yeah.

Exactly.

For that we should like write a proposal for uh

for research with modelling.

No, it definitely doesn't have to be.

Um, it's really I think it should reflect what you

are interested in.

So, I mean, we're starting off quantitative models, but there'll

be more empirical stuff coming later in the course.

So it can be.

Yes.

So, uh, I think I'm familiar with what a proposal

for empirical paper looks like.

But if it's for like a reality related paper, what

was the proposal?

What does it propose?

Yeah, um, that's a good question.

So I guess if it was like a pure theory

paper, it could be along the research proposal could look

along the lines of, here's a mechanism I think is

important.

And here is, broadly speaking, how I would try to

model that not actually developing the formal model.

But, you know, here's the kind of assumptions of the

kind of framework I would use for a quantitative model.

It could be a quantity, maybe it could be.

Here's a question that I think is interesting.

And here is the type of model I think could

be used to answer that.

And here's the type of approach that could be used

for the calibration.

Something like that.

Yeah okay.

So we now need to what what specifically the collaboration

needs to to be done.

It's just the.

Yeah I mean I think we're looking for something pretty

early stage.

Right.

It's only 2000 words we're not looking for.

I've done a paper we're looking for.

Here's an idea I have about a paper, and here's

some ideas of how I might proceed with that.

Thank you.

No problem.

Yes.

Okay.

Yes.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

It was better than nothing.

It wasn't great for.

All the other few questions.

Um.

Lecture 2:

So basically I kind of want to say I'm not

against working.

With you and your views.

And it's just kind of kind of hard because like,

do you mean the.

People who you don't like the idea for you like

that?

And you.

Tell me to focus on the other thing I like

best, which is, you know, yeah.

As opposed to the change in it because that work.

Yeah, exactly.

So if I get some of that.

Yeah.

Hello.

Well.

It's for the third year.

Yeah.

No, no, I see what.

I think of.

Yeah.

You two so hard to separate.

Yeah.

It's just I feel Isolated, impossible to separate.

So that you can measure it.

Yeah.

So I mean, how do I measure a culture against.

Which.

It's kind of warmer than last week.

Anyway, last year was much worse.

I.

Mean, everything I call thinking of.

Yeah.

It's just it's just.

Like.

So you can say that.

Like.

You feel completely exhausted as, like a role model.

I mean.

There are.

Other countries.

Are there any country after that?

Yeah.

So, yeah.

Okay.

So infrastructure, transportation.

So I mean, instead of receiving a stipend.

Yeah.

They ignored me for the past ten days.

Wow.

Now they just, uh.

I just emailed them again, and they told me.

Oh, we don't know what you were supposed to receive.

Can you confirm the amount you were supposed to?

Can you expect to get the same every year?

But we have.

To.

Send information.

Right?

Yeah.

I think so.

Yeah.

If you're focusing on any questions.

I think we could do it.

Okay.

I was just.

I don't know.

Yeah, I mean, I like it.

But yeah.

My question is.

What's that?

Going to.

We're hoping that you don't.

Think about.

That.

I just want.

To know you.

Know?

What?

Others.

Think about that.

Yeah.

But you know, just 100 that are you.

Know, 7000.

And then.

In the 700 and 100 for the.

109.

You know, like.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Nothing.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Anyway, this is just the one, I guess.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I don't know.

I.

Don't.

Know.

I mean, I wasn't expecting.

Company.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I said.

I just said.

Okay.

Let's go.

Um, any questions or issues anyone wants to raise before

we start today?

No.

Good.

Okay, so let's remind ourselves where we've gone to last

time, and we can talk about what we're going to

do today.

Um, so if you recall last lecture, we were talking

about quantitative trade models.

And we spent the lecture going through this model that

Eaton and Quantum had developed, which is a quantitative Ricardian

model, which captures in a kind of multi-country Framework, how

differences in technologies across countries interact with trade costs to

shape patterns of trade.

Um, and we were kind of looking for getting a

very a variety of things out of this, this paper.

So on the one hand there was this modelling trick

they use whereby they assumed that productivity draws within an

individual country were sampled from this fresh productivity distribution, which

is a kind of a useful trick to be aware

of because it leads to this very tractable, tractable structure

of a quantitative work.

Um, and then we saw how it, in a courtroom

were able to take their model to the data in

the sense of calibrating the model and use it for

counterfactual analysis.

And therefore, you know, kind of it provides a convenient,

relatively simple to calibrate quantitative framework for doing trade policy

counterfactuals.

So that's where we got to at the end.

Um, we didn't quite finish off all the material on

quantitative trade models.

So the first thing we're going to do today is

kind of look at a little bit of work that

extends what Eastman Quantum did, um, and kind of develops

alternative ways of kind of calibrating the model and doing

the analysis.

So we'll look at some kind of more recent work

built on these important, uh, framework.

And then once we've done that, we're going to spend

most of today talking about the role of firms in

international trade, um, and theories that kind of put the

firm at the centre of, of trade and kind of

what we learn about the effects of trade from doing

that.

Um, but first off, we're going to talk about this,

uh, quantitative paper by Caliendo and Amparo.

So the Caliendo Perot paper is, you know, it very,

very closely builds on the eastern quarter model, but it

kind of does.

It essentially makes kind of two contributions above what you'll

find in Eaton and Quarter.

One is that it adds a few extra bells and

whistles that are not in the baseline Eaton and quarter

model, and which make the model, you know, essentially increase

the realism of the model and therefore make it more

useful for quantitative analysis.

Um, in particular, they're going to extend it to have

multiple sectors, which is a fairly straightforward extension.

And then they're also going to show how to put

input output linkages into the model.

So we can start to think about kind of the

role of production networks.

And you know whether they matter for quantitative uh, trade

policy analysis.

And we will see that they are, at least in

a quantitative sense, uh, important.

So that's going to be one thing we're going to

take away from this paper.

And then the other contribution is they're going to provide

a kind of different Approach to doing counterfactual analysis than

the one used in Eton and Quarter, which has some

advantages over the Eton courtroom approach.

In particular, if you recall, essentially what Eton courtroom did

was find ways to use the gravity equations that came

out of the model to back out all the model

parameters.

So they calibrated all the parameters in the model.

And then once you calibrate the model, obviously it's fairly

straightforward to do counterfactual analysis.

The innovation in the Caliendo and Paro paper is they're

going to say, well, actually, for the standard counterfactuals that

we are likely to be interested in, such as what

happens if we shock trade costs or what happens if

we shock technologies.

You don't have to fully calibrate the model to do

that.

Instead, what you can do is you can solve the

modelling changes.

So the idea is you're solving for the change between

kind of the initial steady state equilibrium and then the

equilibrium following the shock.

So that's giving you kind of what happens when there's

a counterfactual.

You can solve the model in changes using less information.

Then you need to fully calibrate the model.

So the way they're going to do that is this

kind of method which is known as the exact hat

exact hat algebra.

So we'll have a look at kind of how they

how they do that and why it's a kind of

useful, uh, a useful method.

And again, this is one of these things that kind

of having been really sort of first popularised in this

Caliendo paper, though, there's an earlier application by decollete and

and quantum having been popularised, it has proved to be

very useful, uh, for doing many different types of kind

of quantitative counterfactual work.

So you see it popping up across a lot of

different fields of economics as a low information way to,

uh, to calibrate the, the model.

So that's going to be the main contributions of this

paper.

Um, and then they're going that particular application is going

to be thinking about, you know, counterfactual analysis of NAFTA.

So we'll then see also what they, you know, using

this framework, what they have to say about NAFTA.

And let me see if I can try and get

my clicker to work because it's not working.

Right.

Yeah.

All right.

Anyway so here's the basic I kind of we're going

to go through this paper quite quickly.

But I'll basically just sort of walk you through the,

uh, environment.

And then we will focus on how they, uh, do

the kind of an example of how they do the

exact algebra, because that's the main, the main thing to

learn.

So, you know, a lot of the notation is going

to be the same as in each and quarter.

There's going to be n countries indexed by ei and

n.

Typically we'll use n for the importer, EI for the

exporter uh J and K will be sectors.

Everything is competitive.

Countries just have labour that they used to produce this

labour and mobile across sectors, but not countries.

Um, as in Eton and Corton, there will be an

iceberg trade cost, which is country sector specific.

Um, we will also incorporate as well as the iceberg

trade cost tariffs.

Um, that's essentially they're doing that because they want to

do counterfactual analysis of NAFTA and NAFTA generated tariff changes.

So they need tariffs in the model.

Um, formerly like the only distinction between the tariffs and

the iceberg trade costs is that, you know, while the

iceberg trade costs lead to kind of a they're they're

a real resource cost.

Right.

It's a melting away of production.

We talked about how we model them last time.

Uh the tariffs generate revenue.

So when you've got tariffs in the model you kind

of need to specify where the revenue go.

Otherwise they just act like iceberg trade costs and increasing

uh increasing trade costs and creating frictions.

Um, They're going to split the economy.

There's going to be some tradable sectors.

They're also going to allow for non-tradable sectors in which

there's no trade.

Um, they're thinking essentially here of there being kind of

a distinction between services and goods, where goods are going

to be tradable and services are going to be non-tradable.

Um, in practice, there is obviously some trade in services.

So you could extend this to kind of have trade

in services, but with higher trade costs.

But they're not going to focus on that today.

Um, NAFTA was mainly an agreement that was kind of

about tariffs on goods.

So it's kind of a reasonable approximation for what they're

doing.

Um, and then preferences across sectors, it's just going to

be constant expenditure shares.

So a couple Douglas setup where alpha is the expenditure

share on each sector.

Um so input output linkages they're going to model them

in a very simple way, which you've probably seen previously,

which is this kind of idea of roundabout Production.

So the idea here is each sector produces an output.

And then some of that output can be recycled to

be used as an intermediate input.

So it's a um it is a convenient way of

modelling, uh, input output structures for two reasons.

Uh, one is that you don't need to bring any

dynamics into it.

Right.

It's this you're kind of sort of have this fiction

that it's this sector is this this period's output is

also being used as an, an input.

And there's no sense in which I produce some intermediates

in one period.

And then they're used in production next period.

So we're abstracting from those kind of dynamics.

Um, and then the other thing is that the, the

production technology for the intermediate and for the final output

is the same.

So it kind of reduces the number of technologies you

need to specify in the, in the model.

Um, so that's kind of the case for doing this

roundabout production where modelling stuff and if you.

Look at how production networks are model this is used

fairly frequently.

But obviously it's also going to have um limitations.

And if you're going to write a paper that's going

to just focus on kind of input output linkages, you

might want to take more seriously the structure of these

linkages.

And think about, you know, do we need sequential uh,

production.

The time is the time element during which inputs move

along a production chain.

Is that important or is the production technology for inputs

different from the production technology for outputs?

They're they're kind of they are abstracting away from all

of that, all of that here.

Um.

And then, you know, other than that, it's just within

each sector.

Then you have the Ek structure.

So just remind ourselves of what that is.

There is a continuum mass, one of varieties in each

sector.

Um, the sectors are these different varieties are imperfectly substitutable.

So this is kind of, you know, there's an elasticity

of substitution here, which is both the elasticity of substitution

and in demand when we're thinking about consumer preferences.

But it's also the elasticity of substitution between varieties in

producing the intermediate.

Good.

Right.

So here's where the fact that the intermediate good and

the final good are produced using the same technology.

Coming to it.

We're going to allow that elasticity of substitution to be

sector specific.

So it'll be sigma uh sigma J.

And then each sector's intermediate input is going to be

an aggregate of the output of all the other sectors.

So let's look at exactly how they do that.

Right.

More specifically this is the production technology.

Um so in when we did EC the production technology

was just this first part.

Here it was the output depend on your productivity draw,

which again is going to be the fresh productivity draw

times the labour input.

Right.

And what they're adding on here is now Labour is

part of the input with elasticity gamma r.

But then this second part these are the intermediate inputs.

So for each sector J uh your input bundle is

a Cob Douglas aggregate of output from all the other

sectors K where there are country and sector specific weights.

So one thing you kind of want to be thinking

about when you look at this kind of equation, you

know, in what way is this general and kind of

allowing some flexibility into the model.

And in what way is it very specific?

Any thoughts on that kind of what you know, where's

the generality in this setup and where are they?

Where are the kind of restrictions being imposed that you

might want to at some point relax or think about

changing?

Any tools.

I mean, the inputs are in a way like you

just have intermediate rules or you're not allowing for other

techniques where you have.

Yeah.

So this is definitely one restriction here, right?

There's no capital.

There's no land.

Um, so you know, that is going to matter in

certain circumstances.

You know, what's the key distinction between labour and capital.

Right.

Capital is a reproducible factor.

So you can invest and build up capital over time.

There's none of those investment dynamics going to be present

here.

So that's one restriction we have.

What else.

I mean so another another feature is obviously you know

this Cob Cobb Douglas aggregate is produced is putting a

particular restriction on the elasticity of substitution between the different

inputs to production.

We're assuming that there's a unit elasticity of substitution.

Whether that is a reasonable assumption is fundamentally an empirical,

uh, question.

Um, but there's certainly, you know, some evidence out there

that particularly when you look at, um, the role of

different intermediate inputs in production, it can often be they

can often be gross complements.

So having the elasticity of substitution, uh, less than one.

Right.

So that's going to matter because if the different intermediate

inputs are less substitutable than we are assuming, then anything

that shocks the supply of one of those intermediates, it's

going to be harder to, you know, adapt to that

shock, right.

On the other hand, if they were higher, it was

a higher elasticity of substitution.

Here it would be easier to substitute between the different

intermediates.

Intermediate.

So.

Even if they're kind of theoretically there are going to

be similar properties to, you know, which will just depend

on this parameter, which would be the elasticity of substitution.

Quantitatively.

It can be very important for these things.

So this is an area where kind of when we're

when we're writing quantitative models, we are going to care

about the magnitude of different elasticities in a way we

don't necessarily when we're just trying to identify, uh, identify

mechanisms.

So there is a restriction here in that kind of

Douglas structure.

Um, on the other hand, I also said there's some

generality here.

Where's the generality?

Well, the generality is in particular that this production technology

is country specific, not just in the sense that technologies

are going to differ across countries, but the CoV Douglas

parameters that we're aggregating with.

They have an n subscript.

Right.

So they are allowed to vary across country.

So we're allowing for the possibility that the you know

labour here is value added.

So the value added share production cost differs, say, between

developed and developing uh, countries.

And moreover, it's doing that not just between countries but

also over over sectors.

So um, it's sector.

It's just an additional structure.

That this.

Model is adding compared to.

These models.

Yeah.

So I mean the baseline is important.

We looked at last week there were kind of many

varieties within a sector, but we thought of that kind

of as a single sector with mass one or varieties

within it.

And now they're saying there's J of these sectors, each

of which has many varieties with within.

And because it's assuming the constant elasticity.

Within the sector, then the definition of sector is a

bit like it matters now, like how you want it

to be.

Yeah, exactly.

And so that's a good point right.

Kind of in what sense does sector matter here.

Right.

I think it matters in the sense that essentially all

these technology parameters are going to be sector specific.

So the sigma is sector specific.

The Fréchet dispersion parameter that theta that we talked about

a lot last week, that's going to be sector specific.

And then all of these technologies sector specific as well.

So that allows us to, you know, essentially to to

map the model to the underlying heterogeneity in the data

more closely than if we just assumed a single aggregate

sector.

Sorry.

For some sectors, which they definitely require some increase in

energy.

Yeah.

They would just have a very small elasticity.

Is that how they're commonly.

Used in the model?

Um.

I think that is one way you could think about

accommodating it.

I think more, to be honest.

The way they calibrate the model is not going to

be it's not going to attempt to match that kind

of phenomenon you talked about.

So if I understand correctly, you're saying essentially, you know,

some sectors there may be kind of a lien tiff

part of the structure.

Um, and we don't have that here.

Yeah.

We don't have that here.

I think if you wanted to take seriously that, you

know, 10% of your or that you needed some quantity

of oil to produce, you're going to want to change

this aggregator here to allow a lower elasticity of substitution,

which I mean, could be done.

It's easy to write that down, but it's not done

in this paper.

Yeah, I thought it's relatively easier relative to just if

you actually do the same thing because.

It's but so okay, so say what your suggestion was

exactly again.

Just that like there are these like essential inputs in

the sectors.

And then you would.

But how would you.

Sorry.

How would you model or how would you map this

model to reflect that.

I guess you would have some sectors which would have

on the opposite part and some which would, but then

it's kind of.

Yeah.

So I.

Mean, I think that.

Would be a very reasonable way to do it.

Um, my point is simply that they don't do that.

So they're not attempting to match that dimension of the,

of the data.

Oh, well, I guess one more question on this to

kind of just help us think through exactly what's going

on here.

Why is it very convenient to have this kind of

Douglas production structure in particular?

If we think ahead to when we calibrate these parameters,

why does having a cov Douglas structure make it very

easy to calibrate this model?

Another way of putting that question is, you know, what

is going to be the observable thing in the data

that we can use to map to calibrate these parameters.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Right.

So like if you have production costs right.

Gamma NJ here will be the share of production costs

paid to Labour.

And like gamma government will be the share of production

cost which is expenditure on intermediates from sector K by

sector J.

Okay.

So each of these these gamma parameters is just a

cost share okay.

And that's convenient for calibration because what standard input output

tables give you is cost shares.

So these parameters map directly onto the kind of entries

of standard input output of cost shares and input output

tables.

Um, which is why this particular way of modelling it

is, is it has advantages.

Right.

So then let's talk about the exact hat algebra.

Um, the idea here is to solve the modelling changes.

So we're going to call like x is our value

of some variable in the initial equilibrium.

And then x prime is the counterfactual variable following the

shock.

And we want to solve for the ratio of these

two things.

So when we're using these at our algorithm we never

try to fully calibrate the model to solve for kind

of to solve for either x or in the initial

equilibrium or x prime in the new equilibrium.

But what we just solve for is the ratio.

And the point is going to be that you can

solve for the ratio more easily than you can solve

for the the levels.

And that makes our life, uh, easier.

In particular, what we can show we won't go for

all these details, but we'll look at some examples of

this.

What you can show is that if you just solve

for the modelling changes, what you end up with is

a system of it's going to be, you know, n

n plus n n j equations in just the wage

changes and the sectoral price indices.

And crucially, this system of equilibrium equations doesn't depend on

some of the key parameters of the model, such as

the productivity levels.

So this is the Fréchet productivity draw.

We called it in in eastern quadrant.

They called it t.

If you remember when we we got our productivity draws

there was a scale parameter T which kind of measured

the level of technology in each country right in, in

carrying a power.

This is now country sector specific and it's called lambda

and J.

Um and to solve in changes, you don't need to

know those productivity levels.

And you don't need to know the iceberg trade costs.

So you can see that is going to simplify our

life because it reduces the amount of information we need

to do the counterfactual, um analysis.

So let's give an example of of that.

All right.

And in particular the example I'm going to give is

like how you solve for the changes in the price

index and how in the process of doing that, you

eliminate some of the parameters that we would otherwise have

to cover.

So, you know, in this model, take my word for

it, the equilibrium price index, uh, for country and in

sector J takes this form where a J is just

some constant.

And then we're adding up over all origins of this

term, which depends on the technology and country I, the

production costs in country I and then the trade costs

between country and N where this trade cost term kappa

is the product of the iceberg trade costs and the

tariff.

Um, and then we've also got our, our much beloved

Fréchet dispersion parameter theta J showing up there.

So you know, if you have very good memory, you

will recall that this equation is are Identical except for

the notation to the price index equation we got in

Eton quarter, uh, last week.

Right.

Uh, there we were calling these terms fives.

Okay.

So we've got this equation for the price index.

We've also got that as an item.

And we get a simple equation for the bilateral trade

show.

So remember pi n ij is the share of expenditure

by country n in sector J on goods from country

II.

Right.

And it was the thing that when we were solving

the Eton model, we said because we had this feature,

that all the adjustment was on the extensive margin and

that the price distribution was independent of where goods came

from.

It allowed us to obtain this simple expression for the

trade, bilateral trade shares.

And again, these bilateral trade justice depend on these sort

of lambda k terms in what, from one country relative

to something that up over all the countries.

So given that we, you know, we're going to kind

of take these two equations.

And then we're going to do the hat algebra.

Okay.

So this is what we're doing now on this slide.

So we are doing the price index the counterfactual price

index which has got the prime relative to the original

price index.

So just an immediate application of the previous equation is

this is the the sum of the post shock variable

variables, which are the ones with the primes here relative

to the pre shock variables.

So we've just got j prime in the top there

and png in the bottom.

Now so far this hasn't helped us because you can

see you know it's still here.

Depends on the Kappas and it depends on the lambdas.

And really our goal is to get rid of these

terms that are difficult to observe.

So how are we going to do that.

Okay.

The trick is um, you rewrite this equation in terms

of the bilateral trade share.

So recall that's what our bilateral trade shares look like.

So you kind of stare at that and you think

how can I express that in terms of the bilateral

trade shares.

And if you do that, um, you kind of notice

that if you ignore that summation and you ignore the

primes there, then what you've got there is that ratio

is the ratio.

That's the bilateral trade shares.

So we want to rearrange that um, to get rid

of the primes essentially.

And we can do that by dividing through by c

k and kappa and multiplying by c kappa, which is

what we're doing in this next expression.

So we have divided through by c kappa.

And then we have multiplied by c kappa.

And we've separated the terms.

So now we've got uh this term here, which just

depends on the change in the uh, production cost See.

And the change in the trade cost Kappa.

And you've got this term here which is the one

we wanted which is the trade shares.

So then we can rewrite that as you know, again

we're summing over all origins, the bilateral trade share times,

the counterfactual changes in the trade costs and the production

costs.

And then we're kind of aggregating using this Fréchet dispersion

parameter beta.

So why is that helped us write.

Well, now if we want to solve for the counterfactual

change in prices, we need to know the counterfactual change

in trade costs.

Well, that's just kind of the shock.

That's what we're going to that's how we're going to

shock the economy.

The counterfactual change in production costs, which will depend on

wage changes and price changes.

So that's something we solve for in equilibrium.

And now, rather than needing to know the production technology

parameters and the original trade costs, all we need to

know is the bilateral trade shows.

So this sort of.

We've gone from needing to know unobserved parameters of the

model to needing to know bilateral trade shares, which we

observe from the trade data.

And that's the advantage of this, this approach.

But questions on that.

To me it kind of makes sense what we're doing

here.

Okay.

And so we've done this for kind of one particular

variable here the price indices.

But the nice thing is you can kind of you

can rewrite all the equilibrium equations in this way such

that the key information you need is just these bilateral

trade shares and a few parameters of the model, such

as the dispersion parameter theta, and also the, uh, the,

the aggregation parameters gamma that we talked about previously, but

which you can read off of, uh input output, um,

tables.

And you know, once Caliendo had observed that you could

do this in this model.

People started kind of trying to write other models in

this way.

And it turns out that there's sort of quite a

wide class of quantitative models which can be rearranged in

this way, such that you have this idea of kind

of using observables, uh, to do counterfactual analysis rather than

unknown parameters.

And we'll see another example of that next week when

we look at some work on trade and labour markets.

Right.

And so then to finish calibrating uh, the model, the

other thing they need is the dispersion parameter theta j.

Right.

And so we had this discussion about this last week

where we said, okay, this is a really important parameter

in these models because uh, it controls the trade elasticity

which is the elasticity of bilateral trade to trade costs.

And that parameter, that trade elasticity turns out to be

really important for welfare.

Right.

So we care about this parameter.

And we looked at one way to get back that

out in the the OECD used themselves last week where

you recall that they kind of had data on retail

price differences across countries, which they used to get an

observable measure, the price gap, and then they kind of

regressed and adjusted measure of trade flows on this price

gap measure.

And that gave them a measure of each calendar.

Calendar propose a different way of doing it, um, which

is going to kind of more directly use a variation

in trade costs to get at the data, which is

kind of nice, because fundamentally in this model, this parameter

is the trade elasticity.

So it was very natural to try and estimate it

off how the trade costs affect trade flows.

Um, and in particular kind of what they observe is

that if you start taking lots of ratios of trade

flows.

So this is a sort of triple ratio where you're

doing, You know trade imports of n from I in

sector J relative to imports of n from H.

And then you've also got I from h h I

n.

And if man by taking these triple ratios you kind

of cancel out all the stuff that is symmetric across

countries that are always just country specific, and you get

an expression that just depends on this set of trade

costs here.

So this is sort of step one.

In their approach we've reduced uh, the the trade equation

to one.

That just depends on, um, trade costs, which is good.

But it's not quite enough because still these trade costs

are not directly observable.

Right.

Remember they have a tariff component that is observable, but

they also have an iceberg component that's not observable.

So we need to do a little bit more work.

Um, and here by a little bit more work since

we need to put more structure on the problem.

So the structure they put on the problem is that

the they assume that the bilateral trade, cos it depends

on the tariff term.

So this is kind of a thing we want because

it's observable.

Um, and then it depends on these additional terms which

are um, either import a specific.

So there's an import a fixed effect here.

There's an exporter fixed effect.

There's an error term.

And then there's this third term which is bilateral but

they assume is symmetric.

So once you put this structure on the trade costs

and then you take the ratio of the Kappas that

we had on the previous slide, that triple ratio, this

thing, all the terms other than the tariffs drop out.

And you get uh, a relationship between the, the trade

costs and the and the tariffs which are observed.

So then you can just estimate that to get a

um estimate of theta J, which is what they do

in the paper.

So advantage of this approach, you're directly estimating changes in

trade, or you're directly estimating the trade elasticity theta J

by looking at the relationship between trade flows um, and

trade and tariff costs.

And you know, by walking through these different steps, you're

kind of being very explicit about the structural assumptions you're

making that generates this as sort of a valid equation.

That's good.

What do you see as the limitations of what they're

doing here?

What are the potential drawbacks?

What might you worry about in terms of using this

approach to measure theta J.

Particularly I mean, think about this a little bit from

the kind of perspective of identification.

What?

You know, what are we kind of assuming about what's

exogenous and what's not exogenous here?

Is that a reasonable thing to assume?

For some time.

Yeah.

Right.

Like you kind of you've got tariffs as your your

tariff ratios as your independent variable here.

Right.

So fundamentally if you think you are coarsely identifying the

TJ, the assumption has to be that there is exogenous

variation in those tariff ratios that you are using.

So the kind of question it then comes down to

is is that a reasonable assumption to to make.

Any thoughts on that.

Maybe, you know, another way of framing that is can

you construct an argument that would lead to some endogeneity

here?

What are the circumstances that could potentially lead to any

kind of endogeneity and then biased estimates?

Of political conflicts.

That decrease trait flow and also confused time.

Yeah.

So that could be like so kind of one possibility

could be that sort of kind of essentially an omitted

variable bias story.

Right.

That there is some other shock that's going on which

is affecting trade flows and also leading to changes in

tariffs.

So it could be some kind of political conflict Between

countries.

That's definitely a possibility.

Um, you could probably also think about some kind of

reverse causality, right?

Maybe.

You know, tariffs are not something that are just randomly

assigned, right?

Politicians set tariffs for various different reasons.

Um, but certainly one of the factors that is likely

to influence tariffs setting is, you know, what are the

trade flows.

Right.

Think about, uh, Trump's current threat that if he wins

the election, he will impose a 20% tariff on all

US imports.

At least part of the motivation for that is he

thinks the US is importing too much stuff.

Right.

So that.

Desire to set a tariff there is very much endogenous

to what's going on in terms of, of trade.

Right.

So, you know, I think kind of kind of acknowledge

that these issues exist, but they're not the issues they're

thinking about in this, uh, paper.

But one question they kind of leave unanswered is, you

know, if we really want to take seriously estimating this

trade elasticity, we need some kind of exogenous variation in

tariffs.

And then you need to think about to get to

identify such unique things much more carefully about what is

the tariff setting process, and when might you be able

to kind of credibly identify these parameters.

But we don't do that in this way.

Okay.

Anyway, so that was a sort of a side on

using tariffs in these kind of equations.

Putting that aside, this is what they do get when

they do those estimates.

So these are the different sectors.

They have agriculture mining and then various manufacturing sectors.

Um and these are their estimates of theta J by

a sector.

You've got some standard errors there.

And then they, you know, they cut the sample or

they trim the sample in various different ways to see

how it affects estimates of, of theta.

But if we, you know, focus on this first column,

these are their kind of main estimates of of theta.

Um, what do we see here.

So there's a lot of variation across sectors.

I think the smallest of a transport is 0.37.

Ah, up to 50 in petroleum.

So I think it's somewhat reassuring that they get a

very large number in, uh, petroleum because we think, you

know, oil is highly substitutable across origins.

So it is consistent with that, uh, finding and generally,

you know, it tends to be that sort of the

more, you know, high tech manufacturing sectors are often here,

have lower numbers, agriculture and mining have slightly higher numbers,

which is again, kind of consistent with thinking of them

more as commodities.

So, I mean, it's hard to know exactly what the

prior is for reasonable estimates of this, uh, theta parameter.

Uh, but the variation, you know, doesn't seem obviously, uh,

insane.

Essentially.

remember when Eton and Quatermass tried to estimate an aggregate

beta last week?

Their number was eight point something.

So I think an average feature is lower than that.

But there's also a lot of heterogeneity across, uh, across

industries.

Okay.

And then just sort of wrapping up, you know, having

done that calibration, they do some kind of factual analysis

of, of, of NAFTA.

This isn't really our main interest here.

But for what it's worth, they find, you know, the

welfare effects of NAFTA are small gain or some small

ish gain for Mexico, very small gain for the US

and a welfare loss uh from Canada.

Um, the reason you're getting a welfare loss in Canada

there is that the way, uh, terms of trade is

shifting around as a result of the shock is hurting

Canada, and the trade benefits they're getting are not enough

to offset that.

Um, there is one feature that's worth noting, which is

kind of consistent with some of the points we made

last week, which is that the smaller countries here, in

this case Mexico attending to gain more from trade.

The other point to note is if you look at

the actual changes in trade flows in their model as

well to NAFTA, they're relatively large.

So for example, Mexico's imports from both Canada and the

US increased by more than 100%.

So again this is a model like the baseline model.

That is saying that relatively big changes in trade flows

can lead to quite small our welfare gains.

And that is a mapping that depends very much on

the values of this data.

Because as you remember, we said last week we had

this, we had an expression, let's just go back to

it to remind ourselves of it.

This is important.

Where was it?

Here we had this expression for the for welfare in

the concordance model, where we noted that the kind of

sufficient endogenous statistic here was the domestic trade share pi

I.

And then that enters with this elasticity theta such that

the bigger feature is the smaller the welfare effects, the

changes in trade are going to be.

So again, that's why the magnitude of this feature is

really important here.

Okay.

So that's what they're kind of had to say about

the calendar power paper.

Any questions on that while we're here.

Sorry.

Is it concerning that Spence seems to be quite sensitive

and like, are they trimming the the very big tree

for us?

Uh.

What do they trim up?

Good.

So that's a good question.

And I cannot recall off the top of my head,

so I should know that I suspect they are trimming.

Well, they're going to be either trimming on the tariffs

or on the trade flows.

Right.

It's going to be one or the other.

I can't remember which one it one it is.

Um, so how how sensitive do you think these Numbers

are.

So certainly, you know, if we look at the most

extreme trimming here, some of these numbers are showing up

negative, which is problematic because the model would say that

shouldn't happen.

So we would worry about that a little bit.

Um, otherwise you know there is some sensitivity here.

Certainly.

Yeah.

And I mean, to the extent that that is happening,

you should worry about that, right.

Because you would want to see that these numbers are

robust to you don't want them to be driven by

outliers, which is essentially what they're checking for here.

Okay.

Other questions.

Um, what.

Yeah.

Yeah okay.

Go ahead and then okay.

So what are some of.

The things we've done to try to overcome that identification

problem for the last six and said, no, there is

a 2019 paper that basically used the Trump tariff, saying

that Trump's election is surprising.

So yeah, his tariffs are exogenous.

Um, but are there other more convincing approaches?

Probably the most I mean, so yeah, people have tried

to think about this.

I think probably the.

Mhm.

There's a recent ah paper earlier this year or last

year where they do two things to try and do

the identification a little bit more seriously.

One is they exploit the fact, um, that when you

negotiate trade agreements and in particular when you can negotiate

trade agreements under the WTO, you cut tariffs on kind

of all other countries at the same time.

So, for example, if like the US and Europe are

in a negotiation at the WTO, they might negotiate over

Europe's tariffs on US cars.

Okay.

Ah, but then whatever they agree will apply on not

just Europe's imports in the US, but Europe's imports from

all the other countries.

So it's reasonable to think that when Europe is choosing

its tariffs, it's probably to some extent maybe endogenous to

its trade with the US or China, but probably the

US.

Europe doesn't care much about its trade with, uh, Bhutan

when thinking about setting its tariffs.

So one trick they kind of use to try and

get more credible identification is they look at how the

the tariff changes affect trade flows, essentially with small countries

that we think are kind of likely to not play

a role or, you know, where the trade with them

is unlikely to matter in the tariff setting process.

So that's kind of one trick.

They also take the dynamics much more seriously, both in

the sense of, you know, trade will adjust typically will

adjust slowly over time to tariff changes.

So you can look at how that elasticity changes over

time.

And also often when there are tariff cuts, they're phased

in over time.

So you want to account for that in your estimation.

So that's probably I think the the leading paper in

that literature.

Um, at the moment when they do that, the main

takeaways, they get much lower numbers for theta.

So they get sort of average thetas around sort of

one and a half, two, which, you know, as I've

just been saying, will lead to higher.

Gains from trade.

Okay.

And just to sort of understand the production technology.

Yeah.

If we have this Cob Douglas assumption and we have

some gamma, is it saying something like in agriculture, 20%

of the expenditure is always going to be on oil

depending on the normal.

Yeah, exactly.

But then if you have sort of iceberg trade cost

shock in the sense that Russia can give natural gas

to anyone anymore, you would expect that the expenditure share

should be endogenous to that.

Yeah.

So that in this model that you're going to miss

that margin of adjustment.

So you know if you if you think that that

is important you need to relax the Douglas aggregation assumption,

which actually it's a little bit of a pain to

do because it makes the model harder to calibrate.

And it introduces an additional parameter which is what is

the elasticity of substitution.

But it's not.

It can be done with some work.

You can, uh, do that, though I think we may

be lacking a consensus on what that elasticity should be.

It probably varies.

Across across sectors.

So final thing to say here is that you know,

these you know, these important paper in particular.

And then the sort of under power application of trade

policy analysis.

There's a, you know, a really big literature that builds

on these papers in lots of different, uh, settings.

So I just want to mention a few of them.

There's a, you know, sort of starting points for further

reading.

Really.

Um, so it's been used a lot in economic geography,

particularly by people like Dave Donaldson.

So Dave, when he was a PhD student here, his

job market paper was about the railway system in India

and assessing quantitatively the effect of the railway system that

the British administration built in India.

And he did that using the Eaton Quarter model.

So kind of, you know, that was one of the

first papers to show how you could take this sort

of train model and apply it in a, in a

spatial setting.

And he also, you know, he did some really amazing

archival research, which allowed him to kind of discipline the,

uh, the model.

Um, and then, you know, often working with Rick Hornbeck,

they've done a bunch of, you know, work on sort

of, uh, economic geography in the US as well, using

similar framework.

So you see that kind of coming up a lot

in the spatial, uh, literature, another dimension people have gone

in.

I mean, it's also there's variations of this used in

in trading or in labour market analysis.

We'll look at some of them next week.

Um, another dimension that we're not going to focus on

in this paper, but I think it's quite interesting is

the model we've looked at here.

Everything's constant returns to scale.

Right.

Um, so there are.

No.

Externalities.

There's no increasing returns to scale.

It turns out, and it took people quite a while

to to realise this, but there's a nice recent paper

by Evelyn and Rodriguez Clare on this point that you

can add increasing returns to scale into the EC model

in various ways.

You can do it for external economies of scale.

Or there's there's other setups, the kind of isomorphic to

that, um, which gives a model which has, you know,

some additional parameters, in particular parameters that govern the scale

economies, but otherwise has a very similar structure to the

EC model.

And you know, what that then allows you to do

is, uh, counterfactual analysis and quantification when there are increasing

Return, so you can evaluate the importance of increasing returns.

In their case, they're thinking about it for, uh, international

trade.

And another interesting thing that comes out of that is

when you do that, you end up with a model

which at the industry level, not at the micro level,

but at the industry level, is isomorphic to a certain

variant of the model that we're now going to go

on and and look at.

And I think that's worth bearing in mind as we

go through the methods model now, because you'll see the

the microstructure of the model and the model do not

look at all the same.

So there's kind of a fairly deep isomorphism, though, that

says that at the industry level they look, you know,

similar though it has to be the increasing returns to

scale version of the each and quarter model.

So that's useful for sort of trying to understand the

mappings between different trade models and what they're fundamentally doing.

Um, and then the other, if you're more into like

production networks, probably, I think the most recent or, you

know, the most interesting recent work on this is, you

know, back.I and Fahey have a lot of papers on

this, uh, one of which is specifically about international trade,

um, where they're thinking about sort of richer production networks

that are in the Caliendo Pro, uh, model.

But this is very much in this.

You know, I think their work is in the same

sort of quantitative line of can we write down production

structures that we can potentially then calibrate and use the

counterfactual analysis?

So there's kind of a more recent strand of the

literature on that.

Any other questions before we move on and talk about

firms.

All right.

So let's talk about firms.

I know right.

You will have noticed everything we said about the Eastern

Quarter model.

There were no firms.

Right.

And that's because we had this perfectly competitive environment where

all producers within a country could produce a given variety

with the same productivity.

Right.

To have firms, you typically have to have some kind

of notion of knowledge capital.

What is it the firm owns that makes it distinct

from people from other firms.

And in the eating quarter model, there isn't anything there.

So there's no concept of firms or firms, firms scale

or firms doing anything different.

Um, so that model doesn't speak about firms.

Uh, if you're familiar with sort of Krugman trade theory

that has firms in that was the innovation in Krugman

trade theory is it brought firms into international trade.

But in Krugman's world, all firms are identical, which in

practice isn't isn't true.

There's a lot of cross firm heterogeneity, uh, which is

not just firms are different, but how how different firms

participate in trade is different.

So let's look at some data on that as a

starting point here.

So this is data for the US and for different

manufacturing industries in the US in 2002.

And for each of these industries we're reporting, you know,

what share of firms are there in that industry.

That's this first column.

Just this is the distribution of firms across industries to

give a sense of how big these different industries are.

And then within each industry, what share of firms are

exporters and conditional on exporting, what share of your total

sales are exports?

So what do we see here?

First off, the share of firms that export is relatively

low on aggregate.

For manufacturing it's 18%.

So that's saying that 18% of US firms in the

manufacturing industry are exporters.

And when we look at how this varies across industries,

you can see there's, you know, quite a bit of

variation across industries.

I think miscellaneous manufacturing is the lowest with 2%.

And then the highest is computers and electrical equipment here

with 38%.

Uh, but even in the computer industry, where we think

about the US having a comparative advantage and being a

big exporter, most firms are not exporters.

So this is telling us something, you know, important in

the sense of if we want to understand the role

of firms in trade, a fundamental thing we need to

be able to understand is, you know, why do some

firms export and other firms don't?

Now then the final column is if you do export,

what share of your output do you export.

And on average that's 14%.

So even among firms that do export most of their

sales, 86% of their sales on average are domestic.

Right.

And again, you can see that number is actually pretty

similar across different industries.

So there is this big gap between, you know, how

much you're selling domestically and how much you're you're exporting.

So this is sort of, you know, big fact, one

about the firms and trade big facts too, is that

if we now kind of zoom in on those firms,

those 18% of firms from the previous table that do

indeed export, they on average look very different to firms

that don't export.

So it's not like a random sample of firms end

up trading.

It tends to be bigger, better performing firms that export.

So what this table is showing using the same data

is regressions of these variables here.

So in the top row log employment just on a

dummy or whether the firm is an exporter.

So and then each entry in the table is the

coefficient on the export dummy for a different regression.

So the way to read this is every entry is

from a different regression where the rows are telling you

the dependent variable and then the in the column one,

the export dummy is the only variable.

Column two we add industry fixed effects, and column three.

We also control for the firm's size as measured by

its log employment.

So you know first column is just showing on average

exporters are kind of bigger along all these different dimensions.

Second column shows that's true within industries.

So it's not just about the fact that exporters tend

to be in industries where firms on average BigQuery, which

you control and look within the industry, it's still true.

And then the third column is saying if we condition

on firm size, do we still see an export premium?

And the answer is yes, but it's much smaller.

So there is, you know, a large chunk of the

export premium for most of these outcomes is strongly correlated

with firm size, but even say conditional on firm size,

exporters tend to sell more, have higher productivity, pay higher

wages, be more capital intensive and be more skill intensive.

Okay.

So this is just telling us exporters are fundamentally different

from non exporters.

And you can anticipate that this is going to be

something we want to take seriously if we're going to

build a model of firms in trade.

And then third third fact if we look at trade

liberalisation episodes and we do essentially you know, if you

do an empirical study of a trade liberalisation episode and

you ask, how does the trade liberalisation affect different firms?

We see very heterogeneous responses across different types of firms

to trade liberalisation.

And in particular, what we tend to see is that

following an import liberalisation.

So say if the UK reduces its import tariffs, smaller

firms in the UK tend to lose market share.

Right.

And these smaller firms tend to be the ones that

only sell domestically, whereas bigger firms gain market share.

Uh, and you know, may also expand their, their trade.

So you're seeing this reallocation from smaller to to bigger

firms and this reallocation because the bigger firms also tend

to on average be more productive.

That can be a source of productivity gains.

So a potential source of gains in industry productivity following

trade liberalisation is the kind of reallocation allocation across firms

even holding individual firms productivity constant.

So there's two classic studies that document this.

Uh, so Nick looks at Chile and looks at Canada.

Right.

So in particular you have Nick.

She's looking at the Chilean trade liberalisation in the late

1970s.

And what she shows is that when Chile reduces its

import tariffs, um, aggregate productivity goes up.

Right.

So there's a productivity boost from this.

And about two thirds of that productivity boost is coming

from this reallocation effect across firms.

Right.

Likewise you know when traveller looks at the uh, Canadian

tariff reductions, when the US Canada Free Trade Agreement came

into effect in uh, 1989, um, and what he finds

is again, industry productivity goes up and about half of

that is due to plant level productivity increasing.

But the other half is coming from the reallocation stage.

So in particular, I think what was what was novel

about these of both these about both these papers 20

years ago, was this, this focus on the reallocation effect

and saying that if we see industry level productivity increases

from trade liberalisation, it might not be because individual plant

level productivity changes, but because we're seeing this reallocation.

So what we are going to do in this lecture

on firms and trade is we are going to look

at this paper, uh, by mallets, uh, which kind of

has become the canonical theory of the role of firms

in international trade.

And in particular, it's a model about how heterogeneity across

firms can match these three facts we just talked about.

So it's going to be a model where not all

firms export.

And immediately the rationale for that in the model is

going to be a fixed cost of market entry that

only larger firms are willing to pay.

Um, and then because of this selection effect, those firms

that do export are going to be bigger and better

performing the non exporters, which was our second fact.

And then our third fact, which is kind of more

involved.

And we'll see kind of how it comes out of

the model when we solve it is that when we

when we do liberalise trade, we get this reallocation effect,

that panic and, uh, document of resources from low to

high productivity firms that boosts industry productivity even without changing,

uh, firm productivity.

So let's take a break here, and then we're going

to come back and we're going to walk through how

the model works.

Is still there.

So.

Come on.

Do you?

Like this?

Oh, yeah.

So that is how.

You know, huh?

She told me that I don't have to care.

Maybe I'll send her a massive finesse with the.

Evidence.

Class.

So on paper, I should.

So.

I thought.

I.

Which is not something.

That.

I think.

It's.

True.

Yeah, I.

Think.

So.

Overwhelming.

Thank you.

Mhm.

Okay.

So we just do our employees.

And.

Let's say we have a model of.

The way Easter eggs.

And my mother.

By.

My eyes are.

Just doing this.

Yeah.

She's okay.

Not to worry.

So terrible.

Yeah.

I forgot.

Okay, okay.

I know.

Yes.

Well, I got it.

Okay.

Okay.

All right.

Don't incentivise them.

With the same characters.

Yeah.

Okay.

So now, if you think about structural transformation as changing,

okay.

In some sense, like, say, images and stuff.

Yeah, sure.

It's not like new jobs.

Being created, but also the.

Fact that so very, very much so.

Yeah.

So when I was at jobs, when I was okay.

I was like, please stop it.

Yeah.

But.

It wasn't.

Because.

That.

Was a nine year old part of.

The.

Job.

Oh, yeah.

And in the worst case.

Yeah.

This is not.

Okay.

Pretty cool.

And.

I have extended the model to.

You tell me what I said.

And.

I was like.

Oh.

My.

Gosh, I didn't see this.

Okay, so this is.

Not the way this.

Is because this was the skill, but not the.

Number of people.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Sometimes I'll show you this, but then that means that

the other ones.

Are available.

And there are more.

Yeah.

Okay.

We should probably get going again.

You know what I mean?

Any follow ups on the material from the first third

of the lecture?

Any questions about any of that so far?

Okay.

So let's come back to talking about this, uh, this

mallet paper and let's see how.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah.

So the seminars they are not on yet.

Right.

The international economic seminar.

Yeah.

It doesn't start till after all the practice job talks

are over.

So I think it will start the first week of

November thereabout.

And then.

This Wednesday is just before this lecture and.

Yeah, 1230 to 2.

So the internationals.

Yeah.

Change something with the international seminars.

Yeah.

It was called International economics and now it's called Trade

and Urban.

But is there the same contact.

It will had the Substantive impact of that change is

the fraction of urban and spatial papers will be slightly

higher than it was in past years.

So it will be a mix of trade, and the

international bill is a bit misleading because it's not international

macro that goes in the macro seminar.

So this is this will be trade and it will

be urban economic geography spatial stuff.

So everything we're doing this time.

So like the other international stuff.

Yeah that would be.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Yes.

Um the other thing is there is a uh internal.

So the 1230 to 2 slot is for external speakers,

there's an internal workshop for trade and some spatial stuff

from 11 to 12 on on Wednesday, which is mainly

the kind of PhD workshop.

But it also has some, you know, uh, local speakers

who speak in that as well.

But faculty work, uh, work in progress.

So sometimes people present, if essentially we haven't if there

are three free slots in the PhD workshop.

Faculty tend to take them, but the PhD students get

the first call on them and most of the time

they fill them up.

Anyone else?

Okay, so let's see how this paper, how this paper

works and kind of what's nice about it and what's

less nice.

Right.

Basic environment.

Many countries indexed by AI and N again.

Uh, the labour market is going to be competitive.

So now there is going to be imperfect competition in

this world.

But it's going to be on the product side.

But labour markets will be competitive.

And again we just have a single factor of production.

So there's nothing interesting going on here.

Uh, each country's labour endowment is AI and there are

going to be dynamics, but they're kind of the way

this model was originally formulated.

If you read the original econometric paper, which you should

do because it's on the reading list.

If you read that paper is a dynamic model with

discrete periods, but the substance of the model can be

reformulated in a static framework.

So there are dynamics here.

Nothing about the model really hinges on those dynamics.

So it's kind of a it's a somewhat trivially dynamic

model.

But what's interesting about the model of the firm.

So let's talk about what firms do in this model.

First thing is if you want to establish a firm

there's a sunk entry cost of doing this.

Uh this is going to be denominated in labour units.

We're going to call it f e.

Right.

So I'm an entrepreneur.

I want to set up a firm I pay this

cost for.

I like hire for workers to establish my firm.

Great.

I set up a firm and then once I set

up my firm, then I learned my productivity.

And this is really the sort of key thing about

the timing in the model is that at the time

you pay the entry cost, you don't know what your

productivity is going to be.

Think about this as a sort of there is uncertainty.

You know, I might have an idea.

Oh, I want to be, you know, set up a

new ice cream business.

Right.

And I pay the costs of buying my ice cream

machine and finding a storefront.

But it's not until I actually kind of establish the

shop that I really learn whether I'm any good at

being an ice cream entrepreneur, okay?

And that that learning process, that's when I learn my

productivity.

Phi, which I draw from some distribution, G of Phi

that's country specific.

So every entrepreneur in a given country I draws from

the same distribution.

And once I get that productivity draw that's then fixed

over time.

So clearly we could be interested in a world in

which firm level productivity evolves over time.

Um, but that's not what the Mellis World is about,

because Melissa is more interested in this reallocation effect across

France he's going to hold individual firm level productivity are

fixed.

So I learned my productivity.

And then I kind of need to do what I

need to choose what to do.

Right.

So I either need to set up and start selling

ice creams and maximise my profits.

Or if it turns out, you know, I make a

batch of ice cream and it's really terrible and I

work out, I'm not going to make any profits.

I also have the option of exiting at this point,

right?

More generally, since there are going to be multiple different

markets here, right?

I have the choice of do I sell the, you

know, not just do I sell the message, but do

I export to each of these, uh, markets?

Is my ice cream so good that I want to

send it over to France as well?

Um, so I have all these market entry decisions, which

we'll come back to, um, and then each period, there's

also some just exogenous chance that I die.

Right.

So this is introducing a certain kind of churn in

which firms exist each period.

But it's not.

This death probably really doesn't matter for the model.

Um, one point to note is we're kind of putting

all the heterogeneity here on productivity.

Okay.

Alternatively, if you want to put the heterogeneity on quality

in the sense of it being kind of a preference

parameter like a taste parameter in the consumer's utility function,

you can do that and the model is fully equivalent.

So if you want to hear quality when I say

productivity that's absolutely uh that's absolutely fine.

And it doesn't change anything.

Right.

So market entry right.

And this is where trade is coming into it.

So what does trade look like here.

Um, the you know, where we're building on each quarter,

there's now going to be two different types of trade

costs.

So as in Eaton Cottam there will be iceburg variable

trade costs which we're going to call Tony.

So these are the iceberg trade costs for imports of

N from I.

So they're going to work in exactly the same way

as E2 important.

But there's also going to be a fixed trade cost,

which is that if a firm from country I wants

to enter market N, it's going to need to pay

a fixed cost of market entry, which is a fixed

cost per period.

So note the distinction here between sunk costs and fixed

costs.

The entry cost is sunk.

You just pay it once the fixed cost you have

to pay every period.

Um and again it's denominated in labour units.

So you know when I'm thinking about market entry, the

question is is the the value of entering that market

to me sufficient to justify paying this, uh, to justify

paying this fixed cost?

All right.

Um, and then, you know, condition on which markets I

enter production is very straightforward.

Right.

Uh, each firm produces its own variety.

So this is a kind of differentiated variety model with

love of variety and preferences.

Firms compete monopolistic early.

Uh, you'll have seen this all before.

The variable cost of production is constant, but it differs

across firms.

So if your productivity is is Fi right.

Your output is five times your labour employment.

So this this Phi that's entering the technology here.

This is the only source of heterogeneity um across firms.

And really the kind of way to think about this

model is it's an exploration of if we just assume

there's one dimension of firm heterogeneity, how far does that

get us in exploring features, in kind of explaining feature

of the data that we're interested that we're interested in.

Right.

Um, we'll use W to denote the wage rate.

So the firm's marginal cost of production is just w

over Phi.

Demand side very straightforward representative consumer in each country lover

variety preferences.

Um so rho is going to control the demand elasticity

which will be sigma one over one minus uh rho.

This will give us the standard uh price index aggregating

across varieties, and it means that each firm will face

constant elasticity demand.

So the demand for the variety omega that a firm

produces depends on its price to the minus sigma.

And then it depends on PN which is the total

expenditure in country N, and it depends on the price

index in country n p n.

So r times p to the sigma minus one is

a measure of real demand in country N.

So this is all very uh standard.

Right.

So that was the setup.

You can see it's a pretty straightforward model.

Right.

It is that there is much less technical complexity in

this model than in the kind of quantitative, uh, strand

of, of trade models.

There's no kind of odd productivity distributions we need to,

to worry about here.

Um, solving the model we can do in a sort

of four step process.

So the way to think about is first you solve

the firm's profit maximisation problem conditional on which markets it

sells.

So we just do profit variable profit maximisation.

Then having sold for the variable profit maximisation decision, we

kind of go one step back and solve.

For which markets will the firm indeed enter.

So this is where the firm makes the decision.

Do I want to export to a particular market.

Knowing that we can then solve the firm's entry and

exit decisions conditional on aggregate variables.

And then the final step is to kind of put

in the aggregate market clearing conditions and solve for uh,

for general equilibrium.

Everything clear so far.

Is anyone got any questions about the setup of this

model.

Okay.

So let's run through these different, uh, parts.

None of them are individually, uh, difficult.

But what we want to really kind of keep an

eye out for is how they fit together and how

they're going to kind of different components that go into

this model are going to deliver the equilibrium behaviour that

we're eventually interested in.

So one point to note the firm's profit maximisation problem

is separable across destinations.

What assumptions have I made that ensure that we have

this separability?

All right, I'll put that another way.

How could I change the setup of the model in

a way that would break this separability?

You know, just think about that for a second.

What?

You know, there's different ways you could do it.

But what would be potential modifications to these assumptions you

could make that would be such that the decision isn't

separable across destinations.

In one class.

Yeah.

So expand on that.

How would you see marginal cost depends on the quantity

that you choose and the worry about expanding export to

market in a major way.

So much on.

Cost.

Yeah.

Great.

Right.

The because we have the constant marginal cost, the cost

of serving an individual market doesn't depend on what I

do in any of the other markets.

If you break that, for example, by having, you know,

you could have decreasing marginal cost, some form of returns

to scale in the marginal cost, then all the decisions

become interdependent across different markets.

Likewise, if the way you model the fixed export entry

costs created any cross market dependency, if, say, there was

just a single export entry cost for all markets that

you had to pay once, and then you could export

anywhere that would create an inter, uh, dependency, or if

there were any kind of scale economies in the sense

that if I enter one country, then entering the second

country is cheaper, that would create those kind of interdependencies.

But, you know.

we clearly simplify the setup and make our lives easier

by assuming those away.

That's one of the reasons why we kind of have

these market specific entry costs.

And we have the constant marginal cost.

So what that means is we can do profit maximisation

market by market.

So let's think about profit maximisation from a for a

firm from country I with productivity theta in market N.

So we can write down the firm's profit maximisation problem

which is very standard.

Right.

You're going to choose the price you set to maximise

your uh your revenue net of your production costs.

The only slight, you know, fiddle in here is exactly

what's going on with these iceburg trade costs, where we

just have to remember that if you want to sell

one unit abroad, you need to produce 20 units, uh,

domestically.

So your, your costs get multiplied by the tailwind and

I on here.

And then the price at which you sell in the

foreign country also gets multiplied by tau n I.

Right?

So this should be this.

So there's a typo here.

This should be NE of phi equals tao.

And I times uh p of p2 five.

So that then, you know, this is a firm that's

doing profit maximisation facing constant elasticity demand.

So that gives us the usual monopoly mark-up pricing rule

that our mark-up is sigma over sigma minus one.

And we charge that mark-up over our, uh, marginal cost,

which is the wage relative to productivity.

So couple of things to note here.

One price is differ across firms.

And more productive firms charge lower prices, which is why

they're going to end up selling more and making higher

profits.

Two the price I charge and this here is the

factory gate price.

This price kind of at the factory gate doesn't differ

across the Destinations.

The reason for that is we've assumed the demand elasticity

is the same everywhere, so you charge the same mark-up

regardless of which market you're serving.

But though the factory gate price doesn't differ across destinations,

the kind of price once the goods delivered does differ

because of the iceberg trade costs.

And that is going to introduce a wedge in prices

across countries, such that markets that are further away and

more costly to serve, the prices are higher and therefore

you'll sell less in those markets.

And that's going to be important for remember we had

this fact that you sell more domestic.

You sell like a lot domestically relative to what you

sell abroad.

These price wedges introduced by the trade costs are going

to be important for replicating that fact.

Okay.

So given that that's our profit maximising price, we get

an expression for the firm's revenue.

Revenue is increasing in productivity, decreasing in trade costs and

labour costs and increasing in the real demand in each

destination.

Nice feature of the model is that if we want

to look at the relative revenue of two firms with

different activities, it just depends on their relative activities, right?

Another way of putting that is this is a model

where everything is multiplicative, right?

So once you start to take ratios, a bunch of

stuff drops out.

And the tractability of this model and of like a

whole class of models that are similar to this, a

French essentially relies on that fact that everything is multiplicative

here.

So that gives us a revenue.

And then we get our variable profits, which are just,

you know, in the usual way, revenue divided by sigma.

So this is the if I, if I sell to

market n one of the variable profits I make in

market n.

And then the next step is to say, okay, well

is it actually profitable for me to enter that market.

So to answer that question, we need to compare our,

uh, profits, which we derived on the previous slide to

the fixed entry cost, which is the wage times the,

uh, entry cost FNI.

Right.

Um.

Obviously the fixed costs are independent of your productivity.

Your profits are increasing in your productivity.

So this is going to define a threshold productivity level

such that if your productivity is above this threshold and

we're calling this threshold here five star, it's profitable for

you to enter.

And you pay the fixed cost and enter.

And if it's below five star you don't enter.

So we get this cut off, uh, productivity such that

uh, that determines whether you, you enter or not.

Okay.

If we go back.

So the previous slide had an expression for profits on

in terms of revenues.

Those are our revenues.

So we substitute that into this expression.

Here we get an expression for the threshold entry level

the phi fi and I star.

Um, you can see it's increasing in trade costs.

It's increasing in production costs.

It's decreasing in real demand.

This is all very intuitive.

Um, you the further a market is away in the

sense of higher trade costs, the higher your productivity needs

to be to justify entering that market.

Because since your exports are subject to higher trade costs,

they will be more expensive in that destination.

Therefore, you'll sell less and make lower profits.

So it will only be the kind of successively more

productive firms who find it profitable to enter those, uh,

those markets.

Likewise, if there is very high demand in the destination

market, which is what this RNP into the signal minus

one term is capturing, then that's a more profitable market

for you.

And that drives down the, um, uh, the entry threshold.

I'm not happy with that.

Any questions on that?

And you know, this is just what that looks like

graphically.

I'm showing you this now because when we come back

to trade, we're going to look at how this graph

changes when there's trade.

But you know what we're plotting here.

We've got profits on the y axis.

We've got productivity on the x axis.

It's plotting your profits net of uh, entry costs as

a function of your productivity.

So if you have productivity zero, you just pay the

entry cost and you make profits minus f.

And then as your productivity increases, your profits increase.

And the threshold for market entry is just where you

cross the x axis.

Okay.

So so far everything we've done has been market by

market because those decisions were separable across markets.

Right.

But there's also one decision the entrepreneur makes which isn't

separable across markets, which is the original entry decision, because

when I'm deciding whether originally to enter or not, I

take account of not just my domestic profits, but also

my export profits in all other markets.

So that's the next step is to solve for that

original entry decision.

So to do that we're going to compute the firm's

total profits, which is the sum across all markets n

such that the firm has a productivity above the market

entry threshold, times the profits it makes in that market.

So this is here.

We're just adding up across all the markets our profits.

Um, and then.

From our earlier expression for profits, we can substitute you

know we can write this out that pi any in

terms of phi and we can substitute the threshold in

and we get this very simple expression for the firm's

profits in each market that the profits of a firm

from I Market and just depend on its productivity relative

to the market.

Entry threshold times the entry costs, right.

And again, this the fact that you can write it

like this, it's for the same reason you could write

the revenues of two different firms in a in a

ratio.

It's all about everything being multiplicative.

Uh, but you can see this is this gives us

a very simple expression just where the kind of only

the sort of key endogenous thing here is the market

entry threshold.

So noting this, we can then ask well what's the

value of a firm.

So the value of a firm is just its present

expected discounted profit.

Expected master's here because you might die with probability delta

each period.

So we discount our profit flow by one over delta.

So the value of a firm is just going to

be its profits relative to delta.

Or if this thing is negative it will be zero

right.

So implicitly here you've got this entry decision.

Whereas if you're if your net profits turn turned negative.

And note it could be negative because you're substituting off

the market entry costs here you exit and otherwise you

make these profits.

Okay.

Right.

And now we've done that.

We can now write down the three entry condition which

is that, you know there's free entry.

So what we're going to want to have in equilibrium

is that the cost of entry was the expected value

of entry.

Right.

The cost of entry is f times w.

The value of entry is the expected value of the

firm.

Where the expectation is given is taken over the different

productivity draws you get.

So the expected value of entry v bar is just

the integral over the productivity distribution phi of the value

of a firm of productivity phi.

And then this is the density of the productivity distribution.

So that gives us a our free entry condition.

Foreign.

Can you again why is it some value is.

what I.

Must have.

That's what.

This thing?

Yes.

Um, so if this pie of five.

Right.

So these are my total profits.

If this thing is positive, then I make in the

stationary steady state I make profits pi of FY each

period.

But with probability delta I die each period.

So you're going to get like a geometric series where

I add up pi of five plus pi of pi

times one minus delta, pi of pi times one minus

delta squared.

And if you do the formula this is what you're

going to get.

And then the other alternative is if your profits are

negative you exit in which case your value is zero.

Other questions on that.

Outcome is done like this.

Because if you do family finance for instance, it's quite

different isn't it.

This.

No, it's I mean we're doing it in the same

way.

It's just we're in a much simplified world.

Right.

So effectively, you know in finance you discount the dividends.

Right.

You're receiving kind of implicitly here.

What we're assuming is that all the profits get paid

in dividends, uh, each uh, period.

The other thing, I mean, the other thing we're not

doing is that there's no kind of discount factor in

here.

We've sort of abstracted away from that.

Yeah.

But I mean, another way to think about this is,

as I said, the dynamics here are not important.

If you just want to think of this firm as

kind of lasting for one period and making profits, Pi

of Phi and the delta not being there, everything is

the same.

As any other.

Assumption because they're saying, oh my, as you said in

the beginning is not intrinsically a dynamic model.

Yeah.

Anyway.

Yeah.

Okay.

So we got our free entry condition.

Um, so, so at this point we've kind of characterised

firm level behaviour.

Right.

And then the question is now how do we aggregate

across firms to get a general equilibrium.

Okay.

So I'm going to sort of briefly sketch this.

You can kind of go to the paper to see

the details of how it's how it's um, done.

But it's not the most interesting part of the model.

Um.

The you know, as originally written, this paper assumes that

countries are symmetric.

So up to now, nothing I've said assumed symmetric countries.

And in fact, I've deliberately set it up so far

with asymmetric countries so that we can use that later

on in the lecture.

But for the general equilibrium we're going to assume symmetric

countries.

So we're going to assume n plus one symmetric countries.

We're going to let f be the fixed cost of

domestic market entry.

And then f x be the fixed export cost to

entering any one export market.

So rather you know, essentially what we're doing here is

rather than letting export fixed export costs be bilateral specific,

it's just there is a single fixed export cost.

Likewise the iceberg trade costs.

Now instead of being bilateral, Tao and I will just

be Tao for all countries.

And we're going to let our wage be the numerator.

So w will be equal to R1 for all countries.

So since it's symmetric we can just set w one

in all uh in all countries.

Right.

So you know know what we're doing.

We're assuming symmetry here.

So we can solve the modelling closed form and get

a kind of good handle on its properties.

Obviously in doing that we are reducing the generality because

in practice countries are are asymmetric.

So, you know, once we assume we impose these symmetry

assumptions, we're going to get that the domestic entry threshold

phi star is just the same phi star in every

country.

So we drop the country Subscribe.

Likewise, the export market entry threshold is the same regardless

of which country you're entering or where you're from.

So that's just fi X star.

So we're kind of dropping all the country subscripts here.

Um, and now if we go back to equation two.

So let me just there that was it there this

equation.

Right.

So this equation applies both when I equals n and

when I doesn't equal n.

Which is to say from this equation we get both

the domestic market entry threshold and the export market entry

threshold.

Um and if we take this equation and compare them,

we now get with our symmetry assumptions, a very simple

relationship between them, which is that the export entry threshold

for x star is the domestic threshold.

Phi star times tau times f over f to the

one over sigma minus one.

So the ratio of these two thresholds just depends on

the iceberg trade cost Tor and the market entry costs

f, x and f.

And now remember what we started this literature with was

this fact that there is selection into exporting such that

only some firms export to match that fact in the

model we need that Phi X star is greater than

phi star.

And we can see now that a sufficient condition for

that is that tau, that this thing here is greater

than one, which is equivalent to saying that tau sigma

minus one if x is greater than f.

So we're henceforth we're going to impose this assumption.

And that assumption guarantees that we match this fact up.

Only some of the firms that sell domestically export.

Yeah.

Sorry.

So with this imply that they either export into all

the markets or they never exported to any market because

because then the demand is kind of destination country specific.

But all the countries are symmetric.

Remember now.

So even the demand is yeah.

Everything is symmetric, right?

If it wasn't the case then that wouldn't be true,

right?

We put the country in there symmetrical on all dimensions.

So as a firm I'm either you know I face

one decision which is do I want to sell domestically.

And then an additional decision which is do I want

to export.

If I export I export to all the other countries

though I pay a per per country entry cost.

And we get selection into exporting provided this is true.

And note that the substantive content of this inequality is

that trade costs have to be sufficiently high.

Right?

So this combination of the variable trade cost table and

the fixed export cost f has to be sufficiently high

that exceeds the domestic market entry cost.

And provided that's true we get this selection behaviour.

So you know what Once we impose that assumption, you

can kind of.

Now, if you plot, if this is the kind of

distribution of firm productivity, what you are doing is you

are breaking the distribution up into three parts based on

these thresholds phi star and phi X star.

So we get a group of firms with very low

productivity that immediately exit.

Then we get an intermediate group that sell domestically but

don't export.

And then you get the top group of most productive

firms that, uh, sell everywhere including exporting.

Okay.

So we're just breaking the firms up into, uh, to

three groups.

Note also that the the distribution of firm productivity conditional

on survival that is conditional on choosing to enter the

domestic market, is a kind of shifted version of the

original distribution that they draw from, where you're kind of

shifting to account for the firms that that exit.

Okay.

And then the next thing you can do is then

come back to the free entry condition and write the

free entry condition accounting for this behaviour.

So let's just be explicit about how we're getting this

free entry condition.

Because in many ways this is probably the most important

equilibrium condition in the model.

So we had our free entry condition before the free

times W equals this thing which is the firm value.

All right.

So we're going to integrate over five the firm value.

The firm value from the previous thing is pi over

delta.

And then the pi itself depends on which markets I

enter.

Uh and the profits I make in each individual market,

and those individual profits can be written in terms of

the cut off in this way.

So if we substitute essentially three, four, five, six and

7 or 6 and six into seven, you are going

to get this equation here, equation nine which is our

free entry condition.

So we want to understand what this condition is saying.

So on the left hand side we have the entry

cost right.

Now remember that the wage w is the numerator.

So that's one.

So that's disappeared.

So the entry cost has to be equal to the

expected value of entry.

What's the expected value of entry.

It's the expected profits in the domestic market which is

this first term.

Okay.

So the first term which is taking over the integral

from above the domestic entry cut off by star.

So this is domestic market profits plus n the number

of foreign countries times expected export profits in each of

these markets.

Which is this second term where.

Note the limit on the integral is the five x

star, the export entry threshold.

Okay, so another way of writing this is the kind

of this this right hand side of the expression.

It's the probability the firm successfully enters times its domestic

profits, plus its export profits times the probability that it

actually successfully becomes an exporter.

And then multiplying by n, because there's n export markets

and we discount all the profits by by delta.

Right.

So what we're showing here is how we can rewrite

this free entry condition in terms of domestic and export

profits.

Okay.

And crucially, if you stare at this condition right.

Note that the only endogenous variables now in this expression

are the two thresholds the domestic threshold phi star and

the export threshold phi x star.

And the reason that is, is kind of by, by

rewriting the profits in terms of these ratios that we

said we could use, all the other endogenous variables dropped

out.

So this gives us kind of one equation linking phi

star and phi x star.

On the previous slide we had another sorry two slides

ago we had another equation which is this one.

So if we take equations A and nine together, that

is going to allow us to solve for the two,

uh, for the two cut-offs.

Okay.

Questions on that.

We're happy with that.

So yeah, from a foreign country that we will enter

all foreign languages.

Yeah.

In this setup, that's only because of the symmetry that

we've assumed.

So it's not kind of a a general property of

heterogeneous firm, but in this specific version of the model,

it is true.

Yeah.

And that's kind of what you know.

That simplifies by meaning here.

We just kind of multiply the profits in one export

market by n.

If it wasn't the case, you kind of sum across

the different export markets and there'd be a different threshold

in each of them.

Okay.

So so equations eight and nine are kind of the

key equations that pinned down the thresholds.

Um I'm now going to kind of show you briefly,

kind of once you know those thresholds, you can write

sort of all the aggregate variables in terms of those

thresholds, uh, which is useful because it kind of shows

that you can you can think of this economy as

if there is a single firm whose productivity is like

the average productivity.

And then you write the aggregate variables in terms of

those average productivity.

And that gives a nice way of representing the general

equilibrium conditions.

So we'll just look quickly at how we do that.

And then we're going to come back to our equations

that pin down the thresholds based on phi x star.

And we're going to ask when we liberalise trade, what

happens to you.

What is the comparative static on those equations when we

do trade liberalisation.

But first off kind of this idea of sort of

an average fan, if we take this equation here as

defining the average productivity of firms that enter the domestic

market.

So it's the integral over all firms whose productivity is

above the exit Cut-Off of phi to the sigma minus

one, weighted by the distribution for these firms, which is

the G divided by the one minus G to account

for exit.

This gives us a measure of of kind of a

weighted average productivity in this economy.

Uh, likewise you can define an average productivity of firms

to export, which is the same thing except now just

above phi X star.

And then you can write average revenue and the revenues

in kind of domestic markets and export markets and the

profit functions all in terms of this average productivity.

All right.

So again what we're doing here is we're kind of

showing the aggregation properties of the model.

And how even though there is this heterogeneity across firms.

So we have an entire distribution of firms behaving different

ways.

If we're interested in the aggregate behaviour.

It's as if there was a single firm that has

this average, uh, productivity.

So what?

And once you've got that idea, you can then show

that you can write the price index.

In terms of that, firms are productivity.

You can work.

Right.

Um.

Overall productivity, which is kind of a weighted average of

the domestic firms productivity in the exporters productivity.

Uh, and then you can write down the kind of

full set of general equilibrium conditions in terms of those,

uh, equations.

I am going to kind of skip through that in

the interests of time.

But the kind of one, probably the one important thing

to note is that when you are doing this kind

of general equilibrium solution, the kind of key equilibrium market

clearing conditions that you impose is a labour market clearing

condition to ensure that all the labour in the economy

is used up.

And then you also have this equation where the kind

of mass of entrants in each period must be equal

to the mass of exiting firms, and that will be

what pins down the number of firms.

So if M is the mass of firms in the

economy, a fraction delta of those exit each period.

So delta m firms leave.

And then the new entrants are the number of firms

that pay the entry cost each period.

At times, the fraction of those firms that draw productivity

above the exit Cut-Off are Phi Star.

And that gives us our general equilibrium.

And then once you've done it in revenues, union prices,

whatever.

Okay, Let's let's skip through that and kind of come

back to thinking about trade liberalisation because this is the

more interesting part of the model.

So we are back now to our free entry condition.

Okay.

So we've got these two equilibrium conditions, the free entry

condition and the relationship between the exit Cut-Off and the

export threshold.

Note also that if you're interested in the closed economy

equilibrium, it looks exactly the same, except there's no export

Cut-Off.

So this equation doesn't exist.

And this term, the export profits here also drop out.

So just the top line of the free entry condition

is the kind of equilibrium condition for the closed economy

which pins down the exit path in the closed economy.

So having said that, what we now want to do

is ask, suppose there is a decline in trade costs,

All right.

And you couldn't formalise that either.

Suppose we go from a closed economy to an open

economy, or suppose we are really in an open economy,

and we reduce trade costs by cutting town.

How does that affect the equilibrium?

And in particular, how does it affect these two cut-offs

phi star and phi X star.

So the kind of question is if you stare at

this equation, can you see sort of intuitively what is

going to change as we open up to trade.

Five stars obviously over the top right.

So that's true.

But kind of justify the statement that is obvious.

Um, because Paul is dropping.

Yeah.

So where are you seeing that.

That means that Phi X star goes down.

Is this equation.

Yeah okay.

But so So you are going to end up being

right.

Right.

So that intuition is correct.

Right.

But I want you to do a bit more work

to justify what you're saying because five star is also

endogenous.

Right?

So how can we rule out the fact that as

tau drops phi star doesn't go up and offset that?

So how are we going to, you know, see what

happens to Phi Star as tau drops?

I mean, no hero.

You've got two equations and two unknowns.

So effectively what I'm asking to do you to do

is in your head differentiate these two equations.

Right now, that's not necessarily the easiest thing to do

just in your head.

But it turns out if you kind of stare at

these a little bit more, the structure of these equations

is simple enough that you can kind of reason through

what's going to happen without formally differentiating.

That means that when the cost is lower than the

possibility of, uh, exports to the foreign markets is, the

higher the expected utility, the higher.

Um.

That is going to be true.

But it's kind of again, if you're sort of jumping

a few steps ahead here, right for now, kind of

really what I want to know is what's happening to

the exit Cut-Off Phi Star.

So okay, so let's see how we can reason through

that.

Okay.

And we're going to start from your point, which is

if Tau goes down and Phi star is held constant,

Phi X star definitely goes down.

So we know that.

So let's say let's kind of take that and let's

then use this equation here.

Right.

So suppose phi star doesn't change right?

Then this first term is unaffected right.

This second term doesn't depend on tau directly.

It only depends on tau through phi x star.

So if phi x star indeed declines what happens to

this second term.

Right.

Well, the thing to note is that this this second

term is strictly decreasing in phi X star.

Why is that?

Well, if phi decreases, we're increasing the range that we

integrate over, which will tend to increase the value of

the integral.

We are also decreasing this thing in the denominator here

which will increase this ratio.

And that will also increase the ratio the value of

the of the entire integral.

So as phi x star declines, this term here goes

up.

Okay.

Now, if this term here has gone up and nothing

else has changed, clearly we're violating the equilibrium condition.

So something else has to change, right?

The only other possible thing that can change is the

the five star.

So then how does the phi star have to change

to bring us back into balance so that the three

entry condition holds has to go up.

Right?

Because you can see the structure of these two terms

is the same.

So this first term is also strictly decreasing in five

star.

So if this term is getting bigger we need this

term to get smaller which means we need to increase

five star.

So what we end up with is that as tau

drops it must be the case that uh, five star

goes up and five star goes down.

Now, now I have kind of just slightly skipped a

step there in the.

I kind of started by saying, okay, assume five star

is constant, then five x star will go down, then

five star must go out.

How do I know that five star can't go up

by so much?

That five star also goes up.

Which is the possibility I originally threw out to to

you.

Why would that be inconsistent with equilibrium?

Any if it goes up as well the second term

goes down okay.

Yeah.

Exactly right.

I mean if both five star and five star goes

up, both these terms get smaller.

And that will clearly violate the free entry condition.

So you have to have this relationship with five star

goes up five x star is going down and vice

versa.

Right.

So as tau drops, what this is going to give

us is that the exit Cut-Off increases and the export

threshold decreases.

Okay.

And the same turns out to be true if the

fixed export cost declines, you have to do a little

bit more work there because the fixed export costs also

shows up in the free entry condition, but you end

up in the same, uh, in the same place.

Okay.

So let's look at that graphically just to reinforce the

point.

So we're coming back to our profit graph here.

And now we're looking at how it shifts when we

open up to trade.

So the red line is the one we looked at

previously which is the profit function.

Uh profits as a function of productivity and autarky.

So now we're going to do the autarky versus trade

comparison.

It's the same thing.

Um, and then what happens if we open up to

trade?

Okay.

As we open up to trade?

Domestic profits decrease because you're now facing competition from foreign

exporters.

So you're facing more import competition.

So the profits I make domestically decreases which shifts the

red line downwards to this new black line here.

Okay.

And that's what causes the exit Cut-Off to increase.

So, you know, here we have the exit cut off

as Phi A and autarky and Phi L are under

trade.

Right.

But also what happens as you start to trade is

if your productivity is above the export threshold, Phi X

star, you also sell to the export market.

And so you get this additional bit of the curve

where the curve kind of kinks upwards because of the

profits from exporting.

So this part of the curve doesn't actually end up

existing.

And the profit curve under trade looks like this black

line.

So we're seeing there you know how how the exit

Cut-Off changes when we go from autarky to trade.

But we're also seeing what happens to profits conditional on

productivity.

And we're seeing that for any firm whose productivity is

below this point here, where the red and black curves

intersect, they actually make lower profits under trade than in

Otaki.

And it's only the most productive firms who not only

export, but, you know, it's not all the exporters even

that make the higher make higher profit.

It's just those that are above this intersection point that

increase their profits as a result of opening up to

trade.

Yeah.

So in this setup, are we supposing that when the

country opens up to trade, it drops, uh, the only

the imports, uh, import tariffs or is it like.

It's.

Because of implicit in the symmetry assumption is that it's

both.

Right.

So if you didn't have the symmetry assumption you could

vary them separately.

Once they're symmetric.

We just have this single table that applies to both

imports and exports.

So we're changing both at the same time.

And then the idea behind this mechanism that Phi Star

goes up is that you have been more participation of

foreign firms in the market so that there's more competition.

Yeah.

Like if you just sell domestically, then there's no more

imports, there's more import competition that drives down your profits.

Um, and then for the marginal exporter, which is this

guy here, you're making kind of essentially zero export profits.

So you still see the decrease coming from domestic, but

for, you know, in for marginal exporters, their export profits

are increasing.

And so if you're sufficiently high productivity your total profits

increase.

Okay.

So let's put this all together and just sort of

uh, refresh what we've learned from this.

What happens in the Metis model?

Uh, following a trade liberalisation, the exit Cut-Off goes up

and the export Cut-Off comes down, um, low.

So you get a set of firms between the old

and the new exit Cut-Off who exit.

So some firms are driven out of business by the

new import competition.

Right.

Then there's a set of firms who only sell domestically,

who continue to sell domestically, but their revenue shrinks.

Right.

And then the most productive firms end to exporting.

And among them, there is a set of firms whose

profits and revenue goes up.

So all of this generates a reallocation of resources such

that less productive firms tend to shrink and more productive

firms tend to expand.

And this is the reallocation effect we talked about in

the Traveller and Path network that we mentioned earlier.

And the effect of this reallocation is if we now

compute aggregate industry productivity, it goes up right.

And we can see that kind of more explicitly if

we go back to our, um, expressions for, uh, productivity

Activity here and like and here.

Right.

So the you know the average productivity of firms that

sell in the domestic market, you know, we're just integrating

over all these firms that are above the exit Cut-Off.

So if you shift that exit Cut-Off up, you are

going to raise the aggregate productivity of those firms.

Now, the export Cut-Off is decreasing as you liberalised trade,

so the average productivity of exporters declines.

But then when you compute the, you know, aggregate productivity,

which is a weighted average of the two, that weighted

average will still go up.

So you boost your aggregate, um, you boost your aggregate

productivity.

Questions on any questions on that.

The other thing you can kind of ask is what

happens to the mass of firms, the massive Producers, right?

Um, that sell in a given market.

So note that there's kind of a couple of things

going on here, which is that as the exit Cut-Off

rises, a lower fraction of entrants survive.

Right.

But also the number of entrants, um, also adjusts.

And it turns out that the the net effect of

those two things will depend on the details of the

productivity distribution.

So the details about, you know, exogenous function G that

they were drawn from.

So it can in principle go either way.

So the model doesn't have a clear prediction for that.

But what it does predict is that aggregate welfare is

going to go up.

And the key source of the welfare gains is um,

the uh, aggregate, um, is the reallocation effect, which is

boosting the aggregate productivity.

So that's the kind of key.

That's the that's that's the sort of basic melodic model.

Right.

And the sort of key takeaways from this are how

by introducing the productivity heterogeneity across firms and these fixed

costs of exporting, he generates a model that kind of

is consistent with these three stylised facts that most firms

don't export.

So you have selection into exporting conditional and exporting.

You sell most of your output domestically, which is because

the trade costs mean that even if you export, you're

selling less in export markets than you're selling domestically.

And then when you liberalise trade, you get this reallocation

effect, because the import competition forces out the low quality

domestic firms.

And it's only the higher productivity firms that that expand.

Any questions on that before we take a break.

Yeah.

So the model is not super consistent with experiences where

after localisation I should increase imports and like because export

depends on sort of distance to the frontier.

And maybe.

I'm not sure I quite.

Follow as I was just thinking that like, you know,

sometimes the realisation might just mainly lead to firms supplying

domestic markets through imports instead of exporting.

That could be because export doesn't depend on productivity relative

to the domestic firms, but depend on like for example,

how far you are to the frontier for.

Yeah.

So I guess, I mean, so one thing here is

because of this symmetry assumption, um, as we've said, we

can't kind of separately cut import costs and export costs

once you break that.

And we're going to do that after the break.

Um, then you can, you can ask if I just

cut import costs, what will be the effect.

Right.

And then you're obviously you're going to get more of

an increase.

The you get more of the import competition effect than

the export opportunity effect.

The other thing is, you know, in the background here,

there's a balanced trade condition, which is why if you're

having more imports, you're also going to export more if

you allow for the possibility of trade deficits and that

import liberalisation changes the trade deficit, then that could also

obviously do deliver different comparative statics.

Okay.

Anyone else at the moment.

Okay.

Let's take another let's take another break.

And then we'll kind of come back and look at

ways to build upon this model.

The.

Size.

Of the.

House.

Yeah.

Um.

Probably right now, around the corner gets to zero.

I.

Feel like that.

Like a negative.

Then what's going to happen is the opposite.

So the.

Point here is.

That.

This.

Is kind of quite a subtle drop in the.

Modulation.

You know, as as he notes, is a very particular

property of the fact that you have this constant.

Elasticity of demand.

Yeah.

That's true.

Is that what ends up mattering for the extended version?

Um, and then the cost is.

So like the general way of writing a constant elasticity,

demand is like this, right?

This is the demand phase.

Is your price elasticity.

This is like capturing the industry level.

Yeah.

And then when you pay your one.

Then the true cost.

Of entry is that as.

The point is making is the thing that could force

you at the margins.

Could be that changes in the, you know.

Uh.

And the wage costs.

And you know, what would matter would be the real

way.

Yeah.

Or it could be that this demand parameter.

A.

Which was going to be.

R or the second one.

It could be that, that was.

That the direct effect that it is, is to have

reduced the volume.

We assume that it's the same.

But in this particular model, what ends up driving.

Down the.

Market is the increase in the you're going.

To have the real way different.

So it's like the back to market competition.

It's technically is is the increase in competition that matters,

rather than the fact that there are more importance in

the goods market.

But that is a I mean, it's a sort of

slightly obscure property of the.

Model, which.

Isn't very general and which people don't tend to fixate

on.

Like, um.

Yeah, I remember when I learned this paper, the first

time.

Professor was teaching it.

To me.

Kind of made this point and talked about this problem.

And it's like we can show that this is the

case, but then it's going to be irrelevant for everything

else we do.

So yeah, so and so basically.

There's.

No economics here.

Why this must be the case.

If there is I don't grasp.

So I don't want to say that there's no because

it might just be that I'm not seeing it, but

I, I don't have any intuition for why.

That is.

Particularly the.

Case in this.

Way.

I know, I know, it is a fact that comes

out of the fact that it's a constant elasticity model.

But what exactly the economics.

Of that is, is.

Certainly something I don't have a clear.

Way of explaining.

That's fine.

Okay.

Thank you.

Good question.

Oh.

Yes yes yes that's great.

sleep.

So he thought I.

Was talking to.

An.

Investor last.

Year?

Yeah.

They're.

Suppose.

Yeah.

What if I had to I would go.

I might.

That's all.

I have.

I have to talk to you.

I know, I know, I.

Know.

What you're thinking.

So what?

I mean.

Is that everything you do?

It has always.

Come to that.

But that doesn't mean.

You should do something about it.

I need.

More time to report.

On these.

Compliments with you.

All right, let's let's get going again.

So for the remainder of today's lecture, we're going to

kind of look briefly at three papers that kind of

build upon the merits framework and use it to analyse

some kind of other questions that may be of interest.

So we're going to look at a paper by Thomas

Chaney, who is going to think about the trade elasticity

in the medical model.

So coming back to this question of we care about

the elasticity of trade flows to trade costs.

I remember in the Eton Quarter model that was the

Fréchet dispersion parameter gave that elasticity.

What what that elasticity in the model.

And what do we learn from that are then we're

going to look at some work by Eastern Quarter McDermott's

um, asking essentially how well does the Mellis model fit

the data when we allow for asymmetries?

How well does it fit the data on which markets

firms actually enter, how much they sell in those markets?

And then finally, we'll look at a paper by Carlson

and Rodriguez Cleary, uh, about welfare gains from trade in,

you know, a broad class of models that includes the,

uh, the metrics models.

That's the agenda for the rest of today's lecture.

So we'll start off with this paper by Cini.

So he's interested in the trade elasticity, how the trade

costs affect bilateral trade flows.

Um, in the Krugman model, which is you can think

of as the symmetric firms version of the matrix model,

the trade elasticity just depends upon the elasticity of substitution.

So the demand elasticity r sigma in particular you get

kind of a gravity style equation where the exports between

countries.

I'm j depend on the product of their GDPs and

then inversely proportional to trade cost to the power sigma

minus one.

So kind of the um, question Shane wants to ask

is, you know, is this also true in the Mellis

model, or does the fact that firms are heterogeneous change

this relationship in some way right now?

Why might it matter?

Well, it might matter because we now have this additional

margin of adjustment to trade.

In the Krugman model, if you increase trade costs, the

margin of adjustment of trade to that increase in trade

costs is the intensive margin of firms and individual firms

selling a different amount.

In the metals model, you have that intensive margin, but

you also have the extensive margin of which firms export,

right?

You have the, uh, the Export thresholds, those fi NE

stars that we were playing with before.

They're also going to adjust to changes in trade costs.

And so this gives us an additional margin of adjustment.

And the question is kind of once we combine these

two margins what determines the overall elasticity of trade.

Now remember in the Eaton quantum it was the Fréchet

parameter theta.

And we noted the reason it was the Fréchet parameter

theta in the Eaton quarter model is because the the

adjustment is dominated by the extensive margin.

We talked about this kind of extensively last week in

Eaton calling that feature.

It's the extent of margin adjustment.

And that completely dominates the response.

Right.

So here's another model where you have both the intensive

and extensive margin.

What does the elasticity look like.

Um, before we do that just here's some sort of

empirical stylised facts that are worth bearing in mind when

we think about these adjustments.

So this table is showing regressions where we estimate a

gravity model on US exports, so we are regressing US

exports to country C in year T on the GDP

of that country and its distance from the US.

And then the different columns, we kind of cutting the

data in different ways.

So first column total export value.

So this gives us our standard gravity relationship that US

exports are larger to bigger economies and they're smaller to

more far away countries.

And then we're decomposing the total export value into how

many firms export.

How many products do those firms export, and what's the

value per product per firm.

So you can think of this as a decomposition into

the intensive and extensive margins.

This value per product per firm, that's like the intensive

margin.

And then we've got the extensive margin of both the

number of firms and the number of products.

Right.

And what's interesting is that if you look at the

distance effect.

For the two extensive margin measures, it remains kind of

negative and around one.

Whereas if you look at the intensive margin it's actually

positive here.

So this suggests that the you know these different margins

of trade are potentially affected, uh, differentially, uh, by, uh,

trade costs.

And that kind of we can learn something from doing

this decomposition.

Okay.

We want to be a little bit careful here because

when I talked about the intensive margin on the previous

slide, it was kind of within an individual firm.

As you change the trade cost, how much do that

firm's exports change?

Okay.

That's not what we're estimating here.

Because as you change move across countries you've got different

sets of firms exporting.

So you know this this number conflates both the firm

level changes and changes in which sets of firms export

to to different products.

But nevertheless, it's kind of showing us that these, you

know, once we do this decomposition, the different components of

the decomposition are responding in different ways.

So, Cheney, what Cheney wants to do is think through,

okay, in the model, if we do decomposition in different

margins, what does it tell us?

Questions come up about that set up before we look

in more detail.

All right.

So to do this he essentially writes down a simplified

version of the methods model.

And it's going to be simplified in a number of

ways.

It's going to be static um, in addition to having

many methods.

So there is it's going to be simplified in some

ways, but also more complicated than others.

But the the ways it simplifies are kind of the

more important ones are one way in which is more

complicated.

There will be many sectors, so there'll be we each

of these sectors will look like kind of the melee

sector from the model.

But he will also have one homogeneous sector, which is

to say one sector where each country just produces a

single homogeneous good and there is free trade.

And the role of this homogeneous sector is going to

be to pin down wages, because each country's productivity in

the homogeneous sector will just pin down its wages.

So in this sense, this is kind of going to

be like a partial equilibrium version of the model in

the wages aren't going to be endogenous to, uh, to

trade costs in the differentiated, um, sectors.

The reason he's doing that is just when he does

comparative statics, he wants to focus on kind of the

partial effect of trade costs on trade flows and not

worry about general equilibrium adjustments.

The other way in which it's kind of we generalise

the model.

We're now going to go back to an asymmetric country

set up.

So that's going to be nice.

And trade costs again are going to be country pair

specific.

Uh but we're not going to have a free entry

condition now.

Instead, we're just going to have that.

There's a mass m of potential entrance, uh, in each

country sector pair that's proportional to the size of the

economy.

So again, this is simplifying some of the sort of

general equilibrium channels that exist in the medical model, because

they're not really relevant for what he wants to do.

And then there's going to be one other important assumption

which is novel here, which is that he's going to

put a functional form on the productivity distribution.

So in millets, the productivity distribution, it just had the

um, we had the density function or the distribution function

with just g of pi.

Right.

And we didn't have to specify anything about the functional

form of that distribution.

Shania is going to impose a specific functional form, which

is that it's perito, which is to say that this

is the um, uh, functional form.

That actually, um, a $5 call at five min.

So that's the functional form of the Pareto, uh, distribution.

You probably again, this is a distribution I expect most

of you have seen in some form or another.

Um, because it is a distribution that comes up a

lot in economics, incomes, wealth, lots of other outcomes are

reasonably well approximated, at least in the upper tail, by

a Pareto distribution.

One of the contributions of this paper was pointing out

that if you impose this parameter assumption on the Mallett

model, first off, it's incredibly tractable and you can solve

everything in closed form, which is nice.

So you see, it used a lot for that reason.

Uh, the other implication is once you have productivity distributed

Proyecto, then things like firms, profits, sales, employment will also

all follow Pareto distributions, which is, you know, again, not

a bad approximation to the to the data.

So it has become very common following shiny to impose

that productivity distribution in this class of models.

Okay.

That's what we've just been saying.

Like note I mean like the Frechet distribution.

The Pareto is a two parameter family where there's a

scale parameter and a dispersion parameter.

So here I've written the scale parameters a.

So by allowing that A to vary across countries, essentially

you're allowing the technology levels in different countries to shift

in the same way you did with we did with

the T in the eastern quarter model.

And then this gamma is a bit like the theta

for the Fréchet distribution, in that it's an inverse dispersion

parameter that controls the amount of dispersion, the variance in

the Productivity drops.

So given this setup, the goal is then to characterise

how changes in trade costs affect trade flows and how

that can be decomposed into the firm level, intensive margin

and the extensive margin of which firms are trade.

Now, if we actually go back to our, uh, profit

maximisation that firms did in the Mallett model, we've already

derived all the equations we need here because remember, we

originally set up the model of asymmetric countries.

So we can just kind of go back to that

and use those equations in particular the revenue that a

firm would productivity phi to exporting from I to n

makes is given by this expression.

Right.

You can see it depends on its productivity, real demand

the wages.

These are just kind of exogenous here.

There's a constant there.

And then crucially we've got the variable trade cost there.

Uh Tao and I so you see immediately from inspecting

this equation that the elasticity of firm level exports to

trade costs is just the, uh, sigma minus one, exactly

as in the Krugman model.

So the intensive margin, uh, trade cost elasticity in the

heterogeneous firm models is the same as in the, um,

Krugman model.

Right?

And it's very intuitive.

When varieties are more substitutable, sales are more sensitive to

change in trade costs.

What's more interesting is the extensive margin.

So to solve for this, extensive margin elasticity is a

two step process.

First we solve for the export threshold and then we

aggregate sales over all firms kind of above the uh

above the threshold.

Right.

So again we can take the threshold from our earlier

work.

It was equation two earlier in the slide.

And this gives us that the threshold is just proportional

to the variable trade cost, and it depends on the

fixed export cost to the power of one over sigma

minus one.

Now, no.

In this setup we want to assume that phi any

star is greater than a EI star.

Why is that?

Or I.

Why is that?

Just to make sure we're following what's going on here?

Yeah, almost like I is for a predator distribution.

EI is the minimum value the distribution can take.

So what this requires is that there is that the

cut off is greater than the minimum value.

Because if it's not, then all firms will enter.

Um, which is a theoretical possibility but kind of doesn't

match the uh match the data.

So we just impose that assumption, right.

And then to get aggregate trade flows, we're just going

to integrate over the firms that are above the export

entry threshold.

So we're going to have the mass of firms that

can enter.

Remember this was exogenous in Sini.

Uh, and then we integrate over the productivity levels above

the ex export threshold.

And a star of their sales.

Uh, we've got sales on the previous two slides ago.

We've got five star one side ago.

So we can do this calculation.

And we get this expression here.

What do we learn from this expression.

Couple of important things.

First this is a gravity equation right.

We're expressing bilateral trade as depending on an export a

fixed effect sorry import a fixed effect.

This is an importer demand term right.

An exporter fixed effect which is this term here.

And then a bilateral term which is just given by

the trade costs.

So one thing we're showing here is that the, you

know, this version of the medics model.

So medics with Perito delivers a standard gravity equation for

international trade.

We're happy about that because as we, you know, have

talked about previously by gravity equation is a good predictor

of bilateral trade.

Second thing is if we now look at the elasticity

of total trade to trade costs, you can see it's

given by the parameter gamma.

So the trade elasticity for aggregate trade here is for

two variable trade costs is gamma right.

So even though the intensity margin elasticity was sigma minus

one, when we aggregate up and combine that with the

extensive margin effect, it's the extensive margin effect that dominates

just like in the eastern quarter model.

And it's the parameter that controls the dispersion in the

Pareto distribution that ends up determining the trade elasticity to

variable trade costs.

We can also hear because we've also got fixed export

costs.

We can also ask what is the elasticity to fix

costs.

And there it's kind of it's a combination of the

gamma and the sigma minus one.

So this is sort of showing us again the importance

of this extensive margin are adjustment for pinning down what

the trade elasticity is in.

Let's just again think about the intuition for that a

little bit.

So a high value of gamma is telling you low

dispersion in the productivity distribution.

Um let's just draw that just to make sure we

understand how Pareto distribution shift around when we change gamma.

So suppose I'm going to draw the pdf.

The density function of a Pareto distribution.

Okay.

So it has minimum value I.

And this is the pdf.

So we'll call it g of five.

First of what does the density function of a distribution

look like.

What kind of curve do I want to draw here.

Yeah it's like downward slope right.

It's it's that informally the CDF is uh that.

So the PDF if we differentiate this is just going

to be k I to the k five to the

minus k minus one.

So you can see it's a it's a polynomial.

And the inverse polynomial is five which gives us this

downward sloping shape.

Right.

And now I should have gamma here.

Sorry I always do.

My shiny uses gamma.

I always use case.

But look, these are games, okay?

So now we increase gamma.

How does this curve shift if we increase gamma?

Any suggestions?

I'm going to increase gamma.

What am I going to do to my density function

on my credit distribution.

Yes.

Sorry.

That's a gamma okay.

It's gamma.

It was just me writing it.

So I'm increasing down.

What am I doing to my density function?

Okay.

I'm not changing the minimum.

Right.

So the minimum is always I.

But I'm changing the power on the far right and

I'm increasing or making that more negative.

Right.

And the effect of that is to sort of tilt

this distribution.

So it's like initially higher and then it's lower.

And so this is kind of what happens as we

increase gap.

So the effect of increasing gamma is to take weight

out of the tail of the distribution.

So there are fewer firms with very high productivity and

more firms that are kind of clustered around low productivity

levels.

The impact of that is to make trade more sensitive

to trade costs, because you've got more firms clustered around

the kind of lower part of the distribution, which is

where the export threshold is actually moving around.

And that's why as you increase gamma, you're kind of

increasing the the trade elasticity.

Questions on that.

One other just kind of observation here is for this

model to be well defined in the sense of for

some of the integrals here to actually converge you have

to have gamma greater than sigma minus one.

So because gamma is greater than sigma minus one, the

trade elasticity in this model is bigger than it would

be in a Krugman model.

And the way to think about that is in the

Krugman model.

You just got the intensive margin adjustment here.

On top of that, you've got the extensive margin adjustment,

and that makes trade flows more sensitive to trade costs

than they would be in a Krugman model.

So that's kind of what I wanted to say about

the shiny paper.

The key takeaway is that, again, it's this this extensive

marginal city that ends up, uh, or it's the Pareto

dispersion parameter that ends up driving, uh, the or determining

the trade elasticity.

Once we allow for this extensive margin adjustment on top

of the intensifies and does.

Anyone want to ask anything else about that before we

move on?

All right.

Next paper Eaton and chromate.

So this is more of an empirical paper.

And the basic question here is okay, so Melissa has

come up with this model of how firm heterogeneity affects

export entry and sales and export markets.

How well does it actually explain the data.

Once we kind of allow for all the asymmetries that

exist across countries.

So they've got the kind of very detailed French firm

level trade data, and they're going to use this French

data to compute statistics about which markets different French exporters

entry and turn, how much they sell there.

And they're going to say, if I kind of write

down a sort of standard millets model generalised to allow

for asymmetries, how well can it fit the French data?

And then they're going to say along the dimensions where

it doesn't fit them all so well, how do we

need to generalise the model further to better fit the,

uh, the data?

Okay.

Key takeaways.

If we just focus on like productivity variation is the

single dimension of heterogeneity that matters across firms, they're going

to find that that dimension alone can explain close to

60% of variation in which markets firms enter.

Right.

So the productivity kind of productivity dimension is relatively successful

about explaining market entry in their paper.

Okay.

But it is less successful in explaining how much firms

sell conditional on entry.

So they're going to add additional.

What they'll end up doing is adding additional dimensions of

heterogeneity to the model to explain conditional on entry, how

much do you do.

You sell.

So we'll start off by looking at kind of some

of the facts they document.

And then we'll see how they generalise the methods model

to match those facts.

All right.

So we've got a bunch of facts here some some

graphs to look at.

And these are all graphs about kind of French firm

level uh behaviour.

First graph up here is each observation is a country.

So like a destination for French exporters.

And you've got the size of the country market size

in billion dollars on the X axis.

And you've got the number of French firms that enter

that market on the y axis.

So the fact that you see a kind of an

upward sloping relationship here is just saying that on average,

more French firms enter larger markets.

That's not surprising.

If you go back to our expression for the, uh,

export threshold, we said that that export threshold is decreasing

in destination demand and that generates this correlation.

Probably more interesting is this second graph which has the

same axis x axis.

But now on the y axis they have how many

French firms enter normalised by a measure of what is

the total market share of French firms in that market?

Okay.

So effectively your normalisation, it's going to be you're going

to be dividing by a big number in countries like

Belgium, where France is going to have a high market

share, and you're going to be dividing by a small

number in countries like New Zealand, where France is going

to have a relatively low market share.

So this is kind of one way to essentially control

for trade cost differences, because France's market share is going

to be greater when there are low trade costs for

French firms to enter.

And it's going to be higher when there are high

trade costs, right?

Note that Notice the kind of big difference when you

go from point A to point B is this relationship

gets much tighter.

And I think kind of what's a bit surprising about

panel B here is how tight this relationship is.

Once you do this single, uh, normalisation.

And through the lens of the model, this relationship is

going to be kind of informative about patterns of market

entry and how they're related to, uh, to trade costs.

Okay.

Um, and then, you know, they also have panel C

is showing kind of how much French firms or, you

know, how the how the distribution of French sales looks

in different markets, just pointing out that there is kind

of, you know, a an upward sloping relationship at each

percentile of the sales distribution, but there's also a lot

of dispersion within markets and how much French firms sell.

So that's kind of sort of first set of facts.

Second fact is they dominate.

There is kind of a hierarchy of market entry from

the perspective of French exporters, but it's an imperfect hierarchy.

And which is to say in this, in the kind

of basic malaise model, right, we we said that there

would be a five NE star for each destination.

Right.

And you can imagine if I here is France, right?

Then you could rank the fine stars from the perspective

of France.

Right.

And what that ranking would tell you would be that

conditional on exporting, any French exporter would enter the market

with the lowest Phi in France, and then some subset

of those firms would enter the one with the second

lowest Phi in France.

And if you keep going up the one which has

the highest Phi in France, you know, only a very

small fraction of firms would enter that.

But any firm that entered like a higher market would

also enter all the lower markets, because they're kind of

ranked along this single dimension.

So what they're interested in here is does export entry

actually look like that?

Right.

So it turns out that the kind of most popular

export destination for French firms is Belgium.

Very close by.

So if this pattern holds right, any firm that enters

any other export market should also enter Belgium.

So you can look at the extent to which these

market entry programs actually obey this hierarchy.

And that's what the data in this table is showing.

It's showing kind of as we rank firms by rank,

so ranked countries by how popular they are for French

exporters.

We've got Belgium, the Germany Switzerland Italy UK Netherlands US

right.

How many firms kind of enter this string of countries

in the data.

Right.

And then how does that compare to what it would

be if market entry was kind of independent and we

didn't have this hierarchy.

And then they also report here kind of what it

looks like in the model.

They eventually end up, uh, building.

Right.

And I think this I always find this table is

a little difficult to take in at first, but once

you stare at it for a while, you realise it's

essentially saying two things.

One, this hierarchy does exist to some extent, right?

You are less likely to enter both Belgium and Germany

than you are to enter Belgium, and you're even less

likely to enter Belgium, Germany and Switzerland.

So there is a hierarchy, but it's imperfect.

It's not the case that if I enter, uh, Germany,

I must enter Belgium.

There will be some firms that enter Germany, but not

Belgium.

So they want to, you know, that's that's something that

the basic model isn't going to be able to match.

Third fact, what we're looking at here is the distribution

of sales by French firms within individual, Uh, markets.

All right.

So here we're kind of plotting the sales distribution.

Um, and you can see it here for four different

destinations.

What they want you to, to take away from this.

Firstly, these curves look very similar across different destinations.

So the distribution is whatever distribution is is very similar

across destinations.

Also, if you really know your distributions you will recognise

that this, this linearity we see here on a log

linear scale.

This is telling us that we've got a Pareto distribution

here.

So to the extent that these curves are flat or

just linear, that would be a Pareto distribution.

Right.

And what we see here is kind of at the,

you know, left hand part of the distribution which is

the smaller firms.

It's looking sorry.

It's the bigger firm.

Sorry.

The bigger firms look pretty much like a parabola distribution.

And then we've got this curvature here.

And what that curvature is, is there are more firms

selling small quantities than the Pareto distribution predicts.

So the Pareto distribution of sales is doing well for

large firms, and it's doing poorly for small firms.

And in particular, it's doing poorly for small firms because

there are lots of, uh, very small firms that sell

less than would be the case if the distribution just

was better.

So that's another factor.

Um, kind of meritocratic model will struggle to match and

that they're going to want to provide an alternative explanation

for.

Okay.

And then final facts is about how much do you

export relative to what you sell, uh, domestically.

So these are various graphs which plot, you know, statistics

about how many markets you enter or what you sell

in export markets conditional on how much you're selling in

France.

And the point they're making with these graphs is that

given how much we observe firms export, they sell more

in France than I've kind of basic Melies model will

predict.

So the mallet model is essentially predicting firms export more

than they do in practice.

So again that's going to be want to be something

that's going to be something they want to think about.

How can we help the model to better fit the

data.

Any questions on these empirical facts?

I'm aware we've gone through them a bit quickly and

are thinking exactly how to process these kind of different

graphs.

Takes a little bit of time, right.

But just you know, reminder we've got larger markets.

We see more entry.

We've got that.

There's this imperfect hierarchy of entry.

We've got the sales distributions within destinations are Pareto in

the upper tail but not in the lower tail.

And we've got the firms sell more domestically than you'd

predict based on how much they export.

If you view the world through a Melies model.

Okay.

So what the paper then having kind of documented these

facts.

Right.

And they document them for France and they were sort

of the first people to document this particular series of

facts.

And people have then kind of gone on to look

at similar facts in other countries.

And it turns out these aren't France specific facts.

You see similar facts, regardless of where your exporters are

coming from.

Having documented these facts, they then ask if I have

a sort of baseline operating model.

So kind of like the Mellett model we looked at

previously, but with a Pareto productivity distribution.

Which of these facts can it match and where does

it fail?

So which facts can it match right.

It does well on there being more entry in larger

markets.

It can hit the hierarchy of market entry and the

sales distributions and the fact that exporters sell more domestically.

So tickets for the model on those criteria, where doesn't

it do so well in metrics?

You're going to have the exact market entry hierarchy, which

we don't see in the data.

Um, in addition, because you have the single dimension of

heterogeneity, and if you know how much a firm sells

in any one market from that you can infer its

productivity.

And then that will tell you how much it will

sell in any other market where it enters in practice,

you know, that doesn't work.

There's another source of heterogeneity in sales across different markets,

right.

And in particular, firms are trying to selling too much

domestically.

And there are too many small firms in export destinations.

So then they're going to modify the basic model to

try and better match these facts.

Um, and in particular they're going to add two additional

components to the model.

So component one is additional heterogeneity.

They're going to assume firms don't just differ in their

productivity okay.

But they also differ in the costs they the cost

of entering each market.

So whereas previously you know our market entry cost remember

was this FNI which was the same across all firms.

They're now going to assume that has a firm specific

component.

So different firms face different fixed market entry costs okay.

And likewise they're going to allow for the demand of

demand each firm faces in different markets to also have

a firm specific component.

And so you're essentially you're adding two more kind of

dimensions of stock of stochastic shocks into the model.

And the entry cost one will allow you to match

the imperfect hierarchy of entry.

And the demand shock will allow you to match the

firms of different amounts.

You know, the relative sales in different markets differs across

those.

Okay.

So that sort of component one.

In some ways this isn't like a super interesting component

because it's just saying, well, if I add more parameters,

I can better match the data, which is like, yeah,

but that's not very, you know, what do we learn

by doing that?

Probably the more interesting part is the second part where

they're going to take an idea from Costas Archilochus, job

market paper about market access costs for small firms.

And they're going to use this idea to match the

fact that you see all these small firms in the

sales distribution, these ones, this curvature, this is this is

going to allow them to match this curvature at the

lower end of the sales distribution, and it's going to

allow them to match the fact that you sell more

in France than you might otherwise expect.

So the idea is going to be that, um, well,

let's look specifically at what it's going to be.

Right.

So the o'clock is idea is going to be that

when you pay your fixed cost of market entry, you

can pay a kind of.

The fixed cost can be split up depending on what

fraction of buyers in a country you want to, uh,

to sell to.

So in particular, if you want to sell to a

fraction f of buyers in country N, the fixed cost

you have to pay is going to depend on a

shock term.

So this is the firm specific market entry shock.

It's going to depend on a country specific term.

So this would be like the F previously the fixed

cost.

But then it's also going to depend on a function

m of f right where this f we're allowing the

firm now to choose.

And the function m right is going to be an

increasing uh, convex function of f.

Right.

And in particular the convexity of this function will mean

that if you only want to access a very small

fraction of buyers, you can just pay a very low

market entry cost.

And then if you want to increase access, kind of

an increasing share price, it ramps up.

That's where the kind of convexity, um, comes into it.

So what this is then going to mean is that

if you are a small firm that wouldn't be able

to afford to access all the buyers in the country,

it may nevertheless be profit maximising for you to pay

to access a small share of the buyers, and therefore

you're going to get more export entry by very small

firms than you would in a baseline model.

And it's that export entry by very small firms that

delivers the kind of the tailing off of the distribution

here.

It also means that, uh, you know, you know, on

average across firms, firms tend to sell less in export

markets, then you predict based on their domestic sales because

they pay to access fewer.

A smaller fraction of the market in export markets than

they do domestically.

And that's how they're going to map match the fact

that you see more sales in France than you do

then you would predict based on export sales.

So I realised we're going through this quickly.

But the kind of key idea here is that in

this paper and sort of more generally in the kind

of trade literature that has looked in detail about export

entry decisions, there has been this kind of puzzle that

we see too many small firms entering markets, compared to

what you would expect from a kind of medic's view

of the world and the rationalisation of that, that kind

of people have developed based on this.

This idea is this, you know, you can pay a

relatively small amount to access just a few of the

of the buyers in a given destination, and that once

you do that, and in particular, once you have that,

that functional form will then give you, uh, a distribution

which well matches those distributions we saw in the, in

the graph.

Any questions on that.

Okay.

So then very quickly final paper for today.

The o'clock is costing on Rodriguez calorie paper.

So this is a paper about the gains from trade.

Now remember we spoke about this a bit in the

context of the you can quarter model.

And we said we had this simple sufficient statistic for

the gains from trade in the June quarter model that

depended on the domestic trade share, which was Pi.

I depended on the trade elasticity theta.

What ACR show is that that eaten quantum gains from

trade formula holds not just in the eastern quarter model,

but in a much broader class of trade models, but

also includes the Melissa pro-rata model.

So they show that there is a broad class of

single sector.

And the single sector here is important single sector trade

models in which the change in real income following a

shock.

So we're doing some of the counterfactual change here just

depends on the change in expenditure share of domestic goods.

So this lambda hat that's the equivalent of the pie

we had before.

And it depends on the trade elasticity epsilon, which is

what was theta in the uh EC uh model.

Right.

So this is, you know, why is this important?

Well, one is a very simple, sufficient statistic for getting

some trade because it just depends on this one elasticity,

the trade elasticity and on the domestic changes in the

domestic expenditure shares.

Okay.

So that's kind of interesting.

And then the The second thing, which I think was

probably the most surprising thing about the paper, is that

you get this same formula in a wide range of

very different models.

So for example, the mallet model and the Eton Quarter

model do not at first glance look similar, but they

do generate this same formula for the gains from trade.

And you know, more formally, what ECR show in their

paper is what exactly are the conditions that are model

has to satisfy to generate this formula.

So we highlight six of them.

Preferences need to be constant elasticity uh as does the

import demand.

There needs to be a single factor of production linear

cost functions either perfect or monopolistic competition, balance, trade and

aggregate profits have to be a constant share of aggregate

revenues.

Any model that satisfies these six conditions which are, you

know, they are restrictive.

These are not, uh, kind of innocuous conditions, but if

they hold, you are going to get this formula here,

right?

And then they know that there are a wide range

of trade models that do indeed satisfy these conditions.

So we've already said each one quarter of a mile.

It's Pareto does a classic Krugman symmetric firms model does,

as does an Army model with national product differentiation.

So many of the kind of canonical trade models do

indeed satisfy these, uh, these assumptions.

And then to finish up, I kind of want to

say a few words on interpretation.

So one thing people often conclude, based on what I've

just said, is that that means the gains from trade

are the same in all these models, right?

But note that's not what they're saying.

What they're saying is that you get this same formula

such that conditional on changes in lambda hat, the gains

from trade are the same.

But remember lambda hat that's the domestic expenditure is itself

endogenous and in general will vary across different models.

So it's not that the gains are the same, it's

just that the formula, um, is the same.

They do provide conditions in the paper such that the

lambda hat will also be the same.

They're stronger than the conditions to get the formula, but

you can kind of get the same lambda hat in.

You get the same in kind of standard Arminian, Krugman,

Eton quarter models.

You also get it in one particular version of the

operating model, where you pay the fixed export costs in

the importing country, which is not the usual assumption people

use, but is not going to completely implausible either.

So there is these kind of deep similarity between these

models that said.

It is crucial for deriving these results that we are

talking about a single sector economy.

And once you move beyond a single sector economy or

you start to generalise in other ways, some of the

equivalence is break down.

So people kind of they first wrote this paper about

ten years ago now All right.

People got very excited about the paper because it kind

of gave this one formula which told you what the

gains from trade were.

So then they developed this kind of cottage industry of

saying, okay, well if I relax this assumption, how does

it change the formula?

So there were a lot of papers writing written doing

that and kind of generalising it to allow things like

what if we have multiple sectors, intermediate inputs, more than

one factor production, variable mark-ups, etc.?

Um, it turns out you can, you can kind of

do these generalisations and you still get relatively simple formulas,

but now they typically will differ depending on whether you've

got perfect competition or monopolistic competition.

So for example, if you have multiple sectors, you get

kind of this formula in an Eaton quantum setup and

this formula in a mellett setup.

So they're not that different.

But then, you know, once you move beyond a single

sector, you're not getting the same, uh, formulas.

And then, you know, final things to show.

Okay.

So suppose we take this formula and we apply it

to the data.

And we ask how large are the gains from trade

in the sense of if we go from observed trade

levels back to autarky, what would be the welfare effects

of that according to this formula?

So that's what we're seeing in this table for a

bunch of different countries.

And the average at the bottom.

And we're seeing it for a single sector version where

all the models predict the same thing, and then multiple

sectors without intermediates and then multiple sectors with intermediates.

Okay.

So you can stare at this table at home if

you want.

Couple of, you know, three key points that I want

to make about it.

First, adding multiple sectors increases the gains from trade.

Second adding intermediates massively increases the gains from trade.

Thirdly, once you have multiple sectors and intermediate, the gains

can be quite different across these different types of models.

So for example in the multiple sectors we with intermediate

version, the kind of perfect competition Eton courtroom is given

an average gain of 27%, whereas the Mellis model is

giving an average gain of 40%.

So you see, you know, those numbers are both much

bigger than the single sector version, where it's 4%, but

they're also differing across the models.

Okay, I'm going to stop there for today.

Any final questions before we conclude?

All right.

Next week we will do labour trade and labour markets

as our topic.

Oh!

My God.

I'm.

So.

Glad.

You're going to present today?

5:01 a.m..

It's just.

I guess that's.

True.

I mean.

Uh, so, uh, Marina told me because she's in this,

uh, group, like it's called Hellenic Group, which is related

to Greece.

And the guys Greeks are.

Yeah.

That's right.

Yeah.

It's about, uh.

It's the name of the presentation.

And, you know.

I'm.

Not.

Sure, I can just send me the.

Kind.

Of, uh.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Right.

I shouldn't have told you you were happy.

Now you're have to go home now.

Yeah.

Okay.

I.

Uh, I know.

Okay.

Yeah.

Is that too much?

It's great.

We'll be honest.

Um.

That's true.

Yes.

It's not all the time.

No, it's.

Okay.

Um.

Yeah.

I mean, uh, if you wanna stay, just stay downstairs.

I'm sorry.

I mean, what's your.

Lecture 3:

Just like if I go.

So.

You need to ask them for six months.

Just.

Don't ask this, especially before you have to do that.

So.

Let's see what you got to.

Say.

As I.

Said, I don't know if it took a long time.

All the time.

Yeah.

Good.

Good.

Yeah.

Please.

Next time, I will ask you to.

Cancel.

Oh.

You sure about that?

Why?

I just descriptively hate it.

Well, I really cannot wait.

I know.

Move away.

British customers will be terrified.

Yeah.

Yeah I know.

Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

Is it a.

New one?

Yeah.

It's been.

A week of innocence.

You know I can't anyways.

I.

Mean, I couldn't care less.

About.

The.

Situation.

All right, let's get going.

Welcome back.

Um, any questions or anything anyone has before we start

for today?

No.

Okay.

Okay, so where are we?

We've spent the first couple of weeks going over, kind

of what I would term as canonical models that are

frequently used in trade and other fields.

So in particular, we looked at kind of quantitative trade

models that kind of built upon what we looked at

eating court and paper.

And then we talked about various ways of building on

the 1814 paper.

And then last week we talked about model firms, and

we looked mostly at the Mellett paper.

And then we looked at a couple of other, uh,

piece of work that build on that.

So this kind of what we've done so far gives

us a good grounding in some of the kind of

core technical material, um, in the field.

And as we will see, the ideas we've talked about,

and in particular the kind of technical methods the models

we've talked about in the first couple of weeks will

come up repeatedly at different points in the course, in

different contexts, which is why we go through them in

detail in the first couple of weeks.

But essentially, what we're now going to do for the

rest of term is we're going to shift to a

kind of more topics style course where, uh, you know,

each week we will think about a different, uh, a

different topic kind of sub topic within international trade or

regional economics more broadly.

So today, for example, we're going to think about, uh,

the consequences of trade for, for labour markets and for

the distribution of income.

And next week we will think about trade and growth

and the relationship between trade openness, innovation and knowledge diffusion

in a kind of dynamic, uh, context.

Um, in my final lecture, which will be the one

that's delayed till week seven, um, what I would like

to do is kind of use the lecture primarily for

student presentations, because I would like to get you guys

to kind of read papers and present them because that's

a useful, you know, it makes you learn a paper

in much more detail if you're going to have to,

uh, present it.

And it, um, also helps you develop your presentational skills,

which are absolutely crucial for as you go through the

PhD.

Um, I'm going to have to think a little bit

about exactly how we do this, because it's a bit

of a big group.

So I think we will probably have to, you know,

we'll probably have to put you into into groups to

do the, um, presentations for thinking about what material we

do the presentations on in that week, in week seven.

It would be useful to me to have an idea

of kind of what particular sub areas you're interested in.

So, you know, given what we've seen so far, given

what we're going to be covering in the rest of

the course, you know, if I have to ask you,

I'm interested in trade and what is the and would

anyone like to kind of volunteer interests.

The advantage of volunteering now is you will probably be

able to, uh, sway me to kind of assign you

presentations on these topics that you're interested in.

So I'm kind of like to know, you know, it

would be groups.

So not everyone will get exactly what they want.

But I'm interested in what areas you want to know

about.

Yes.

Trading environment.

Trading environment okay.

So this is yeah I mean this is clearly very

topical.

Um, and an important area.

Yeah.

Um, something trade and international related, maybe.

So I really also like developed model based type of

stuff that we did last week.

And if there's something that includes exchange rates, I'd be

super happy.

But I think.

You might have to wait till next term or, um.

But something that's based on like.

If you want some technical.

Okay.

Yeah.

Um, I'm interested in trading labels, so it's going to

be fun.

Building on this.

Okay.

So let's see what we do today.

Yeah.

Um, I'm interested in the trade in economics.

Okay.

I'm interested.

So what?

How do you understand the term geo economics?

Right.

Because it's a new term, right?

It kind of got invented a few years ago.

I heard about it, and I'm not sure, like.

Yeah, exactly.

I'm not sure if everyone understands the same thing, but.

So how do you understand what?

Geo economics.

Intersection between economics and international relations.

Okay, so the dimension of competition between states and strategic

terms and how it intersects with, uh, trade supply chains

and in general, information on economics.

Okay.

That seems like a reasonable definition.

I'm happy with that.

Okay.

Anyone else at the moment?

Okay.

So what I will do, I think what I'll do

next week is I will get you all to write

down your contact details and indications of what areas you're

interested in.

And then after that, I will assign you to groups

and I will give each group a paper.

And when it comes to week seven, the group is

going to present that, um, the paper.

Um, it would obviously be useful when we do that,

if you know, you are not going to be at

the week seven lecture for whatever reason, don't sign up.

Um, because for the obvious reasons.

Okay.

Anyone, anyone want to contribute anything else on that topic

before we move on to the lecture?

No.

Good.

All right.

So topic for today.

Trade and labour markets.

So as as I like to do I want to

start with a little bit of uh, kind of history

of ideas about, you know, how trade economists have thought

about the distributional implications of trade in the past.

And we're going to do that pretty quickly.

And then that's going to bring us to look at

how people think about these questions today.

So the main kind of history point I want to

make here is that traditionally, the way the field has

attacked the question of what are the distributional effects of

trade has been to focus on the wage distribution and

to focus pretty much exclusively, until recently, on, uh, dividing

workers into two categories skilled and unskilled, and asking, what

is the effect on the skill premium.

And the answer to that question has always been presented

in terms of the stock of Samuelson theory.

So if you took about any point taken undergrad or

master's international trade, you would, I hope, have seen the

scope of Samuelson theorem.

Um, it's a theorem that comes out of the old

model of factoring downwards.

And essentially it says if you've got, uh, two countries

trading and one of them has relatively more skip the

two countries trading, there's two factors of production, which we

call skilled labour and unskilled labour.

And there are no technological differences across countries.

So the source of cross country heterogeneity is just in

the factory environment.

If one country has relatively more skilled to unskilled labour

than the other.

So like the ratio of skilled to unskilled labour in,

say, the home country is higher than in the foreign

country, then when the countries open up to trade, firstly

the home country will have a comparative advantage in the

skill intensive good if we assume there are two goods,

one is more intense than the other.

And when we open up to trade, the effect on

the, uh, on the skill premium will be to increase

the skill premium in the more skill abundant country, and

to decrease the skill premium in the, uh, unskilled, abundant

country.

And, you know, if you've seen the earlier model, you

would have seen this kind of proof within the framework

of the model.

The intuition is pretty straightforward.

It's that if you're the relatively skill abundant country, then

the rest of the world is kind of skill scarce

with respect to you.

So when you're opening up to trade, it's like you're

entering an economy where there's less skill around and that

makes skills more valuable.

And that drives up the skill premium.

And for the unskilled, abundant country, the reverse is happening

as it's opened up to trade with the home country.

Skills are becoming more abundant and so that drives down

the skill.

So you get this prediction, that kind of skill premium

goes up in one country and down in the other

country.

Um, and if we think about it in a kind

of North-South framework or, you know, developed developing framework, we'd

expect trade to increase wage inequality in the developed country

and reduce wage inequality in the developing country.

So kind of mapped on, you know, that's a sort

of empirical prediction that as the north and south start

to trade more together, we see the skill premium go

up in the north and down in the south.

Right.

And because of the dominance of the ruling model in

thinking about international trade for essentially between the 1930s and

the 1980s, that was the predominant way that people thought

about the wage effects of trade.

Um, starting then really kind of early 1990s, um, as

more empirical data became available to actually study in practice,

what happens to wages when we liberalise trade?

There was kind of a wave of research.

It's nicely summarised in this.

You know, if you're interested in this literature, there's Goldberg

papers, a journal, I think Journal of economic literature paper

summarising a lot of the empirical literature on this question

or the early empirical literature, um, and basically making the

point that when people came to actually test the so-called

Samuelson theorem, they found it in most context.

Yeah, in most contexts it failed empirically.

Um, and it failed in along kind of two different

dimensions, each of which is individually important.

So firstly, it's not the case that globalisation has tended

to increase wage inequality in the north and decrease wage

inequality in the South.

I think making any kind of statement globalisation has X

effect on wage inequality is probably going to be controversial,

and there's going to be scope for disagreement over that

in a way there isn't.

If I kind of you want to say that globalisation

tends to increase, you know, aggregate efficiency and generate aggregate

gains, almost everyone is going to agree with that statement

on aggregate if you start making statements about globalisation has

some effect on inequality.

You need to be a lot more nuanced, right?

Which is another way of saying that the findings of

the empirical work in this area tend to tend to

be a lot more context dependent.

You know, it's not uniformly the case that it goes

one way or the other.

Um, that said, you know, there's certainly.

A reasonable amount of evidence that in many cases, globalisation

is associated with increasing wage inequality.

We'll look at some of that later today.

Um, but that seemed to the extent that that's true.

It seems to be, you know, as true in the

South as in the North.

So this fundamental role in the idea that wage inequality

goes one way in the north and another direction in

the South doesn't really get anywhere.

It doesn't get any support from the from the data.

So that's one way in which the Samuelson theorem failed.

And then another is that The mechanics of how the

prediction works.

Is that the reason, uh, wage inequality changes is shifts

in the demand for skill across industries?

Essentially, the skill intensive industry expands in the north and

it shrinks in the south, and that is what generates

the changes in wages.

But when labour economists in particular started looking at, you

know, well, how has, uh, demand for skill changed over

time and how has this been affected by trade liberalisation?

What they find is that most changes are not across

industries.

They're within industries.

And this kind of within within industry, changes in the

demand for skill is simply something that the Australian model

does not speak to in any, in any way.

So it kind of in that way, something about the

model in particular, the fact that it doesn't have this

within industry dimension, means it's really inadequate for talking about

what seemed to be the most important changes in the,

in the data.

Um, so there's this kind of rejection empirically of this

Just open submissions.

And what that prompted starting, you know, around about the

time this Goldberg paper was, uh, written, which was when

I was in graduate school.

Um, and a lot of people were thinking about these

issues was a re-examination of what are the channels through

which trade may affect wage inequality?

And it led to a wave of, you know, kind

of new models and also new empirical analysis, which in

one way or another, kind of took more recent developments

in kind of modelling of trade more seriously and then

connected them to the, uh, labour markets.

So to give an example of that, you know, one

of the strands which we'll see in today's lecture is

papers that think, okay, well, we've got this Mellis theory

about firms and trade and selection into trade in the

Mellis model we looked at last week.

All workers are the same.

So that model on its own has nothing to say

about the weight distribution.

Well, what if we introduce different types of workers into

a Mads model?

What are we going to learn?

Okay.

Um, so you can kind of think about this as

sort of more, uh, taking these kind of more modern

trade theories and thinking about wage inequality.

Um, the motivation for doing this is also kind of

built on a few additional empirical facts, which if you've

taken labour economics, you'll be familiar with many of these.

So one is that this firm size wage premium that

on average wages are tend to be higher at larger

firms.

Um, so if you're going to have a model of,

you know, firms and trade and wages, you're probably going

to want to have it consistent with that fact.

Likewise, the kind of international trade analogue of that is

that there's also an export to wage premium, which is

that if you compare wages at exporters to non exporters,

they're on average higher than higher exporters than non exporters.

And then you can kind of decompose that and say

okay, well, if on average the wage is higher at

the exporter, is that because of workforce composition or is

it because of differential returns to workers that are, you

know, either observable or unobservable?

Uh, the same.

Um, it turns out it's probably a bit of both

that on average, exporters tend to be more skilled intensive

than non exporters.

Uh, but also even if you conditional condition on observable

worker characteristics, exporters still pay higher wages than non exporters

to observable be identical workers.

Right.

So that's going to be another feature of you know

several of them are a couple of the models we're

going to look at today is mapping this matching this

export to wage premium.

Um and then kind of also just wanted to mention

a couple of empirical studies that were done using firm

level data to try and understand, you know, if how,

how the kind of wage distribution across firms, changes following

a trade liberalisation, um, or an export shock at least.

So there's a paper by Bruegel and another one by

Mary Amante and Don Davis.

Um, so Bahujan looks at the devaluation of the Mexican

peso in 1994.

So, you know, conceptually, he's thinking of this year.

The peso devalues.

That's a that generates a positive demand shock for Mexican

exports and particularly for Mexican exports from the United States.

So it's a demand boost for exporters.

And he asks what happens to our wages following that

shock.

And documents that you see wages increase.

But that increase is concentrated in more productive plants.

And because these more productive plants also had higher initial

wages, that tends to drive up wage inequality.

Right.

So it's some evidence linking increased kind of exporting to

increase wage inequality, but crucially purely coming from within industry

mechanism.

And then the, you know, the Amazon Davis paper, which

is about trade liberalisation in Indonesia, kind of reaches a

similar conclusion that following trade liberalisation, you see wages go

up and exporters and they actually find wages go down

at non exporters.

And that also drives up inequality.

So there was this sort of wave of these empirical

papers showing that even if we you know, if we

reject the Samuelson theorem and we think that there are

these kind of intra industry effects going on, and then

we ask kind of, well, okay, well, what are what

is going on within industries following trade liberalisation?

But certainly in this circumstance we see to see these

increases in in wage inequality.

Right.

And to some extent, this was an example of kind

of the empirical getting ahead of the theory.

At the time these papers were written, there wasn't kind

of theoretical models that could rationalise this kind of behaviour

were only just starting, uh, to be beat the battle,

but they kind of motivated a new wave of theories

trying to understand.

These different.

Facts.

Yeah.

What would be the reasoning of the decrease in average

wages of no obvious virtue?

Um, the explanation they give in the paper is that

it's the import competition.

So as the.

You know, trade liberalisation occurs.

Um, we talked about this a little bit in the

context of the Metis model last week, that the liberalisation

both is reducing export costs for exporters, but it's also

reducing import costs for goods that are importing.

So if you are a non exporter you're you know

you're very directly competing with import goods.

So as the imports become cheaper it's eventually a kind

of competitive shock.

And that is in some way affecting the firm in

a way that the increases average wages.

And I'm a bit vague at that last part because

the papers are a bit vague in that last part.

But we'll, you know, we'll, we'll see in the paper

or at least in one of the papers today, a

potential kind of mechanism of progression.

Any other questions at this point?

Okay.

So you know, where we're going is thinking about frameworks

for thinking about the relationship between trade and labour markets

that provide alternatives to the classic stopper.

Samuelson.

Um, and we're going to look, you know, we're going

to look at three different papers essentially in today's lecture,

which represent different ways of thinking about these problems.

Um, so one strand of kind of work has been

like working within a competitive labour markets framework, where there

is skill heterogeneity across workers and thinking about matching between

workers and tasks and workers and firms, and asking how

trade liberalisation affects that matching process and affects the kind

of competitive wage that we can look at an example

of that literature.

Then there's going to be another strand of the literature

which has said, okay, let's take, uh, imperfections in the

labour market seriously, and let's model labour market frictions and

understand how, you know, how wages are determined at a

firm level in frictional labour markets, which is also going

to, you know, once we have frictionless market is potentially

going to be a role for unemployment as well.

So unemployment into the picture.

So we're looking at an example of that.

And then there's been a third strand of the literature

which builds more on the, you know, sort of famous

empirical work by author Dawn Hansen on the China shock

and how the Chinese shock has affected local labour markets

in the US, and asks, what if kind of the

wage distribution we think about is not so much skilled

versus unskilled, but it's wages in different local labour markets,

different regions within a country.

How can we model regional labour markets and the effects.

Of the.

Special effects of trade in asset.

So we'll you know, this third strand of the literature

has a a spatial aspect to it, which we will

also, um, look at.

So specifically we're going to kind of competitive labour markets

paper.

We're going to focus on this work by Kostin and

Vogel.

Then we'll look at a minute Skokie and reading paper

on fractional labour markets.

And we'll look at the Caliendo Dvorkin Perot paper on

regional labour markets and the China shop.

Any questions before we kind of get going with that.

All right.

So we're going to start with this question on Vogel

paper.

Um, and I'm teaching you this course now, Vogel paper,

partly to show you kind of what's been done in

this sort of competitive labour market tradition, but partly also

because it is a very nice example of how to

work with, uh, assignment models of the labour market, which

again, I think is a kind of useful, uh, Take

need to have in your in your toolkit.

So we're going to see how they develop a matching

model between heterogeneous workers and heterogeneous tasks okay.

Um, the idea of these kind of matching models is

all about kind of comparative advantage across workers that workers

sort to those tasks where you have a comparative, where

they have a comparative advantage.

But because the, you know, there's going to be an

endogenous equilibrium matching function when you shop the economy, you're

going to shop both the matching function and then the

wage distribution.

So it leads naturally to thinking about how do different

types of shocks.

We'll focus on globalisation.

Shocks affect how workers match the different types of jobs.

And what does this mean for the, uh, the wage

distribution.

In addition, because these models typically have not just skilled

and unskilled workers, but typically actually have a continuum of

different worker types, it means we can talk about the

kind of distribution across the entire or the wages across

the entire distribution.

So our measure of inequality is much richer than just

thinking.

What's the skill premium.

It's like what the entire distribution look like, which is

nice.

Once you start to connect to facts like, you know,

wage, uh, polarisation that we saw, uh, in the US

and Europe in, in the 1990s and 2000, where you

see all kind of wages expanding at the top of

the distribution and compressing and or remaining stable in the

bottom half of the, uh, of the distribution.

So we're going to have this kind of extra richness.

Okay.

So plan of attack, we're going to kind of walk

through the basic assignment model.

Um, and this basic assignment is very general in the

sense that it could be applied to lots of specific

questions.

And then we will focus mainly just on how to

characterise the equilibrium, the assignment equilibrium and how we get

the wage distribution out of that, which is a little

bit technical, but it's kind of fun.

I think maybe you might not agree with that.

Um, and then we will talk about kind of talk

more briefly about kind of different ways of applying the

model.

All right.

So here's the setup.

There are Ell workers I think for now don't worry

about any kind of open economy features at the moment.

Just think that there's there's L workers.

Workers are heterogeneous in their skills and skills like indexed

by theta.

So L of theta is going to be the mass

of agents with skill S and theta.

Uh.

And this is going to be some distribution on support

theta lower bar.

Uh theta upper bar.

Uh it is we're going to assume there's no mass

points.

It is conceptually straightforward to incorporate mass points and technically

an absolute pain, because you have to kind of deal

with each of the point of discreteness separately.

So we're just going to assume there's continuous support.

Uh, I suppose this distribution with no mass points, um,

everything's observable, there's no imperfect information here.

And labour is going to be the only factory production.

As I said, this is a very much a competitive

model.

And this is what the technology looks like, which is

the key, you know, assumption in the in the model.

Um, so there's a single final good.

That final good is a SES aggregate of a continuum

of tasks.

We're going to call them here.

Uh, tasks.

There is a kind of isomorphism of this model under

certain circumstances onto firms rather than tasks.

But for now just think of them as tasks.

So the tasks range from z bar to set up

a bar.

A y of z is the output task.

Z epsilon is the elasticity of substitution between tasks and

b of said.

You can see it's kind of in here as a,

uh, a kind of supply shifter.

You want to think of it.

Essentially, it's the parameter in the model that captures the

relative demand for different, uh, tasks.

And in particular, it will end up being a way

to measure the skill bias of a country's technology is

particularly good to see.

So we're going to have this final group which is

the numerator.

And then here's how the individual tasks are produced.

So the output of each individual task is linear in

labour.

But then labour differs in its productivity.

So the output of tasks is we integrate over all

the different types of workers.

This is how many workers of type theta are employed

in tasks.

And so that's just the kind of linear quantity term

in the production function.

And then the psi is the productivity of type theta

workers in a task set.

And it's going to be the properties of this psi

function that will end up defining the, uh, the equilibrium

assignment.

I haven't happy with that so far.

Good.

So what what assumption are we going to put on

psi?

Psi is going to be continuously twice differentiable.

That's just, you know, makes our life technically easier.

Uh, but crucially, it's strictly log, super modular.

Okay, so if you haven't come across log super modularity

before, it is a strong form of complementarity between the

different inputs into a function.

So technically, what it's saying is that if you take

the log of the function and then you take the

cross partial derivatives, it's positive, right.

Think about this.

You know intuitively what it's saying is that the the

marginal product of each input is increasing in the other

input.

So the marginal product of scale is higher at higher

z tasks.

And likewise um, the marginal product of moving to high

z task is higher for higher ETA tasks.

Um, in terms of, you know, function, functional forms that

we used to if psi is a constant elasticity aggregate

of theta and z log.

So super clarity is equivalent to saying the elasticity of

substitution between d2 and z is less than one, right?

So Cobb Douglass is exactly on the boundary between log

super modular and log submodule.

Right.

And then once you've got stronger complementarity than you get

in the Cobb Douglass function, you're into the log super

modular part of the parameter space.

Yeah.

So that's I mean that's the setup of the model.

Right.

You see it's a very simple basic model.

And then the problem we need to solve is what

is the equilibrium assignment of workers to tasks.

And what is the distribution of wages across our workers.

So how are we going to do that.

Well we kind of start with profit maximisation by final

bids to produce and work backwards.

So, you know, the final goods part is straightforward because

it's just a CSS aggregate.

So you're going to get a standard constant elasticity demand

function for each are good.

So the you know demand for task said is a

function of the prices of tasks.

Then it's a function of this B parameter and it's

a function of total expenditure.

And then the more important bit is the profit maximisation

by intermediate input producers.

Right now here the technology is just linear.

So the cost of production is simply how many people

do you employ times the wage, which means the unit

cost of production is just the wage divided by the

productivity.

So it's going to be profitable for these producers to

produce whenever the value of employing one worker, which is

the price of the good times, the productivity is weakly

less than the wage.

You have to pay that worker, right?

And then the sort of tricky thing here is obviously

there's a continuum of different worker types data.

And both the price function P and the wage function

W are endogenous.

So the kind of trick in solving it is how

to characterise this assignment, taking account of the fact that

P and W are um are endogenous.

So at this stage, all we're saying is conditional on

the pa w if this thing holds, you're going to

have positive employment.

Okay.

And then we need to characterise the P in the

W to actually say, well which types of workers do

we have positive employment for.

Questions so far.

All right.

So here's the kind of key result on the assignment.

So what they show in the paper is that Under

this assumption that the productivity function psi is log super

modular.

The equilibrium assignment has to be such that there is

a strictly increasing matching function called T that maps worker

skill theta to task type Z such that you have

positive employment in a given task Z only for workers

of type theta such that t of beta equals z,

right.

So it's essentially saying there's one type of worker that

undertakes each task.

And higher type tasks are matched with higher skill workers.

The intuition for this hopefully is reasonably straightforward.

We said that kind of with this strong complementarity that

the log super modularity captures, uh, more productive workers are

relatively better at higher type tasks, and therefore, it shouldn't

be surprising that the efficient equilibrium is to have this,

positive associative matching.

Formally, the kind of formal proof of that result is

a little fiddly.

Um, and if you're, you know, if you're interested in

these types of models, I would recommend going and reading

the paper.

If you're not, I would probably just stick with the

intuition.

It works by kind of sort of.

You posit that you have the positive associative matching and

show it's consistent and show that you kind of have

a contradiction without the positive, a sort of matching.

Um, it really kind of reduces in the end to

proving a single crossing property of of two functions.

And the regularity conditions we received are sufficient, uh, sufficient

for that.

So we're going to get this positive associative match.

Right.

And that's then going to allow us conditional on the

matching function, to write down the output of each task

Z.

Note that at this point, we haven't actually solve for

what the matching function is, or we've said is it

has to be upward sloping.

In addition, we know the lower bound and the upper

bound because of the bounds on the distributions.

Right.

But we still need to solve for the kind of

a for t.

Any ideas of how we might want to do that.

What information haven't we or what equilibrium condition haven't you

used that is going to be useful for solving for

T.

In kind of market clearing conditions.

So I mean, if you think kind of what we

what we have done so far, we've done kind of

profit maximisation for the final producers and the intermediate producers,

and that's given us that we have this upward sloping

demand function and we've got the, you know, we've got

the final good demand from the creation.

Well, we haven't imposed any market clearing conditions in particular.

There's going to have to be a labour market clearing

condition here.

So the kind of additional condition which we will in

a moment impose is the labour market clearing condition, um,

which will then help us to solve for the, for

the team.

Before we do that, I want to say something about

the wage distribution.

And the key kind of observation here is that if

I'm a producer, if we come back to this produce

intermediate goods producers profit maximisation problem, think of this instead

as a cost minimisation problem.

So think of it as what is the minimum cost

of producing one unit of output of goods end.

Well, the cost of producing one unit of output is

the wage w over the productivity side.

So.

Right.

So it's this this ratio w over side right.

Now you're going to want to choose the worker type

that minimises that production cost.

So if we you know differentiate this with respect to

theta and solve for the minimum we get this expression

here.

Quick caveat on the way through the wage function is

itself endogenous.

So we can't just assume it's differentiable.

We need to prove that again that's a sort of

tricky technical, somewhat tricky technical proof that you can find

in the appendix of the, uh, appendix of the paper.

But it works out.

So what that then gives us the solution to this

cost minimisation problem.

We get on the left hand side this wage elasticity

here.

So we've got the elasticity of wages with respect to

theta is going to be equal to the elasticity of

the productivity function with respect to theta evaluated at the

z equals t of theta.

Right.

And the crucial point about this right is firstly.

The only endogenous kind of object on the right hand

side here is the matching function.

So that's telling us that the matching function is a

sufficient statistic for wage inequality.

So if you know the matching function right then you

can just read off the wage elasticity from here.

Right.

And the wage elasticity in turn determines the inequality in

wages across workers.

So one nice property.

And this is.

You.

Know most.

You know, kind of models we look at will have

some nice tractability property.

The nice tractability property of the model is that the

only thing you know need to know to solve what

happens to wage inequality is the matching function.

So the model is going to just reduce to as

we shop the economy what happens to the matching function.

And then when you know what happens to the matching

function you know what happens to the wages.

Then the second part of that is.

If we look at how shifts in the matching function

affect wage inequality, which is to say if we shock

z equals t of theta, what happens to the wage

elasticity.

So we take the derivative of this thing on the

right hand side with respect to the z equals to

theta.

Right.

What we get back is just a nice log super

modularity condition okay.

So what that's telling us is that if you increase

Z.

Then you increase wage inequality.

So not only is the matching function sufficient statistics sufficient

statistic for wage inequality, but we know that there's a

kind of monotonic relationship between shifts in the matching function

and shifts in, uh, in wage inequality.

So if we can characterise whether the matching function moves

upwards or downwards, we know immediately what happens to, uh,

wage increases.

Any questions or clarifications on that?

All right.

This is what we've just been talking about.

So we've got that.

And then we kind of come back.

As I said, we're going to use the labour market

clearance condition to solve for the matching function.

So what is the labour market clearing condition.

Remember the supply of labours of workers with skill less

than teachers.

Our data.

What's demand for worker was with skill less than theta.

It's the interval between z bar and tier theta.

So this is the range of task types that workers

with skill less than theta are employed in times the

employment of workers in each individual task type.

You know, this isn't a hugely fun equation because it's

got this integral here.

So we're going to differentiate it.

So we differentiate this expression to get this um and

what you've got now if you stare at this is

it's a first order differential equation for the matching function.

Uh t.

Right.

So if you look at kind of what's endogenous here,

you've got the top term.

You've got the wages w of theta.

But we already showed that conditional on the T you

know the W.

So this is just an equation for a sort of

differential equation in T um which you can then solve

to obtain the matching function.

Slight you know draw back.

This doesn't have a closed form solution.

It's convenient.

It's a very very nonlinear equation, very, very non-technical.

Um, so you can't solve this in closed form, but

what you can do and the kind of way they

do comparative statics in the model is you can say

for a given shock to the economy, what happens to

the solution to this equation.

Right.

And so the comparative static exercises turn on that.

If we shock the economy, what happens to this, uh,

to this equation.

And therefore what happens to the matching function once you

know where I am to the matching function, you know

what happens to waiting for it?

Okay.

So I want to give kind of yeah.

Like it just kind of walk through an example of

how we do that, just to illustrate how they do

use the model in in practice.

Okay.

So the particular shock we're going to think about areas

technological change.

So suppose we we said the technology parameter in the

model was this is b b of z.

And we're going to think about a shift in b

of z.

So b of z is going to change to b

tilde um where b tilde is going to be such

that the ratio b tilde z prime over b tilde

z is weakly greater than b of z prime would

be a z whenever z prime is greater than equal

to uh z.

Right.

So what this is saying intuitively is that, uh, the

kind of supply, the importance, the skill bias of the

technology is shifting towards higher, higher z tasks, which are

the more complex tasks.

So another way of thinking about that is, you know,

this is this is this sort of formally correct way

to define skill bias, technological change in this economy?

We have a continuum of task types.

right so we can think about that.

This is a kind of skill bias, technological change shock.

And we want to understand how does that affect the

the equilibrium.

Um.

So what they're going to show is that it shifts

the matching function, uh, upwards.

All right.

The way to we just kind of draw the match

function here.

Okay.

So we've got.

Theta on the x axis beta two theta I, I've

got z on the y axis going from z.

Bar to set up bar.

Suppose that's our original matching function.

T of theta.

Right.

I've drawn it.

There is it's linear.

That's a purely arbitrary choice.

There's nothing in the model that says it should be

linear.

Um, and then we're shifting, uh, b upwards.

The new matching function is going to look something like

that.

It's going to be.

Sitting above the old, uh, matching function.

Depending on whether the z and Z of themselves shift.

It may be that it intersects at the two ends

of the interval.

Or it might be that it kind of shifts up

at the two ends of the interval as well.

And either of those things is possible.

And then the question is kind of intuitively why is

that?

Right.

So we kind of stated we have this result on

the matching function.

If we come back to look at our equilibrium condition

that defines the matching function, can we stare at this

for a minute and work out why it is that

this skill bias, technological change is going to shift the

matching function on this?

Any thoughts on that?

Have a stare at this equation.

It's not like it's not the easiest thing to see,

but it's worth staring at it to kind of try

and convince yourself you understand what is going on.

Any.

Any ideas?

I mean, let's break this down.

Let's see if we can kind of like I mean,

first off, the underlying shock here right is to be.

So let's start by looking at what role B is

playing in this equation.

You can see it appears there in the denominator in

terms of b of t of theta.

So the first thing that moves here is that B

function.

How does it move what we said.

It kind of gets relatively bigger for higher z top.

So when t of theta is getting higher right.

So think about for example what it's doing at the

two end points Z low lying z up above that

B function is getting bigger at the z upper bar

relative to at the z lower.

As we increase the b function, what happens to the

slope of the matching function?

Increase it flattens.

Right?

Because you've got you're increasing it in the denominator there.

So you know all else constant.

And that is holding a lot of other stuff constantly

but all else constant.

As you increase the B you're flattening the matching function

that T prime is uh declining.

So what this shock is doing again all else constant

is it's tending to flatten the matching function at the

top and in relatively terms to steepen the matching function

at the bottom.

So no kind of in our drawing here.

That's exactly the way we've drawn it.

The kind of new matching function is flatter at the

top and steeper at the the bottom.

So that's sort of intuitively matches what's going on here.

Right now there are additional complications, which is why it's

not easy to stare at this and see what happens,

which is that, you know, as you move the matching

Function.

This term is also moving and this term is also

moving.

Um, what you can show, if you're so inclined, is

that as those two terms also move around, which is

the kind of endogenous response to the shift in B,

they do so in a way such that the the

new matching function cannot cross the old matching function.

Okay.

The reason being that if they intersect at any point,

then the T and the wage don't change because you're

at the same, you've got the same matching function.

So it's only the B that shifts, right.

And the shift in the B is telling you that

the new matching function must be flatter than the old

matching function, which means that it can't be crossing it

from above in this way.

So you can rule out that crossing.

And once you rule out that crossing, and you've got

this flattening at the top and steeply at the bottom,

the only thing you can have is that the ship

looks like that.

Okay.

So it's not again, it's.

It's a slightly different way of thinking about the comparative

statics, because the way you do comparative statics in this

model is not, oh, I've got the equation in closed

form and I inspect it and it's not I differentiate

the equilibrium conditions and solve kind of the solve the

total derivatives.

It's you know, everything is pinned down by this labour

market clearing condition that we differentiate it.

And then you kind of have to understand if you

shock it in one place, how does it how does

it move around.

Any questions on that.

Okay.

So this is kind of what we've been just talking

through here that this move, you know, shifts the matching

function around okay.

And then the question is okay, so if the matching

function is shifted up What's happened to wage inequality?

Right.

Well, that's immediate, because we know that when the matching

function shifts up, the wage elasticity increases.

And that means an increase in wage inequality in the

second order stochastic dominance sets.

So this upward shift in the matching function increases wage

inequality throughout the entire, uh, distribution.

So we get the very natural result that skill buys.

Technological change leads to an increase in wage inequality, right?

At this point, I think you might quite reasonably say,

okay, that was a lot of work to say that

skill buys technological change, increases wage inequality.

We could have shown that in a much simpler model

much more quickly.

And that would be true.

Um, the point of kind of working through this is

not so much to get that result, but to understand

how the model works, because we can then use it

to think about, you know, other shocks, and in particular

globalisation shocks, where it's potentially kind of less obvious what

the result is going to.

Uh, To be.

So let's let's look at an example of doing that

now.

So now we're going to go from one economy to

two economies.

Um home and foreign.

Final good is non-tradable.

Intermediate goods are freely tradable.

So this we're abstracting from any trade costs here.

Um.

And then the technologies are going to be identical across

countries, except that we can assume that the home side

is some proportional constant gamma of foreign side.

So if you know gamma is greater than one, that

home is more productive than foreigner everything.

And if it's less than one, it's less productive than

foreign everything.

So this is just a introducing sort of factor.

Neutral picks, neutral productivity differences across countries.

Um, no migration.

And then the crucial source of patronage, the skill endowments

and also the skill bias of the technology that is

the countries.

Uh, so first we solve for the free trade equilibrium.

The easy way to do that is to observe the

in this setting where there are no trade costs.

The free trade equilibrium is simply going to be equivalent

to the Or.

It's going to be the same as the integrated equilibrium

of a single global economy, whose practice supplies are the

sum of the factors right in the two countries, and

whose technology is a weighted average of the technologies in

the two countries.

So if we define the world technology as this constant

elasticity weighted average of the technologies in the two countries,

um, then the free trade equilibrium will be the equilibrium

of the world economy with this, um, technology.

I think it's probably if I just tell you that

it's not immediately obvious that that is the case.

The way you would prove this is you would write

down the equations of the free trade equilibrium, and you

would observe that they are the same as the equilibrium

conditions for this closed economy.

With this technology.

And the reason we are making this point is we've

already done a bunch of work on how to solve

the closed economy equilibrium.

So if we can characterise the free trade equilibrium in

terms of the equilibrium of a closed economy, we can

leverage everything we've done previously when we analyse the effects.

Of trade shocks.

I'm happy with that.

The other point to note is that when we have

this kind of integrated equilibrium and, you know, we're seeing

it here, but this, this concept of the integrated problem,

if you read the old kind of rolling trade models,

it comes up a lot in them.

So it's kind of a common when you're thinking about

trade models where factor endowments differ across countries.

It is often the case that the easiest way to

calculate the open economy equilibrium is through this kind of

integrated equilibrium of the global economy.

Um, and what what we're also getting into creates equilibrium

is there's a form of factor.

Price equalisation results in inefficiency units, which means kind of

adjusting for those gamma differences.

We talked about factor prices are the same in both

countries.

So under three trade factor prices are equalised everywhere.

Um so now let's ask how do technology differences across

countries, uh, matter for when we open up to trade.

What are the kind of way effects on wage inequality?

So let's let's think about the home country as having

a skill bias technology relative to the foreign country.

Where for it to be skilled biased.

That's those kind of relative differences in the feed that

we've already talked about.

Okay.

Then that also means home technology will be skilled biased

relative to the world technology and reverse performance technology.

So when we move from autarky to the open economy,

it's like we have skilled buyers, technological change at home

and unskilled bias, technological change in the foreign, country?

No, the other way around.

Sorry.

Skill buys, technological training.

Foreign and unskilled bias.

Technological change at home.

Right.

And that's convenient because we already know how that affects

the wage inequality.

Because it's what we just did over here.

So what this is telling us is when we open

up to trade between these two countries, um, wage inequality

is going to go down at home and up at

up in the foreign country.

So when the only difference between countries is the skill

bias of their technologies, okay, you can see this thing.

Give us a prediction that kind of in a similar

way to something.

We get wage inequality moving in different directions in the

two countries.

So that's sort of a starting point which uses the

results we've already looked at.

And then what they do in the paper is they

consider kind of a wide range of other, uh, comparative

static exercises comparing opening up to trade and comparing looking

at shocks to the global economy.

because, you know, what are the consequence of factoring down

the difference across countries, skill buyers, technological change.

And they look at our offshoring.

I'm not really going to spend any time talking about

these different results.

But, you know, the model is a convenient one for

thinking about this.

What I do want to just to finish up on

this topic, what you could also do, and this kind

of links back to what we were doing last week,

is now let's call our tasks firms, right?

And let's have a version of the metrics model where

there is heterogeneity that the Z's are equivalent to the

productivity heterogeneity that we had across the mallets, across the

firms in the mallet model last week.

And then workers, instead of being homogeneous as they were

last week, have this skill heterogeneity.

So we kind of combine the assignment model that we'll

be looking at this morning with the firm heterogeneity model.

We look at last week and ask what happened.

How does trade affect wage inequality in that context?

So there what you're going to get is first, the

more productive firms, the higher z firms matched to the

highest skilled workers.

So you're going to get heterogeneity in worker type across

firms.

And that heterogeneity is going to be such that the

bigger firms, which are also the exporters pay higher wages

because they're more skilled intensive.

So in that sense the model is going to be

consistent with the, uh, findings we talked about that firms

wages are increasing in firm size and that hired exporters

than non exporters.

And then you can ask okay well what happens if

we open up to trade.

Right.

And remember in the management we get this kind of

reallocation effect where the big firms expand and the smaller

firms shrink.

The way that plays out in terms of our matching

function is your increasing the demand for skill, because the

exporters are the Moscow intensive firms.

So the effect of trade in that model is to

increase the demand for skill, which shifts up the matching

function and tends to increase wage inequality.

And crucially, it does that it would do that kind

of both in the North and in the South.

So by combining these kind of assignment models with a

fixed type model, you get a framework where, um, regardless

of trade between kind of identical countries or between north

and south, the mechanism that generates tends to increase wage

inequality, um, in both countries.

So it provides a different perspective on kind of relationship

between trade and wage equality.

Then you would get in a Samuelson, uh, type model.

And if you look, for example, at this recent Grossman

Hultman paper, which also builds innovation into the model, that's

the mechanism they have there to get these kind of

richer relationships between trade and, uh, and wage inequality.

Any questions on that?

Yes.

Um, I don't think I've fully understood like what is

the connection between having a skilled, biased, uh, economy or

a one country that is more skilled biased with the

metric function?

Yeah.

So is there, like, a clear connection or so?

Sorry.

Just ask that question again to make it so I

can make sure I understand it.

Yeah.

Maybe another way to ask is when there's like a,

when there's a skew bias technological change.

Yeah.

Does that necessarily make the, um, the magic potion go

from the lower one to the upper one?

Yes, yes.

I mean so so yes.

I mean, it makes it go up the where exactly

I've drawn it is arbitrary, but it has to make

it go up.

And I kind of give you two reasons that the

intuitive reason is as technology is becoming more skilled biased,

you're there's kind of increased demand for skilled workers.

And that means that for a given a worker of

a given type, they end up matched with a more

advanced task.

So you can see the the shift up in the

matching folk.

You're saying that a worker of a given skill level,

they're now working in a more complex task.

And and so intuitively that's coming because there's more demand

for skill.

And also necessarily is there a 1 to 1 relationship

with the the tax and the wage associated with it.

Yes yes yes.

So yeah.

Exactly.

Right.

And you know, that's a prediction of this particular class

of models rather than, you know, more general.

But within this class of models, it is both that

you get this uniform shift in the matching function, and

that the matching function is a sufficient statistic for the

wage such that the matching function shifts upward.

You get more wage inequality.

I'm confused because this is what would be happening in

the home country.

The skill of bounded country.

Yeah, right.

Uh, no.

No, this would be what happening in the foreign country.

Okay.

Because and this I mean, I made this mistake as

I was talking through.

So let's just make sure it's.

Yeah, it's it's slightly.

Right.

So if the home country.

is has a technology that is skilled biased relative to

the world technology.

So know that the difference is not, um, that that

factoring down into difference is that they have different technologies

and there's more demand for skill from the home countries

technology.

So when we shift from kind of having the home

countries technology to having the world technology, from the home

countries perspective, there's now less demand for skill.

And that shifts the matching function downwards.

And in the foreign country the opposite happened.

So in the opposite, um, sorry, the only country what

is happening is the opposite of yes.

It would be something like this.

Okay.

So what I can't understand is why inequality increases in

both countries then.

No.

So in this case it doesn't okay.

Right.

So and so and but let's be careful.

So in this case where we're assuming the only difference

across countries is the skill bias of the technologies as

you open up to trade technology, uh, inequalities go up

in the foreign country, down in the whole country.

The case where it went up in both countries was

when we then kind of plug this into a mallet

type model, right where you have the, uh, firm heterogeneity

in the selection street, and then you get kind of

a different mechanism operating.

Right.

Yeah.

So sorry if that was confusing.

Um, that's on me.

I think, you know, the broader point is the.

The details of what happens to inequality will depend on

kind of exactly how we embed this assignment process into

a larger model.

Right.

Um, but however you do it, what matters is what

happens to the matching function.

It's just what happens.

The matching function will be different for this kind of

skill.

Bias technology, comparative static compared to kind of a maritime

comparative static or compared to some other.

Okay.

Yeah.

Can we try to uh, I mean, I am a

bit confused on what skill bias technological good change is.

So is there an increase in productivity for occupations or

tasks which are higher skills, or is it a demand

shifter?

Formally, in the model.

It's this.

B parameter which you can think of.

I would think of it as a supply shifter rather

than a demand.

If it's given some given amount of output of tasks,

how much does that contribute to aggregate output?

So when B and z goes up, it's like task

Z is contributing more to final output.

So the skill bias technological change, is there going to

be that the kind of high z tasks are getting

bit kind of contributing more than.

Anything else at the moment.

All right.

So that's kind of we've looked at this kind of

Cosmo Vogel assignment model.

Let's take a break here.

And then we're going to come kind of come back

and look at a different way of thinking about the

labour market.

Yeah.

If you if you march in this civil war and

fall in for the winter and I don't something to

unemployment is not if.

You continue to assume that the labour market is.

Competitive.

Because as long as the labour market is competitive, you're

going to get kind of full employment to the degree

if you want it to speak to an employment, you

also need you need some reason why you had some

friction.

And so in order for like that skillset.

Yeah, that's not a lot.

That would be.

Enough you need because even with the entry costs in

the model, the labour market itself is.

Competitive.

So you would need some friction.

So it's like search or whatever it is.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

For these conclusions to call your task to be substitutes.

I don't think.

So.

I mean, I'm coming for more of a structural change

right now where the primary result is if, like, agriculture

and manufacturing, both, uh, complements, then, uh, productivity.

Right.

Yeah.

In agriculture decreases the demand for agriculture.

So in that case, I was thinking of something like

I said, that increased automation happening, which is sort of

a skill based technological change that would decrease the demand

for workers in that area.

So then inequality would actually decrease.

I pretty confident that that doesn't happen.

To you.

Here.

I just want for the outcomes.

We've been talking.

About.

It may be that there is some outcome.

So typically right, whether it's only bigger or smaller, more

matters for things like kind of revolutions or.

Cost shares.

And whether they go up or down.

So it may be this for I mean, I would

expect to control whether the cost of shares go up.

And that would be shocking.

That's going to matter.

But so how do matching function moves?

I don't think it does matter.

Right.

Because the thing I was just checking is that the

Epsilon here is its Cylon.

Affirmative.

Cylon Mine is the one here.

It would matter if there's any sign of minus one.

That's not the.

Key.

Yeah, so I feel bad because.

It's the sign on the show that they're not the

Upsilon minus one.

I don't think it's.

Really affected by the technology.

Don't you think the technology will gain the scale of

what's streaming before you go to the chamber?

I don't want to.

Go back, that is for sure.

For sure.

The scale of the workers.

How we ask our workers.

Premium and all.

This technology and technology is probably a top quality junior.

Role.

It's just a skill.

That's the thing that.

So you can.

See all the skill and skill.

Skill Campbell has to go back to this time.

You need, you need.

To scale the skill that he's got there.

You never know what you've got a skill with.

I don't.

Know what happened.

I need a sense of scale.

You know, like the psychology, technology, that magic.

And skill that give somebody a skill based on us

to go about just.

Go.

Back.

To what?

You see.

Okay.

Okay.

Okay.

I'm sorry, but I think it's just a touch on

the issue.

Relatively skeletal in the water distribution system.

Well, that's the technology.

That holds the sample for the most of you.

Know children?

Relatively.

Someone didn't say how to make sure you don't have

to do much.

Yeah, so don't be shy.

So just go.

There you go.

So.

Basically, you know.

All these things, and you just feel bad for me.

Probably doesn't have anything against you.

Okay.

That's interesting.

So let's go.

Back and talk about kind of his recent talk with

you.

When you look at what you have done with that

one.

I was.

I was actually I was a bit kind of surprised.

So thank you for that.

Yeah.

I mean, I guess the.

Situation is.

It's hard to imagine Japan has developed what it might.

I mean, all right.

Should we go again?

Yeah.

Does anyone have any additional questions about what we talked

about, uh, before the break?

Oh, yeah.

Sorry.

Yeah, yeah.

It's the opposite to a stop sign.

Um.

Yeah.

So it depends on exactly what kind of exercise you

do.

If you do, if within the casino Vogel model, you

do the kind of equivalent to the Samuelson type exercise

in that model which say you let factor in downloads

differ across countries, and then you open up the trade,

you actually get an equivalent result in stock assignments?

I mean, the wage inequality goes down in the scale

of London country and up in the scale, uh, uh,

skill scarce country.

So simply the the framework itself does not affect change,

the sort of assumption, type result.

What the framework does, though, is it allows you to

think of a kind of richer set of comparative statics,

some of which change, some of which deliver a different

relationship between trade and wage inequality.

And that was the point I was trying to make

with kind of if you embed this in a metric

type model, you get a very different set of results.

So it can potentially give a different answer to the

question, how does trade affect wage inequality?

But if you do the sort of the closest exercise

to the sort of the same exercise in this model,

because, you know, a similar result.

So obviously here you've got a distribution of worker types.

So it's been really the same pattern since.

Um, Sometimes I get a bit lost in translation.

So could you briefly have, like, an historical view of

how the models progress over time?

Could you maybe recap that?

Like what was the contribution?

Like in what sense is this different to what they

did before?

Like what are they still like not understanding.

So the key kind of contract or the key novelty

in this model is characterising the equilibrium assignment of workers

to tasks, while maintaining sufficient tractability to be able to

then use it in an open economy, generally in context.

So in that sense, it's quite a it's a text.

I think the the main theme from this paper is

the technical contribution about how to solve the assignment problem.

And then the work that more the work that builds

on this paper has said, okay, now they've solved that

technical assignment problem.

We can combine that with, say, the ML model in

a way that provides new answers to the effect of

trade or wage inequality.

Any anything else?

Um, yeah.

And you mentioned like a specific like equilibrium type.

I think I've never heard of the like the integrated

equilibrium, but have a solution concept.

That would survive.

So it's an idea from trade, from international trade that

under certain circumstances.

The three trade equilibrium.

So the equilibrium where you have two or more countries

trading with no trade costs, is isomorphic to the equilibrium

of a single closed economy.

Who's either their technology or their factor?

Endowments are some sum or average of the ones in

the individual countries.

So it's kind of a way of mapping the free

trade equilibrium to an equivalent equilibrium of a closed economy,

which is often used there, a circumstance in which that

is a useful thing to do to understand.

Okay.

All right.

So for this part of the lecture, we're now going

to look at an example of the strand of literature

that thinks about the role of labour market frictions and

their kind of interaction with international trade.

So this is kind of another way of, you know,

particularly thinking about the role of firms and the and

the labour market and kind of, you know, in some

ways what we're going to do is we're going to

integrate medic style firm heterogeneity.

You'll see the the model we're about to look at

very directly builds on the Maddox model.

But it's going to combine that model with a frictional,

uh, labour market in particular, is going to be a

kind of search and matching frictions out of Diamond Mortenson.

Uh, PC3 so it's going to be an example of

how you can, you know, on a technical level, it's

how can we combine these two things while maintaining, you

know, as always, in if you want to do international

economics, you need an up track ability to be able

to talk about general equilibrium in some way.

So by maintaining that track ability to do general, uh,

equilibrium.

And then we're going to, you know, what are we

going to use the model for.

We're going to say, okay, well, what does this tell

us about how trade affects the ah affects the wage

distribution.

Um, now the, you know, obvious challenge with this literature

as kind of whenever you move away from perfect competition

is, well, what how exactly are we going to model

the imperfect nature of the competition?

Right.

So in the same way as in product markets, once

you go away from perfect competition, it's like, well, is

it monopolistic or oligopolies?

Is patriarchal know or monopolistic competition?

Once you start to think about frictional labour markets, there

is a vast literature identifying all the different types of

many different types of frictions that can exist in our

labour markets.

I've listed some of them up here, but this list

is far from, um, exhaustive.

But you know, the point here is not necessarily to

argue about which of these frictions are most relevant or

about kind of all, the different frictions you can have.

But to say that if you want to model a

fractional labour market, you are going to have to make

some choices about how what exact frictions you choose to

model, because it would be unwise to try and stick

all of them in a single model.

You just end up with a mess.

Um, so you have to make some kind of model

selection choices at the start about how am I going

to set up, uh, my model?

Um.

particularly motivated.

We talked at the start by that Amity and Davis

paper, which very much kind of cast itself in a

kind of imperfect labour market context.

So sort of coming from that, there had been a

large number of recent papers thinking about, okay, how do

we put frictional labour markets in trade models, particularly from

trade and firms are models.

The one we will focus on is this harmonic Scott

Redding paper where the friction is the search matching, uh,

frictions, which provides a kind of particularly kind of nice

way of doing it.

But if you prefer other types of labour market frictions,

you can go and find in the literature.

I would imagine, a model that has your preferred type

of, uh, of friction.

But let's talk about how they, uh, do it in

this, this work by holding this book in reading.

Um.

Kind of.

You know, before we go through the details, what are

we looking out for here?

Right.

On the one hand, the building block here is a

medical model.

So partly we revising the medical model from last week.

Right.

And we're remembering how we model firm heterogeneity in that

framework, how we model entry costs, how trade leads to

these reallocation effects.

So we're going to have all of that going right.

And then we're also going to have Diamond Morton's and

pastry to search matching frictions which I expect you've all

seen in macro.

Um, and then we're going to kind of see how

we can combine the two, uh, in a fairly clean

way.

So I'll walk through the assumptions.

But please, kind of, you know, ask questions as we're

going through as of when stuff is unclear.

So we're going to have two country model home and

foreign.

There will be asterisks on foreign variables.

Uh, we are going to focus on the case where

the home and foreign country are identical.

Let's just start with okay.

So there's no asymmetries across country.

So we really ask them kind of what's going on

within each country, um, workers are going to be ex-ante

identical and they're going to be risk neutral.

So, you know, big departure here from Casino Vogel, where

it was all about the differences in worker skill type

here, as in, everyone at least to start with is

identical.

So what we're going to be interested in is how

workers who are observable be identical end up getting paid

different, uh, amounts.

Right.

And so there's going to be some rent sharing and

equilibrium.

We're going to be interested in how that rent sharing

works.

Also the the risk neutrality assumption here is meaningful, right.

Because the fact that you start off identical, but you're

going to end up on different wages means that there

is some actual kind of a meaningful stochastic risk element

here.

So we, you know, worker behaviour will in principle depend

on their risk preferences.

We are simplifying life by assuming there is neutral.

Um, and we're going to focus on kind of a

single sector.

If you then want to embed this into kind of

general equilibrium with one sector or with more than one

sector, you can't do it.

It's not what drives the results we care about.

In this module we are see as embedded CSS demand

continue.

Differentiable varieties are here one over one features the elasticity

of substitution across varieties and a is the sector level

demand parameter.

So when I said we were thinking about sectoral equilibrium,

kind of what I really mean is that this A

is exogenous, right?

We take that A is given and that there is

some higher level problem where we solve for how much

expenditure is allocated to this sector, which determines the A

in general equilibrium.

But you know, for what we're doing, it's not that

A that is really crucial.

So our merits if you want to set up a

firm you're paying an entry cost.

The entry cost is f e.

And then when you draw pay your entry cost you

draw a stochastic productivity.

And here we're going to use that convenient assumption we

saw in the paper by Sini last week that when

you draw your productivity it's drawn from a Pareto distribution.

So in particular, the distribution of firm types of data

was skill type.

Before the break is no firm type of distribution of

firm type.

Data is coming from this parameter distribution with lower band

beta min.

And then once you've entered, there's a fixed cost feed

of producing for the domestic market and a FX of

exporting and a variable I spoke trade cost tab.

So these are, you know, all these assumptions about firm

entry and fixed costs and trade costs.

They're all exactly as in Malick's last week.

On the technology side, the firm's output is given by

this equation here.

So you can see it depends on the firm's productivity

level.

Right.

And in minutes this would just be theta times L

the number of workers you employ right here.

We've got a slight twist on that.

We've got that.

It depends on H which is the number of workers

you employ.

But with their decreasing returns to scale in age, but

then it also depends on your average ability of your

workforce.

Eh?

Okay, so why are we doing this?

This average ability, we're going to kind of come back

to this and exactly where this comes from.

But this is how we're going to kind of capture

the exposed differences across workers.

So we'll come back to to that.

But think about it's kind of capturing something about how

well firms are matched with workers.

And then the the decreasing returns to scale.

Right.

That assumption kind of is going to be useful in

solving them all.

But the way they think of that is it's kind

of like a Lucas types.

This isn't a Lucas banner control model, but the motivation

for having the gamma less than one is similar to

in a Lucas span of control model, right?

Remember, a Lucas banner control model is about, uh, a

firm where you've got a manager and managing a bunch

of workers, and the manager has a time constraint.

So the more workers he has to manage, he's spread

more thinly across workers, and that reduces the firm's productivity.

And that introduces concavity into the firm's production function.

They're thinking about something similar going on here.

As you employ more workers, the managers time is being

spread more thinly.

That introduces the decreasing.

Returns to scale.

Okay.

So then yeah, the most important action is on the

labour market side.

So how are we modelling these labour market frictions.

So it's a search model right.

So you're searching for workers and you have to pay

a search cost.

So if you want to match with a measure N

of workers you pay a search cost B times n

in equilibrium.

This b that will be endogenous.

And they'll be determined by their Mortenson search matching function,

where you have the kind of ratio of vacancies to,

uh, to kind of people searching for jobs.

Okay.

So at some point you're going to want that be

to be endogenous.

But for now, just think from the firm's perspective at

least, the firm just takes that as a parameter which

determines the search cost.

And then you match with these n workers.

And then when you match with the workers, each worker

draws a kind of match specific ability, which determines its

productivity at working at a given firm.

So what they're trying to capture here is the idea

that sometimes you're hired by someone and you have a

good match.

You fit well with your team-mates your particular skills are

a good fit for what the firm needs, and you're

very productive at that firm.

And other times that is not, uh, the case.

Now, I just kind of rationalised that through saying what

kind of intuitively some jobs would fit better than other.

Another way of kind of looking at that more empirically

is to say that if you run like misery and

Syrian type wage regressions, and you regress log wages on

worker characteristics and firm characteristics and a residual right.

Part of what's going into that residual is like the

work of firms.

Right.

So you've got the sort of classic ecosystem worker characteristics

account for some shared wage variation.

Firm characteristics account for some share, but they don't account

for all of it.

And you know, part of what you can what you

can put in the residual is a work of firm

match term.

And that's also part of the variation.

And it's this work of firm match term that they're

really focusing on on on here.

Specifically again they're going to use this kind of convenient

predictor distributions.

They're going to assume your worker firm match ability is

drawn from a distribution.

So we're going to label that A.

And this distribution has lower bound a mean and shape

parameter k.

Crucially, you don't know your match before you match with

the foe.

Okay.

Um, this is both kind of sensible because we think

about it as being the kind of it's not it's

an unobserved Pi.

It's not.

It's not correlated with the workers type or any of

the workers observable characteristics.

It's just something about the particular match of the firm.

And you don't learn how good you are at a

particular firm until you're actually being employed there.

So it's unobservable, um, ex-ante.

And this ability, if you leave the firm, you lose

it.

So you can't carry it from one firm to, um,

another.

So that's one part of it.

The workers have these match abilities, match specific abilities.

Moreover, from the firm's perspective, these match specific abilities are

imperfectly observable.

Okay, so the kind of hiring manager of the firm,

when they match with these N And workers that they're

searching for, right?

Ideally, what you want to do is the hiring manager

is kind of okay for each of these end workers.

Be able to observe.

Do I have a good match or bad match?

And I keep the guys with the good match and

drop the guys with it that match.

However, yeah, if you think that this is something you

kind of only learn slowly over time, and maybe when

you're working in teams, uh, learning the contribution of each

individual worker is difficult.

So they're going to model this as being imperfectly observable.

And in particular, they're going to assume that you just

get a signal about the ability of each worker.

Um, so if you you invest in screening, um, and

you pay a screening cost CAC to the delta over

Delta, and what that screening cost allows you to do

is to just observe which workers have ability below the

city.

So think about this as like you're given the.

The firm is able to give the workers a test,

but all the tests can do is tell if you

don't have a particular skill, he can't tell you.

Kind of conditional on having the skill how good you

are at it.

So the idea is this, this test, if you invest

in this screening, it's costly.

But if you do invest in it allows you to

observe which workers are below some threshold.

You can choose that threshold that ABC is a choice

variable firm, but it allows you to observe the ability

below that threshold.

Um, and then, you know, you could choose not to

hire those workers if they don't have high enough ability.

Questions on that so far.

Okay.

So then let's think about the firm's kind of hiring

employment decisions and the different trade offs the firm faces.

So suppose I'm a firm and I want to scale

up.

I think I've got a good product, I've got a

good productivity draw.

I'm a high theatre firm.

I want to increase my output.

Here's our production budget.

If I want to increase my output, I can't change

data.

Right.

That's just I drew that at the start.

I can increase output though, either by increasing the number

of workers I employ, H, or the average ability of

those workers a so the kind of trade off the

firm is facing is if I want to increase output,

do I do it by employing more people or by

employing better people?

And what's crucial for this model is how that trade

off differs depending on, you know, firm size, which is

to say depending on on theta.

So in particular, because we have this decreasing return to

the number of workers high the age to the gamma

term.

You can't simply increase output, or there are decreasing returns

to increasing output by hiring more workers.

So naturally, more productive firms want to be bigger.

Just as in matters remembering merit, you're more productive.

You're going to be bigger.

So as a more productive worker firm, I want to

be bigger.

So the natural way to do that is to increase

the number of workers I employ increase h.

But as I do that, I run into this decreasing

returns problem.

And so because as I scale up, I run into

this decreasing returns problem that increases the incentive for me

to instead try and raise the ability above.

And the way I raise worker ability a bar is

to screen my hires more effectively.

Remember that screening costs depend on AC, and if I

pay a higher screening cost and raise AC, I can

observe all the workers below AC.

I can fire them and that will increase my average

ability.

So what you're going to get is that the the

more productive firms will invest more in screening and have

higher average ability, uh, workers.

So as I, as I get more productive, I do

employ more workers.

But I also at the same time employ higher average

ability workers.

Now, why does this I mean, why are we doing

all this?

What they want to get to like, is a model

where the the wages that workers end up being paid

differs across firms.

And we started with a world where all workers are

kind of ex-ante identical.

Okay.

By introducing these match specific ability differences.

Right.

Then you're, you know, you're generating, uh, productivity differences in

practice across workers.

But firms don't observe your productivity except for observing whether

you're below or above a C.

So from the firm's perspective, if I hire you, if

you pass the screening test, all the workers are the

same.

But the more productive firms because they end up hiring

higher average high average ability workers, we'll end up with

kind of more productive works on average.

And that's going to mean they're going to end up

paying higher wages.

So that's kind of where this machinery is driving at

is kind of a rationale for why we're going to

end up seeing wages differ across firms and differ across

firms in a way that is crucially kind of correlated

with productivity.

Any questions on that so far?

Yeah, just a question on the timing.

Did they choose to enter before they start hiring?

Yeah.

So you pay you pay the entry cost?

Yeah.

You draw your productivity, you match with workers, then you

do the screening and then you choose which workers to

buy or hire.

So it's sort of apex in this country.

Selection of exporting companies to begin.

Thank.

Yes okay.

Any questions at this point.

Yeah.

I think you said that, um.

Identical workers mean that they're all drawn from the same

distribution for every country.

It doesn't mean that the same skill is not.

Yeah, exactly.

They're all drawing it.

When the workers draw their ability, everyone draws from the

same, uh, distribution.

And before you draw from that, no one has a

signal of what they're going to, whether they're going to

get a good.

Draw or a.

Bad.

So, crucially, we know where that matters in the modelling.

Is that the point?

You hire the worker, you don't know anything about whether

this is a good or a bad work.

It's not like you can look at the workers CV

and say, this person went to LSC.

They're good.

Um, you know nothing about them.

Or so one way is to read it as you

know nothing about them.

Another way is everyone who applied to me came from

LSC.

But some of the people might end up being better

match if I don't know that until I see.

Yeah, I also have always discrimination.

For example, if you identify workers with ability below and

then maybe we can pay them lower wages by not

hiring.

So in practice I agree that would be principle.

In principle I agree that would be possible in practice.

I said.

Um, we haven't got to how wages are set yet.

When you do, you will see the way they issue

the wages.

Then there's more.

That's not possible.

Um.

The reason being that.

Are they going to?

The wage increase is going to imply that they end

up paying everyone who works at the firm the same

wage.

Right now, you could generalise that clearly.

Right?

So that's not what they're focusing on.

Anyone else.

Right.

Why do we get to work straight.

Okay.

So we kind of talked through the intuition for the

trade offs the firm faces.

Um, and then we talked through the indices.

Yeah.

We talked about the intuition.

If you want to actually formally solve them on this

where the cost no go the model quite complicated.

So this model once you made the all the assumptions

is actually very straightforward to solve.

You just write down standard profit maximisation problems.

All the functions are concave.

You're going to get closed form solutions for everything.

So I'm not going to go through the details of

that.

But it is.

It is straightforward.

There's nothing technically complex here.

What you will find if you do that Is that

conditional on the screening threshold AUC, the number of workers

you will hire will just be the number you match

with n times the share that are above the screen

ratio.

So this maps our screen threshold to the number that

we hire.

It also gives us the average ability.

Right.

So this is just the expected, uh, the expected value

of operator distribution above AC.

So that that allows us to work right.

Firm output as a function of how many workers and

our screening threshold.

So now what we've done is we started off with

the kind of primitive production function which was as a

function of how many you employ H and uh, average

ability, a bar.

And we've transformed that in terms of the N and

the AC, which are actually the kind of variables that

the firm directly chooses.

Um, we're going to assume that gamma k lies between

0 and 1.

Remember gamma was the returns to scale in the h

function, k was the dispersion Fashion parameter in the workers

ability draws.

So we require that that is less than one to

ensure that the firm has an incentive to screen.

Because K is greater than one, that means gamma must

be less than one.

So why did we assume that we had decreasing returns

to scale at the start?

Because otherwise this inequality wouldn't hold and then you'd have

no incentive to screen.

Which is to say, if you have no incentive to

screen, what it means is I just hire all the

workers that I match with because the returns to scale

are strong enough that you've got no incentive to replace

quantity with quality as you get better.

Okay, given this, um, you can then do kind of

profit maximisation and get the firm's revenues exactly as it

melts.

Right?

Each firm is selling a differentiated variety.

There's monopolistic competition between firms.

So you're just going to charge a constant mark-up over

your marginal cost.

And that will give you your revenues.

Okay.

And then the kind of one bit we haven't come

to yet his wages.

So how are we going to determine wages in this

model?

Right.

Since we have a fractional labour market, it constantly be

the case that workers are paid their, uh, marginal product

because in this environment, once a worker has been hired.

Right, they're in a relationship with the firm.

They're not perfectly substitutable.

The worker outside the firm.

I want to fire the worker and replace them with

a new worker.

There's a cost to that.

So the worker has some bargaining power relative to the

to the firm.

There's kind of a bilateral monopoly type relationship there.

So you know, as is standard in these models, there's

going to be wage bargaining between firms and uh, and

workers.

Uh, the wage bargaining will occur once all the kind

of fixed costs, the fixed production, exporting, search and screening

costs have been paid.

So what's the point that the kind of worker is

specific to the firm?

That's when the wage bargaining occurs and they're going to

bargain over the firm's revenues with outside option that the

worker gets fired and gets nothing from, uh, unemployment.

So the complication here, right, in a sort of modern

sense, is you have one worker per firm.

So you just have kind of bargaining between the worker

and the firm.

And that's straightforward to solve.

The complication here is now we have many workers matching

to each firm.

So we can kind of need a generalisation of the

standard Nash bargaining protocol to the case where we have

many, uh, many workers.

The idea they use the kind of bargaining protocol they

use is this one due to stolen and swiped.

Does that get taught in the micro courses at the

moment?

Anyone seen this before?

No.

Okay.

That's fine.

Um, if you're interested in wage bargaining, this paper is

beautiful.

It is extremely theoretically elegant and is well worth reading

to understand more about wage bargaining.

The idea is to use the Shapley value.

Now do we do this in micro?

You don't.

You don't do the shopping bag.

It's in WG.

You guys should be doing this.

Um, okay.

So the Shapley value is the solution concept for cooperative

games.

The idea.

Um, is essentially, you know, if you have multiple participants

in a game bargaining over how to split a pot.

The Shapley value is a specific solution concept that satisfies

certain axioms about, you know, if two participants make symmetric

contributions, they should get, um, symmetric payoffs and sort of

various other, uh, desirable uh, Properties.

In practice, intuitively what it says.

Right.

So man you've got N players and you line them

up in order.

Right.

And you start off with nobody's playing the game.

And so the payoff is zero.

And then you add one player and you say, okay,

if this just this one person played by himself, what

would the payoff be.

Right.

And that's their marginal contribution to the payoff.

And then you add the second player and you say

if you go from just having that first player to

the second player, what's their marginal contribution.

And so you go through each player and say what's

their marginal contribution.

Right.

And that gives the marginal contribution of each player, but

it gives it conditional on a particular ordering of players.

Right.

And then you permute over all possible orderings.

Right.

So if there are n is like some kind of

n factorial number of orderings.

And you take that average marginal contribution over all possible

orderings, that's the payoff they get using this Shapley value

idea.

So what Stalin's foibles show is how to kind of

apply this to work of firm wage bargaining.

Right.

And that's the solution concept we're going to use in

this paper.

Right.

The crucial, oh, you know, kind of thing to know

here right here are pay.

Our players are our workers.

We've got um, each of them and the one firm.

And crucially, in any kind of coalition that doesn't involve

the firm, the payoff is zero.

Because if the firm's not there, you get no payoff.

So if you have this ordering and there's a worker,

you come before the firm, your marginal contribution is zero.

And then the firm comes and it makes a really

big marginal contribution because now you can actually produce stuff.

But then the additional workers that come after the firm

also make a smaller marginal contribution.

Right.

And so you average that over all orderings with the

firm and kind of all the different positions.

And it gives you a way of measuring kind of

what is the worker's marginal contribution to this coalition of

the workers of the firm.

Um, so I'm just sort of doing this intuitively because

it would, you know, it takes a while to go

through it, uh, technically, but it's a nice way of

solving, um, cooperative bargaining games.

Uh, we're using it here for work of firm bargaining.

If you read like the literature on incomplete contracts, this

Shapley value idea comes up a bit in the incomplete

contract literature as well.

There's a nice, uh, Acemoglu and Hultman paper which uses

it to think about technology adoption.

So again, it's just, you know, be aware of it.

It's worth kind of, uh, knowing that in this particular

context, if we implement this tolerable idea and we take

marginal contributions over all the different orderings, what we'll get

is that the firm gets some fraction of revenue, which

is one over one plus beta gamma.

Uh, remember here, beta was the demand elasticity and gamma

is the returns to scale.

So those tend turn out to be the two parameters

that determine how important the firm's marginal contribution is, and

the other one minus one over one plus beta gamma.

So that's beta gamma over one plus beta gamma fraction

of the revenue goes to the workers.

But remember from the firm's perspective all the works are

identical.

So each worker gets paid the same.

And so there is a simplification here that because the

screening test only identifies workers below a threshold when it

comes to this bargaining, even though some workers are more

productive than others, the firm doesn't know about that, so

they all get paid the same you can.

The actual still survival paper allows you to have kind

of asymmetry across workers, but that's not being used here.

All right.

Any questions on this.

It's a little bit of a kind of diversion from

the main thrust of the paper.

But I think it's also something it's worth you being

aware of it.

It might be useful in future.

Yeah.

So white firms bargaining power is decreasing the gamma because

our AC is higher.

The form can have multiple.

It's because if gamma is higher, the marginal contribution of

each additional worker is higher because there are weaker returns

to get stronger returns to scale.

Like if if you think of gamma being very small.

Am I getting that right?

Yes.

If gamma is big, right?

If gamma is big, each additional worker contributes more because

the decreasing returns to scale are less.

It's kind of instead of going like this, you're going

like that.

So the marginal value of adding a worker is higher.

So the worker's marginal contributions are higher, which means that

the workers get a bigger share of the pot relative

to the firm.

Does that make sense?

You're looking not completely convinced.

Okay.

Yeah.

The general question is the result on how ex-ante identical

workers.

Get different and sensitive to that particular form of bargaining.

Is this the key way that they're delivering the results?

So, so which results specifically.

The wage of equality, of otherwise excellent performance?

I mean, so it's certainly provided any bargaining protocol which

ends up with kind of the workers getting some traction

and the firm getting some traction is going to qualitatively

have the same predictions about wage inequality at the end

of the day for this paper.

So the fact that it's one over one plus beta

gamma here, rather than some other fraction isn't going to

be crucial for anything we do.

If you had a solution Where the fraction depended on

firm size.

So here the fraction is constant regardless of how you

start the equilibrium.

If the fraction changed with firm size, then potentially you

could get different results and I can't.

I can't think through quickly enough exactly how that would

change depending on the bit, but it's kind of.

The fact that this doesn't depend on firm size is

potentially important, right?

The fact that it's one over one plus beta gamma

not.

Yeah.

Because I guess like if you think about unionisation how

difficult it is to unionise.

Yeah.

Have firm sizes.

Yeah.

So I certainly wouldn't want to make the claim that,

you know, the qualitative results they're going to get in

this paper are completely independent of how the workers and

firms Advanced bargain, but at the same time it's new.

I, I would hypothesise that there is there are alternative

bargaining protocols that would deliver quality signals.

Okay.

Any other questions.

At this point yet?

So just to go back as it is.

So right now whenever you add a motor you add

additional output.

But if they're splitting a fixed policy begin with then

since starting from the second person it's all zero output,

right?

So say that one again to make sure.

So if the cooperative game is that like they're splitting

a fixed part, then the first person you add him

and then that's like the.

Whole oh yeah yeah yeah.

Yeah.

Exactly.

If regardless of how many you had the pot was

the same.

Then just whoever came first would kind of contribute the

whole pot and everyone else would contribute zero.

Right.

And in that case you'd end up evenly the shock

value solution to that game would be if there were

n players would be everyone gets one over N.

Yeah.

No, I mean, I guess one other thing to say

on that though, is like for for this particular case

where we're thinking of firms hiring workers, it is very

natural to think that each individual you work, you hire

makes some marginal contribution to the overall, um, output so

that the marginal contribution of the additional players is zero.

Okay.

Um, so we you know, at this point, we have

kind of talked through all the main ideas or the

kind of key assumptions in the model, and it's now

just a case of kind of bringing them together to

actually solve for the equilibrium, and then to use that

to understand how trade affects wage inequality.

So we'll go over that a little bit more quickly,

hopefully now that we understand what's going on.

Um.

So the firms kind of profit maximisation problem, right, is

to choose how many workers you match with and to

choose your screening threshold and to choose whether you enter

each market to maximise its profits.

And it does this kind of anticipating how the bargaining

game is going to play out and how the kind

of screening test will work on average, because here we

have a continuum of workers.

So there's no kind of aggregate uncertainty in the effect

of that test.

And you know, as in as in merit, this will

generate thresholds such that there's kind of a cut off

above what you enter the domestic market.

And then another Cut-Off above which you enter the export

market and will denote those cut-offs b to D and

d to x.

Okay.

Um, so then what the solution of this profit maximisation

problem will give us is functions that map the firms

type to how many workers they are match with what

their screen threshold is and the wage they pay.

Um, and it is straightforward and kind of intuitive given

what we've already talked about.

But if you have higher typed data, you're going to

match with more workers or you're going to hire more

workers, are you going to have a higher screening threshold?

Uh, you're going to pay higher wages.

Um, and you will also be more profitable.

And crucially, and this will be important for the inequality

result, all these functions are going to have a discontinuity

at the export threshold.

So they're going to jump discontinuous upwards at the export

threshold.

Can anyone see intuitively why that is.

Think about me.

Start by maybe just thinking about how many firms you

match.

So how many workers you match.

Why are we going to see an upwards jump in

the kind of firm size, measured by employment at the

export threshold.

Because once you reach that threshold, you're going to have

more demand.

And then you want to hire more people.

So yeah, and they're kind of the key addition is

that like you're going to have like a finite jump

up in demand because of the fixed export cost.

So if there was no fixed export cost, you could

imagine a world where when you start to export, you

start very small, and the marginal guy has zero workers

that they're using to export.

Right.

But here, because you pay the fixed export cost, the

marginal guy is selling a positive discretely kind of positive

amount in the export market.

So when you go from being a only serving the

domestic market to serving the export market.

There's a jump up in employment, and that would be

true in the baseline model as well.

If you look at firms employment in the metals model,

it kind of goes up gradually.

And then you hit the export threshold.

It jumps up discretely.

Right.

And in this version, because employment is jumping up, everything

else jumps as well because they're all interrelated.

So you get these jumps not just in how many

workers you match with and how many you highballs and

your screening threshold and then the wages.

Remember, what we've just showed is that wages are a

fraction of revenue.

So as the firm size jumps up, your revenue jumps

up.

So your wages also jump up.

So you get this discrete jump in wages comparing non

exporters to exporters.

And you can see this is going to be how

they match the exporter wage premium in this model.

Um, okay.

I want to kind of go over this briefly, but

one kind of issue that might come up here is

since firms pay different wages, the workers have an incentive

to direct their search towards firms that pay higher wages.

We said these workers are risk neutral, but, you know,

they want to maximise their income and everything's observable here.

So why don't workers direct their search effort or just

apply to firms that pay higher wages?

Right.

It's because in equilibrium in this model, the firms that

pay higher wages also have higher screening thresholds.

So there's also a higher chance you just get fired.

Right.

So you can think of this is this is kind

of like an investment banker pays a very high salary

but also fires half of its workforce each, each quarter.

And the expected wage is going to be the same

across all firms.

So that's the kind of sense in which the equilibrium

is sort of consistent with workers.

Workers could in principle direct their search, but they don't

care which firm they are.

They match up with their expected wages in the same

firms.

Note also, the workers that do get fired here end

up unemployed.

So this is also a model.

We're not talking about it, but this is a model

where some workers where there is unemployment.

And you can ask how does trade affect unemployment.

Okay.

So then to finish off on kind of this paper,

let's ask what it has to say about wage inequality.

Right.

So first off why do we have wage inequality even

though workers are essentially identical.

All right.

It's because you match with different firms and then having

matching funds you get different ability draws.

And so some firms that get bad match specific worker

productivity are fired and they just end up unemployed.

And even conditional on passing The, uh, screening test at

your specific firm.

You then are paid a wage that depends on the

productivity of the firm that you're matched with, because you

get some share of that firm's revenue, and that revenue

differs from others.

So we get wages that end up differ, uh, across

across firms.

And that gives us wage inequality.

And then how does trade affect that wage inequality.

Well here's the wage function plotted as a function of

productivity.

So the closed economy wage function is this dash three

green line.

You can see it's continuous.

And then when we open up to trade the blue

line is the wage function with trade.

So firstly note it has this discontinuity the export threshold

that we just talked about.

Right.

That's this jump here.

This is because firm revenue is jumping up there which

causes the jump in wages.

Um and also note it's kind of shifted upwards for

the exporters and downwards for the non exporters.

So this is kind of like that Amity Davis result

we talked about at the very start where they found

that following Indonesia's trade liberalisation uh wages increased at exporters

and decreased at non-experts.

This model um can have a similar property I say

can because it's not guaranteed to actually the the level

of this wage function, in particular the level of this

wage function in real terms relative to prices, uh, is

not in when it could go up.

It can't go down, but it could all go up.

Um, but certainly, you know, what you're seeing here is

that this discrete jump here is increasing wage inequality between,

uh, firms.

What is it fun to export and workers that firms

that don't export.

So we're getting as we move from or talking to

trade wage inequality goes up.

Right.

And I'm kind of showing that graphically.

Formally right.

This distributions the distribution on along each of these things

is perito.

And so you can do the calculations and you can

show that that is indeed the case.

Now we'll ask a slightly different question.

Imagine we were already open to trade, and we would

use the variable trade cost for what's going to happen

to this wage function if we further reduce trade costs.

And what will that do to wage inequality?

Any thoughts on that?

Yeah.

Sure.

The discussion moved to the left and comes up.

Yeah.

It's moving.

Yeah.

So the threshold the first thing to know as you

say is this the threshold at which the jump occurs,

the threshold that's going to move down to our intuition

here.

Exactly the same as it matters.

As you liberalise trade the actual threshold declines.

So the jump in moving to the left.

And it will also get potentially a yes, it will

get smaller because the.

Revenue that happens to be um.

No.

I mean when.

No it wouldn't.

No, it's not necessarily going to get smaller.

Uh, because what you're also doing, if you've increased the

variable trade cost, is you're increasing exports for firms that

do export, which tends to push up the gap between

the revenue of exporters and and non exporters.

So I think the size of the gap.

I would need to look at uh yeah I can't

immediately tell you what happens to the size of that

gap.

You need to look at the actual equation okay.

If you if what you decreased was the fixed export

cost, that would shrink the size of the gap.

Because as you decrease the fixed export cost, the kind

of marginal export to get smaller and that shrinks.

Yeah, that's what I think the question.

Yeah.

No, that's all right.

Um.

So that so the wait function is kind of kind

of a move that way.

So you're going to have more people in the export

firms and fewer in the non export.

But um, and then the question is what happens to

wage inequality.

And I think if you think about this for a

little bit you'll realise that it's actually ambiguous because on

the one hand you've kind of got a if you

move the gap you're shifting who's on the lower section

and who's on the upper section.

But how that affects wage inequality depends on kind of

what share of people were on the two sections originally.

And it turns out that if you plot wage inequality

as a function of we've jumped over this bit here

as you if you plot wage inequality as a function

of trade openness, you actually get this hump shape relationship.

So here we have kind of we've got like autarky

on the left and then, uh, perfect openness on the

right, completely open free trade on the right.

And you can see initially as you're about to trade,

wage inequality increases, but then at some point it starts

to decline.

And the kind of the reason it starts to be

fine is because you reach a point where most of

the firms are exporters.

So as you add more firms to the set of

exporters, you're actually kind of shrinking dispersion in the in

the wage distribution.

So you get this prediction of this kind of class

of models is that increasing trade liberalisation first raises and

then shrinks wage inequality.

Questions on that.

Okay.

Let me just check.

We covered so quickly on.

Yeah.

So I mean we've done it.

Look at graphically the slides kind of talk more formally

about how you can characterise these changes in uh in

behaviour.

So the boundary condition one um, so that's kind of

the main things I wanted to say about this model.

Just a few additional observations to finish off.

Firstly we focussed on its predictions for wage inequality because

that's what we're focusing on today.

There is unemployment in this model as well, and so

you can also use it to study how trade affects

unemployment.

The answer to that tends to be kind of the

answer to that is not unambiguous.

So depending on the details of the model, depending on

how the search and matching function work, depending on how

you embed the industry and general equilibrium, you can get

different effects on unemployment.

So there's no clear trade raises or lowers.

Are unemployment result that comes out of this?

The second then is to kind of mention there is

a follow up paper where they add a fourth co-author,

Mark Mundell, where they take this model.

So the original paper, the econometric paper is just a

theory.

And then they have this follow up paper where they

then estimate the model on Brazilian data.

So they use match worker firm.

Employment Match worker firm data from Brazil.

The race data that you will probably have seen used

in many development papers.

Um, and they use it to kind of structurally estimate

this model.

And they make kind of two important arguments in that

paper.

One is that the fit between the model and the

data is pretty decent in the sense that when you

look at the distribution of wages and employment across firms

and how they related the prediction of the model, do.

Okay.

Um, and then the second is that if you want

to explain these kind of employment and wage distributions, the

model does much better when you account for the fact

that these, you know, in their model, you have these

exporters who pay these higher wages than it does.

If you do, you run a restricted version of the

model without exporting.

So kind of wanting to argue that accounting for the

international dimension.

In terms of the firms that select India.

Exporting is important for the fate of the model.

What they also do in that paper is they try

to kind of quantify when they fit the model.

Are we on the upward sloping or the downward sloping,

uh, part of the curve.

And I think, as I recall correctly, I think if

I was somewhere around there on the curve, so, you

know, towards the hump, but still at the point where

increasing trade liberalisation or further increasing trade openness would further

increase, um, inequality.

That said, you know, if you wanted to critique this

paper, one obvious comment would be, um, you know, we

have focussed here on a very specific labour market friction,

the search matching friction.

We have, as it's been pointed out, have a specific

wage bargaining, uh, protocol.

How robust are these predictions to alternative, uh, labour market

frictions?

Right.

So there are lots of other people thinking about different

labour market frictions.

Um, some of them are the kind of the general

hump shaped relationship between trade and inequality shows up in

lots of different these frictional labour market models.

That's quite a common prediction.

But some of the, you know, the details of how

it works can be very, um, very different.

In addition, you know, the the empirical kind of follow

up paper is a nice addition to the theory, but

it's not a kind of model where the key is

not a paper, where the key idea is to kind

of causally identify with the mechanisms that operate in the

paper, are actually existed, you know, operating the data as

well.

So there's kind of a space for more empirical evidence

on which of these questions are important.

Uh, so as well, we.

Uh, useful.

Any before we have any kind of additional questions on

this paper.

All right.

Let's let's take a Steven Blake.

Okay.

Let's get onto this one.

Okay.

I.

Because you might be fired.

So?

You might just end up getting fired from somewhere.

And so.

Yeah.

That's how it works out, actually.

And even though the way that two of.

You might say.

Control.

Over.

Your estate?

Yes.

All right, let's, um, let's do the final part of

the lecture.

Okay, so continuing to think about trade and labour markets.

This final paper we're going to look at is about

the, uh, China shop.

So I'm going to assume most of you, um, if

you haven't read, are kind of familiar with the basic

or third on Hansen research on this, which says that

US local labour markets, which were more exposed to Chinese

import competition during the 1990s and 2000, experienced worse labour

market outcomes.

Along a wide, uh wide range of uh indicators.

This, you know, this finding.

Has sparked renewed interest in.

Understanding the relationship between, on the one hand, trade liberalisation.

And, you know, specifically how we think about import competition

in the US from China and local labour market outcomes.

So it has sparked a wave of research.

Um, that kind of introduces a regional element in terms

of actually explicitly modelling local labour markets within a country

and then seeks to understand how trade shocks, specifically import

competition shocks, affect our local labour markets.

And obviously the original author, John Hanson work is essentially,

you know, empirical if in different, uh, regressions.

What I want to show you is kind of one,

uh, attempt to understand the general equilibrium effects of this

shock across local labour markets using a structural model of,

of trade.

So it's kind of, you know, how can we build

on the empirical findings reported on Hanson to discipline our

structural models and to better understand the spatial consequences of

trade.

So we're still thinking about sort of wage distributions here,

but now we're more thinking about kind of wage distributions

across across space.

Um, so this paper we are going to look at

is this paper by Caliendo for Contemporary Econometrics Thousand and

19.

Um, it very much builds on the caliendo of Perot

paper.

We, we looked at in the quantitative models lecture.

So if you remember that calendar and power of paper,

it took each one quarter and it extended to kind

of have multiple sectors, uh, to have intermediate inputs.

And it showed how we could do counterfactual analysis in

that model using the exact hat algebra, where we solved

the modelling changes rather than levels.

And the advantage of solving the modelling changes rather than

levels, was that we didn't need to calibrate all the

parameters of the model, such as the technology parameters and

the.

Trade off parameters, and we can simply condition and observe

trade levels.

And that allowed us to do the calibration.

So what Caliendo, Dvorkin and Perot are going to do,

building on the earlier calendar, Karabakh is kind of extend

their quantitative framework to include a spatial dimension, right.

Where the spatial dimension will be, as you could anticipate,

local labour markets.

But then, crucially, they're going to allow for endogenous migration

across labour markets.

So it's simply calling different economies in the Caliendo model

local labour markets.

That would be easy, but it doesn't add much.

What this paper adds is we're going to have multiple

labour markets in the US, and then workers are going

to make migration decisions across these labour markets so that

then when we do the the counterfactual in this model,

the counterfactual is going to be the China shock.

They're going to calibrate the counterfactual system.

Shock kind of replicates what.

We see going on and on.

And so we're going to ask.

Given the response to this shock, not just on the

supply side, but also on the migration side.

And in terms of worker reallocation, what does the model

tell us about the general equilibrium Interim effects of the

China shop on different local labour markets and different sectors

within the US.

Right.

Crucially, you know, this is going to allow us to,

you know, where the author, Don had some results.

Very insightful then necessarily partial equilibrium in the sense that

like any difference in differences estimation, there's a missing intersect

issue that if you want to aggregate, you have to

make some assumptions about what happens to the essentially the

the unaffected local labour market here.

You know, the advantage of the structural modelling is going

to be that in general equilibrium, the model is going

to tell us what happens to that unaffected labour market.

Of course, the cost of doing this is we're no

longer simply going to be causally identifying effects or attempting

to identify effects.

We're going to rely on the structure of the model.

So in that sense this is a nice paper to

kind of think about some of the trade offs between

reduced work and structural work, and how sometimes, you know,

how we get kind of different results depending on we're

thinking partial equilibrium or or general equilibrium.

Okay.

Um.

This is another paper where the model is quite technically,

um, complex.

Here the complexity is not so much that any individual

part is difficult.

It's just there's a lot of moving parts because you

have the whole kind of trade input output, multiple sector

structure from Caliendo and Parrot.

All right.

And then we're going to layer on top of that

the regions the local labour markets and the migration decisions.

And that means you end up with a lot of

different, uh, moving parts.

So we're not going to go through kind of all

the equations of this model.

But what I want to show you is kind of

how they model the migration decision, because it's going to

be, uh, you know, a useful example of one approach

you can use to modelling migration and frictional migration and

how they kind of calibrate that part of the model.

Then we'll look at the results that gets us to.

So you know, the trade input output that's coming from

the power.

We've seen that we're not going to talk about that.

What we're going to talk about is our migration.

So each they're going to what they call a labour

market here will be an industry region combinations.

They're going to be multiple industries, multiple regions.

And the combination of those two things will define labour

markets.

And crucially you can migrate.

But there are frictions to that.

Um, so we're going to set up this migration problem.

And then what we'll see is they, they, they build

a version of it.

We have this exact hat algebra if we're doing counterfactual

analysis and the category of our model.

And we said it was very convenient in this paper,

what they're going to add is a dynamic version of

this.

So this is going to be a dynamic model where

people migrate over time, and they're going to have a

dynamic algebra that will allow us to solve the kind

of transition path and the migration problem over time without

fully calibrating the model.

So once again, it's going to be.

Let me just shut that window.

Um.

Oh, yeah.

That's a bit better one time.

Yeah, we will not any longer be in a building

site.

But anyway, it'll be.

Um, the kind of contribution to this dynamic algebra is

that, again, it's reducing the information set you require to

do counterfactual analysis.

So it kind of has the same advantage that the

exact hat algebra had in the under power model.

And it's, you know, able to do it along the

entire transition path, which is why this paper ended up

in econometrics, is a very nice technical contribution.

Worth noting.

Also, you know, it can do this whole kind of

dynamics without ever having to be in steady state, which

is very unusual in these models.

So let's talk about the migration, um, decision.

It's fundamentally a dynamic, discrete choice problem where each period

workers are choosing, do I want to stay where I

am now or do I want to migrate?

And if I migrate, there's a cost.

Um, part of that is kind of a frictional moving

cost.

That's the same for all workers.

But then there's also an idiosyncratic cost, uh, shock, which

is differs across workers.

And this idiosyncratic element is going to mean that different

workers that start in the same place will make different

decisions.

Um, they argue in the paper that these idiosyncratic shocks

are kind of a desirable feature of the, the model.

Um, you know, I kind of think what's going on

here, essentially, the idiosyncratic shocks are going to be very

convenient because they're going to make help, make the model

solvable.

So they want these idiosyncratic shocks in there for modelling

reasons.

But you know, if you have to make an assumption

for a modelling reason, it's good if you can also

provide an economic rationale for the assumptions that this is,

that their rationale for it is that if you look

at migration flows, gross flows are much bigger than net

flows, which is to say, workers move in both directions

from New York to California and from California to New

York.

And the net flow might be quite small, but there

are big gross flows each period.

And in the model, the reason they get those kind

of they can match that with these big gross flows

is these idiosyncratic shocks.

Someone living in New York gets a job offer in

California and move to California, and vice versa, even if

in the kind of net effect is, uh, is there?

All right.

Here are the actual equations.

We're going to look at index locations by I and

N, right?

Think of a location as a labour market.

So in the in the end it's going to be

a region industry combination.

Right.

But for now just think of it as a location.

Um.

What's your value function.

So this is the value of a household in location

and a time t.

It's the utility I get consuming in location n at

time t.

Um, this utility function is going to be a log

function, and my utility is just going to come from

wages.

So I'm going to earn wages in the labour market.

Um I will buy goods.

Um there are trade costs here.

So the price the price of goods differs across location.

So what matters for utility is the real wage.

Right.

But that kind of real wage is going to come

from the supply trade part of the model that we're

not focusing on here.

What we're focusing on here is the migration decision.

So I get my utility from consuming in location n

today.

And then looking forward I have to decide do I

move next period?

So what I'm maximising here is over all the different

locations I can move to I to one to n.

What is the expected value of being in location in

x period minus the moving costs?

So these are the common moving costs from moving from

moving from I to N.

So bilateral moving costs.

Plus this is the idiosyncratic shock.

So it's person R a person specific for moving to

location I.

Right.

So these idiosyncratic shocks are coming to this island.

And we're going to assume here's our convenient functional form

assumption coming in epsilon is type one extreme value distribution

which is say it's a Gumbel distribution.

All right.

So remember when we did each and quarter what brought

us tractability was the Fréchet distribution of productivity.

Shock and pressure is type two extreme value.

It turns out when you're doing these migration decisions, what

makes it convenient is to have a type one extreme

value distribution, which is this, uh, Gumbel distribution.

I think we have the functional form here.

Yes.

This is a dumbbell distribution.

It's a sort of double exponential.

Um, I've never worked with a Gumbel distribution personally, so

I don't have a good intuition for kind of how

this for the sort of properties and behaviour of this

functional form.

But this is the distribution function and, you know, like

a Fréchet distribution because it's an extreme value.

It's an extreme value distribution.

It is the limit of certain stochastic processes.

So as when we talked about Frechet, we said if

you're taking kind of repeated productivity draws over time and

you take the max under certain regularity conditions, you will

get to a fresh a.

Similarly, if you are again taking repeated draws and you

take a max, you can get to a gumball under

different regularity conditions.

So that provides a kind of way of potentially rationalising

using this distribution.

But in practice, you know, the more the kind of

more important reason for using is it gives us the

tractability we want.

Um, note the parameter new here, which is kind of

scaling the idiosyncratic shock.

New is going to end up being an important parameter

for how responsive workflows are to these shocks.

So it's kind of like a migration elasticity which ends

up being an important parameter to calibrate.

In the model.

Any questions on this basic setup?

Yeah.

I was wondering if there's a reason why I didn't

do discrete time heterogeneity of workers by education.

Because there's this transition.

Yeah, I mean, it would add another layer of complexity.

I don't think there's any reason you couldn't do it.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah, like I don't I don't think in that I

don't think you lose track ability.

You just add another subscript.

Yeah.

So that would be a I think.

A straightforward extension.

Um one okay.

So I'm this is a guess I, my guess is

why they don't do that is when it comes to

calibrating the model, you require data on migration flows between

these local labour markets.

And if you want to add different worker types, you

would require that migration flow data by worker type.

I'm not.

If that's not readily available that's going to be a

problem for that.

Okay.

Sorry.

Can I also ask about this inelastic supply of labour.

Like it comes up a lot in spatial models.

Yeah.

but what?

How do you think about it when some shocks do

change labour supply?

Based on empirical evidence.

I think that in circumstances where that is happening, you

could make a good case that you should write down

your spatial model with some kind of fresh elasticity in

some kind of labour supply elasticity.

So I mean, I think it's again, it's an assumption

of convenience that kind of simplifies the model slightly.

If you think you are, if you think you are

modelling a situation where in practice there is a big

labour supply elasticity, you're going to want to in some

way adapt the model to have that.

Um.

Okay.

My get I'm not sure I, I would guess that's

not too difficult to do in this class of models.

Again, I'm being a bit vague because I haven't worked

with this class of models, so I don't have like

a complete feel for what you can or can't do

about breaking the tractability.

But I don't see any reason why that, um, would

be a problem.

The other thing you can do in some papers do

is you make one of your local labour markets, unemployment,

and then one of the flows into or out of

unemployment.

And that's kind of a novel way of getting it.

Essentially there is a labour supply.

Okay.

And that's just so there is it's certainly worth bearing

in mind that often in these models, there is a

lot of scope for redefining what exactly N maps to

in the data.

Okay.

So this is the problem the household has to solve.

We're just going to spend a few slides kind of

talking through how you solve this problem.

Because this is the sort of key additional component compared

to the previous calendar power paper we looked at.

Um, so given this maximisation problem, the first thing we're

going to do is we're going to take expectations of

both sides of this.

So when we do that, we're the big V is

going to be the expectation of the little V, so

the big V is the expected value of being in

the R location.

Right.

So that's equal to the expected value of this thing.

Right.

And this utility this this straightforward component.

We don't need to worry about that.

Uh, but you do need to worry about kind of

solving for this thing because here's where you're getting your

idiosyncratic shop for your gamble.

Shop for each of the different locations.

So in particular, what we need to solve for is

this phi n t, which is the expected value of

this stuff.

And this is where the gamble functional form comes into

play.

Because for this particular functional form we can compute that

expectation okay.

So in particular you're computing this expectation over this epsilon

right.

You're integrating over this epsilon.

And you get this uh solution for phi n t.

Right.

No.

We've got this new turning up here.

We said that was a key parameter.

Watch how it keeps floating around.

And then you've got the phi n t depending on

the log of some, some of the kind of value

of being in each different location, subtracting off the migration

logs.

So kind of what this is saying is that the

the value of being in location n at time t

has a component, which is.

A kind of an aggregate of the value of being

in other locations at time t plus one accounting for

how much does it cost to move from n to

I.

Right.

But this is in expected terms because we've integrated out

the idiosyncratic shock here.

Um, now that we've done that, we can then obtain

expressions for migration flows between each pair of regions at

each time.

So we're going to let mu be the fraction of

workers that go from I to n in period T,

um.

And since each worker right, the workers here are homogeneous,

given the conditional on location at the conditional location at

the start of the period, everyone's the same.

So the fraction of workers that move is also equal

to the probability that an individual worker moves.

Right.

Um, which is to say, what's the probability that the

best option you have next period accounting for your shock

is in location I, which is to say that what

you get in location is greater than equal to what

you can get in all the other locations.

Right?

And again, solving this just means integrating out these Gumbel

shocks, which gives us this same expression.

Right?

And note this is essentially or it's a component of

the expression we previously had in the fall.

So these terms these x for beta v minus tau

they keep showing up because they appear whenever you integrate

out this uh Idiosyncratic shop.

So note now that the the migration flows kind of

depend on like the value expected value of being in

location in each period relative to that kind of expected

value taken over all different, uh, locations.

And if you recall back to the Caliendo power model

or even the Maddix model where we had the trade

share, the trade shares, the Pi noise that depended on,

you know, some I n specific stuff in the numerator

relative to that summed over all, uh, destinations in the

denominator.

This expression here is analogous.

You want to think about this as the kind of

for migration.

It's the analogous expression to the noise we got in

the trade models that we looked at of questions.

And this is we're going through.

So given this, I mean, if you just back up

a few slides, right?

What I said was we had this value and we

wanted to solve for that expectation of the value.

Right.

We've now at least partially done that.

So what we've now got to is the point we

can write this value in terms of the utility and

in terms of these, these terms the beta v minus

tau terms, which in turn map to the muse and

then given the muse and given the initial allocation that

gives us the labour distribution next period.

And so the thing, you know, important thing to know

here is that the kind of equilibrium conditions.

Depend.

On these, uh e to the beta v minus tau

terms.

Right.

So if we want to solve this model and we

want to do counterfactual analysis on this model, Those times

are going to play a crucial role.

Okay, but what the migration shares, the muse are showing

us is that there is a mapping from those E

to the beta v minus tau terms to the migration

shifts.

And so when they do the dynamic algebra in this

model, what that essentially does is it says if we

observe these migration flows, we can use them as an

observable measure or kind of observable way to not need

to directly calculate these terms.

And we can write the model, at least in changes

in terms of these migration flows rather than in terms

of these equilibrium objects.

And that's what's going to allow them to do the

dynamic algebra.

And in particular, it's going to allow them to do

the dynamic algebra without having to calibrate the migration minus

the migration cost parameters.

Towns.

Right.

So in the same way in the train model, we

could do counterfactual analysis using trade shares without calibrating trade

costs.

Here you can do it using migration shares without calibrating

migration costs on top of that.

Kind of everything I've just said had a sort of

steady state stationary flavour to it.

What they show is that if you observe this in

an initial period using the structure of the model, you

can then actually do the kind of analysis for all

future periods, even out of steady state, um, which I

always find a slightly magical property of this model, but

I don't think I fully understand why it works.

But, you know, indeed, given the structure they put on

it, it does.

And that allows them to do this, the dynamic element

of the model.

So any questions on that?

Yeah.

Okay.

So that was the migration component of the model in

the full paper that's then integrated with the trade component.

Um, I'm not going to go through all the trade

equations again.

So we saw them two weeks ago.

Um, what I am going to do now, though, is

I'm going to kind of say one thing about how

this maps to think about welfare in this model.

And then I'm going to talk about how they calibrate

the model and just we'll look briefly at some of

the results to finish off.

So the welfare thing here.

All right.

Remember when we did gains from trade.

We said you know kind of within this class of

EC style quantitative trade models.

Um, we obtained this very simple formula from the gains

for trade, where the kind of welfare effects of a

change in trade depended just on the trade change in

the domestic trade share to the power of some elasticity,

which, crucially, depended on the trade elasticity.

What we're now going to show is that in this

model, there is kind of an analogous formula where the

impact of the kind of the migration component of the

model on welfare operates through changes in the domestic migration

check, which is to say, to show people that don't

migrate with an elasticity.

That depends on this new parameter that we flagged as

being important.

So again, there's sort of an analogy between what's going

on with migration here and what was going on with,

uh, trade in the, uh, models.

We looked at, uh, previously, the way to see that

we rewrite our value of being in N of T

is in terms of our current period utility, the value

of staying, and then the option value of migration.

Right.

So this is the additional value we get from the

possibility that we might choose to move from n to

our next period.

Right.

So that creates additional value to us because it's an

option.

We then take the expectation of that equation.

So we replace the little V's with big V's and

we integrate out the um, Gumbel shock.

We then note that our mu n n, which is

a state, is the share of workers that don't migrate,

can be written in terms of the E to the

beta VN over VH minus tau okay, which allows us

to rewrite the option value of moving in terms of

this, uh, staying probability.

Right.

What's going on here.

Right.

You've kind of you've got this exponential in the denominator.

So that's entering the negative term.

And it kind of ends up being the same as

that.

So just this whole option value just collapses to this

mu n.

Right.

So that mu n is again we talk about sufficient

statistics quite a lot in this course.

It's a sufficient statistic for the optimum value of having

the opportunity to migrate.

So it's kind of telling us about how valuable it

is that you might be able to to migrate.

Okay.

So then if we we can then plug that back

into this expression and we get this welfare equation for

VMT in terms of VMT plus one.

If we then run that forward right.

Because this holds for all times t.

So we can just keep iterating forward.

We get that the value of being in location n

at time zero is just some sum over future periods

of what is the wage I get at, uh, period

t and then it's scaled by the migration, uh, share

mu and end to the power of mu.

So in a model without any migration, this is just

one.

And you just got that, you know, your lifetime expected

present utility is just the log of the wages, right?

That's perfectly standard.

What this is showing is that in this model, you

can if you know these muons, you can calculate the,

uh, the additional value that you get from the option

of migration.

Any one happy with that?

So in this case the mu necessarily is below one.

The mu necessarily is below one.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Oh yeah.

Yeah.

Yes.

Yes yes.

Sorry.

Yes.

No, I was agreeing with you.

Yeah.

The Mu necessarily is below one right.

Which means obviously its inclusion in this formula increases welfare.

Right.

And that should be intuitive because yeah migration can only

the option to migrate can only make you better off

because you can always choose to stay.

Right.

So that's kind of a sense check that this.

Doesn't even make sense.

Okay.

So then final final thing we'll do today is we

will talk about how they take this model actually to

the, uh, to the data and what we need to

actually kind of implement the calibration.

Um.

So they're going in practice.

They're going to have, uh, fit their regions are going

to be the states of the US.

So 50 states, 22 sectors.

They will also have a non employment sector.

So this is where they are somewhat getting at your

point about the labour supply as does this city.

Um and there'll be 38 countries.

But the way to think about this is within the

US.

You have all this regional detail.

Each other country is just a single or each other

country sector combination is a single labour market.

So in total this gives them a thousand different, uh,

different labour markets.

So it's pretty radically right.

No.

At the same time, it's not nearly as detailed as

the kind of local labour markets that Donald Hanson talked

about, which are the commuting zones, the metropolitan statistical areas.

Um, why in practice kind of guesses for why they

use US states rather than commuting zones.

Migration data for states is easier than commuting.

Yeah, I think that's I think that's it.

I think it's a data limitation rather than a computational

limitation.

There is a lot of computational power going into this

model, but it's solvable with modern computers.

But the data architecture you need hasn't necessarily kept up

with that.

So the choice of states is really about what data

do we have.

You know, what level do we have migration data, which

is going to be crucial.

Um, right.

Because the data we need we need to know in

the initial year what, uh, what where is what is

the allocation of labour is l zero is the allocation

of labour across each of these individual labour markets in

the initial year that you have that data for 2000.

Um, and usually they, they're going to focus on manufacturing

and services.

Uh, they're not farming and mining in the public sector.

Then they also need the migration matrix.

So the mu minus one is the, uh, intersect and

interstate mobility between, you know, period of time, period minus

one and period zero.

All right.

So this is the reason we need this is this

is what's going to allow us to do the dynamic

hand algebra without, uh, calibrating the migration, uh, cost.

So you kind of crucially have to have this at

least one year's, uh, matrix of labour of migration, um,

decisions and then the pi.

So the pi pi is the trade shares.

Right.

So this is another data constraint here in that if

we in models where it's just countries trade shares across

countries, is it easy to access trade shares across local

labour markets.

Tougher.

So they're going to be able they're going to construct

some data across states.

It's not perfect.

But this would be another example where if you went

to the commuting zone level we do not have trade

flow data in Eugene.

So uh, level typically.

So you got your migration data, you got your trade

data, and then you've also got data on the value

added in each labour is your value added and the

gross output, uh, data for each labour market, which we'll

kind of pin down there, used to pin down some

of the kind of other structural parameters in the, in

the model.

Um, so given this set of data, which, you know,

on the one hand is quite demanding in the, the,

the, the mu and the pi are bilateral between each

of these, uh, labour markets, um, which is, you know,

that's a very rich set of data.

I certainly don't think you could do this exercise for

the UK.

Uh.

But on the other hand, you know, what's nice is

you only need the mu and the pi for one

initial year.

Even though they're going to do dynamic analysis, they don't

need to observe it every year.

So that's an advantage.

Um, and then we need some other parameters like as

in the trade modes, you need the trade elasticity data.

So we talked about how Caliendo and Perot estimated that

last week.

And they just used the calendar estimates.

They're going to need an estimate of uh, beta which

is the discount factor.

So they're going to go with a 4% annual interest

rate.

Uh, they're going to implement this quarterly.

So it's 1% quarterly.

And then the final parameter is this this new parameter

which governs the migration elasticity we've been talking about.

So they're going to they'll use 5.3 but they're going

to estimate that themselves.

So here's how they're going to estimate new.

Um from and this is a structural equation, this structural

equation coming out of the model that the log of

the migration flows between.

So here n is the locator is the kind of

location and J is the industry.

So we're now looking at flows between kind of industry

location pairs relative to the domestic.

You know the non migratory for location n in the

industry J is going to depend on kind of wage

differences between these local labour markets.

And also you can express it in terms of migration

flows in the next period.

Right.

So we've got this kind of forward looking equation.

You kind of stare at that and you kind of

think, oh dear, everything is endogenous right.

There's clearly endogeneity issues here.

What they do is a kind of GMM estimation, whether

you're going to use the past values of the mu

and the W as instruments for the current values, um,

we could have a discussion about how credible we think

that is.

I think it's not the kind of estimation that if

you were giving an applied micro seminar, people would be

very convinced by.

But if you're writing a structural paper and this is

kind of one parameter you need, you can, you know,

get away with doing this kind of estimation.

Right?

So that, I mean, that's how they're going to do

it.

Um, they've got 26 years of data to do this.

And when they do that, they estimate, you know, you

estimate the new here, they're going to estimate a new

five point, uh, a 5.3.

Um, but I think, you know, some of the more

important observation is that as when we looked at the

Eastern Quarter model, we said, okay, that data, that trade

elasticity is a really important parameter.

And each important kind of provides us one way of

estimating it within the structure of their model.

But that that then sparked a literature of kind of

other people thinking more seriously about how to identify it.

The parameter.

I think the same is true here, that, you know,

what you would expect is that if this new parameter

is very important, other people will think more about how

to identify it.

But here's one way that is consistent.

With that model.

So now coming to the counterfactuals, what they want to

feed into this model is the China shop.

So what do they mean by the China shop.

What they mean is they're going to estimate kind of

essentially following auto loan enhancer.

Um, imports US imports to each location by each sector

J.

Right.

And they're going to regress that on our other advanced

countries import from uh, in each sector J coming from

China.

Right.

So that gives this, this is, you know, if you

remember what Don Hansen, this is their instrumentation strategy that

you use other countries import from China and it's from

instrument for US imports from China.

So that are doing that regression that then gives them

predicted changes in US imports from China.

Right.

But you can't if the issue is if you're doing

counterfactual analysis, imports is not a primitive that you can

shop.

Right.

It's an endogenous outcome.

What's the primitive that we think of is causing the

China shock.

It's productivity increases in China.

So they then solve their model for the changes in

Chinese TFP by sector for their news 12 manufacturing sectors

that they have that would generate this increase in US

imports.

So that kind of backing out, what would the China

shock to productivity have to be to generate the trade

patterns that we see in the data in terms of

increased imports from China?

And then having backed out these TFP shocks, that's what

how they shock the model.

They don't say, okay, I'm going to shock the model

using those TFP shocks.

And I'm going to ask can if actually what is

the effect of those shocks on the equilibrium and all

these different labour markets.

And in particular, the time period they're looking over is

they're focusing on the shock between 2000 and 2007.

So that's a slightly shorter period than ad work, which

goes back into the 90s.

But it's the period of kind of big growth in

Chinese imports following China's accession to the World Trade Organisation.

And yeah, so by the Chinese TFP from the import

data.

So I don't really yeah.

No, I mean it is a little bit.

complicated.

They run this regression on the import data.

So this is purely run on trade data.

And they estimate that A2 right.

Then they ask what are the changes if I if

I sold my model for different changes of Chinese TFP,

what changes in Chinese TFP.

Do I have to feed into the model such that

the change in imports in the model matches the change

in imports in the data, as predicted by this equation?

So basically, based on this equation, you can get a

prediction for how much U.S. imports from China should increase.

And then the question is what do I have to

shock TFP by in a model to match that?

So I don't really understand the difference between the shock

and the shock what's changed in Chinese exports?

Yeah.

Um, so in the model, Chinese exports will change because

of, uh, the shock to TFP, but it will also

change because of a bunch of kind of induced general

equilibrium effects resulting from, say, Chinese changes in Chinese wages,

Chinese changes in US wages, changing demand patterns in other

countries.

So the because the trade variables are endogenous, when you

shop TFP, the change in them reflects not just the

property up here.

In fact, all the general equilibrium adjustments in the model.

So they're kind of playing with that.

So you include both the free data and other data

like like the Chinese wages to calculate.

This is a yeah okay.

Like and kind of fundamentally you know what's going on

here is they can't shock trade because trade is endogenous.

They have to shop something else.

But TFP is not directly observable.

So you have to back out changes in TFP.

And they just do that in a way that is

consistent with the model, right?

What I think what they're doing here is not is

not kind of terribly important, other than they're just getting

a kind of model consistent shot that they can then

do counterfactual analysis.

Sorry.

Yeah.

Let me just take a question.

What is the context like?

Is it when you shut off migration or.

No.

So the counterfactual thing going to be compare the equilibrium

where Chinese TFP changes between 2000 2007 to a counterfactual

where Chinese doesn't change between 2000 and 2007.

So the the kind of remove this entire shock.

Yeah.

Okay.

You can think of like we observe the world where

this happened.

And then you can ask, let's take out that.

That's not that's not quite the way they do in

the mall.

Because in the model you kind of have the equilibrium

in 2000.

And you can run that forward and solve for the

future path of the equilibrium.

Either with or without that shock.

And then you compare those two future paths as a

way of saying this was the effect of the China

shock.

Yeah, sorry, I was wondering, did they show that there

exists in equilibrium because this is a dynamic.

Yeah.

No, no.

But I mean.

This I think I think it is fair to say

this model is far too complicated for any standard existence

and uniqueness proofs to apply.

I mean, they're going to solve the model and they're

going to solve for equilibrium.

So, you know, an equilibrium exists in the sense that

for the for the calibrated model, which is, say, solving

and changes, they can solve it.

So in that sense it exists.

I don't recall if they have a discussion in the

paper about whether kind of to what extent they look

for whether that was unique or not, but yeah.

Okay.

Because I was just thinking, I think, you know, when

you're doing counterfactual, what would be the other state that

you compare it to?

Like in each period, comparing just the evolution of the

variables in the state where productivity growth wouldn't happen.

But so think about it.

Let you start from for them essentially 2000 is we

observe the economy in 2000.

And then you can solve forward from 2000 shocking the

exogenous parameter of the model in whatever way you want.

So one way you can do that is you can

solve forward in 2000, assuming Chinese TFP doesn't change.

And that gets you one path of outcomes, and then

you can do it with the shocks and get you

a different path of outcomes.

And the kind of when we say the kind of

counterfactual result, it's the comparison of those two paths.

So they're they're kind of showing numerically to each of

those individual paths exists.

And then you can compare them.

Okay.

So does you consider the possibility that the Chinese truck

disappears.

So the U.S. will import from other countries.

Like how when you say disappeared, what precisely do you

mean?

It's part of the counterfactual.

We mean there is no technology shock in China, so

the import exposure to Chinese will be similar.

However, sometimes that force will force us to import similar

goods from maybe other countries.

Yeah.

I mean, so in the mechanism that channel would operate

in the sense that in the path they calculate where

you don't shock Chinese TFP, where you hold China's TFP

constant.

You know, trade is all the trade flows are endogenous

in this model.

So, you know, as you shop or don't shop Chinese

TFP how much the US buys from China and how

much the US buys to all the other countries, you

know, adjusts to satisfy the economic conditions that is going

on.

There's a lot.

I mean, that's as I say, there's a lot of

moving parts in this model.

I mean, just some of which was.

Actually on the slide.

Okay.

So we should, um, we should finish off.

So let's look at what they actually find.

So here's a summary of some of the uh results.

So first off this is employment shares.

We're focusing on employment shares in the US in different

sectors over time.

So they're running here from 2000 through to 2012 quarterly.

This is manufacturing services construction wholesale and retail.

So they're seeing you know manufacturing the employment share drops

in manufacturing and increases in, uh, services.

Um, you know, on the one hand this is not

surprising, right?

The fact of the China shock is import competition primarily

in manufacturing.

So it drives workers out of manufacturing in general equilibrium,

where those workers going, right.

Some of them are going to end up in services.

The point or at least partly the point they're making,

though, is kind of when auto, Dawn and Hanson do

calculations along the lines of Chinese import competition has destroyed

X jobs where X typically are some large number.

They're doing that using their difference in differences estimates, which

basically just say Manufacturing.

We've seen this negative effect on manufacturing.

We're going to aggregate that up, but we're not thinking

about in general equilibrium.

Do we see increased employment in other sectors.

So the kind of point they're making is okay.

Yeah.

Employment drops in manufacturing.

But to the extent that workers are reallocating elsewhere, it's

going up in uh, up in services.

And then here the implications for, uh, welfare.

So this is a histogram of the welfare changes across

different local labour markets in the.

Uh, US.

And you've got all of them here and here.

We've got it split up into manufacturing and, and non-manufacturing.

Um.

So takeaways.

Right.

The average effect is positive.

Right.

So kind of one takeaway in this paper is that

on average the US is gaining from the China shop.

Right.

But at the same time you're seeing this big heterogeneity.

Um, you know, it's kind of concentrated around 0.1, 1.2%.

There are some labour markets that are seeing very, uh,

negative.

So this is kind of showing that there are these

distributional implications.

And, you know, some of the most exposed locally markets

are are losing.

And if you kind of plot the changes regionally, you

can say kind of see which regions do better or

worse.

So like darker green is bigger gains.

We're kind of averaging across labour markets are going to

stay here and they're lighter colours.

You're doing uh less well.

Um you can see that.

You know, unsurprisingly and totally, it's the kind of Midwest

that tends to do worse, which is the one region

that was most directly exposed to the, uh, import competition

in China.

You can also see if you split into manufacturing and

non-manufacturing, it is the manufacturing sectors that have been, um,

hardest, hardest hit, which again, not particularly surprising.

What's nice about this paper is, you know, they've kind

of done all the work to see once we allow

for migration adjustments and trade adjustments, what it is generally

could have implications.

Um, so I think that's pretty much where I wanted

to start for today.

Does anyone have any final questions?

So just so the the employment effect on manufacturing is

negative, but the welfare is still concentrated in a positive

region.

So is that because the ones that are left still

working in manufacturing are more productive?

Um.

Yeah.

I mean, it's going to be because the I mean,

there's more than one channel operating.

So one is like, even if workers are reallocating at

a manufacturing.

So there's manufacturing industries are being hard here.

Um, another the another implication that it's going to decrease

US import prices.

So you've got wage effects on the one hand, but

you've also got import price effects.

So that will tend to benefit all US workers through

the cheaper imports.

And then I think the second important channel would be

the migration effect.

So even if your region where you live at initially

the local market you're in initially is hard hit, this

opportunity to switch.

And here switching could mean switching location, but it could

also mean switching sector, as we saw in the welfare

formula that has an option value, so that even if

wages in the sector decline doesn't mean you're worse off.

So the welfare.

For manufacturing workers is the extent of manufacturing.

Work.

Yeah.

It's like if I was in Ohio in the steel

industry in 2000, what's that happened to my welfare?

We're kind of in the present expensive present discounting sense.

All right.

Good.

See you next week.

Thank you.

Oh, no.

Oh!

My.

God, this is great.

I love that.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Really?

Yes.

Yeah.

Oh.

Yeah.

Well.

That's good, that's good.

Thank you.

Yeah.

So you're still a role model?

Yeah, I think the role is.

Next month.

She should be at the beginning of November.

I guess.

Beginning of the year.

Actually.

I think you will in the email, uh, receive the

email?

Uh, no.

Not yet.

I was not the manager.

I will check that.

Yeah.

So.

Oh.

So I also need to, uh.

Tell Dana that I would like to be involved in

that trade.

Uh, the trade group.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Please, please tell her.

But the email I received was from another.

It was not from an email.

Um, so there is, um.

You can also ask her to include you in the

workshop and seminars like this.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So I received an email from them.

And they say that the workshops which are which are

exactly like PhD centres really you guide, you organise also

seminars with the LLC related to the international trade or

they start from six six of November 6th and they'll

be on Wednesday.

Yeah, I know that.

So then uh.

They will be uh, seminar workshop as well.

So I spend a whole day here.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Like three days.

Yeah.

But it's very convenient because you just need to apply.

For this thing.

Exactly.

Yeah.

So you can ask her to include you in the

trade group at UCL and here.

Oh, you have a group at UCL?

Nothing.

It's not like a group.

It's just.

Just a several students.

Exactly, exactly, exactly.

So who's doing trade?

I'm not sure.

Oh, Christian.

Greece?

Yes, Greece.

Lecture 4:

I'm not sure.

Okay.

You can you can browse it.

Yeah.

No, they haven't uploaded the new documents for this year,

so.

But.

Yeah.

So you are doing.

I am.

Yes.

Labour?

Yeah.

Yeah.

You do have.

You have.

Uh, yeah.

Yeah.

So.

I did.

Yes.

Right.

To celebrate this.

Okay.

It's free because nobody wants to go here.

Sorry.

So what's wrong with me?

Do I have a week?

Well, it's not free, but it's free.

That is like I'm affiliated a stadium.

Okay, so free because everyone wants to go.

Because it's also because no one wants to go.

Like when they were in Champions League.

And I don't know why it's free, you know, but

it's not for everyone, right?

Yeah.

When is it?

That's a privilege.

I'm done.

I just I'll ask him.

I'll just take this there.

Yeah.

So it's a budget and all?

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

Oh, this does it.

No.

Those are Champions League.

This is Europa.

This is the Danish or such.

So thank you for your time.

Is my alchemist.

What is the export?

I want to know once again, that was the home

team.

Uh.

The one.

Well, you can sit here.

Okay?

Okay.

Well.

We've got enough space for everyone.

So.

We don't need to stay in the.

Yes or no?

We've got to work on that room.

No.

I guess not.

But now, if you just, like, straight up talk about.

Yes.

That's right.

It should.

Be fine.

Yeah.

Now we.

Have to you.

You're not making you.

Crazy.

Yeah.

But now I think.

I don't know how to answer that.

You just finished taking stuff out of this video.

I Despite this three months, it never ends.

It's crazy.

Yeah.

December.

And then new construction.

So it's going to.

Oh, well, I think it's going to destroy.

Is that I hope.

Yes.

But I live next to where they constructed and you

know how they do it.

And that was okay.

But I think like they're going to like still use

the old building which is going to be on the

site.

And that's, that's not I think it's not good because

what is love is like coating the stuff with ground

and then construction.

But like once you have the building that's fine.

Yeah.

No, no, we will see.

Because there's not that like it's so hard for me

to send them notice to maintenance today because one of

them we can't turn off the radiator.

Oh that's very nice.

But it doesn't really.

It doesn't work, right.

Yeah.

So this is mine.

Just to give you the illusion of control.

Try to read it.

Yeah, yeah.

That's English.

Time up.

Yeah.

You know, it's way too hard for the German.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it looks nice, honestly.

Maybe it's also because it's.

It's paper tablets or something.

That's kind of normal.

I don't know what I was going to ask.

What are you reading?

And then it's.

No, no.

No, but there's no tags.

So the normal is.

This is why you pay £20 for this one.

Because they have, like, a dog and then they put

something inside.

Oh, wow.

That's pretty cool.

Yeah.

But this is something I hate.

And.

It's not.

Because.

She doesn't like her.

Point is.

I don't have enough.

It's the wish list.

Suspect could grab this batch from the back.

Okay.

Okay.

Um, how is everyone?

Okay.

Good.

Good.

So I'm going.

All right.

It's not too busy.

Right.

I have a call today, so I might just speak

softly and take breaks, but we'll see if we can

get through this.

Right.

So the topic for today is trade and growth.

So the basic, you know, framing of that is if

you think about all the models we've looked at in

the previous lectures, they've been models where production technologies are

held fixed.

Right.

In the sense that, you know, in the, in your

kind of Basic canonical Ricardian textual models.

This is very obvious.

You have a fixed exogenous technology in the Eton and

Court of Mallets and Mallet models that we looked at.

It's a little bit more complicated because you're drawing these

stochastic productivity.

So, you know, technologies do vary across across firms or

across producers.

But in these models there's kind of the distribution you

draw from is still fixed.

So in that sense, the kind of production possibility frontier

that is drawn out by the technological possibilities of autonomy

are just an exogenous, uh, input into the model.

And we then kind of solve and characterise the allocation

in equilibrium conditional on this technology.

Um, but obviously it is at least possible, uh, that

the technologies evolve endogenously over time and that this process

of technological evolution may be linked to trade itself.

So what we want to be thinking about in today's

lecture is how does trade affect the direction and the

pace of of technological change?

Kind of acknowledging this possibility that the technology is endogenous

and that it's endogenous to trade immediately opens up, you

know, a fairly broad set of of research questions that

we might be interested in in the kind of papers

in this trade and growth literature I've written on.

So there's just some examples of them on the slide

here.

Uh, but typically they fall into one of a number

of categories.

They're either about, um, you can think about, you know,

how on the one hand, how does trade affect where

knowledge is either produced in the form of innovation, or

it could be where it affects how how kind of

countries catch up with knowledge in terms of adoption.

It can be how trade affects, therefore the kind of

technology gap Uh, between countries.

Uh, and what does this mean for thinking about the,

the gains from trade?

So we've talked quite a lot about the gains from

trade in the cortex context of economies and Quarterman and

Malik's models.

Um, but all those models are kind of, you know,

the gains from trade holding technologies constant.

If trade itself affects productivity and technologies, then that's going

to be a kind of another channel through which trade

has welfare effects.

So we can ask, you know, do we see dynamic

gains or losses from trade.

And we'll look at some work on that uh that

today.

And then you can also, you know, all your policy

questions that you ask in static economies.

You can also ask in this kind of growth context,

how does uh allowing the trade to affect technology, what

does it mean for kind of optimal policies and optimal

intellectual property policy as well?

So these are the sort of big picture questions that

the literature we're going to talk about today is going

to, uh, to speak to and to try and address

more specifically what I would like to do in this,

uh, lecture is kind of I'm going to take the

first part.

It's going to be more sort of literature review style

than previous lectures have been.

So I want to give you, you know, this is

a very broad literature that we're only going to have

the opportunity to sample kind of a small part of

in this lecture, but I want to kind of give

you an overview of some of the main ideas and

main bits of work that have been done in this,

uh, literature, focusing mainly on kind of what are the

different kind of theoretical contributions that have been made, but

then also talking about how that kind of leads to

the available empirical evidence linking trade and innovation and, and

growth.

So we'll spend the first part of the kind of

first part of the lecture thinking through these issues.

And then we're going to look at two specific papers

that we're going to go through in more detail.

So there's going to be this paper by Bauer and

Overfilled thinking about, uh, this is specifically a paper about

how trade affects the diffusion of ideas across countries and

what and thinking about the implications of that for dynamic

gains from trade.

Um, and then I'm also going to talk about this

recent paper that I've been working on with co-authors, where

we think about optimal intellectual property policy in open economies,

and how integrating kind of trade into models of, of

patenting and patent policy, how that changes our perspective on,

on optimal policy in that, in that environment.

So that's the, uh, agenda for today.

Is anyone have any kind of questions or issues you

want to raise before we get going?

Okay.

All right.

So let's just back up and start with kind of

very basic stuff that you will have seen before.

But that's going to help frame how we think about

these, these questions.

Uh, so on the one hand you can frame everything

we're going to say today is in terms of, well,

we have exogenous technologies.

Now we're going to make technology endogenous.

Right.

But in the process of doing that, we kind of

want to acknowledge that there are fundamental ways in which

knowledge technology is different from other inputs.

Right?

And these are the kind of fundamental ways that you

get introduced to whenever you see your first macro endogenous

growth model, which is that, you know, unlike, say, labour

or capital, if we think of knowledge as being another

input to the production function it has, these two special

properties are on the one hand it's non rival.

So if we have the blueprint for an idea then

many people, many producers can use that blueprint at the

same time without there being any kind of uh, exclusivity

in who's using it.

Um, which obviously is in some sense this is the

this is the special property of technology such that investment

in technology tends to generate increasing returns, which stimulate, uh,

long run growth.

This is essentially from making this observation, modelling.

It is what Roma won the Nobel Prize for.

Um, and then the other special feature of technology is

that it is imperfectly excludable.

If I own a piece of a machine and I'm

using that machine, no one else can can use it,

and I can.

I can prevent other people from using, even if I

don't want to use it myself.

That is not true about knowledge.

If I invent a new idea, that idea over time

will tend to percolate and spread through the rest of

the economy.

Um, even if I try and prevent that from from

happening.

So, you know, technological innovation tends to very naturally also

a kind of by-product of that is knowledge spill-overs generating

externalities across, uh, across producers, so that the implication of

this being that when we start to think about endogenous

technology, we're not going to be thinking about an efficient,

uh, economy.

We're going to be thinking about an economy where there

are these spill-overs.

And then kind of one of the big question becomes,

how do different shocks to this economy, whether they be,

you know, trade integration shocks or policy shocks, how do

they interact with these knowledge?

Spill-overs.

And that's going to be really important for thinking about

about welfare.

So where did where does technological change come from.

Right now we're sort of starting our procession through the

kind of questions that this literature has, has thought about.

Just to kind of give us a grounding in how

people think about these issues.

Um.

You know, historically, and a lot of the early literature

on this was focussed on the idea of learning by

doing.

Right.

So the idea that as you produce, as you use

a technique, you learn about it and that allows you

to improve the technique.

And so your productivity increases over time.

And typically the way this is modelled is you model

productivity as a function of cumulative relative passed output producing

the uh, uh, the product.

Now a key a key question that then raises is

what is the the scope of that work.

So I can say there's learning by doing.

That's fine.

That's straightforward.

But the more the kind of more interesting question is

if there is learning by doing, who learns in the

sense of is it at the firm level we get

learning by doing or is it the industry level?

And also the thing about open economy issues is it,

you know, the national level or the international level.

Um, so a lot of kind of what the sort

of predictions and properties of learning by doing models will

tend to hinge on what you assume about the scope

of the learning.

Right?

To see an example of that, suppose you just assume

that learning by doing occurs at the firm level, to

the extent that all the learning is is at the

firm level, then a rational firm will internalise how its

current production decisions affect its future productivity through the learning

process.

And in this case, you actually will have a model

without any knowledge.

Uh spill-overs.

So if learning by doing is just at the firm

level, it doesn't generate these kind of externalities, which tend

to be typical of of growth models because firms will

internalise how their behaviour affects the learning.

Um, so for that reason, kind of most, most learning

by doing models, at the very least assume that learning

is at the industry level, so that then the benefits

of one firm firm producing spill-over to other firms in

the industry.

And then you are immediately introducing these knowledge spill-overs and

these externalities.

Right.

And you can kind of without needing to write down

the model, you can anticipate that this is going to

imply firms kind of under invest in producing in order

to learn so that the decentralised equilibrium involves too little

production in industries where there's a lot of, uh, a

lot of learning by doing.

And that then generates the possibility that kind of government

intervention to increase output will, uh, generate these learning by

doing spill-overs and increase future productivity.

Um, and if you think about sort of infant industry

style arguments for industrial protectionism, okay, the, you know, one

way to rationalise why you might want to protect an

industry when it is young and developing is so that

you increase the scale of the industry so it learns

faster to become more, more productive.

So these learning by doing models, then, you know, immediately

lead us down a path where we can potentially rationalise

a much more interventionist approach to, to governance and to

industrial development, then you would have absent these knowledge externalities.

So there was a I mean, just in terms of

where the literature is on this.

There was a lot of literature on learning by doing

models in the early 1990s.

Um, and there hasn't been so much, uh, since then.

So the, um, the Grossman Hellman paper that's referenced there,

which is a Handbook of International Economics Review chapter on

kind of trade and trade on the trade world literature,

as it stood in 1995, has a long section thinking

about or discussing models of learning by doing in open

economies, what that literature or the kind of the conclusion

that literature came to was.

So sometimes it didn't generate an easy takeaway in that

kind of the implications of the models often depended critically

on exactly how learning spill-overs will specify, and in particular,

whether they were kind of just to a single industry

across industry and in the open economy context, whether they

were national or international.

Right.

And you can again anticipate intuitively what that's going to

be.

If learning spill-overs are just national in scope, then the

country that kind of gets an advantage or has an

initial advantage that and produces more output.

In industry, that advantage will tend to accumulate over time.

So you get this kind of lock in process where

you get path dependency in where different countries have comparative

advantages.

So again, you know, some path dependency can be a

feature of these models.

But that really depends on the scope being nationally.

If the scope is international then you don't, you know,

you're getting more international spill-over you don't get this kind

of path dependency and lock in effects.

So, you know, what do we kind of take from

that literature?

There are lots of interesting dynamic processes you can get

at of learning by doing and often when thinking about

Analysing the dynamics of the industry.

It can be a useful kind of modelling trick to

have in your in your toolbox.

Um, but it has fallen slightly out of favour as

a kind of a way of thinking about technology, technological

change, primarily because, you know, in these learning by doing

more and more learning, it's just purely an externality or

a spill-over from production and, you know, the direction the

literature has gone.

You know, starting with the kind of an early work

of Romer and AG on how it in these areas

is more thinking about, okay, but what if actually in

order to learn, you have to deliberately invest in technological

upgrading.

So the kind of main focus of.

The more recent literature has been on this kind of

deliberate technology upgrade, and that's mainly what we'll think about

today as well.

All right.

So now I wanted to say a little bit about

just sort of the landscape of different mechanisms through which

trade, uh, may matter for technological change.

So our kind of question here is.

You know, suppose you have a model of endogenous technological

change.

I was going to ask if I open up to

trade, if you think that the kind of extreme version,

if I compare the economy in autarky to the economy

in trade, how will opening up and integrating with the

rest of the world?

How will that affect incentives to upgrade technologies?

What are the potential mechanisms that are going to operate?

So I want to talk about four kind of groups

of mechanisms that the literature has identified as being potentially

important.

The first one is just a straightforward market size mechanism.

So if you think about a firm making an innovation

decision or making an adoption decision, sort of generally making

some kind of investment decision where they're deciding whether to

invest in improving their technology.

It is very natural to model that decision as a

fixed cost investment.

And again, this comes back to the uh, to the

kind of non rivalry, the non rival nature of technological

knowledge.

Right.

If I'm buying capital if I'm buying machines and I

want to produce twice as much out I need twice

as many machines typically.

But with technology, once I've got the idea for the

technology I can use that across kind of a larger

scope of production as uh, as I like.

So in that sense, technological investments tend to be fixed

costs.

What do we know about fixed costs?

All right.

Is that you're going to be more willing to make

that fixed cost investment when you have a larger market

for your your sales.

So to the extent that international trade raises market size,

we would expect there to be a positive effect of

trade openness through increased market size on technological investment.

So that's kind of mechanism one fairly straightforward.

That said kind of, you know, mechanism one here is

conditional on market size indeed increasing in trade.

Why might it not increase.

Well, it's because the flip side of opening up and

market size, potentially increasing package export, is that you also

face more incumbent import competition as you open up to

trade.

Um, and this pushes in the opposite direction.

So to the extent that foreign exporters enter my market

and sell to domestic consumers.

Import competition is going to increase and that is going

to shrink our market size.

So there's also this negative, uh, you know, what we

might think of as a negative import, uh, competition effect.

So one question that kind of then goes, well, how

do these two effects offset each other?

Which is more important?

Um, I don't think you can make a general statement

about that.

But in many, if you write down probably the simplest

trading growth model you can.

So, you know, Grossman and Helpmann did a lot of

the early work on trade and growth, putting essentially taking

either the Romer expanding variety model, the Agon and Howard

quality Ladders model, and putting them in open economy settings.

If you take a sort of standard Roman model and

put it in an open economy setting with no bells

and whistles.

The import, competition and market size effects exactly offset each

other, so you get kind of no effect of trade

on growth in that in that model.

So that's a result that's worth kind of highlighting.

Um, both because it suggests that, you know, in a

very simple framework there may they may not be any

effective trade or growth rate.

It's not obvious that there necessarily will be effective trading

or trade and growth.

But also if you tell us that, you know, if

you do want to make an argument that trading over

linked in some way, you need a reason why these

two effects don't exactly are exactly offset.

Also, we're saying that if you take this is a

little bit more technical involved, but if you take each

and quarter model and you endogenous the scale parameter of

the Fréchet distribution.

So remember these in quarter model, you drew from these

Fréchet distributions which had this parameter t which kind of

govern the location of the distribution.

And in the model we looked at, that t was

just an exigent parameter.

You can kind of endogenous that.

So it depends on, uh, technology investment in a way

that generates an endogenous growth model.

But again if you do that in the simplest way

possible, you will again get a setting where input, competition

and market size effects are exactly like a search engine.

Yeah.

In the Grossmann and Hartman is the reason why.

They offset each.

Other, that you assume some symmetry of home and foreign

or like or is that you.

Know so they they do assume symmetry of home and

foreign.

My intuition is that that is not crucial for the

result because certainly needs in accordance setting.

You don't need symmetry I think.

The kind of key intuition is that, you know, on

the one hand, you've got more export opportunities and on

the other hand you've got more import competition and sort

of absent some force to make them in balance.

They just they naturally balance each other, each other out.

Um, it would be, you know, Grossman Hellman do start

from symmetric economies and it would be an interesting exercise

to check whether that does carry over to asymmetric economies

in their model.

And not totally sure, but I don't I don't see

an obvious reason why it would.

Any other questions so far?

Okay.

Um.

Now, another thing to say about the import competition effect

is that once you put it in a schumpeterian model

like an agile and how IT style model, it becomes

a little bit more interesting because in those models you

can also get as well as the sort of the

import competition effect is I face more in competition with

import competition I sell less, I invest less.

When you have kind of like growth, like technology races

in the economy.

So imagine you've got, you know, one of those ones

where you've got two firms and they're competing to be

the leader firm because the leader takes over the market.

Right.

In that kind of schumpeterian structure, the effects of competition

on investment are more complex and more interesting.

Um, in particular, because you can get these kind of

escape competition effects where if you're kind of a current

times neck and neck with your competitor or, you know,

as the competitive become, you know, if you face increasing

competition, that means you now lose your market and a

neck and neck with your competitor that generates an incentive

to innovate in order to get escape the the competition.

So in those models you can get through the input

competition effect also can be pro uh, pro growth.

And there's a kind of nice review of those types

of mechanisms in there.

Um, this is a more recent handbook of international law

which review chapter by occupation and methods.

Okay, then what other mechanisms might might matter so that

both the market size and import competition affect are fundamentally

about, you know, opportunities to sell to the consumer.

But as we've already talked about because of these, you

know, potential for innovation to generate, uh, knowledge Spill-overs, there

are going to be these knowledge spill-overs externalities of these

models.

And if trade either increases or decreases the rates of

knowledge spill-overs, then it's also going to affect kind of

growth through that, um, channel.

So it becomes it is when kind of asking this

question of how does trade affect growth, it is useful

to think of kind of two separate questions.

One is how does trade affect growth?

Holding knowledge spill-overs constant.

And then the second question, does trade also directly affect

knowledge?

Spill-overs.

And those are I just kind of want to highlight

that those are distinct questions that the literature often confuses

and conflates.

Okay.

But if we think about the question of does trade

generate knowledge?

Spill-overs I think it is very it is very natural

to think.

And, you know, if you write down a model, this

is what you'll find that if trade does indeed stimulate

knowledge spill-overs, then that will be a channel through which

it, uh, tends to raise growth.

So then the question is, you know, why might trade

raise knowledge?

Spill-overs we will look in a moment at this where

an open field paper which has one theory of that.

So we're kind of you learn through interacting with the

the buyers and sellers in the global market.

Um, it might also be that as you open up

to trade, you're able to buy knowledge embodied in imported

inputs or or capital goods.

Or it could be that trade.

Incentivises or creates a mechanism for domestic knowledge.

Spill-overs are faster.

So there's kind of various mechanisms out there that have

been identified in the literature through which trade may stimulating

spill-overs, and that that could be a source of kind

of higher dynamic gains.

And we'll kind of we'll focus on this where an

overfilled paper is one representative from that literature.

All right.

And then the other, the kind of final group of

mechanisms.

And these are I think these are some way a

little bit more complex because they were kind of required

bringing multiple sectors into the model is that, you know,

as we think about what happens in meeting Quarter-mile, when

you trade in the Asian quarter model, you specialise, you

tend to produce more of those sectors where you have

a comparative advantage.

So trade affects kind of which sectors you specialise in.

Now take that observation and kind of combine it with

the observation that this opportunities for growth and for technological

improvements are greater in some sectors than there are in

the economy, kind of high growth and low growth sectors.

So once you have this kind of interaction with trade

affecting specialisation and growth opportunities differing across sectors, you can

see that.

Then through that mechanism, trade is also potentially going to

have effects on on countries growth and in what kind

of whether countries specialise in like high tech or, or

low tech, um sectors.

Um, and again, kind of like the learning by doing

models, this can create a kind of path dependency.

So imagine and Matsuyama has a very nice paper on

this in the early 1990s.

Like there are two sectors in the world.

There's agriculture and there's manufacturing and manufacturing is a sector

where you can kind of invest in R&D, and that

that generates growth.

And agriculture is just a static, boring, no growth sector.

If at time zero, when a country opens to trade

with the rest of the world, it has a comparative

advantage in agriculture, right?

Then it will specialise in agriculture and it will never

invest and grow the manufacturing sector.

And then it becomes kind of locked into the manufacturing

sector.

So it generates this path dependency where your initial comparative

advantage determines your long run, uh, comparative advantage.

Um, now that doesn't necessarily mean you get generate welfare

losses.

That didn't mean it might do.

But if the you know, the country that is specialising

the agricultural sector is trading with the rest of the

world still.

So innovation is going on in the manufacturing sector in

the rest of the world, and it's able to import

those products.

product, it can still potentially be, uh, better off, but

it will never kind of go through the process of

industrialisation and and and development.

So another topic this class of models have been used

to think about is this kind of how does trade

affect the industrial development process through, uh, patterns of specialisation.

Um, and there's a very interesting recent paper on that

question, which is this paper here by Atkin, uh, Cassano

and Fukui.

They, they build a model where there's kind of a

continuum of sectors, and you can rank sectors in terms

of their complexity and the higher complexity sectors have higher

knowledge.

Spill-overs.

So when you trade with the rest of the world,

you know, the trade will affect which sectors you specialise

in.

And then if you if trade forced you to specialise

in lower complexity sectors that generates lower spill-overs, which can

generate welfare losses.

So theoretically, that's just a recapitulation of what I've just

told you, kind of the earlier literature as safe as

possible.

The nice additional contribution they have in this paper is

kind of an empirical application of that where they use

China's.

Well, you know, let's say that they use cut China

and other countries entry to the WTO as shocks to

the patterns of specialisation in different countries.

So the idea is, say, on Thailand, I specialised in

some range of products.

Right.

And then a big country like China kind of integrates

more with the rest of the world economy that affects

which country, which products Thailand specialises in.

And then they kind of say, well, how does that

affect, you know, the first stage, Thailand's trade is the

second stage, Thailand's income per capita.

And what they show you, what they estimate is that

the effect of kind of increasing globalisation between late 1960

and early 2000 has been to cause countries to change

their product specialisation in a way that, on average, countries

have specialised in less complex products with lower spill-overs.

And for most countries in the world, this has generated

welfare losses.

So the most of the papers we're going to look

about, look at and talk about today.

I'm going to argue that, uh, greater openness generates some

kind of dynamic gains from trade in terms of faster

growth or improved knowledge.

This paper is interesting in that it comes to the

opposite conclusion, and it argues for this particular set of

trade shocks that they use for their identification.

Greater openness actually ends up making most countries are worse

off.

And I'm just to kind of recapitulate on the on

the theoretical side, the reason those countries could become worst

off is that you are changing your pattern of specialisation,

and you're specialising more in sectors where there are lower

learning possibilities.

Any questions?

Sorry.

Just just on that note, like when they say sort

of well for loss, do they just mean the level

of GDP per capita or just growth?

Uh.

I am trying to.

Do they are what I am.

What I am struggling to remember is whether.

Okay, let me back up.

They don't mean level.

Right.

So this is a welfare statement that is basically, you

know, discounted value of future welfare across all future states

of the economy.

What I'm struggling to remember is whether in the long

run equilibrium they have ongoing growth or whether you converge

to a stationary steady state.

In the long run, I can't recall which of those

that property that model has, but they don't.

What they don't mean is just your kind of long

run.

Income per capita is lower in levels.

They mean starting from today, if I look at the

expected present discounted value of your future of the path

that you will take, that that path generates lower welfare

for the representative consumer than the alternative pathway, these trade

shocks hadn't happened.

Okay.

Any other questions at the moment?

Question in my summer paper, does it ever talk about

how a policy intervention can affect the patterns of patterns

of specialisation.

Yeah, that's a fairly kind of common direction for that

kind of literature to to go away.

Because once you once you acknowledge that the kind of

decentralised equilibrium may lead you to specialise in a sector

that isn't optimal from the economy's perspective, and that also

that there is this path dependency.

It's very natural to say, okay, well, if I temporarily

intervene in period zero, so that if initially, instead of

specialising in agriculture, you specialise in manufacturing, uh, what are

the consequences of that?

And certainly in this class of models, it can be

the case that that temporary policy can change or both

change your long run pattern of specialisation.

So, you know, you could intervene one period.

And then after that you will be happy to specialise

in manufacturing without intervention, and also that there can be

welfare increasing.

Now, it doesn't mean it necessarily is, but it certainly

is a theoretical possibility in this.

These type of problems.

Um.

So kind of once we start to think about this,

that can cause an end for paper, like a kind

of, you know, part of what's generating the possibility of

losses in this in their paper is they're not just

thinking about kind of economies that are at the technological

frontier, which the kind of growth literature often does.

But economies that are behind the frontier are for whom

learning or technology upgrading is not about innovating, creating new

ideas, it's about function.

So another strand of the literature is really thinking about

how does trade affect incentives for for adoption rather than

for innovation.

And the the sort of most important mechanism that papers

in that literature tend to be based around is this

idea of an advantage or backwardness, which is an old

idea, goes back to at least Gershwin product in the

economics literature.

But the idea is, if, you know, if I'm currently

further from the technology frontier, then there's more knowledge I

can learn and catch up on, and therefore the cost

of technology upgrading is is is lower.

If I'm further from the technology frontier and it generates

this advantage of backwardness, which allows countries to, uh, to

catch up.

So one of the channels then, for which, you know,

greater openness might generate faster technological growth in backward or

in less technologically advanced countries is if, as you integrate,

they're now able to learn not just from kind of

the domestic frontier.

But the global frontier as well.

So that's another channel which these kind of knowledge spill-overs

might matter.

Right.

So then just sort of again, I kind of I

want to give a quick historical literature overview to point

you to some of the main kind of papers in

this, in this literature kind of if you are interested

in reading more, we talked about there being a lot

of kind of learning by doing literature in the 1990s.

And then, you know, when the endogenous growth literature kicked

off.

The key kind of trade in endogenous growth literature is

the book by Grossman and Haldeman.

If you ever work in this area, you've got a

good starting point is to read this, uh, the way

this book, which thinks about, you know, lots of different

versions of both Rome area and, and agree on how

its star models and what happens if you open up

them up to trade.

There's another strand of the literature kind of.

Krugman, 79, wrote, a kind of key contribution to that

about, you know, product cycle models so that analyse how

products that are initially produced in the North, what what

determines the rate at which they spread to the, uh,

to the south?

And how does this shape the international income gaps?

And then so there was kind of that literature in

the early 1990s, and then the more recent training growth

literature in common, you know, as we saw we saw

kind of with the Asian quarter and the medics models

and the literature that build on that, than a lot

of the recent work in trade has been let's incorporate

richer heterogeneity into the kind of neoclassical models.

And the same has been true in the trade and

growth literature.

So people have more recently kind of taken these earlier

literatures and incorporating richer producer heterogeneity.

And so there's a kind of strand that builds on

the medics model and build broke into the medics model,

which I've written a paper on.

And then we'll have a nice paper on that where

overfilled people will look at in a minute, builds on

these and quantum literature.

Um, what what is perhaps missing a bit from this

literature more than from the static literature is a kind

of canonical quantitative dynamic trade model.

So it's kind of we already talked about, you know,

building on each and quarter Caliendo.

Perot.

And then, you know, sort of walking.

Perot had developed these quantitative static trade models, which have

been very widely used for, you know, counterfactual and trade

policy analysis.

One thing we can ask is that kind of a

and it's the same true in the sort of dynamic

area.

Is there a canonical quantitative trade and growth literature that

isn't really at the at the moment?

So that's kind of a gap in the literature.

Which one of you would feel great?

Um, the challenge there is that, you know.

The properties of the dynamic models are going to depend

very much on how you model the knowledge.

Spill-overs so what does the innovation and adoption process look

like?

What kind of investments do you have to make to

upgrade technology?

Um, and then what are the externalities in that process

and empirically identifying those kind of spill-over parameters is more

challenging because they are kind of, by their nature, externalities.

So without kind of being able to discipline exactly what

those externalities look like, it's harder to kind of write

down a quantitative trade model.

Uh, but that's kind of what the literature is trying

to start and work towards at the moment.

And we'll look at the the kind of motel paper

is a kind of an example of a quantitative trade

model that we will look at later in the, uh,

lecture.

All right.

Sorry for the coffee.

Then the other thing I wanted to say, kind of

while we're on this part of the literature, on the

lecture, what do we know about the kind of empirical

side, the relationship between trade and growth?

As you might imagine, identifying the causal effect of trade

on growth is difficult.

Right?

You are asking and this is a big sort of

macro level empirical question, uh, you kind of intrinsically it

is really a question you kind of have to answer

at the country level while also taking account of international

spill-overs.

So the whole global economy becomes a single system.

Um, so there's all kinds of kind of reverse causality,

omitted variable bias problem that we face here.

What has the literature done?

Well, the kind of the starting point is, which is

this Franklin Romer paper from 1999, which say, okay, as

we've already talked about, the gravity model is a good

predictor of trade openness.

So let's use geographic variation where countries are located.

Are they landlocked to predict how open they are and

use that as an instrument for trade openness.

So they do that and they find positive effects on

income per capita.

The problem with that approach, and this kind of Rodriguez

and Rodrik paper makes it very makes this point very

forcefully, is that both their results are not very robust

to changes in their sample, but also their kind of

obvious concerns about omitted variable bias to the extent that

geography is correlated with other stuff institutions.

Perhaps then you're going to get immediate variable bias in

these estimates because you're just estimating off a single cross

section.

Um, so what people have then tried to do is

to kind of try and find time bearing instruments for

trade openness.

And FIRA has a couple of important papers in this

literature where essentially what he does is he uses transportation

shocks as instruments for how openness changes over time.

So he has one paper where he uses the development

of air transport and the kind of increasing importance of

air transport relative to sea transport, to argue that, you

know, when air transport becomes more important, countries like Rwanda,

which are landlocked, are benefit much more than countries which

have good port facilities.

And so therefore the introduction of kind of air freight

as a major mode of transport makes Rwanda more open.

And then therefore, that we've got an instrument for openness

and we can best estimate how that affects income per

capita, he estimates in the last year of income per

capita to trade around 0.5.

Um, in that paper, the concern with that strategy is

that if you become more open to trade because there's

more, you're kind of got better air links, right?

That's also potentially going to increase migration and foreign investment

and technology.

Spill-overs.

So I think it is reasonable to think about this

elasticity more than elasticity of income per capita as globalisation

broadly defined, rather than being specific about trade.

Um, he then has another paper that we're kind of

similar idea, except now he exploits the closure of the

Suez Canal in the 60s and 70s, uh, which is

more of just a kind of pure shock to trade,

right in the particulars of the sea distance between countries.

When he does that, he estimates a lower elasticity, about

0.25, which is consistent with the idea that this is

more of just a trade shock and not a broader,

um, globalisation, uh, shock.

Um, but also for the first point, couldn't it be

a concern that like, there's not going to be airfreight

for, for example, grains.

Mhm.

And then that's why you have a larger bias to

estimating.

So such an investigation.

Do you want to expand a little bit on kind

of exactly kind of what you mean by that.

In the sense of why you think that leads to

biased estimates.

Um.

Well, so the trade that is going to be carried

through air is going to be of like higher, uh,

added value goods.

Yeah.

And so this means that it can, it can possibly

have more spill-overs.

To the.

Country, which would increase income per capita by a larger

number than it would be if there was a lower

added benefit.

Yeah, so I think that's a reasonable argument to make.

And then I think there's kind of a question of.

Do we think that as meaning.

That of that kind of argument is implying that the

estimates are biased or that is it saying something about

the kind of external validity of that estimate?

Right.

So I think the way I might phrase what you've

just told us is that what he is estimating is

not the effect of trade on income per capita.

It's the effect of trade in a particular subset of

goods.

Right?

And as you correctly point out, the goods you tend

to send by air tend to be low weight, high

value goods, which might be good where there is more

scope for learning or for improvement in productivity.

So I think that's a very valid criticism of, well,

I don't know if it's a question, it's a valid

interpretation.

Yes.

Okay.

Um, so yes.

How would they normally measure?

Um, openness to trade?

Yeah.

Good question.

Sorry, I should have I should have said that the

standard measure would be like imports plus exports relative to

GDP.

All right.

So it's just it's a sort of defacto measure of

just how much trade do we observe relative to, uh,

to GDP.

Um, now depending on exactly kind of what empirical question

you're after, you might, you kind of might rather than

having that measure which is based on kind of observed

trade, you might rather have some kind of policy measure.

So, you know, another approach would be to measure like

what is the average tariff level a country has or

other measures of, of.

Of of, of of trade policy.

So there isn't there isn't one single measure.

It's kind of different measures are used in different contexts.

But in you know, in this paper it's, uh, trade

relative to both these papers.

So that's the meaning of is your income to trade.

Yeah.

It's the increase.

The import share.

We get an increase in GDP.

Yes.

Um, let me know okay.

So okay, so I think I just missed in in

these papers he actually regresses the regresses log income per

capita on log trade so he doesn't hear.

He's not normalising by GDP per capita.

So it is just the elasticity of income per capita,

uh, to trade.

Uh, which makes sense in the context of his kind

of empirical strategy.

But if you wanted to measure openness, you would want

to normalise trade pipe.

Okay.

So again, this is sort of a literature where because

the kind of empirical challenge of finding a good instrument

is difficult, it's not you know, there aren't a huge

number of papers in this literature, and there's certainly scope

for us to kind of learn more about this relationship.

But the work that has been done suggests kind of

at the macro level, we do see this positive effect

of increasing openness on, on, uh, trade.

Um, that said, you know, we've already talked about how

the er can cost neutral Cooley paper provides a very

different, uh, take on whether there are gains from trade.

Essentially, they argue that the shocks they're looking at, though,

they don't find evidence of trade.

And then the final bit of literature I wanted to

talk about is just kind of these were the sort

of macro level papers on trade and growth.

What do we know at the firm level in terms

of evidence on trade and and growth?

So there's a number of papers at the firm level,

um, which basically ask the question if we study a

particular trade liberalisation episode, how the firms respond to this

trade liberalisation episode.

So, for example, Pilot Business has this paper where she

looks at as Argentina and Brazil liberalise trade from Mercosur.

So Argentinean firms face lower tariffs on their exports to

Brazil.

How do they respond?

And she documents evidence of kind of technology upgrading by

Argentinian firms.

So this is, you know, sort of evidence consistent with

that market size effect.

We talked about at the start that as market size

increases for, uh, Argentinian firms, uh, they invest more in

technology and they're looking at kind of the US trade,

have some evidence that kind of points in a similar

direction.

So there's this kind of micro evidence which is supportive,

that this market size effect does seem to operate in

practice at the firm level.

Um, and then there's also a literature kind of looking

at the import competition effect at the firm level.

Um, so this is why I've moved back to Van

Reenen.

There's work by Auteur or to and co-authors the same

kind of group, of course, that we talked about last

week in the context of the China shop.

What's interesting here is that these two papers, in some

ways, kind of ask a similar question.

They're both about how does Chinese import competition affect productivity?

Growth and innovation at the firm level are converging in

in Europe or in the US.

But they come to different conclusions.

So in the the Blumenthal paper, they find that, uh,

the response to Chinese import competition in Europe is increased

innovation.

Um, excuse me.

Sorry.

Whereas in the auto paper, they find that in the

US the response is decreased innovation.

Um, so the literature so the literature on how import

competition affects innovation at the firm level is a little,

um, there are different results in different empirical contexts.

Context, I think it's fair to say there isn't a

consensus.

The import competition either stimulates or decreases innovation.

It's very context dependent.

Now, if you think about the discussion we had when

we originally talked about competition, that potentially actually kind of

makes theoretical sense in that we said that, you know,

in schumpeterian models there can be, you know, import competition

has the potential to decrease innovation through the sort of

direct competition.

But if you have these kind of escape competition effects,

then it can actually increase innovation.

So you could kind of interpret Lumet's findings that kind

of European firms were innovating to escape competition with the

Chinese, whereas you could interpret your total finding that kind

of in the US, the market size effect was such

that, you know, the reduced the reduction in market size

and reduced innovation.

So that's sort of it's a way to try and

reconcile the different findings.

Uh, though, you know, ideally we would like to know

more about why one effect dominates in one situation and

another in another.

Yeah, and the reason that we know in the previous

one that it's really just on on the size of

market effect and not also important competition is this, this

kind of a unilateral tariff change.

So in these cases, like there is no Brazilian firms

not also being able to to export to Argentina or.

Yeah, I mean so it's not unilateral but they are

trying to separate the two.

So you kind of you can imagine that if the

tariff reductions are different on exports and imports, you can

estimate the two effects separately.

Um, and that's essentially what they're trying to do in

this paper.

So for example in the Labeller and traveller paper they

have bales which are both, you know, what is the

reduction the export tariffs I think they've their data is

Canadian.

So from the perspective of Canadian firms what reduction in

export tariffs do I face on my exports to the

US and what reduction on the US firms on based

on imports.

And because those things aren't perfectly correlated, you can separate

the two.

Okay, so that's what I wanted to say about the

kind of existing trading growth literature.

Before we get into a couple of these papers in

more, uh, detail.

Um, what we've been trying to do in this discussion

is sort of highlight what some of the most important

questions are, and the sort of broad types of answers

that people have given, but also where there are existing

gaps in the literature that, uh, research could, uh, fill

in.

So in particular, you know, I think these are these

final four bullet points here are kind of four areas

where I see big gaps in this literature.

Uh, one is, um, kind of understanding more about this

import competition, about when it's positive or negative and kind

of under what circumstances does it exactly offset or not

offset the market size effect.

Um, a second is thinking about.

Uh, do.

We, do we see the effects of kind of at

the firm level or more on within firm changes or

across firm reallocation effects?

When we talk about the merits model, we highlighted how

everything came from cross firm reallocation.

Okay.

Once you allow firms to make technological investments, then you're

also getting within firm technological changes.

So understanding the relative importance of those two margins is

important.

And then particularly for thinking about kind of dynamic effects

of trade and how trade affects knowledge, spill-overs is really

the kind of crucial parameter we'd love to know more

about in many contexts, and also how important this advantage

of backwardness is for allowing developing countries to to catch

up.

All right.

Any.

Yeah.

Sorry.

Just on the market size effect, um, is there I

thought there's a similar argument to that people made to

support protectionism, the market effect.

Yeah.

What the same mechanism to fly through.

So it's like the same idea of bigger market supports.

Yeah.

But you know, it depends on if it's homework for

them.

Yeah.

So I think.

At least other kind of basic level, the home market

effect is like a static version of these kind of

learning by doing, uh, effects that we have been talking

about.

Right.

In that.

Um, if you think about it.

So the kind of in the original way Krugman wrote

down the whole market effect, as your market size increases,

the size of the industry increases, which overall increases overall

industry product productivity.

That's the home market effect in a static sense.

And you know, that can generate incentives for policy intervention.

The dynamic led to kind of learning by doing stories.

In particular I've been talking about are kind of another

version of a similar effect, but it's more about explicitly

about the dynamics, but the kind of some of the

underlying intuitions are similar.

Okay.

Any other questions at the moment before we take a

break?

Okay.

During the break I'm going to send around a bit

of paper.

So as I said last week, um, Catherine is going

to take over the lectures for the next two weeks,

but then I'm coming back in week seven and we're

going to do some presentations.

So I'm going to send around a sign up.

So if you can put down name, email address and

kind of what topics within international trade you're interested in,

then I'm going to allocate you into groups to do,

uh, presentations together.

Uh, if you're auditing the course it is optional whether

you want to do a presentation or not.

If you are taking the course of credit.

Please do, uh, sign up.

Uh, and the more the more information you give me

about the areas you're interested in, the better the chance

I can allocate kind of an allocation of groups such

that you have some topic you're interested in in the

paper you're going to present.

Okay.

Thank you.

So if we could fill that out, let's just send

that around.

Two.

Metres.

Um.

Okay.

So.

Uh.

Decision time.

Think about it.

Well, because you will not be able to change the

topic until your PhD dissertation.

Let's say.

Developing countries.

All right.

What would.

What will you do so that I can.

Convince you to not like me?

I don't know how.

Physics, actually.

Yeah.

That's true.

Um.

I like these as well.

Yeah.

Those two lovers.

It's part of the marriage.

Um.

Let's see.

No, let's be honest.

Uh.

Very good.

Uh.

She pauses.

Huh?

She pause.

I don't think I'll go that specific.

Otherwise it's not right.

I guess I just pick you up anyway.

Yeah, yeah.

I know.

That's actually a good question.

I don't know, hammering.

Outside right now.

Oh, yes, it is beautiful.

Sitting on the side of the building where you're facing.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Me too.

Yeah.

I mean, the place right next door is, uh.

I decided today it was enough.

And then I'm going to invest in really good noise

cancelling headphones.

Yeah.

It's still not enough.

I mean, I hope it helps, but, yeah.

No, I have, like, in-ear ones that I use right

now and I realise I push them so deep in

there that it's maybe not good for medical.

Yeah.

It's supply chains like the networks that people.

Thanks.

Let's get a coffee.

Yeah.

Which one's delicious?

The kitchen offered something similar.

I can see how you do not appreciate the kitchen

appliances.

I can see why you don't.

All right?

Yeah.

Okay.

Uh.

Can you send it over?

Yeah.

This.

Actually have a question?

Yeah.

So what do you think?

These answers to all of the industries you don't like.

Like for example.

Yeah.

So we go to complex and region and.

Then bargaining maybe.

Yeah.

I think it definitely would be like if you were

kind of thinking about a sort of spatial type model.

I would definitely, if there is, um.

Like this kind of evidence that if you, if you

have a knowledge flows as measured by parking citations that

are extremely geographically localised against.

Each other.

Yeah.

And the action is not needed.

Yeah.

I need you to translate.

Um, sorry, I didn't finish it.

Uh, also on special landing.

No points from the last one.

Um, specialising in, uh, golf, I guess Quicken Loans.

Yeah.

So the idea of a, like, low value added product

doesn't.

Really exist in there.

Um, but they have a kind of a Ricardian model

where production just uses labels or labels during production.

So.

Um, yeah, all your value items is always coming through

that.

That label.

And I really focussed on this idea.

That expensive spill-overs varies depending on the species.

Okay.

All right.

We should get going again.

So our kind of next step is to think about

this paper by Boyer and overfilled.

Um, so I picked this paper because it is very

kind of explicitly built on these and called the model.

Right?

It's building on a model that we've already seen, and

it's introducing technology dynamics into that model.

Um, and in particular the way it is going to.

Yeah.

Now they have started really.

Um.

A constant battle in this building at the moment to

keep the noise out.

Um, so they're interested in this question of how does

trade affect technological growth, and what does that imply about

the kind of dynamic welfare effects of trade?

And in particular, there kind of starting point is the

idea that you learn from other producers or sellers that

you interact with.

Right?

So it's this sort of idea flows idea that you

might have seen in kind of some of the macro

work and moulded some work on this with Lucas.

uh, the idea that, you know, when producers or when

buyers meet sellers.

Part of what goes on is kind of an exchange

of information.

And that exchange of information can lead to, uh, knowledge.

Spill-overs.

Right.

So kind of the question where an overfilled ask is,

how does trade integration affect those knowledge spill-overs that are

occurring due to those interactions between buyers and sellers?

And what does that tell us about how trade affects

technological, uh, dynamics over, over time?

So they're going to set up a model that has

these kind of idea flow components.

Um, and they're going to kind of do a little

bit of theoretical work on.

Uh.

You know what, how trade backs that.

And then they're going to try and quantify their model

and say something quantitative.

Right.

The fact that they are building on this important model

means they have a framework that is indeed kind of

well suited for quantitative analysis.

Okay, so what are we going to talk about?

We'll talk about how they model idea diffusion, how they

bring trade into the model, how the two things interact,

and then kind of how we can do some quantification.

Okay.

So here's the setup.

It's a continuum of goods indexed by s in zero

one.

So a unit interval of goods for each good.

There's many potential producers and there's strong competition between producers.

So this is kind of building on these.

And more specifically it's building on Bernadette's and Jensen and

Caution, which is kind of a related paper that introduced.

We talked about it briefly in the lecture, but it

introduces um, imperfect competition in into, into each and Gordon

style model.

And the way it does that is, rather than assuming

that all producers have the same productivity draw.

Right.

So any concordant would be in a country for a

given country variety, all producers are the same productivity, so

there's perfect competition between the producers Says.

And by not eating yet in the courtroom, each producer

has a different productivity draw, and so the producer has

the best productivity draw, captures the market, and they limit

price to just keep the second best producer out.

Right.

And that's where the kind of virtual competition comes into

it.

That sounds complicated.

It turns out that essentially when you do that, with

the exception of the fact that you now have these

mark-ups, so you have some profits, everything else is just

kind of completely isomorphic to how the baseline is important

model.

Uh, look, so if you kind of understand the eating

quarter model, this extension with imperfect competition is actually very

straightforward to work with.

Okay.

So we're going to use Q to measure an individual

producer's productivity.

Right.

And then how does learning come into this model.

So I'm a producer I currently have productivity.

Q but over time I get new ideas.

So there's some stochastic or exogenous arrival of new ideas

at a given rate.

Okay.

And when I'm kind of hit by the idea of

area and I come up with a new idea, I

draw a new kind of productivity for that idea.

And the new productivity I draw is going to be

Z to Q prime to the beta, where Z is

just drawn from some exogenous distribution.

So if you just had a Z here, you kind

of be back in the eaten quarter world and a

what where I overfilled.

Add to that is that the Q prime component, um,

depends on the distribution of ideas that other producers have

and that I interact with.

So the Q prime is drawn from some distribution GT,

where GT is an endogenous distribution that kind of reflects

the productivity of other producers in the economy and potentially

other producers that I also interact with in other countries.

So it is going to be the endogenous.

The fact that this GT is endogenous and is affected

by international trade, that will generate the productivity dynamics, uh,

in equilibrium.

Um, so that's the that's the kind of quality of

the idea I get the, the productivity.

And then how often do I get new ideas?

Well, they arrive at this rate a t of of

z.

So a t is the arrival rate.

And then if my new idea is better than my

old idea, I adopt it and use it.

And if I don't, if it's not better than the

old idea, I just throw it away.

So there's kind of three disposal of bad ideas.

And then this parameter b here is uh, sorry, not

beta is crucial uh, because it measures kind of how

important the diffusion is in terms of its how important

the component.

The component that depends on the kind of endogenous distribution

is if beta zero.

They refer to that as a pure innovation model.

Right.

That's the case where you're just getting the exogenous draw.

Whereas if beta sub one you're getting kind of a

much stronger.

They're referred to as a pure diffusion model.

And as we've seen, the parameter beta tends to be

kind of crucial for that quantitative results.

I want happy with that so far.

Any kind of clarifying questions on that?

It's kind of this is one of those papers where

kind of you get the original setup.

The race for the rest of the paper follows quite

straightforward.

Okay.

So given kind of know what we've done here is

we've said kind of what rate did new ideas arrive

at and what productivity they have.

Given those two assumptions, we can then ask how does

the entire distribution of ideas evolve over time, which is

what we're going to do on this slide.

So the distribution of productivity across producer.

Any time t we're going to call F of Q.

So.

One minus f of Q is the uh the mass

of ideas that are better than Q.

So this is this left hand side here is this

is the mass of ideas that are better secure at

time t plus delta.

Right.

So that's going to be equal to the mass of

ideas that are better than q at time t plus

for ideas that are worse than uh, q at time

t, what is the probability that between T and t

plus delta, you get a new idea that is better

than q.

And that's what this integral here is given giving.

Right.

So that integral is just what is the probability that

between t and t plus delta I get a new

idea.

So it's arriving at this rate a.

And then the probability is that it's better than a

Q is given by this expression here.

Now we want to kind of work in continuous time.

So we're now going to take the limit as delta

goes to zero.

Um, so if you take the limit of this thing

as delta goes to zero and you rearrange in a

way that's convenient, what you get is you get the

derivative of the log of the distribution function just depends

on the kind of integral over the new ideas that

I might be drawing, uh, of the, you know, function

that's giving the arrival rate here.

So there's a little bit of kind of algebra involved

in getting to that expression.

But what it's telling you, and this is very intuitive,

it's just that the way in which the existing distribution

evolves just depends on how fast ideas are arriving, which

is the A term here.

and it depends on the distribution that I'm drawing.

The Q term uh, from, which is the GP.

Okay.

So so far we've been like general in the sense

that we haven't put any functional forms on the A

or the G.

What the paper then does is essentially show you what

functional form assumptions you can make.

That makes all this kind of now work in a

nice, tractable manner.

So that's the next step in the, uh, paper.

So they're going to assume that the arrival rate of

ideas.

Um, with quality Z.

So just to go back, remember what that was idea.

This is the, you know, product, the exogenous component of

the productivity.

So the arrival rate of ideas of equality Z is

this alpha z to the minus theta.

So this is just saying that you get the higher

quality ideas which are higher Z ideas occur less often.

So that's kind of natural.

Um, and in particular, you've got this kind of, you

know, constant power function here, which is attractive ability.

And then the alpha T is just a measure of

the overall kind of rate at which you draw ideas.

Now, if we combine that assumption with the assumption that

the kind of the upper tail of G.

So the upper tail of existing ideas is sufficiently thin.

And this is the formal sense, formal kind of assumption

that we need to hold and that beta is less

than one.

Then as you go to kind of take the limit

of this process going to infinity, the distribution of ideas,

or this is to be more specific, a normalised distribution

of ideas converges to a Fréchet limit.

Okay.

So this is kind of fun, but it's kind of

it's certainly very useful.

Um, but, you know, without having to put any assumptions

on G here.

Beyond that, it has this thin right tail.

And just putting this kind of power function structure on

the arrival rate of ideas.

We then get the kind of limiting distribution, this functional,

the shape of it is perito.

And this kind of normalisation here, which is scaling over

time is saying that, you know, it's a it's a

fresh distribution which is, uh, travelling outwards over time.

And where this, this lambda t here now is kind

of essentially the scale of this distribution, which summarises what

is the stock of knowledge in this economy.

And you can see the stock of knowledge in the

economy is just the integral up to the current time

of the arrival rate of ideas times an integral which

captures the quality of those ideas.

So this is convenient because this says, you know, if

this if this proposition holds, what we end up with

is a fresh distribution of idea quality, where the, uh,

kind of scale parameter of the distribution is endogenous and

depends on this diffusion process.

So it's kind of nice in that, um, it rationalises

essentially a model where what technology diffusion does is it

affects the scale parameter, the Fréchet distribution.

But you keep your, uh, you know, nice, tractable and

Fréchet functional form.

And the, the novelty here is then the contribution of

the paper in this dimension is showing that under these

assumptions about the ideal arrival process, you get this threshold

effect.

Any questions on that?

Okay.

So let's look at kind of a simple example of

how that might work to try and sort of better

understand the dynamics that are going on.

So.

You know, up to now, if you were kind of

paying close attention, you will have noticed that we haven't

really specified exactly what this distribution G is.

So what we're now going to do is we're going

to start actually putting specific structure on the distribution G.

And let's start with the case where g is just

the existing distribution of productivity.

So think about this as there is an existing distribution

of producer productivity out there.

When I get a new idea I'm randomly matched with

some existing producer and I learn their productivity, right?

That would give us a setting where the G is

equal to the f.

If that is the case, then we get a very

simple differential equation for how the stock of knowledge evolves

over time.

You can see it just depends on the arrival rate

and the existing knowledge stock.

And we've got this gamma function, which often shows up

in the fresh air model because it's the solution to

a particular integral.

Um, so we just get we get this knowledge evolving

over time in this way.

And if we're now also impose that the arrival rate

of ideas grows exponentially over time, then the stock of

knowledge also grows.

Uh, you know, in the limit of this, it grows

exponentially as well.

And the growth rate of the economy just depends on

gamma over one minus.

Uh, beta.

Okay.

Where remember gamma?

Where did we bring gamma into it?

Here or here.

Gamma is the arrival rate of new ideas.

So, you know, the economy grows because it gets new

ideas and it grows because of the learning.

And as beta gets closer to one, which is to

say more learning, you get a faster rate for.

Any questions on that?

Yeah.

Not on that.

No.

This is more about innovating than adoption, right?

All the firms are innovating here.

I'm not sure I quite agree with that.

Um, because if you think about when you get a

new idea and if your, your new idea is drawn

from the existing distribution.

You could think about that as kind of what I

do is I match with an existing producer and I

adopt their technology.

Right.

Now, the reason it's not that simple, though, is, you

know, your your new idea is to has these two

components.

So the way I would tend to think about it

is that like Z is the innovation component and Q

is the adoption component.

And your overall productivity is kind of a combination of

the of the two.

But I think the fact the fact that you're your

productivity does depend on, you know, in this example here

on the existing distribution.

That's to me I would read that more as adoption

than than innovation.

Okay.

Yeah.

Curtis the income for capital term comes from we didn't

specify the production process.

Yeah.

So fair question.

We haven't fully specified the model at the moment.

Um, what we're going to we're going to in a

couple of slides basically just say there's a kind of

linear in labour technology and that that will then give

this income per capita rate.

But you know that you are right.

I'm anticipating stuff I haven't showed you yet.

Yeah.

Okay.

So we'll we'll come to that.

Okay.

So, um.

At this point, we, we estimate that, uh, the process

for the distribution of productivity firms draw productivity from is

the distribution of the highest productivity in the economy.

No, it's the it's the the distribution of the distribution

across kind of all producers that are active.

So think about it as a continuum of goods okay.

And the productivity of the producer that's kind of actively

producing each good varies across goods.

So you might get a draw from the kind of

guy who has very high productivity.

But you might also get a controller from the guy

who pays over.

That's it.

I mean, within every industry.

Yes.

Within there is only.

One within each industry.

You, you you meet the best goal.

Yeah.

Okay.

Because we're assuming as you see, the other guys are

inactive currently.

So you don't want it.

Yeah.

But eventually one could extend to capture any kind of,

uh, spill-over.

Just modelling the dysfunction Function g right?

Yeah.

So you can put you are free to put whatever

structure you like on the G, which will give you

depending on what assumption you make, it's going to be

more or less tractable.

But yes okay cool.

Okay.

So now let's kind of fully specify the model.

Right.

Because so far we just specify this learning process.

What does the rest of the model look like.

This should look more familiar because this is where we're

just going to borrow from Bernard.

And yet in the autumn.

So there are many countries.

Each country just has a stock of labour that it

uses to produce.

It also has the stock of knowledge lambda I right.

This thing evolves over time, but we need an initial

condition setting it.

And there's going to be iceberg trade costs for trade

between pairs of countries.

Um usual constant elasticity of substitution preferences across this continuum

of goods.

Uh and here's our production technology straightforward.

So each producer just produces linearly using labour.

So if I have productivity q my production y equals

two times out.

Um, so this gives me an expression for the unit

cost of a producing a good in country I and

sending it to country J.

This should all look kind of fairly familiar from the

eastern and quarter model, right?

The cost is my labour cost times the ISO trade

costs divided by my, uh, productivity.

Um, and then since we have both on competition here,

the, uh, price each producer charges will just be either

the monopoly mark-up or if if lower, it will be

the they'll charge the kind of difference between their cost

and the second lowest, uh, unit cost.

Okay.

And then the difference there is giving them their profits.

So with that structure, I kind of.

With that structure at the industry level and conditional on

the knowledge stock, the equilibrium looks exactly like the income

quarter model.

So you get a price index that depends on the

technology of each country, its production cost and the iceberg

trade costs.

You get an expression for trade shares, which depend on

the ratio of these, these terms that show up in

the price indices across countries.

This if you go back to kind of what we

looked at in the first lecture of the course, this

is exactly the same expression just with different notation.

And then to pin down equilibrium you get the labour

market player information.

So if I know your knowledge stock the static equilibrium

which is given by these conditions.

And then what the paper is interested in is okay,

but how does the knowledge stock evolve over time.

So the way that I'm going to model that, which

is to say, the assumptions they're going to make about

the distribution G you draw from, they consider two alternatives,

uh, which they call learning from sellers and learning from

producers, and the learning from sellers case.

When you get a new productivity draw your new cue.

You draw from the productivity distribution of all producers that

sell to your country.

And in the learning from producers case, you draw from

the distribution of all domestic producers.

So in both cases, trade is potentially going to affect

these distributions.

Right.

Most obviously in the seller's case because as you open

to trade then you're drawing from the distribution of not

just domestic sellers but also foreign firms that sell into

the country.

Okay.

And in the learning from producers case, as you open

up to trade the set of domestic producers, that's active

changes.

And that also introduces a kind of endogeneity between the

distribution you draw from and trade.

So what they're interested in is if we make these

assumptions about how you learn, what does that imply about

how trade integration affects productivity dynamics?

So consider those two cases in turn because you get

slightly different results.

So in the learning from Sala's case, what we're saying

is that the distribution G is this the distribution of

all settlers in country at time T okay.

Um, now, if you go back to kind of the

equilibrium conditions of each, um, quarter model that they give

you, the expression for the distribution of productivity among sellers

coming from each country, and then we can kind of

combine them across countries.

And then what you get is you get the following

expression for how the stock of knowledge evolves over time.

So this is the growth in the stock of knowledge

in country I.

It depends on the idea arrival rate in country I

that's very natural.

Just how often do you get new ideas.

And then it depends on this term which is a

summation over all other countries or all countries, including domestic

countries are Of this term is the trade share and

this term is technology and country J.

Relative to the trade share coming from country J.

Okay.

So you can see trade affects this process through the

Pie terms.

And intuitively what's going on here is you know, this

term is capturing the fact that as you buy more

from country J.

So as pi goes up, you are, uh, accessing more

ideas that come from country J.

And then the second term is a measure of the

average productivity of producers from J that sell in AI.

So lambda J is the technology stock in country J.

When that's higher country, J has more, uh, a more

productive producers on average.

But then there's this selection effect where only the most

productive producers participate in trade.

And the in the Eaten Quarter model, it turns out

to be the case that the pi ij parameter is

captures the magnitude of that That's the selection effect.

So think about if pi j is very low, that

means you're not buying very much from country J.

Right.

And then lambda j over pi j will tend to

be very high.

So what's happening then is when you don't buy very

much from a country, it's only the most productive producers

in that country that you buy from.

So then the average productivity of the producers you're coming

into contact with is very high, which is why that

Lambda J over PJ ratio will be high.

And then as you buy more from that country, the

pi J Lambda PJ declines because the marginal producer that

enters is less productive than those first producers.

Okay everyone, I agree with that.

Um.

So if we think then, you know, we'll look at

this more if we think intuitively about what happens as

we increase trade integration.

There's two effects you kind of buy more from foreign

countries are which tends to be beneficial because it tends

to increase that term.

But also the average productivity of the producers that come

from the foreign country decreases.

And that's a that's a negative effect.

So these offsetting effects through which trade integration is going

to affect the knowledge stock.

Um, and you can actually show that if you want

to maximise knowledge growth, what you need is for the

trade shares to be proportional to the lambdas.

So to maximise your knowledge growth, you want to buy

from each country in proportion to its knowledge stock.

Is that what will happen in the equilibrium is there's

no policy intervention?

Is that what the equilibrium?

Is that what the trade shows will actually look like

in equilibrium?

Yeah, okay, I guess that wouldn't.

Be the case because you probably don't.

Internalise this fully.

Because the I guess the idea shock happens to everyone

in your economy.

And so you could you just focus on yourself.

And I guess that's a classic story.

Yeah.

I mean, so I mean, you've got the right idea

there, which is that, you know, this this learning is

an externality in the sense that, um, you can't choose

who you match with.

Right?

There is some randomness going on here.

Um, so.

What determines the amount that you trade with foreign countries

is the static equilibrium, right.

And in the static equilibrium, we saw at a moment

of what determines the trade shows.

And the static equilibrium is this expression here.

So it depends on the knowledge stocks, but it also

depends on the wages and the trade costs okay.

Where is the to maximise productivity growth.

You want the static.

You want the edge.

The trade shows to just depend on the relative uh

knowledge.

So in general the uh decentralised equilibrium here will not

be the growth maximising, uh, not leading, the growth maximising

uh, trade shows because it doesn't do.

This because the trade costs and the wages are not

entering this expression.

That makes sense.

Okay.

So we can um, that was learning from sellers.

Learning from producers is more straightforward in this model.

So the the dynamics of the learning from sellers this

process are more complicated than the dynamics that I use

this process in this model.

Um, and you can see that here, which shows that

when you just learn from producers, then the knowledge dynamics

depend just on this term here.

Right.

So compare the two sides.

Here we're summing over all trade partners of these two

terms.

In the learning producer case you've just got this case

which depends on the domestic knowledge stock relative to the

domestic trade share.

So here trade affects the knowledge the evolution of the

knowledge but only through changes in the domestic trade show.

So this is kind of similar to those formula we

saw for uh welfare gains from trade in both the

eastern quadrant and Malik's models, where the domestic trade share

was the kind of sufficient statistic for summarising the welfare

gains for trade.

In this model, the domestic trade shows the sufficient statistic

for summarising the endogenous evolution of the knowledge stock.

And as you open up to trade and that domestic

trade share declines.

So more trade openness will decrease, i.e. you can see

that that increases knowledge gap.

So in the learning from producers case, it is unambiguously

the case that as you become more open to trade,

uh, growth increases.

That's not true in the learning from sellers case, because

they're the kind of composition of who you're learning from

matters.

Another way, but I suppose suppose it's a three country

world, and suppose that you've got the domestic economy, and

then you've got a very high tech foreign economy, and

you've got a very low tech foreign economy.

And the domestic economy is kind of in the middle.

If when I open up to trade, I trade a

lot with the high tech economy in the learning from

sellers case, that will be a big boost to productivity

growth.

But if I trade not with the high tech economy,

but the low tech economy that will actually reduce productivity

growth.

Because now the kind of average meeting I have is

with a less productive, uh, uh, seller.

Okay.

Right.

Sorry.

Can you say that again?

Yeah.

You're learning from kind of, you know, you you randomly

meet one of the producers that is selling into your

country and you learn their productivity.

If one opens up to trade, the new producers that

arrive in my country are all coming from a very

advanced country with very high productivity, and I now start

to meet some of them.

Then my average productivity draw improves and productivity growth increases.

So this would be like the case of say the

UK opening up.

And we just meet sales coming from the US and

they're more productive.

So we get positive spill-over.

But in this model you can also get negative spill-overs

such that as I open up to trade.

Now, instead of meeting the kind of mediocre producers from

the UK, I'm meeting the low quality producers that are

coming from Spain, say.

Um, and that means that the on average, I'm now

getting a worst productivity drill I did before.

So productivity growth actually declines.

Okay.

So.

So that's a that's a possibility in the Learning Counsellors

case.

But it is not a possibility in the learning for

the use case.

Thank you.

Yeah.

One thing I do not understand is since we have

only one producer in each industry.

Yeah.

Even when we open up to trade, the one producing

will be the highest productivity one between the two countries.

Yeah.

Always possible for trade to decrease productivity.

If.

If so, think about what.

It's not it's not the productivity decrease.

It's the productivity growth decreases.

It's like the previously I'd been growing like this and

now I'm growing like that.

So it's like you're getting better.

Less productivity can't decrease your right, but it can increase

less quickly.

But I am.

So if, um, a producer from a low quality country

is selling a good in my country, it means that

this productivity drawer is higher than the producer in my

country.

So.

Okay, so so so that.

That last statement is not true.

Can anyone say why it's true input costs right.

Yeah.

So because remember it's this thing that matters.

So you might be the most productive the lowest cost

guy because you have high Q but it might be

because you have a low wage.

So if I do this, if the if they win

because they have low wage, not high productivity, that's gonna

be bad for productivity.

Good.

Okay.

Any other questions on that.

Um okay.

So now we're going to talk about getting some trade.

Right.

So as in kind of the class of models that

a character is in that is got to know, Rodriguez

clarified.

We talked about real income here.

Just depends on the ratio of technologies to the trade

chat.

So in the static models we've talked about up until

now, trade just affects the party.

Now it also dynamically affects the lambda.

So we're going to call the effects that operate through

the pi static gain some trade and the effects that

operate through the lambda dynamic gains and trade.

And the goal of the quantification exercise they're going to

be doing, they're going to do is to be like,

how big are the dynamic effects relative to the static

effects?

Um, if I mean.

This model is pretty tractable, but you're not going to

get closed form solution in the general asymmetric country case,

which is why we're going to go to quantification.

But if you make countries symmetric, it all solves incredibly

straightforwardly.

So if we assume there are n symmetric countries and

I support costs are common across countries, you can show

that the income in free trade relative to autarky is

just a function of how many countries there are.

And in particular, there's one term which captures the static

gains, and then the second term that captures the, uh,

dynamic gains here.

And you can see that the dynamic gains are higher

when beta is bigger.

Now let's just remind ourselves what beta is because it's

an important parameter here.

And it's easy to forget what it's doing.

Beta was the power that the productivity draw was taken

to.

So as you increase beta we're saying it's kind of

like the diffusion matters more.

And what we've now shown is that our gains and

trade in this symmetric world are greater when beta is

larger.

Right.

So takeaway from that.

If we want to think about the importance of these

dynamic welfare effects in this model, calibrating beta is going

to be really important.

And also if you set beta equal to zero, the

model kind of you know, it does have dynamics, but

it just is equivalent to the static train model.

So it's the fact that V2 is greater than zero,

that you have this diffusion process that generates the dynamic.

Um.

Right.

So here's some kind of graphs which are speaking more

to kind of how the kind of welfare effects and

the growth effects depend on, on beta.

So what have we got here.

These graphs are a little bit take a little bit

of digesting.

We've got the learning from this example on the left

and the learning from produce for example case on the

right.

Um.

In the top panel we're plotting the stock of knowledge

against openness.

And in the bottom panel we're plotting income against openness.

Um, and this is kind of a, you know, there's,

there's, there's growth here.

So this is kind of normalised income along the balanced

growth path.

And then we're doing that for different values of beta,

right.

So if you look at the turning from producers example

first, which is the simpler case, okay.

What we're seeing here is like how as we increase

openness, how does the stock of knowledge increase.

So the black dashed line, that's when that's kind of

the static model with no knowledge diffusion.

You can see uh, the stock of knowledge is independent

of openness.

And then as you increase beta, uh, the stock of

knowledge becomes more sensitive to, uh, to openness.

Right.

And in the learning from producers case, it does so

in a very simple kind of log linear, uh, manner,

so that the bigger beta is the kind of bigger

the gains are from openness.

The more interesting case is the learning from sellers case.

And the point they want to make here is that

in the learning from sellers case, when beta is large,

Most of the gains from increased openness occur at very

low levels of openness.

Why is that?

Is because, as you first open up to trade, right,

the first foreign producers that enter your market are the

most productive ones coming from any given country.

So you meet those foreign producers and you learn from

them.

And when beta is high, right.

Knowledge diffusion is relatively fast.

So the ideas that they bring in rapidly spread through

the economy.

So even at relatively low levels of openness, you get

these kind of big gains from opening up to to

trade.

Right.

Whereas when beta is low you see much less of

that.

Um, that, that that going on.

So.

Kind of two two things here.

Like there are additional gains from trade when we've got

beta positive.

Right.

But the larger batteries, the more you tend to reap

those initial gains just when you first open up to

trade, whereas once you're already very open, you can see

the static gains that the dynamic gains are very similar.

Right.

So it's saying that the ratio of the dynamic to

the static gains very much depend on both the level

of beta and your level of, of blueprints.

Any that kind of clear.

So this is kind of what we've been uh, okay.

So then let's come to the quantification.

So to do the quantitative analysis, they're going to add

a few more bells and whistles to the model to

make it a little bit more kind of quantitatively relevant.

Uh, so they're going to have intermediate inputs as well

as as labour.

I mean I think one, one takeaway from the certainly

from the quantitative trade, it should be static or dynamic,

is that the magnitude of your estimates is very sensitive

to whether you account for input output linkages by having

intermediate inputs or not.

So typically when people are doing quantitative work, they will

have input output linkages in that they'll also have non

traded goods.

And they're going to have physical capital as well as

Labour.

Um and they're going to have a 64 country version

of this model which they're going to calibrate from 1962

to 2000.

And now if you think about it, despite there being

kind of a lot this being quite a rich model,

um, there's actually relatively few parameters you need to calibrate.

In particular, there's really just two sets of parameters you

need, which are the arrival rate of ideas, which are

the alphas and the trade costs, which are the towns

and the way they choose to do.

The calibration in this paper is to choose to to

allow both these parameters to be time varying, and to

choose them so that the model exactly matches the data

on how TFP levels and bilateral trade shows evolve over

time.

So this is kind of an approach to calibration, where

we can say we've got enough parameters to match all

the moments we interested in, and we're going to choose

those parameters to kind of exactly match the time path

of those, uh, of those moments and then what they're

going to do kind of.

So this is the idea of sort of they calibrate

the model to the observed changes in trade costs and

rates.

Okay.

And then they're going to answer if I have some

other counterfactual change in trade costs, how does that affect

the the path.

And in particular how does that affect, uh, TFP growth.

Now the other parameter that obviously matters, as we already

talked about, is the beta, which is crucial because it's

kind of like the extent to which technology diffusion matters

right now here.

They do run into a bit of a problem in

that they don't have a kind of clear strategy for

calibrating beta.

So one, you know, a weakness of this paper is

that it's going to, you know, essentially be forced to

kind of present results for an illustrative range of values

of beta, rather than being able to say, okay, here's

how I would, uh, I would it would calibrate beta.

Um, the benchmark beta they're going to use is 0.6.

They, that is chosen so that the, uh, idea of

arrival rate in the US matches US population growth.

Um, the motivation there being you seen kind of Chad

Jones's work where the underlying long run source of more

ideas and more people, it's kind of matching that idea,

but it is a pretty, you know, it's a fairly

arbitrary way of calibrating beta.

So one, you know, one thing that would be nice

for this kind of literature and the papers that build

on this is to come up with a more convincing

way of calibrating.

Okay.

So then let me be a little bit more explicit

about how they do the counterfactuals, because it can be

a little confusing.

I certainly found it a little confusing when I first

read this paper.

Um, so you've got two sets of time varying parameters

the idea arrival rates alpha and the trade cost kappa.

Um, and they can solve for the TFP in each

country in each period as a function of these, uh,

parameters.

So what they're going to do is they're going to

compare TFP, uh, for the calibrated parameters at time t

to their initial values at time zero.

And they're going to decompose that into a term that

comes from changes in, uh, trade costs holding the idea

arrival rate fixed at time zero, rate at time zero,

and a term that captures the contribution of the change

in arrival rate.

So the idea is that this term captures, that captures

the contribution of arrival rates, change the ride rates, and

this term captures TFP growth from the changes in our

trade.

Right?

Alternatively, what you can do is you can change the

idea arrival rates at initial trade costs and then change

the trade costs at new arrival rates.

And that gives an alternative way of doing the the

decomposition.

Right.

Essentially what they're doing here is they're just saying when

we do the trade cost counterfactual, do we do it

with arrival rates at their end of sample level or

their beginning of sample level.

And that potentially is going to give slightly different quantitative

numbers?

Uh, so, you know, absent a particular reason to choose

one or the other, they do.

They do both and they compare them and we're not

happy with that.

So here's um, kind of an example of what they

find when they start to do these kind of actuals.

So they first focus on kind of for the East

Asian countries that have grown very rapidly in the post-war

period China, Korea, Taiwan and Thailand.

And for these countries, the blue line is observed TFP

growth.

The purple dotted line is, uh, TFP growth in a

model where they're in just a static model where GOP

growth only comes from the static efficiency gains from trade

integration.

And then the orange and the red line are the

two alternative counterfactuals we saw in the previous slide, where

we look at how what is the effect of reduced

trade costs on, uh, on TFP during the the sample?

So what do we take away from looking at these

graphs.

So one is that the red and the orange lines

are always above the purple line, which is just to

say that TFP growth, the dynamic component of the TFP

gains here is positive trade integration is boosting, Are boosting

productivity growth.

And you know, which is perhaps unsurprising, but remember that

it's not necessarily the case in this model that that

has to be, um, true.

Um, and then the other thing is when we kind

of look at magnitudes on average trade cost declines here

can account for maybe about half the productivity growth in

these, uh, countries.

So given that these are very countries that grew very

rapidly during this period, that's kind of suggesting that trade

cost may have played an important role in that, uh,

in their productivity growth.

That's what they kind of want you to take away

from, from this.

And then the other kind of quantitative features I have

here to show you.

What we're plotting here is changes in TFP growth in

the data on the x axis and in the model

on the y axis.

For the static model without technology dynamics and for the

dynamic model.

Uh, and each observation is a country.

And again, the point that you're just making here is

that the the productivity gains from a reduction in trade

costs are much larger once you allow for the dynamic

effects of technologies than in the, uh, static model.

So that, again, they're making the case that when you

incorporate these endogenous trade integration on technologies through this idea

diffusion process, it suggests that the, uh, effect of trade

on productivity and the welfare gains that generate a much,

much larger than in static volumes.

Okay, so that's kind of the main arguments they made

in the paper.

What concerns might you have about this paper or questions

first if you want.

Yeah.

Sorry I was just thinking like um, they say that

the source of changes in trade, trade costs.

But what if it's, you know, population growth, depressing wages

and making it easier for you to export it, which

could also be.

Yeah.

So so they in the background.

That calibration also kind of allows populations to adjust over

over time.

So I don't think I said that.

So that's on on me.

Uh but.

You're you're correct that you know trade could also grow

just because economic scale is expanding.

But they account for that in the calibration.

Just kind of changes in population size and changes in

capital endowments.

Okay.

So.

Yeah.

The fact that in these pictures it's the trend because

in the sense that I'm, I'm a bit.

Wondering what.

Because otherwise I guess there are some countries that would

grow even more and then they can't explain any of

that.

So they say, okay, we take the average growth like

TFP growth rate out and then just the variation of

that.

But that's a bit because this means they can actually

explain even less than.

Explain now.

Is that.

The way their model is set up for kind of

the long run growth rate is not affected by trade.

So they want to take that out.

Kind of what what you want to think is like,

you know, the global economy is growing at some long

run.

Very great.

That doesn't change when you open up to trade.

But what changed when you open up to trade is

kind of where countries are relative to sort of their

potential.

And that's the that's the effect they're trying to get

at here by determining everything.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Does this.

Model imply.

That I think.

The countries never want to trade with the rest of

the world.

You know, so not so.

Not necessarily.

Right.

So it does have something to that.

And let's go back.

Here.

Right.

If your goal is to maximise your knowledge growth.

And no no that's not the same as maximising welfare.

But let's set that aside for the moment.

You want your trade shares to be proportional to knowledge.

Share.

So it's saying you want to train more with higher

knowledge countries, but not zero with high knowledge countries.

And the reason for that is even so, not zero

with low knowledge.

The reason for that is even in the low knowledge

countries, because there's a distribution of productivity, the best producers

you can still potentially learn from, it's just there's fewer

of them in the low knowledge countries.

What it is saying or you know, what would be

true in this model is you may want to adopt

trade policies such that you trade more with high knowledge

countries to our knowledge countries.

Now whether that's the case depends on, you know, how

these trade shares compare to the actual observed trade shares

which would be given by this expression.

But if, for example, you trade a lot in the

decentralised equilibrium, a very low knowledge country, there would be

a case here for imposing import protection against that country

to shift your trade shares.

I have a questions on this movement.

Yeah.

So.

Yeah.

Page 32.

Why are these variables home?

Why x y x negative.

Um, it's so there's kind of two bugs.

That one is that they've taken the log, uh, which

is made.

So if you've got a log of something less than

one, it's going to be negative.

And then, you know, why is income per capita less

than one.

They it's normalised relative to something such that it is

less than one.

Uh, is it obvious what it does?

I suspect they've normalised it such that it kind of

log such.

The income per capita is one.

Um, in the limit as you open up.

Does it say openness with users?

Uh, per capita income?

No.

So.

Sorry.

Openness.

Openness is increasing as we go this way.

So log Pi II is inversely related to openness.

So this is the domestic trade share.

So as as this declines openness is increasing.

But with better increasing these curves um become more nimble.

Um.

So yes.

But you don't.

That's not what you're doing.

There is not a trade integration comparative study.

It's a comparative study across models with different values of

data.

If you want to do a trade integration comparative study,

the question is as you increase openness, how does in

this case per capita income change.

And what it's showing you is that for high better

at low levels of openness, you see very rapid increase.

And then once you get to higher levels of openness.

They're kind of.

It's less sensitive to openness.

Does that make sense?

But I so one thing I definitely agree with you

is there's a lot of information in these graphs.

And it takes a lot of time staring at them

to get your head around exactly what they're saying.

They're not it's not completely transparent what we learned before.

Other.

Other questions.

So would it be fair to say that the the

results are really sensitive to the like, therefore, especially in

the accounting?

Um, when they do the work miracles and and they

don't really show.

Yeah.

I mean, because we're going so the one I show

you doesn't show you the sensitivity to fades.

Uh, other than, like, you've got the beta zero basically.

That's like static versus dynamic.

But yes, the results are so sensitive to the value

metre.

They just use the.

And yeah, the choice of beta is a.

I think Ezra describes it as a heroic assumption.

The way that they calibrate.

Mhm.

Okay.

Um, so you know, they are very aware of that

limitation.

Okay.

You know what I mean.

So what I would take from this paper, if we

kind of sum it up before we have a break,

um, there's a technical contribution in modelling the knowledge diffusion

process in a way that is both tractable and delivers

this Fréchet limit, which allows us to kind of use

the eating courts and machinery that works well for doing

trade models.

So that's a useful technical contribution to the paper.

And then the substantive argument is, is making is twofold.

It's first that to the extent that we learn from

interaction with other producers or sellers, as trade sort of

improves, the set of people we interact with, that can

be an important source of dynamic gains because it can

generate these, uh, this, this form of productivity growth.

But exactly how that change the dynamic gains depends crucially

on this value of data.

Right.

So as we saw when beta is very high, you

get the dynamic data when you open up a little

to trade.

And then as you open up more the dynamic gains

are much lower.

So the value of beta is is important.

And you know, the paper doesn't have a huge amount

to say about about beta.

So I think we probably wouldn't want to take its

quantitative numbers too seriously.

But it's more illustrative that potentially this is the quantitatively

important channel that's kind of worthy of further study.

Any final questions?

All right.

Let's take another break that.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Oh wow.

You guys did provide a little bit of information.

That's great.

Thanks.

We did of one's handwriting?

Yeah.

How would you draw the boundaries?

Like what?

Innovations?

Because what if there looks like innovation?

Because you're not creating ideas from scratch.

You're always thinking of something and building on it.

So.

Yeah.

Um.

I think that's a really good question.

And I don't think.

It doesn't matter to here, but.

I guess.

No, no, no, but I mean, I think it does

matter in general.

So I think it's a good question.

I think it matters.

And I think there isn't a clear like, agreed upon

way of delineating the two in the literature.

The personally the way.

Sorry.

No, I mean, I think intuitively we think about it

is innovation is when you think fundamentally new and adoption

is when you adopt something that's yeah, already exists.

How we model the two often looks very similar, because

even when you innovate, you build upon existing knowledge is

existing knowledge, and therefore that very quickly looks quite similar

to adoption.

So yeah, like it can I think in models they

often look very similar.

Oh man.

It's like these like the more knowledge kind of innovation

models.

Firms are staying on fixed costs.

They pay higher to innovate like they're.

Paying less to.

Yeah exactly.

But even then you're saying kind of saying in both

cases like there's a fixed cost of doing it and

it's just in one you the fixed cost is slightly

higher.

Again, the modelling is quite similar, even if conceptually we

think they're separate things.

Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

Oh yeah.

Just a technical passage.

I didn't understand how when we have the expression for

maximising knowledge growth and we have g.

Um.

G prime, what's what.

Okay.

So sorry.

Yeah.

I mean, Jay is one country and Jay farm is

a different country.

So this is like saying my my import share from

country.

Jay, relative to my import share from country Jay Prime

should be the knowledge of the country.

Jay.

Relative to the knowledge.

Okay.

Okay.

I was thinking, can it be consistent in.

Aggregate.

Like if every country trades according to this, uh, to

this optimal condition, does it does it add up to

one?

Uh, so it can do because since these things are

relative, then you can always imagine that there's a constant

of normalisation here which you can adjust to make sure.

So it's definitely it's feasible.

And in this way it's they determine the the level

of openness.

So the the Tei the trade with yourself.

Yeah.

Because I mean so j here could be ai so

pi I.

Over pi should be lambda I over lambda j.

So training yourself should also be subject to this.

But in this case one that we one.

Wouldn't want.

To train yourself.

No.

Because it's the pi I it's the share of expenditure

on goods produced domestically.

So that's the last one.

Yeah, but I mean, uh, would be equal to the

share.

To your stock of knowledge divided by your stock knowledge.

Oh, no.

No, but it would still be you'd it would be

like J is I, but J prime is that.

Do you.

Right.

Okay.

Right, right.

Sorry.

No no no.

And it's it's it's a bit subtle.

Okay.

Yeah.

No it is, it is.

The whole.

Thing is.

Just.

That.

Selfishness.

Is so crucial for.

Okay.

I.

Hope so.

Yeah.

So hopefully, you know.

All right, let's, um.

Let's get started again.

Let's refer to the laptop.

Not sure for sure.

Okay, so for the, um, kind of final paper we're

going to look at today, I wanted to show you

of an example, an example of a paper that thinks

about kind of optimal policy in a dynamic context and

specifically optimal, uh, pattern policy.

So, you know, the motivation here is the long standing

debate over how much protection countries should provide to intellectual

policy.

On the one hand, we think that protecting intellectual intellectual

property and protecting intellectual property allows innovators to appropriate the

returns to their innovation, which increases the incentive to innovate.

And if we think that in the decentralised equilibrium innovation

is inefficiently low, then we might want to encourage greater

innovation.

So that's the rationale for strong patent protection.

On the other hand, particularly in the open economy context,

there is a concern that in practice almost all innovation

goes on in rich industrialised countries.

So patenting, innovation and patenting are incredibly concentrated in like

a very small number of countries.

I think, for example, just the US and Japan do

half the world's patenting in China is China is also

becoming increasingly important in patenting, but historically, it's basically only

been the G7 that did a kind of significant amount

of R&D and and patenting.

So they're concerns that if countries provide strong patent protection,

essentially what they're doing is they're handing market power to

firms that come from these rich countries.

And by increasing their market power, these firms are going

to charge higher prices.

So you end up with kind of a transfer of

rents from consumers in poor countries to firms in, uh,

rich countries and countries, governments, countries like Brazil and India

in particular, have been very vocal in arguing that because

of this, it doesn't make sense for them to provide

strong match protection.

So this paper we're going to look at now is

kind of an attempt to provide a quantitative answer to

that question.

What does optimal policy look like in open economies, and

how do we quantify this trade off between, on the

one hand, wanting to provide an incentive for innovators to

create new ideas, but on the other hand, are being

concerned that patents create market power, which is itself a

distortion free.

And you're all probably too young to remember this.

But in the in the 1990s, when the World Trade

Organisation was being set up, there was a kind of

very contentious argument over the trips.

Trips chapter of the World Trade Organisation, which it trips

is Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

What Trips essentially did was force developing countries to strengthen

their patent protection to levels that were already available in

developed countries.

So in order to become a WTO member, you had

to agree to have, for example, to offer 20 years

of patent protection for all technologies, whereas before that developing

countries tended to have much weaker, uh, patent protection.

So there was a big argument over whether this was,

Uh, you know, whether this benefited the world or whether

this actually left.

Some countries are worse off.

So we're going to try and speak to that as

well.

Is that debate as well in this paper?

Um, so the the goal is to construct, you know,

a quantitative model that features both the kind of dynamic

elements that we've talked about today and also, you know,

static elements of trade and, and market power, and then

to calibrate them all in a way that allows us

to quantify this trade off between innovation and growth and,

and market power and use it to analyse optimal, uh,

pattern policy.

Um, so let's get into the model and how that

works.

And I kind of chose this paper, uh, partly because

it's a model that combines elements of both the eastern

quarter model and the Mannix model.

So it draws nicely on stuff we've looked at already,

uh, in the, in these lectures, uh, many countries, again,

we're just going to have each country has Labour as

a factory production.

So Ellen will be the Labour country and time is

continuous.

Each country has a representative consumer who discounts, uh, the

future rate ro and has constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution

preferences.

So gamma is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.

So this is a very standard setup in kind of

growth models of what intertemporal preferences look like.

I imagine you've seen it before.

Um, so workers earn a wage and they can invest

in risk free, uh, assets.

And we're going to assume the international capital markets are

closed.

So we're really focusing on openness through trade integration, not

financial globalisation.

Um, and then the final goods is just a gain,

a constant elasticity aggregate of different varieties.

So omega are the different varieties, M is the mass

of varieties.

And it's going to be growth.

It generates growth in this model.

So when we innovate we're going to create new varieties.

It's Romanian in that sense.

And then varieties differ also in their quality, which we

call um, sci.

And that's going to play an important role in the

in the model.

So the kind of the preceding stuff was standard.

And then the, the action of how this model works

is in how varieties are produced and trade it.

So conditional on being able to produce a variety, the

production kind of looks okay.

Like in the output is just some productivity times how

much labour you use and productivity is drawn from a

fresh distribution with scale parameter t dispersion parameter theta, and

then varieties are traded subject to iceberg bilateral trade cost.

So that all very much looks like even corporate model.

What is distinct here is there's going to be an

assumption.

There are two different types of For ages, so there

are going to be both eat and what we call

eating golden varieties, and what we'll call heartland Krugman varieties.

The eat and cotton varieties are produced competitively, can be

produced anywhere in the world, and then are traded exactly

as the called model.

So they're just going to be sourced from the lowest

cost supplier of each variety.

So this is kind of our familiar eating corn setup.

But then the heartland Krugman varieties are monopolistic varieties in

the sense that only a single producer in one country

knows how to produce those varieties, and then it can

sell them anywhere in the world as a monopolist.

So it's going to sell them, you know, charging a

a monopoly mark-up, which in here is the standard, you

know, this is the same as email.

It's just the monopoly.

Mark-up is just sigma over sigma minus one over the

unit cost of production.

So the way in which market power introduces distortions.

Here is is twofold.

It's through the mark-up distortion.

The fact that you're charging this distortion sigma over sigma

minus one.

But note there's also going to be a sourcing distortion

because for the each and quarter varieties, you can always

source them from the lowest cost producer.

But for the monopolistic variety, you can only source them

from the monopolist who is not necessarily the lowest cost

producer.

So we generate the the market power that is introduced

by the existence of these Hubbard Krugman varieties generates, uh,

these two sources of, of distortion.

And then when it comes to quantifying the model, it's

going to be all about the trade off between these

distortions that market power introduces versus the effects on on

innovation.

So at any sort of this slide is sort of

describing what's happening in a static sense at any point

in time.

And then the dynamics is about what determines kind of

how many each of the quantum and how many Krugman

varieties are and how they change over time.

So there's a life cycle of product varieties here that

when varieties initially innovate, invented.

So you do R&D to invent a new variety.

When you initially invent that new variety, it starts out

life as a whole, equipment variety that's just produced by

the single, uh, monopolist.

Right.

And so when you you create it, you learn your

qualities, Cy.

And this is kind of like medicine that the quality

side is drawn from some fixed distribution.

Okay.

Um, and then there's some patenting decisions that will come

through in a moment.

Um, and then once your patent decisions are made, you

also learn your productivity.

So note that there are these two dimensions of, um,

product heterogeneity.

Products differ in both their that qualities and their activities.

Um, and the the modelling trick that keeps this model

tractable is essentially having these two dimensions operate independent independently.

Um, that allows you to leverage the kind of ease

and quarter machinery whilst also having these monopolistic properties.

So each variety starts life as a husband problem product,

but then over time it transitions into being an eastern

quadrant product.

So it's kind of like a product lifestyle where it

transitions from being produced and sold monopolistic to produce and

sold competitively.

Um, and for that to happen, two things happen to

happen, uh, the technology has to diffuse.

So technology diffusion occurs at some Poisson rate.

Nu.

So the idea here is that initially only the monopolist

knows how to produce the variety.

And then at some point in time, knowledge about that.

If a variety seeps out and other producers can potentially

produce it.

So the producer loses their technological monopoly.

But they may also have a legal monopoly, which is

what the patents give.

So the variety will only become an even courtroom product

when both the technology is diffused and the patent that

protects the product has expired.

Okay.

And the way patents work is that patents are country

specific.

So if you want patent protection.

So if I'm a US producer and I want patent

protection in Germany, I have to buy a German pattern.

And that gives me a monopoly right to sell my

goodin in Germany.

But it doesn't affect my kind of whether I have

a monopoly right anywhere else in the world or not.

So we have these country specific patents, um, and they

expire at a rate a delta n.

So delta n is kind of the key policy parameter

that governs the strength of patent protection.

Um, and the smaller delta N is, the stronger the

pattern protection is, the less quickly the patent expires.

Any questions so far.

Be clear tonight.

Okay.

And then kind of stepping we're kind of doing this

in reverse order.

We're now stepping back another stage to say okay what

does the actual innovation process look like.

So you do R&D to innovate.

Um each R&D worker innovate at rate E to L

to the minus kappa.

So what's going on here?

The ITR is a parameter that captures how good each

country has is at R&D we call it the R&D

uh efficiency.

So this is kind of capturing the idea that the

US is just a more innovative environment than the UK,

for example.

And then the L to the minus kappa here is

capturing congestion in R&D.

So there's a kind of stepping on the toes analogy

that the more people who are doing R&D, the less

productive R&D arm becomes.

If you if you kind of read quantitative models of

growth, people think this kappa parameter is about a half.

So there's empirical evidence that essentially the returns to scale

in R&D are decreasing.

And the one way to capture that is how to

have this kind of congestion processing in R&D.

So it's kind of something that tends to get thrown

into quantitative models of quantitative growth models.

And then as usual, there'll be a free entry free

entry into innovation.

So you just enter into innovation into innovating and maximising.

Okay.

Um so I do my R&D, I innovate, when I

innovate, I get my quality CI and I create big

CI varieties where big size the aggregate Quality.

Of of.

All varieties in the economy.

So this is where the knowledge spill-overs are coming into

the model that generate endogenous growth.

It's saying that as the as the economy grows, each

successive innovation creates more, uh, more varieties.

I think if you you would have seen in macro

the typically endogenous growth models, there's some kind of knife

edge spill-over condition that has that is necessary to ensure

the existence of a balanced growth path.

Right.

And that condition will typically say spill-overs have to be

sufficiently, uh, strong in this in this setup, it's this

assumption that is generating that possibility of balanced growth.

Um, and then your quantity side.

Right.

So we're kind of following shiny here.

So that's drawn from a Pareto uh, a Pareto distribution.

Um, so we've got kind of both the predicted distribution

coming here on the quality draws.

And we have the Frechet distribution on the productivity draws

as well.

Okay.

And then note that we can take the the aggregate

quantity psi and we can decompose it into uh, in

each market we decompose it into what share of quality

is sold competitively.

So this is the kind of shared quality that's sold

as each important product.

And then the share that is sold monopolistic coming from

each, uh, origin market.

And what the kind of variety lifecycle process we talked

about on the previous slide is going to do is

going to tell us about the dynamics of each of

these, uh, variables and how they evolve over time.

Will then, you know, both generate the growth in the

economy as CI grows, but also the split between the

ci c and the CI m is telling us about

how much market power there is in the economy.

And then the kind of final component of the model

is the patenting component.

So the way patenting is modelled here, is it as

a fixed cost.

So there's a fixed cost or in labour units to

patent in each country.

And so from firms point of view it's just a

kind of a value maximisation decision you patent.

If the additional value to the firm from patenting exceeds

your value if you don't pass them.

So if we let VP be the value of a

firm from I with quality side and patterns and VMT,

if it doesn't pattern, you just compare.

Is that increase in value from patenting?

Does that exceed, uh, the fixed cost of patenting.

Right.

So what is the increase in value from patenting.

It's going to depend on three terms.

It's going to depend on your quality.

It's going to depend on the profitability of the market.

You're seeking to patent it.

And it's going to depend on how much you increase

your effective discount rate.

Quite pathetic.

So where are those three different terms coming from?

Well, higher quality products generate higher profits, so that it's

just more valuable to hold patents on those profit on

those products.

Likewise, it's more valuable to pattern in markets where you

make higher profits.

Um, and then this this final term which is given

by this expression here.

Right.

What this is capturing is that if you patent the

expected duration, the expected time during which you have a

monopoly over your product and make profits gets longer.

So this is the boost to, uh, the boost to

your profitability coming from holding the patent, from the fact

that you kind of expect to be a monopolist, uh,

for longer.

So if we then compare that value of patenting to

the fixed cost of patenting, and this has a very

merits flavour to it, you get a quality threshold above

which you, you patent.

So it's this usual kind of observation that, you know,

if you have, um, the cost is a fixed cost

and the benefits are heterogeneous in some measure of, you

know, firm quality or productivity, you'll get a threshold above

which people choose to pay the fixed cost.

Okay.

And here the that threshold depends on the value of

patenting, which in steady state can be written as depending

on the cost of patenting the profitability, and then the

expected profit or the expected duration increase from, from from

patenting.

And if you do comparative statics on the threshold, you

know, what you're going to see is that the threshold

is is lower.

So you see more patenting when you have stronger patent

protection, when patents are less costly.

And also then when you have faster technology diffusion, why

is there a complementarity between patenting and technology diffusion in

this model?

Anyone's kind of see what what in the model is

saying that when technology is diffuse, faster firms have an

increased incentive to patent.

Because you have a.

Lower time being the monopolist than the rest.

Yeah.

Exactly right.

Imagine a world where there was no technology diffusion.

If there's no technology diffusion, then you've got no incentive

to patent because you just keep your monopoly, because technology

never diffuses.

But the faster that technology diffuses, the greater the value

of of patenting is because you're kind of less protected

by the technological monopoly.

So the legal monopoly becomes important.

Any question this is the this is the setup of

the model.

So any kind of clarification questions on the setup of

the model.

Okay.

Good.

All right.

So before coming to the quantification I wanted to show

you kind of a few of the kind of equilibrium

conditions in the.

Model.

To understand kind of what the equilibrium looks like and

how changes in pathogen protection are going to affect welfare

in the models.

So first of all, what does the equilibrium look like?

So this is a model in which there's going to

be a balance group.

So in the in the balanced growth path equilibrium uh

all economies grow at the same rate.

Right.

And they all agree at the same rate because we

have this technology diffusion across countries.

Um, this is something I didn't really mention earlier on,

but it is kind of a feature.

You see, showing up in this literature in many different

places is that, um, if you do kind of closed

economy macro, right, typically your model, if it's an endogenous

growth model in closed economy macro, the model is going

to have some prediction for the economy's growth rate and

that growth, that prediction will depend on various parameters of

the they call it.

For example, it's a model with strong scale effect.

The growth rate will be increasing in the population.

Okay.

So that then kind of if you if you just

do closed economy macro, that kind of suggests different economies

for different populations.

In this case you grow at different rates.

Um, in practice, you know, the global economy doesn't look

like, you know, there are just some economies that always

grow and others that grow slowly.

Um, and one of the insights of the kind of

more open economy perspective is that as soon as there

are technology diffusion, the so called technology diffusion across countries,

that kind of ties growth rates together in this country.

So typically, as long as there's any non-zero magnet technology

diffusion, steady state or countries will grow at the same

rate.

But what?

The way in which differences across countries manifest themselves as

differences in the levels of income in steady state, and

not differences in the in the growth rate.

So I think that's just something that to bear in

mind, which people who don't think about open economies often

get it wrong.

Um, anyway, coming back to this model in equilibrium, we

have a steady state growth rate given by this g

here.

Um, and you can see that the steady state growth

depends on, you know, how much R&D is going on

in all the different countries.

So it's the sum over all the different countries of

how much R&D they're doing times their R&D, um, efficiency.

And what this implies is that, you know, patent protection

in each country affects the innovation effect, matters for growth

rate innovation in each country.

So when we think about the kind of effects of

patent policy, one of them is going to be that

how you set up patent protection in each of the

countries in the world will affect the global.

Uh, of course.

Then what is that going to mean for welfare, at

least in steady state?

You can write kind of the representative consumers welfare in

each country is depending on the growth rate, faster growth,

boost welfare and a consumption level term which captures kind

of level of consumption conditional on a given state of

the conditional on a given kind of technological state.

And so then the the point being that much as

in the overfilled paper, we could kind of decompose the

effects of trade into static effects through the trade share

and dynamic effects through the technology stock.

Here you can decompose the effects of patent policy into

static effects through normalised consumption.

So that's where the kind of market power effects of

patent policy are going to come in.

And dynamic effects through the growth rate.

And it's going to be thinking about optimal policy is

going to be about thinking about the trade off between

those two channels.

So let's do a little bit more work to understand

the magnitude of those two channels in this model.

Because eventually this is going to be everything's going to

be quantitative.

quantities.

We care about the magnitude here.

So first off, what is the dynamic effect of patent

protection on growth.

So if we take this expression for the steady state

growth rate substitute for the only endogenous thing on the

right hand side here is these R&D employment rates.

So we can kind of substitute for LRR using the

equilibrium conditions model.

And then we take the derivative of that growth rate

with respect to patent protection in country N we get

an expression for how changes in patent policy affect growth.

Now it's quite a complicated expression.

And it's got a bunch of equilibrium, you know, endogenous

equilibrium variables in there.

Um, but we can by kind of staring at the

terms, we can understand intuitively what's going on here.

Um, so first off this d dialogue.

Delta y log.

Delta.

Enter.

Remember that delta big Delta was.

The, uh, change in the effective discount rate when you

strengthen pattern protection.

So as you strengthen the pattern protection by decreasing delta

n, delta N goes up.

Right.

So the fact that this term is negative is saying

that as you strengthen pattern protection, growth goes up.

So that's kind of telling us that we have this

positive effect of stronger protection on M.

But then we're kind of what we're interested in is

how big is that effect.

So that depends on this second line here.

So what this second line is saying is we're going

to sum up across all origin countries, this first term

is what is the share of global innovation that's being

done in country I.

The second term is what are the what is the

share of the value of innovating in AI that comes

from sales to country?

end.

And the third term is how big is the boost

to profits?

Uh, in country.

When you pack it in country.

So the important thing is that this elasticity will be

bigger.

Um.

When country I.

Makes high profits in country N and when country does

a lot of innovation.

Right now when is that going to be right?

Well, when these shares will be high.

When, um, country N is a big market, right.

So you can see market size is going to matter

here.

But bigger markets are more profitable.

Right.

And in particular when country N is a big market

for countries that do a lot of innovation themselves.

So the boost to growth from stronger pattern packing rotation.

Will be larger when the country that offers stronger Patriot

protection is either a bigger market, or it's a country

that is better integrated with more innovative markets.

And here is where trade comes into the picture, because

due to the home bias in trade, each country is

most closely integrated with itself.

So it will tend to kind of disproportionately have a

large market share domestically.

Okay.

What that means is that when a country strengthens patent

protection, it has a big effect on domestic innovation.

And that matters a lot for the global growth rate

if the domestic country is also a big innovator.

So a simpler kind of a simplified way of saying

all of that is that patent policy will affect growth

more when the country that strengthens patent protection is more

innovative itself.

So that's going to end up being quantitatively important in

this model, because it's a reason for why you might

want to have heterogeneity in the strength of pattern protection

across countries.

Intuitively, when the US strengthens pattern protection, it will have

a much bigger growth effect than when India strengthens patent

protection, because there's just very little innovation that goes on

in India.

So those kind of domestic market share terms are less

important.

Okay.

So that's the dynamic effect of pattern protection on growth.

What about the static effects of patents.

Where where do they show up in this model.

So remember we had the welfare term that depend on

growth and depend on this normalised consumption.

This normalised consumption level depends on real profits and real

wages.

So the question is how does stronger protection affect real

profits and real wages.

Well if I offer stronger patent protection.

I'm generating increased market power in my domestic economy.

Right.

Patents are very heavily protected in the UK.

There'll be a lot of market power for firms selling

into the UK, which means firms make more profits in

the UK.

So it will tend to boost profits in the UK.

But it will also have effect on real wages, um,

in the UK, and that that effect on real wages

will come through the monopoly price distortions that we talked

about earlier.

Right.

And in particular the effect that the, the fact that

the more market power there is in the UK, then

the more you get this both the the monopoly market

distortion and the sourcing, uh, both of which tend to

drive down real wages.

So we can see in this decomposition how the, uh,

the trade off between the kind of market power effects

on the one hand and the innovation incentives of, of

patent protection are going to enter the model.

And then the goal of the quantitative work is going

to be to say how relatively important is to have

so.

Many questions before we kind of proceed to look at

the quantitative stuff.

Okay.

So let's let's move on to that.

Um, okay.

So how do we calibrate this model?

I mean, first off, as is often the case when

it comes to calibration, we complicate the model by introducing

some features that are, you know, sort of considered necessary

for realism.

So, you know, for an open field did that.

And in this paper it's done by including, um, again,

including intermediate inputs, um, allowing for trade imbalances, uh, allowing

for additional fixed costs of patenting and also including a

non patenting sector, just to acknowledge the reality that there's

a lot of patenting in manufacturing and in some kind

of IT services, and not a lot of patenting in

the rest of the economy.

So if you want to talk about patents, you're really

kind of focusing on those sectors where packaging actually actually

happens.

And then the model is kind of calibrated to the

steady state of the model is calibrated.

The world economy in 2015 for, you know, sort of

the 12 biggest economies, um, and there's sort of three

sets of parameters that are really important to calibrate here.

Like one is the trade costs.

Right.

Um.

And following not exactly following Caliendo, but similar to Caliendo

parrot.

If you know the observed trade shares in this model,

you can pack out the trade costs.

So the trade costs are just chosen to exactly match

observed bilateral trade shares.

Um, and then you have the.

Patent policy parameters, right?

In particular, uh, you know, what is the strength of

pattern protection in each country?

And the goal is going to be to infer that

from variation in where countries choose to pattern.

And then you've got how the R&D efficiency parameters, how

good is each country R&D.

And you're going to infer that from how much innovation,

how much patterns in each country, um, each country does.

Um.

So in particular, like the sort of key bit of

data that's going to be important, there is, um, data

from patterns that on bilateral pattern flows across countries.

So from each origin country to each destination country, how

many patent applications do we see in a year.

Right.

And you can think that this is the sort of

patent flow data that is analogous to the, uh, bilateral

trade show data that we've been using repeatedly in the

in the course.

Um, if you do end up doing research on kind

of innovation topics in either a closed or an open

economy, one of the challenges is always, how do we

measure innovation?

Because it's typically not directly observable.

And patent data is, you know, in many contexts, the

best observable proxy for innovation we have.

So you will see a lot of these types of

papers tend to use, um, patenting data.

And what we do in this paper is you kind

of particularly focus on these international mapping share data, the

idea being that, you know, as we saw earlier, you

will patent more in a destination if it is largest,

which is to say, if you trade more with our

destination.

But then conditional on the observed levels of trade, you

also patent on the destination.

You provide strong impact of protection.

So this means if you kind of observe trade shares

and then look at residual variation in patent and condition

on trade show.

It's informative about how strong patent protection is in each

country, and the idea of the collaboration is to use

that information to back out the strength of patent protection

in each, uh, in each destination.

And then you can use information on kind of the

flow of patents coming from each origin, together with R&D

investment rates, to back out how efficient each country is

and what these R&D efficiency programs.

So.

Um, this is the match between the model and the

data in terms of the bilateral patenting shares.

So just to show that it does a not perfect

but not too bad job in matching the variation.

Um, and these are the other parameters of the model

that are calibrated, the most relevant ones, because these are

going to be the policy ones we focus on, uh,

the deltas which remember the pattern, uh, protection.

So what you're seeing here is how the strength of

pattern protection varies across countries and broadly.

You can see there are two groups of countries.

There's developed countries which have stronger passenger protection, and developing

countries such as China, India, Russia, which typically have much

weaker, uh, patent protection.

So this is kind of saying that the observed patterns

of patterns that we observe in the data are consistent

with our idea that kind of developed countries provide stronger

patent protection than other developing countries.

The other thing that then comes out of this calibration

exercise, you can ask kind of how is innovation allocated

around the world?

And kind of I said, you know, at the beginning

of the lecture, the innovation is extremely concentrated in developed

countries.

That's something that's true in the calibrated economy here as

well.

You've got the US doing about a third of total

innovations, Japan and Europe about 22% each.

And then China, even though it has been becoming more

innovative, still only about, uh, about about 3%.

And the implications of that for what the kind of

steady state looks like is the more innovative countries are

going to produce more of these heartland government products and

do kind of more monopolistic trade, whereas less innovative countries

will specialise more in trade in each and quarter products.

So we get this kind of endogenous division of the

world into trading different types of products, which have different

levels of market power associated with them.

Right.

And clearly you can anticipate that if you trade more

or if you produce an export, more monopolistic products, you

are going to stand to benefit more from stronger patent

protection than if you are primarily trading and exporting competitive

products.

Okay.

Any questions at this point.

But we kind of look at the counterfactual analysis.

Okay.

So to conclude.

Uh.

What does the counterfactual analysis look like?

So there's a bunch of counterfactuals in the paper, uh,

all of which in one way or another, analyse kind

of what happens if you change the strength of pattern

protection.

So this is a dynamic economy.

So the counterfactuals we have in mind you change the

strength of pattern protection today.

It's like a permanent change in the strength of pattern

protection.

And then you ask how does this affect the future

kind of time path of the, uh, economy.

And you kind of map out what that does to

to welfare.

And, you know, as in many dynamic economies, it's going

to be important here to account for not just differences

in steady state wealth, but but also what are the

transition dynamics between, uh, between steady states?

Um, so we'll start off by looking at some kind

of unilateral policy, counterfactuals where one country changed its plan

of protection.

And then we'll talk about kind of what the cooperative

equilibrium might look like.

And we'll use that to shed light on the Trips

agreement.

And we'll mainly do this by looking at graphs and

tables.

So this graph here is showing.

The each of the different lines is what happens if

you change patterns once the global growth.

If you change pattern protection in one country at a

time.

So like this blue line is how the growth rate

is plotting the growth rate as a function of pattern

protection in the US.

So this is the kind of calibrated value here.

And then as you move to the left you're strengthening

pattern protection in the US.

And you can see that's having a strong positive effect

on on growth.

Likewise the orange line is stronger protection in Europe.

And then you've got China and Japan.

And then the other countries are there at the bottom.

Right.

So the main like lesson from this graph is that

there is extensive heterogeneity across countries in the extent to

which stronger pattern projection affects growth in.

If you strengthen pattern projection in essentially the US, Europe,

Japan or China, it has quite large growth effect.

And pattern protection in all other countries has very little

effect on growth.

Now what does that imply for welfare?

Okay.

Now it's plotting how changes in pattern protection in one

country affect welfare around the world.

And this left hand panel is changing again, changing pattern

protection in the US.

And then the blue line is what happens to US

welfare.

And the other lines of what happens to welfare in

other countries.

And the black lines are kind of measures of world

welfare.

So what you see is that apart from the US,

as you strengthen pattern protection, countries get better off.

And intuitively what is happening there is that the growth

rate is going up, as we saw on the previous

slide.

And so those countries are benefiting from the increase in

growth rate, right.

At the same time, the increase in U.S. patent protection

is creating market power, but it's only creating those market

distortions in the US market.

So other countries don't lose from the market distortions.

So they're just generally benefiting from stronger patent protection of

us.

Um, whereas in the US you have both effects going

on.

You have both the faster growth, but also the increased

market power.

And at the calibrated equilibrium is such that there is

a small decline in US welfare as it strengthens pattern

protection.

So the US makes itself worse, worse off by strengthening

this pattern of attention.

Which is to say that from its perspective, the market

power effect is dominating the growth component.

Um, and then the right hand panel is the same

thing, but now it's China that's strengthening its patent protection.

And again, you know, the domestic country loses and everyone

else gains.

But note that the magnitudes are very different because the

the growth gains from stronger power protection are much weaker,

and therefore China itself loses much more from strengthening its

protection.

So kind of what this is telling us is that

there is this three rider incentive in patent policy where

you gain from other countries providing strong patent protection, but

you lose if you're the country that's providing this stronger

protection.

So we can then ask, what is the um.

Kind of what is the optimal policy look like in

the global economy?

If we imagine, from the perspective of a global social

planner who can set policy in each country individually to

maximise global welfare.

Right.

And here, again, sort of technical aside, if you start

to think about optimal policy in a global context, there's

a question of how do you weight welfare in different

countries.

Right?

And because economists are loathe to take normative positions, there

isn't kind of one right way to to do that.

So in this particular table, I'm showing you weights, each

individual in each country equally.

But we can argue, you know, there is open debate

about whether that is the right way to, to do

things.

So just to sort of flag that, that that becomes

an issue when you think about open economy policy, uh,

exercises.

Okay.

So here we're weighing each individual equally.

What is the cooperative equilibrium look like.

It's to provide like as strong protection as you can

in developed countries and no protection in developing countries.

Right.

So there's this strong the model has a strong preference

for providing differing levels of patent protection across countries.

And in particular, it's only the kind of rich innovative

countries.

In this case it's US, Europe, Japan, Canada, Korea and

Mexico.

Mexico aside, the other countries are those which in the,

uh, calibration have much stronger, are much more innovative.

So.

This we didn't talk about this column, but this column

is showing you how efficient different countries are in the

category of equilibrium.

And you see the US, Europe, Japan, Canada, Korea are

an order of magnitude more innovative than the other countries.

And so what the pattern policy analysis is saying is

that it's those countries that should provide strong patent protection.

And the rationale for that is that when an innovative

country will buy stronger patent protection, it has bigger growth

effects.

So there are bigger positive global spill-overs.

Right.

But the static costs are just borne by the, uh,

the country itself.

So the level of innovation for the country doesn't affect

the static costs.

And that means it ends up being efficient for the

more innovative countries to provide patent protection.

Note that it's not the case that larger countries provide

more patent protection, because China, stronger protection in China has

big effects on growth, but it also affects a lot

of people because the people in China and the balance

of that is China ends up not providing protection.

Yeah.

So if there is no international trade, what is the

optimal level of patent protection under this model?

It's country specific.

Yes.

Uh, I don't know.

I, I don't have that number in my head.

What I can tell you is, which is a sort

of related exercise, is if you force all countries to

have the same level of protection and you plot global

welfare against that level of patent protection, you get a

kind of hump shape so that there's a sort of

an interior optimum.

So at a global level, the world as a whole.

And, well, there's a whole kind of sort of a

moderate level of protection.

But if you allow it to if you allow the

world to get that by having different protection across countries,

it wants the innovative countries have strong protection and the

non individual countries to have very weak protection.

Okay.

Because from US case privacy, it looks like uh the

benefit comes from uh protection is quite low.

Yeah.

But you can't directly read that across to what it

would be like in the closed economy.

The fact that there are these cross-border spill-overs is part

of that, because, you know, part of what's going on

there is when you strengthen pattern protection in the US,

you boost profit, but you boost profits not just for

US producers, but foreign producers as well.

And from the perspective of the US government, that's a

loss.

Whereas if the US was a closed economy, you wouldn't

have those spill-overs, so it changes the trade off.

Now.

What about Mexico?

Here?

Why?

Mexico is not an individual country.

It's not doing very much innovation.

Can anyone see why the model is going to want

Mexico to provide strong patent protection in the court of

equilibrium?

And the answer to why that might be.

Possible trade share with us, which is very innovative.

Yeah.

Exactly.

So this is kind of where trade is becoming really

important.

Like stronger patent protection in the US doesn't generate many

benefits through more innovation in Mexico.

So strong competition doesn't generate much more innovation in Mexico.

But Mexico is highly integrated with the US economy.

So it generates increased innovation in the US, which more

than offset the cost to of increased market power in

Mexico.

Okay, good.

And then final thing, I just wanted to show you.

What if we now kind of use the model to

analyse the welfare effects of the Trips agreement?

Um, so to do this, we're going to compare the

2015 calibration model to a pre trip's 1992 calibration.

And then we're going to do a counterfactual where we

take post trips pattern protection and revert to pre-trip pattern

protection and ask how does this affect welfare.

So first two columns of this table.

These are the baseline pattern levels you saw before.

These are the calibrated levels in the pre trips equilibrium.

The main things to note is if you look at

countries like India or China to a lesser extent also

Russia, they had much weaker passenger protection in the pre

trip.

So this is the idea that joining the WTO and

signing up for Trips agreement has led to these countries

strengthening their patent protection, but still not going kind of

all the way towards toward harmonising with developed countries.

And then this shows the welfare effect of allowing the

developing countries to, uh, reduce their patent protection back to

pre-trip levels.

And what we see is the developing countries themselves gain

from that, and the rest of the world loses.

So this is support for the argument that these countries

made that signing up to trips with bad for them,

because essentially it transferred resources or transferred rents from developing

country consumers to rich country firms.

And then the final exercise you do is say, okay,

well, when you sign up to the WTO, you don't

just sign up to trips, you sign up for various

tariff reductions.

So suppose we run both the trips counterfactual, but also

these tariff effects simultaneously.

And then we find that the tariff effects are much

more important, uh, quantitatively.

So even if you lose some trips as a standalone

policy, the combination of Trips and WTO membership is worth

increasing for all the countries in the, uh, in the

sample.

Um, so I think we'll stop that today.

Um, the idea of this lecture was just to kind

of give you a flavour of the kind questions you

can answer once you sort of open up trade to

dynamic effects and think about the kind of endogenous nature

of, um, of technology.

Any final questions?

All right.

Good.

So I'll see you all in three weeks time.

And I will send you emails allocating papers and groups

for presentation.

And it will be Catherine, uh, at this time next

week.

It's yours.

Yeah.

I stole it from.

Hold on.

This morning before nine.

Okay.

Yeah.

It's And it's.

My lord told me where it was.

Okay.

Uh, yes.

Yeah, I can, I can see over this.

Uh, yeah.

So it doesn't have to be me.

I mean, you.

Need some one.

Right at the end of Wednesdays, so it's not really.

It's not necessary, but.

No, it has to be the trade conference.

Yeah.

Because you'll do they'll have you doing stuff on that

extent okay.

It's.

No.

No I mean like one question.

Yeah.

This.

Particular uh, thing, which is as I said, uh, or

the paper says, uh, there's this big of myself when

you protect, uh, you know, there's going to be a

monopolist.

Yeah.

But then, uh, I don't know, like, for example, the

Microsoft case, um, the I don't know, I forgot the

name of the regulator in the US states.

Try it at least in 99 or 2000 to break

the company.

So and one of the arguments was this is a

monopoly.

We want more innovation, we want more competitive behaviour.

And so at the same time that protecting patents in

a way might increase innovation, it might also, uh, decrease

innovation.

Is there any work in this like optimal sponsorship.

Yeah.

No, that's a that's a good point.

And the kind of.

Model we've just been looking at doesn't capture that mechanism.

If you work kind of an issue criterion model.

For.

Similar reasons to have kind of in the middle you

can get this kind of escape competition effect where like

essentially the effect of increased competition on innovation in a

schumpeterian model is non-monotonic.

And because of that, if we think about instead of

kind of increased competition, the amount of patent protection you

have, you can also get kind of non monotonicity in

that relationship.

So people.

Lecture 5:

Yeah, I think it's very boring.

Same theory.

Thank you.

Hello?

Hello.

Oh.

Yes.

Oh oh.

Oh 300 and.

43 seafood.

Hello?

Are you all right?

Yeah.

Yeah.

I mean.

Yeah, no I haven't.

Yeah.

I mean, I think it's.

Gonna be.

Okay.

I don't know.

Yeah.

Um.

Yeah.

When did you hear that?

Uh, I.

You.

Wish you had.

Some.

Protection.

Oh.

Okay.

Okay.

This is what?

I saw.

Yes.

The slides are mercifully short.

Are you ready for this?

Yeah.

Of course.

Chris, I'm reading logs.

Are you not?

Doing things at the same time?

I don't know.

I didn't have another meeting.

No, I was the last one to make one of

the meetings, which is probably a sign of the fact

that, you know, you.

Always feel like.

Look, this is.

Wonderful.

We have a new manager.

Right?

How exciting a woman.

Not quite true.

Is it sad that you have to keep an extra?

One last year?

No.

No.

But you do.

This is an eventful day.

We want to.

Thank you all.

So.

Much.

Just to make sure you don't.

Have a problem.

Okay.

Let's see.

Yeah.

This is.

This.

Is.

This is bizarre.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Business.

Manager.

Yeah.

I think this is one of them.

Okay.

The.

Answer.

Is.

In the national interest.

Yeah.

Okay.

Hi, everyone.

Um, I'm Catherine Thomas, and I'm an associate professor in

the management department.

Um, I'm going to be teaching today's lecture and next

week's lecture for this course.

Um, as I understand it, Thomas has already given four

lectures, uh, in this course.

And so he's gone through a few of the sort

of workhorse models in trade.

These two lectures are, um, our intention is that they

should be sort of, um, sort of practical, a bit

more practitioner orientated because, um, you know, basically since 2003,

trade has become much more empirical.

And, um, all of us that we're working and trade

up to that point sort of suddenly had to adopt

a whole lot of empirical methods that we perhaps were

less well trained in.

And, uh, that process is still kind of ongoing.

So we're we're going to, um, uh, talk about, uh,

production function estimation as it's done in, uh, to help

answer questions that are important in trade.

And then next week, discrete choice models, which is going

to see about those in this form.

So I don't know if there's anyone working in the

neighbouring classrooms.

Maybe keep the doors open, keep talking and then hopefully

someone will come and tell me to close it if

it's too noisy.

Okay, so, um, first off, can I get a, uh,

just a bit of a sense which program you guys

are in now?

Most of you in the econ PhD program?

Yes.

Okay, I know, I know, we've had some emails from

people from UCL or labs who were thinking about take

taking the course auditing.

Maybe there are some some students in that group here

as well.

Okay.

And uh, also econ and management and most of you

in the second year or third year of your PhD

or second session.

That's excellent.

Right.

Okay.

Um, so aside from that, I don't know if Thomas

mentioned to you much about the CEP research program here

in the, uh, LHS department.

Um, you may be familiar with some of the work

we do, but, um, most of the trade faculty or

trade adjacent faculty, anyone kind of doing policy work in

applied policy work in micro, um, are often affiliated with

the centre for Economic Performance, and we're all in the

trade program.

And we hope that as you continue with your studies,

there will be opportunities to get involved with the trade

program and come to the seminar series to partake in

the workshop, uh, course, etc..

So, um, they're both on Wednesdays starting next week, so

you guys should all feel free to come if you're

able to.

The workshops start at 11 and the seminar starts at

1230.

And Thomas mentioned this.

Okay, I, I don't know, I think it's I think

it's quite I think, you know, if you're in your

second year, it's kind of optional to go to seminars.

But if you are interested in trade, there's some really

amazing speakers.

I've heard this term in next term, um, you can

check out the schedule on the CEP website.

Next week.

We have an urban speaker from Bristol, and then we

have a series of trade people coming.

All right.

It'll be great to see you guys there if you

are interested.

So 11:00 104 in this building.

It's the student workshop.

1230 is the seminar okay?

Excellent.

Wednesdays just before this lecture.

So, um.

Okay.

So.

Right.

So what's our objective today?

So, um, as you know, essentially since 2003, uh, firm

productivity has been a really important, um, uh, variable, a

really important firm characteristic in a huge universe of, uh,

trade papers.

So today we're going to talk about productivity estimation and

how it's done using trade data sets.

Um, we're going to sort of build on what Thomas

sort of talked about about 2003, and what we might

be looking for in data to help Evaluate whether the

model is at work and the magnitude of the impact

of those mechanisms in the data.

And then, of course, uh, here in this bit, we're

going to be like a product, which is a firm

characteristic.

There's also a large and growing literature which, um, uh,

allows for endogenous firm level productivity.

It's a firm choice reflecting its the returns to innovation.

And, uh, we're going to talk about some of the

sort of workhorse methods in that.

And then we're going to tackle the issue of varying

mark-ups, which is, um, uh, you know, so controversial topic

in trade, because if we have a C.

S demand function and characteristic of C as demand, which

is a very handy The demand system to have in

a general equilibrium model, because it's very easy, tractable to,

relatively tractable to work with, and that implies constant mark-ups.

But we know there are various mechanisms, and indeed the

data suggest to us that firms do not have constant

mark-ups.

So there's been a little bit of a a push

within the field to sort of move away from CS

type demand systems in various ways.

And we're going to talk about papers that do that,

and also empirical methods for estimating varying mark-ups in, uh,

trade applications.

Okay.

So hopefully this will be stuff that you will find

useful in your work.

For those of you who are also doing IO or

have done I've done IO in the past.

Um, I think if you're doing it at the moment,

probably doing demand estimation, you haven't got yet got to

production function estimation.

That usually comes a bit later if you but if

you if you've done it before you may be seeing

some of the key, um, uh, approaches to productivity estimation,

uh, in production function estimation.

But when we talk and focus specifically on the trade,

uh, questions here okay.

All right.

So we've got until five and aim to have a

break around halfway through.

Uh, please do jump in with questions.

If I don't know the answers to the questions today,

I will endeavour to find them out by next week.

But, um, yeah, it would be interesting to hear what

you guys have to say.

And if you have any experience actually applying these methods

and what your experiences have been, uh, we'll talk a

little bit about some of my papers and try to

estimate.

Okay.

Okay.

So, um, you know, the great, great thing about trade

as a field, I think it's really appealing is that

the development of the field has sort of been very.

um, monotonic.

And there's a kind of few step changes where their

new theories have come and have really changed the way

that people, uh, have thought about the gains from trade

and gains from international trade.

And one of the biggest innovations really ever, frankly, you

know, the big show then help improvement matters.

And that was the, um, what uh, Millet's paper from

2003 published in econometrics.

Um, and of course, that was the same time as

eating according to it's a very big year for trade.

And, um, here's the as far as I understand, you're

the first to incorporate explicitly firm heterogeneity in a general

equilibrium model of trade.

And, um, with that firm heterogeneity opened up the possibility

for a new channel for gains from trade, which is

a reallocation of resources towards more productive firms away from

less productive firms, either because they exit or they get

smaller.

Um, once the economy has opened up to trade.

Okay.

Now, in that model, firm productivity is an exogenous draw

from some underlying distribution.

I think in a case of Pareto distribution and it's

a firm level characteristics and it's unchanging.

Okay.

So the opportunity for gains from trade is when, as

I said, the resource resources or I think it's just

labour in the base case model is no longer employed

by, uh, sort of medium productivity draws or smaller productivity

draws, but instead the competitive pressures are such that those

firms have to exit the market, or at least they

don't stick around.

And, uh, the larger firms, i.e. the more productive firms,

they get larger and they use the aggregate endowment of

labour in more productively because those firms have higher productivity.

So this, as we know, is a very elegant mechanism.

You know, we have the selection, we are the exit,

we serve the domestic market, we serve the domestic market

and we export.

And where those cut offs are between the exiting and

the exporting, uh, shift around when we've got trade competition,

uh, more competition for trade.

Okay.

Specifically, they shift to the right.

Now, uh, you know, if we understand that mechanism, it

sounds very appealing to us.

We know that large firms export.

There's lots of data that tells us these few large

firms are, you know, disproportionately contributing to trade activity.

They must therefore, be disproportionately contributing to gains from trade.

We want to be able to understand and quantify this,

but in order to do that, we have to really

understand, first of all, what the product of the distribution

looks like and then how it changes, um, in response

to an opening up to trade or new trade opportunities

or new competition from imports or something like this.

Now, but to do that, you know, to have that

lovely distribution, productivity, we've got to, um, have some way

of getting from the data that we've got third level

data that we've got to that distribution.

Otherwise we can't have the distribution to start with.

We definitely can't test if the thresholds are changing.

Um, all right.

So, uh, if we want to do an empirical evaluation

of anything related to that model or any exogenous, you

know, any sort of response to trade, uh, we have

to find some way of quantifying what these firm level

productivity is in the understanding that, you know, turnover productivity

is kind of the output differences that can't be explained

by variation in input choices.

So the idea being that a firm using exactly the

same inputs as a another identical firm, other than their

differing productivity, the more productive one is going to be

producing more output.

But to do this, of course, we need to, um,

to try and kind of measure the output differences that

can't be quantified by, um, inputs.

We for sure have to measure outputs accurately, and we

for sure have to measure inputs accurately.

Otherwise, you know, we've got, uh, we've got no hope

of measuring productivity.

And we also need to make some assumptions about what

the production function is, what the technology actually is.

And all of these are either empirical problems or modelling

challenges that are just really, um, there's a lot of

richness in the literature about everything in here.

You know, so a lot of a lot of choices

to be made in any trade question, um, where you're

trying to estimate whether something is supposed to be happening

to either aggregate productivity, the distribution of productivity in the

economy, or particularly firm level productivity.

Okay.

So now we're going to do like basic producer theory

for a while, just to kind of give you a

flavour of where the problems are.

Um, so I might try and do this quite quickly,

but I'm going to I think it's still worth doing

because it's just a reminder of, of all of the

structure that is often glossed over in the, um, uh,

uh, papers that we read.

So, um, let's imagine, you know, even quite sophisticated papers

that we read and write these days might start with

a cop Douglas production function, where we've got some output

yet to be defined, how we measure it.

Um, being this, um, uh, coming from this labour inputs,

capital inputs and some um, in this case, it's a

Hicks neutral productivity term.

And each of those terms can vary by firm firm

I and very over time and of course these exponents

in on the uh inputs alpha L on labour alpha

K on capital, um the production function coefficients.

Perhaps we might even assume that they sum to one.

So that being constantly tends to scale kind of production

technology.

But we don't always assume that we might also, um,

estimate that separately.

Now with with.

Douglas, we're.

Usually always going to start by taking locks of both

sides.

And so we have the log of output is equal

to because it gives us a nice linear function.

This term alpha right.

Which is what the total factor productivity is.

This is the term we're kind of interested in.

Um log of labour, log of capital.

And then these linear coefficients um alpha l and alpha

k um show up like this.

Um now the issue is that this alpha it, it's

a, it's a residual.

Okay.

So we don't know what it is.

And even if we have got great measures of output

and even if we have got great measures of input

and labour input and capital input, the best, the best

we could hope for then measuring this to kind of

perhaps do a, an ordinary least squares regression and collect

this as the residual of that regression.

That's even when we've got great moments of output labour

and capital.

Okay.

Um, but of course, you know, we've already got quite

a lot of restriction coming from Douglas.

Uh, we're, uh, imposing the all of technical changes.

Is Hicks neutral?

Um, we might also choose instead.

It's particularly if we're interested in in the nature of

production technology and whether it's changing over time.

Uh, we might also or in addition or instead, um,

have a trans log production function, something like this.

We could perhaps extend it at a time, varying terms

here that allow something to be, um, factor specific rather

than, um, uh, hicks neutral technical change, something like this.

But usually we're going to see some sort of Douglas

production function or at most some kind of transmog production

function.

Um, and the key thing is that this alpha term

is a residual.

So it's going to be in any kind of regression.

It's going to include perhaps anything that's um, firm specific,

non varying over time, anything that is firm specific that's

varying over time and perhaps um, varying in a way

that the firm knows about when it's selecting its input

levels and maybe something that doesn't vary.

Sorry that that varies over time but is not known

to the firm.

So we want to allow for this alpha it term

to be to be quite, uh, general in terms of,

uh, what we see in the data, what the firm

sees when it's making its input choices and how and

also how this thing might be holding over time.

Now, um.

Uh, in the end.

Okay.

And now the thing is that, you know, we do

these regressions in all of the methods that we, um,

are going to talk about today.

And, you know, the key observation is that firms are

hugely heterogeneous in the amount of output they produce.

Conditioning on some measure of input size is just huge

productivity heterogeneity.

And, you know, across firms in a given point in

time.

And also the productivity level for any one firm is

quite persistent over time.

Some firms are just better than others consistently.

Okay.

Now this you know, both of these facts are kind

of puzzling.

It's kind of the starting point for the field of

organisational economics by saying, why is it that we see

such, uh, productivity differences and especially productivity differences that are

that are not competed away, you know, that persist.

And, um, and it's kind of a difficult fact, really

for a lot of, you know, base case, standard micro

theory to even acknowledge because we have a production function.

We get to ask the production to do to do

a lot.

You know, firms are optimising against that production function.

They should all be behaving in the in a similar

way, you know, in theory.

But but the data tell us, tells us that they're

not.

Um, so you know, what what do we think is

causing, uh, one firm's level of this alpha parameter to

be different over time and also across firms in reality,

what is it?

You know, some firms are just better run.

Okay.

They, uh and this is the starting point, I would

say, broadly speaking, for, uh, John Van Reenen and Nick

Bloom's work on management practice.

Let's find out exactly how they are run.

And if we can point, pinpoint practices that are indeed,

um, correlated with higher measures of productivity.

And it turns out they can and that's a successful

agenda.

Maybe it's just measurement error, you know, maybe we're just

not actually correctly accounting for variation in the quality of

inputs or the quantity of inputs that firms have got.

Maybe we're just not actually counting very precisely what it

is that they're producing either the quantity or the price

possible.

Okay.

It's just a although the persistence of the questionable things

doesn't seem to be random measurement anyway.

Um, and then maybe we've got time varying conditions that

are hitting firms.

Similarly, perhaps we've got, uh, exogenous shocks, whether whether shocks

from other macroeconomic shocks that are hitting all firms at

the same time, some firms are better able to respond

to any shocks.

And some firms, um, are not.

Okay.

So there's lots of things, you know, we don't really

know anything about what could be driving this heterogeneity, but

it's very apparent in the methods that we're currently used

to estimate, uh, firm productivity and, uh, kind of important

to dig into.

Um, right now, the first big issue that we are

going to, uh, confront with this production function estimation and

with this definition of TFP is the residual in an

estimated production function, is that a lot of the things

that we think are contributing to variation in this measured,

uh, value, this residual could be because firms are, um,

uh, responding to firms are choosing their inputs, choosing their

outputs in response, not necessarily not just using their outputs,

but choosing their inputs in response to variation in this

alpha.

Right.

If that is the case, then we're going to have

problems estimating our production function coefficients, because we are going

to have a systematic bias in the alpha L and

the alpha potentially alpha k coefficients.

If we have firms knowing something that we don't when

they're making those input choices.

Yeah.

Is that equivalent to saying that we have, um, technical.

Change, technological change that's not fixed neutral?

Uh, no, I don't think it is.

I think it's it's I think it's not to do

with the functional form itself.

It's just our ability to estimate what the parameters of

that functional form are.

So let's say that this is the true process.

We're going to have difficulties estimating specifically it's um alpha

L that worried about here.

Um, if this out alpha by t term Is um,

uh, not uh, is is a is part of it,

or at least some of it is observed by the

firm when they're choosing their levels, their actual quantities of

okay.

Okay.

And we're particularly worried in this case about El because

that, um.

And other variable inputs, because the firms can adjust the

quantities of those variable inputs more easily than they can

arguably adjust the capital.

Okay.

So I can hire more workers.

I can hire workers for more hours if I get

this high, if I've got this high value of alpha,

either in general or particularly this week, I'm going to

take advantage of that by hiring more labour this week

and producing more output.

Now, that means that I'm going to have systematically a

higher level of L when I've got a higher draw

of alpha, which means that I'm getting that I'm imposing

that alpha is a mean zero residual term.

It's going to end up with me overestimating my, um,

alpha coefficient because observations have a lot of labour are

going to look like they've got a ton of output,

okay.

But they're getting a ton of output, not only because

they've got a lot of labour, but because they've also

got a high productivity draw that time period.

Okay.

Uh, okay.

So this is a, you know, a well known problem

since the 1940s.

Okay.

This and it's the the endogeneity of the variable inputs,

um, endogeneity of the variable input choices of firms too.

Exactly.

The term, the TFP term that we're trying to measure,

uh, and uh, leads us to have sort of biased

estimates of these coefficients.

Okay.

So it's coming from the notion that, um, firms input

choices may be reacting to the shocks that they're receiving.

Okay.

So just to go into that.

So basically, um, do I understand correctly that means a

firm can sometimes observe a productivity drop or something and

then change just like labour choice.

Possibly.

Yes.

Yes.

That's that's the that is the concern.

You have like a real world example for this.

Yes.

So let's say um, let me think of a really

a really sort of clear one if I can um,

you know, let's think about the production function of the

LSC.

And for some reason, the number of students that are

on campus every week just varies.

Okay.

Uh, and some weeks in the summer, there's like a

million summer schools and executive education.

There's just a lot of students in the classroom.

Okay.

Now, LSC, when it's making staffing decisions, says, hang on

a second.

If we care about the total number of students that

were educating and in order to educate a student, we

have to have some labour input on our side and

the input of the previously uneducated students.

Um, then the weeks that there are more students here,

uh, we have a lot more opportunity to create value.

We're just going to pay all our staff overtime and

get them to teach evening courses and get them to

teach more and more.

And then our total output that week will be really

high.

We will say, oh, look, that was the week.

So we don't observe whether how many students are just

hanging around waiting to be taught.

But we do observe how many hours the faculty are

working.

So it all look that week, the faculty members each

work 20% more output went up by 50%.

Okay, that Alpha L in the production function is really

high because that week when we had a little bit

on the margin, we had a little bit more faxing,

a lot more output.

So that marginal impact of more of teachers working over

time has led to a lot more output.

But actually, it's not only that, it's the fact that

there were just more students around to be taught that

week as well.

So, uh, the kind of like.

Also a supply demand thing, like there's more demand for

teaching when there are more students around.

Yeah.

So I think it could be I think it could

be either a supply or a demand thing.

And actually we're going to see biases coming from both

of those, uh, issues.

And those executives are willing to pay a lot more.

An output is measured in dollars.

Then it's a demand side shock.

Uh.

If it's just some sort of for some reason, our

technology is better, let's say, you know, every, um, but

in a way, classrooms got five times as many people

in.

Yeah, because it wouldn't just be more demand for the

product would also have to be defined, like satisfying the

demand in a more efficient way.

In a way, right?

Because otherwise it would just show up through higher input

factors.

Um, but yeah.

So.

But if there is some other reason why the firm

has chosen to have this a higher input factors that

week.

Uh, that that's where the bias could come from.

So then we attribute all of the, the, uh, benefit

that we're getting from both the random unobserved reason and

the higher faculty to the higher to the higher input.

Okay.

Okay.

That's okay.

Um, okay.

So let's let's just imagine that the alpha it the

unobserved TFP has got these three sort of components alpha

AI, uh, firm level, permanent.

Just some firms are just consistently always better than others.

Something that's.

Time varying and unrelated to the factor of choices.

So it's just a shock that the firms don't know

before they make their input choice, uh, decisions.

And then there's this bit which are time varying differences

in firm productivity that are known to the firm when

it chooses.

It's very important.

Now I'm just writing down the math of what we've

just been talking about.

Okay.

Um, you know, these are going to have a problem.

The problem that we've just been talking about is this

endogeneity problem.

The choice of factors is endogenous to this, um, transitory

part.

We can also have measurement problems in the inputs and

the outputs.

And then we also might have selection in the data.

If for some reason we have we're thinking that we're

getting data from a non-random set of firms.

So we're going to talk about all three of these.

Okay.

So let's just go into some details on the simultaneity

problem, which is what we've just been talking about.

Um, so if inputs do respond to shocks, any a

simple OLS regression of the one that we just discussed

at the front log of output on log of variable

inputs on log of fixed plus log of fixed inputs.

Those coefficients would be biased, particularly for the um coefficients

for the inputs that are just quickly like labour or

materials.

So already we're imagining what it's like in a firm.

Right?

We're saying that the manager of the firm can somehow

adjust some inputs more easily than others.

And the estimates that we're worried about are the coefficients

with the easily adjustable, um, uh, factor for the easily

adjustable factors.

And it's going to be important as we go through

today that there are some factors that can that are

adjustable and some that aren't adjustable.

And, uh, usually the assumption is made, and it's a

very strong assumption that capital is not adjustable to time

period specific shocks, but labour is and that that's now

conventional to make that assumption.

But it's it is quite a set of assumptions on

both fronts.

You know, a that labour is easily just from a

fever camp.

It's not, but it's kind of conventionally I mean, um,

and uh, for the measurement, so, so kind of leapt

ahead a bit.

But the, um, approach to solve the simultaneity problem, we

rely very heavily on there being some inputs that are

not, uh, adjusted in response to the shocks.

Um, but however, the, um, problem is within the estimation

of the coefficients that are attached to the flexible input

All right.

So what do we do when we're trying to estimate

coefficients accurately using OLS.

And we are concerned about an endogeneity problem.

What we do is we try an instrument okay.

We will try and find um something some we could

try and find some variable that is, uh, positively correlated

with the, say, the input choice but unrelated to the

shock.

Okay, satisfies the exclusion restriction and is, um, causing, um,

exogenous variation in the input choice, but is otherwise unrelated

to the shock and hence unrelated to the output measure

other than through the input choice.

That's what we would be doing if we were looking

for an instrument.

Now, some people might say, okay, if I have good

data on input prices and there is exogenous variation in

input prices may be that could be a decent instrument

for the input choice, but that requires us to have,

you know, ideally firm level input prices very infrequently observed.

And also those input prices are prices and may also

be correlated with the shock, especially if we think the

shocks are related to some kind of broader macroeconomic environment.

So many issues with using contemporaneous input prices, um, up,

you know, many papers might use some kind of aspect

of the panel structure to create instruments for input choices.

For example, we might do a generalised method of moments

using lags of the independent variables, lags of input choices

to instrument for contemporaneous input choices.

Thinking there's going to be some persistence there, and the

lagged variables will be uncorrelated with the these disappearing shocks.

And a classic paper in this literature is Blondeau and

Bond.

Okay.

This is what everyone was doing prior to mid-nineties let's

say in production function estimation.

But then along in the mid 90s came this big

paper by um, all the in papers.

Uh, how many of you have read this paper?

Yeah.

Okay.

So it was it's been a massive deal in production

function estimation.

So two of you have read it.

Um, uh, it's, you know, it's a it's a it's

a great paper.

Um, and instead of using an instrumental variable approach, they

use a control function approach.

And since this time most of the um, estimation of

production functions is going to have some kind of control

function going over there and, uh, in order.

I'm going to describe what they actually do in this

paper.

Um, there's ways there is a lot of structure in

the model about, uh, how firms behave over time and

specifically that they're forward looking, dynamically optimising in each period.

They are price takers and input markets.

There are some factors that are variable from period to

period.

There are some factors that are state variables, i.e. in

a given period, these state variables were determined in the

prior state.

Um, there's quite a lot of structure and we need

all of that structure to apply this method.

But the overall idea is kind of the opposite to

an instrumenting strategy.

So in a typical IV, as I say, as you

know, you'll be looking for a another variable that's correlated.

With the variable input but uncorrelated with the shock okay.

Quality control function approach says let us do the opposite.

Let us look for a variable that is really correlated

with the shock okay.

Um, and we are going to use whatever information we

got from this other variable that's very correlated with the

shock to kind of substitute in to the production function

for the variation that is happening in output.

That is due to the shock, which is going to

allow us to separately identify the coefficients of interest of

for us, which are the coefficient on the variable inputs,

where we might have the endogeneity problem.

So the design, the research question not okay, not the

actual paper itself, but the methodological research question is how

far can we get count if we can find a

variable that is, um, uh, very correlated with that shock,

which we think is causing an endogeneity problem.

Okay.

And uh, the requirement for that variable, which is the

sort of mysterious thing that is, um, uh, can be

discussed, uh, now is that, um, uh, we want there

to be a if there is a we need a

monotonic relationship between the shock, this alpha it kind of,

uh, process that the firm is responding to and its

choices of TFP process and this other variable, we want

it to be as college as possible, needing to be

monotonically and as Uh, related.

Okay.

And we will see why.

Um, okay.

But okay, so just as a, you know, just to

give the game away, the variable they use in this

paper is firm level investment in each period.

The idea being that so firm level investment is nowhere

in the production function.

It's not labour, it's not capital.

But the idea is if the firm, some of the

managers of the firm are observing their alpha it when

they're picking the quantity of the labour input, therefore creating

a simultaneity problem, that we're concerned about, the endogeneity problem

that we're concerned about.

Let's imagine that that manager who's making the input choice

for labour input choice is also observing that alpha and

thinking, hang on a second.

We've got a high alpha draw.

Now, that means that any investment we make this period

is also going to be more valuable.

And our investment process over time is going to be

very correlated with the evolution of the alpha IT shock

over time okay.

And we're going to use this.

Let's imagine it is.

And we're going to use that information with the structure

of the model to try and solve the induction.

And that's that's what that's the kind of main underpinnings

of things that you need a lot of structure as

we were discussing.

Um, all right.

So but before we get into that, just taking a

step back.

Classic io, uh, paper for interest purposes.

What what is the actual research question in this paper?

The research question is about it's not a trade question.

It's about, uh, deregulation of an industry.

So in I think the 1980s in the US, the

telecoms industry was deregulated.

There used to be It was AT&T that did all

of the telecoms infrastructure and everything.

It was broken up and elements of competition were introduced

into the telecoms industry.

And the research question in this paper from 1996, fresh

metal winning paper, I think is what is the effect

of deregulation?

What was the effect of the deregulation on the productivity

of the industry?

Did it do what it was supposed to do in

some sense and get rid of this big monopoly giant

kind of slumbering along in the industry and induce competition?

That's supposed to be good.

Um, and to do that, they have this great data

on inputs and outputs of telecommunications plants, uh, over the

time period in question.

And they look at, um, and they allow for productivity

to be correlated with in part, uh, there was and

the one of the problems is there's lots of entry

and exit.

And so they have to somehow take that into account.

And, uh, they are going to measure an overall productivity

increase, and then they break it down into three parts.

What they find is that actually plant my plant productivity.

There was no sort of within plant changes in productivity.

And in fact, you know, conditional on the distribution of

fixed factors and the distribution of variable factors actually led

to a fall in efficiency.

So some of the existing plants weren't using, um, the

variable factors as well.

You know, the labour was not in the most efficient

places, but uh, there was a positive reallocation effect towards

the more productive plants in the fixed factors over time,

which meant an overall increase in the industry.

So their approach allowed them to estimate productivity satisfaction at

the firm level and hence at the industry level over

time in a way that was sufficient for them to

break out kind of the overall dynamics of productivity evolution

in this industry.

Okay.

Now, how did they do it?

Okay.

They have a model.

And as I keep on as I'm going to say

again and again, there is a lot of structure in

this model.

And they and the key thing about it is they

use it, they use the structure and there's a lot

of assumptions.

So and in this structure is a lot of the

problematic bits that subsequently have been um, uh, tweaked.

Let's say okay.

So in the model we are going to assume that

we've got firms competing with each other.

And those firms are heterogeneous in that productivity.

Let's call it alpha.

Right.

Um, that they face the same market structure and they're

also price takers.

So they face fixed input prices, fixed wages, Fixed costs,

the same cost of capital.

And here's the first big one.

Um, this alpha, it is assumed to evolve as a

evolves as an exogenous Markov process.

Okay.

So it's a bit it's like a it's kind of

as in Mellors, the firm, um, uh, has a period

I, I t draw.

But this dynamics or minute doesn't have any benefits, but

they, uh, the today's draw is random conditional on what

their draw was yesterday.

Okay.

So all of the past history is summarised in the

firms is Markov.

But the the level of the productivity yesterday conditional on

that they draw something today okay.

You know doesn't have to be static but uh okay.

So this is a sort of firm level characteristics evolving

as a Markov process.

So it's what we had the best.

Guess what we had yesterday?

Plus some random bit.

Okay.

Now, uh, that's that's quite specific in an in, in

an industry where there's a lot of technical change going

on, by the way.

But, you know, we'll come back to that when we've

got firms making choices that related that allow their actual

productivity to be endogenous, which we're not.

Here.

We've got a random process conditional on where they are.

Okay.

And we're going to say um g is some non-linear

increasing function of lagged productivity okay e.g. open for now.

So and because it's a dynamic problem, we have firms

making an explicit and explicit choice in each period, which

is do I continue in business today or do I

exit?

If I exit, I can sell my fixed assets and

I get the salvage value.

If I continue, then I get some profits today.

And also I have the kind of present value of

all my future profits conditional on my state today.

Okay, so so in every you know, so there'll be

there's an underlying Bellman equation which you've probably seen which

discounts to today.

The you know, given I'm in business today and I'm

using fixed assets and data.

What's the value of doing that today.

And continuing which allows me to again, make the same

decision tomorrow.

When tomorrow I can exit or continue.

And then the day after that I can report to

that I can exit will continue.

So I discount that all back.

And that's in my Bellman equation.

I just compared the do I leave today get my

salvage value or do I continue?

Um, if I continue, then I make two choices.

I choose the level of my variable inputs, which we

then call data.

I think it's just labour, labour and materials, but that's

just labour.

And I'm also and this is critical for this model.

I'm going to make a choose a level of investment.

Okay.

Now what is the purpose of this investment.

Well investment today increases my capital stock at the start

of tomorrow.

Okay.

Um, and, uh, importantly, uh, both of those choices are

made.

What I've observed for it as you need firm and,

uh, capital next period is determined by whatever my capital

was in the previous period depreciated somewhat, plus the investment

that I made in the previous period.

So that's just a kind of structural thing that's going

on.

So everyone with me.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So that conditional.

Transition matrix for the Markov process.

Is not individual.

It's not like specific to firm, right?

Like not having the same productivity last period.

They have to draw from the same conditional distribution.

Yeah.

Yeah.

It's it's just dependent on what your own productivity level

was.

But like if two firm had the same priority like

alpha um t minus one they would then draw the

same distribution.

So then this bit term creates like it's, it's it's

the meaning is like a idiosyncratic shock to the firm.

Yes.

Okay.

Yes.

Which will in Alpha I t plus one will show

up in its, uh, previous periods.

Okay.

Okay.

Uh, I mean, is there any like, evidence on whether

firms actually actively choose, like, exit or whether they just

run into bankruptcy and there's a forced exit?

Excellent.

Uh, why is it even relevant to the model?

Yeah.

In this particular industry setting, this exit business is is

a big deal because they see a lot of it

in the data.

Yeah.

Now, whether those firms were whether it's relevant, fully rational,

forward looking decisions and there weren't additional capital constraints and

all that sort of thing.

And I can't remember if they comment on that actually.

Um, yeah.

It's kind of assumed that there's no, no frictions at

all in this model other than the those are reflected

in the costs, which are the same for everybody.

Um, okay.

So we've got this, these two choices.

Um, the solution to the model is for the final

decision is, is the theory produces this Bellman equation, which

means that the firm will exit?

Um, if it if it gets a low draw, a

particularly low draw of its alpha.

But interestingly, um, the threshold level of alpha at which

they exit depends on their capital stock.

Reason is that for any one given draw of productivity,

um, the value of staying in business at that productivity

draw is going to be larger.

So.

Right.

So I've got one productivity draw today which, which changes

the probability over the probably the productivity draws that I'll

get in the future.

And it'll be the same sort of expected draws just

as a function of what I've got today.

But those same set of future draws translate to a

higher value of staying in business.

If I've got a large if larger capital stock, if

I'm larger because I can, I'm going to get the

same possibly good shocks, but I can leverage those good

shocks over that.

Those shocks are complementary because of the nature of my

production function with my capital stock.

So if I'm larger, the same series of shocks is

going to be more valuable for me, which means I'm

going to get negative selection.

The firms that are the firms that have a larger

capital stock are going to continue in the industry at

a lower productivity draw.

So if you're a small firm, you have to get

much better draw in order to continue.

So what does that mean?

It means that I'm going to have um, I'm going

to have selection, but the selection is not going to

look random.

In fact, it's going to create a problem because I'm

going to look like it's going to start to me

to look like that.

The large firms are unproductive.

It's not.

It's just that the large firms are present.

No.

Okay.

Uh, okay.

Uh, okay.

So I first make my decision, and then if I

stay in the industry, Then I can write down this

investment function where my investment today is a function of

my, uh, productivity draw today, my capital stock today, and

other kind of time variable.

It's called time fixed effect, something like that.

It's called the rate of interest or whatever.

So some other time better.

Okay.

So each firm makes two decisions in each period okay.

If they stay in they make this decision as well

okay.

Right.

So that that's what I'm assuming is going on.

And the issues are I want to estimate my productivity

process and I want to estimate my production function coefficients.

How do I do it when I've got this simultaneity

between output, uh, observed output and variable inputs through the

fact that the firm observes after it and I've got

the exit of inefficient firms.

And it's not all firms that are inefficient.

It's particularly likely to see the exit of small, inefficient

firms because of this, uh, dynamic, uh, approaches.

So, uh, they're just going to have a potato, just

kind of a relatively simple production function, just a kind

of Douglas production function, slightly similar to what they have

in the paper.

But let's just say it's a complex function.

And this, Alfred, is known when the firm makes its

investment and labour decisions and, uh, mu it is unknown

by the firm and the economy nutrition.

Okay.

So this is a massive build up, but I'm spending

a lot of time because it really does show up

so much.

Okay.

And in a trade we'll just say, oh, we'll just

use auto pickers.

And there's so much, so much in the way of,

uh, structure here.

That is I think it's important to, to, to, to

know the assumptions that are being made.

Okay.

Now let's first get down to the selection issue.

So the thing is that the expected quantity given that

you survive is going to be, um, you know, whatever

your output is.

Plus and then conditional on your alpha, ah, it can

be conditional on the fact that you've chosen to survive.

And this term is not going to be, um, uh,

a zero in expectation, um, because, uh, so first of

all, l depends on the level of alpha T, but

importantly, alpha is correlated with this kit through the, uh,

selection process that is going.

So I've already said this firms with logic are going

to continue at lower productivity levels.

The error term is decreasing in K, leading to a

downward bias in the um estimate of the alpha coefficient.

So our concern is because of selection, we're going to

have a downward bias in k in alpha k And

the other issue is going to be that we're going

to have an upward bias in Elle, because if they,

uh, when this is unobserved will be high to us.

But the firm observes that it's fine.

They're going to.

They're going to be able to vary Allen up here.

So we're going to be concerned kind of going in

about an upwards bias and alpha L and a downward

bias in alpha K two different programs okay.

Right now how are we going to use this investment

function.

So this was a tool that was developed two years

earlier by papers.

And it shows that, um, uh, under the certain assumptions

that the investment, the level of investment which might be

observed is strictly increasing in productivity.

So I, I it is strictly increasing in alpha.

Right.

And productivity given the capital shock.

And what I'll do is show that under certain assumptions

on the processes that determine investment.

That investment function, if it's monotonic, can be inverted.

Okay.

And this is this is the machinery in politics.

I as long as I'm willing to say it satisfies

all the, um, functional form assumptions that allow me to

do this inversion.

I'm going to do that inversion, which is going to

allow me to proxy for, uh, the unobserved productivity with

this, uh, the inverse of this investment function.

Now, what assumptions are required.

It's got it's got to it rules out a ton

of, um, uh, uh, possibilities.

Like, you know, adjustment costs are firms specific, can vary

with productivity.

You've got firm, specific kind of demand processes and, uh,

or labour market conditions going on.

So anything that, um, we're going to kind of assume

that that investment is, is determined just by these factors.

And then Levinson and Petrine.

This is a very similar idea, except that they say

their motivation in their paper, which you also will see

Levinson pattern is um, often is that in applications, you

see that some pattern is they say, okay, look in

the data very practically, it's often very hard to observe

investment levels at the firm.

And quite often, by the way, those investment levels are

zero.

And as soon as we've got zero investment, we can't

really do this.

Um, uh, inversion, but materials expenditure, that's also a variable

input that's going to be determined by um, uh, the

firm's knowledge of alpha.

It, it's definitely a variable input like labour.

It's more often observed in commonly used data sets, for

example Orbis or something like that.

And so instead of using the investment function and app

to derive a control function for productivity, I'm going to

use observed data on materials choices and invert that to

derive a control function for productivity.

Now both of these have problems, but at least it

is true that data on materials is more readily available.

Now, in order to do this, by the way, you

can't have materials in the production function.

At least it's not so straightforward.

But now I'm thinking that maybe you can figure out,

okay, so we need something that we can invert, some

other factor that we can invert to proxy for productivity

okay.

And then it proceeds quite mechanically in the following way.

So we're going to take our production function log of

output is a is a function of the, the log

of the labour input, the log of capital, and instead

of having an alpha it is my residual.

I'm going to put in there this uh inverse investment

function.

And then my residual is just going to be this

new it.

So the idea is that I need something that's sophisticated

enough here to fully capture all of the movement in

that I need that alpha.

Right.

Okay.

That's that's the that's the idea.

Um, now what all your papers don't do is tell

us exactly what functional form this inverse investment function should

look like.

So what they do, I think, and what is often

done is just say we're going to let it be

as general as possible and proxy it with a, uh,

higher order polynomial function.

We're going to allow it to be depend on the

levels observed investment and capital, and the interaction of investment

in capital.

The squares and the cube.

The cubic.

I'm not taking a stand on exactly what the inverse

function looks like.

It's just putting them all in there.

Okay, but note if you make this very, very general

in the way that we might like to do because

we don't know anything about it, then we've got an

Alpha K here.

And then we've also got a phi K here.

So if we try and estimate this whole thing we've

got a problem in identifying um alpha K.

But we'll come back to that.

That's the second stage.

The idea is that the first stage, if we do

now just estimate this broadly speaking by OLS, will allow

us to get an unbiased estimate of the alpha L.

That's the first stage of quantities we've control for the

simultaneous problem.

Yes.

Questions.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So this bit here is different from it's like same

notation but different from the shock before.

Right.

Because alpha it is its inverse of I.

So then I think I this bit I think yeah

that's it.

I think that's the, I think that's supposed to be

the same new it as we had in our original

production function.

So we said, um, so I think right on this

for the, for this one, I mean, this is the

yeah, I changed the notation a bit.

And so instead of this being the whole residual, I

said this is the residual okay.

So what we've done is kind of substituted in for

this bit the observed to the firm bit.

And this is the unobserved to the firm and the

econometricians bit.

Which we used to call mu I did I.

Sorry me yeah me me.

Me I mean.

It's still the same meaning.

It Sounds good.

And then just another.

Question on the negative selection part.

So obviously if the firm has a lot of capital

they sell it for salvage value.

Then they're also going to get a higher salvage value

today.

So is there some kind of restriction for example like

you have a like very high beta or some kind

of condition such that firms like the the they get

more future value that always outweighs the increase in like

salvage value that they get today because they have higher

capital.

Does that make sense?

Uh.

Right.

Salvage value is going to be increasing proportionally with the

capital that you've got.

So we'd be more likely to exit if you've got

larger capital.

Uh, I think probably it's assumed that everything is proportional

there.

So if I've got more capital, I have to pay

more for it, and I.

I can't remember any explicit discussion of this, but there

probably.

Is some additional layer of assumption that would then result

in this negative selection if they if that eventually feeds

into their monotonicity.

Yeah.

I mean the, the the selection bias that they discuss

explicitly, which they think is the sort of the first

order problem is this is one that I mentioned that

the future value of the firm at a given productivity

draw, the future of the value of the firm is

is higher when you've got a higher.

So they must be, uh, at least implicitly imposing that

the, um.

Okay.

So so I think what you've mentioned doesn't have any

direct channel for, for the biases of the alpha k

coefficient or does it I can't remember.

Yeah.

So let's say it's kind of a they're worried about

this a negative net selection problem that any given draw

of alpha they're going to be more likely to survive

if they've got more capital, outweighing the fact that that

capital may be differently valuable in the salvage market.

Let me say that I think that must be implicit.

I'm not sure I can have it.

I can have it.

Look at that.

What what do they assume about the salvage?

Okay.

All right, so that's what this is our first stage.

And this allows us to get a I.

The idea is this gives us a consistent value, a

consistent coefficient of this is just a consistent estimate of

this alpha L.

And if we think we've got a large enough sample

then the alpha L will be, uh, unbiased.

And um, we will be, uh, done then with the

with the labour coefficient, we are by no means done

with our hope to get the, um, capital coefficient, um,

because what we're left with is this complicated feed expression

that is capturing all of the ways that capital investment

together will influence, uh, output.

So then we have to do something else.

What do we do?

And we have the second stage.

We are going to do something.

Uh, the second stage regression, where on the left hand

side, we subtract the kind of, um, contribution of labour

given the estimated and then consistent estimate of alpha.

We subtract that from our output and then we try

and estimate, uh, all of these terms in here.

And I can't remember what G looks like.

We're going to just do another non-parametric estimation to try

and, uh.

Okay.

Right.

Sorry.

There's another step.

Sorry.

All right.

How are we going to get this Alpha K?

We are going to say that alpha k as a

state variable is unaffected by anything that happens in this

period.

It's determined purely by its own level.

Last period and shots that happened in the last period,

um, and specifically the alpha shock that we get today

is going to the was the expected one we could

expect yesterday, plus some, uh, shock that is unrelated to

the capital stock.

Therefore, we can say that the observed output tomorrow is

going to be whatever capital we had tomorrow, less this

function of everything that we had last period.

Plus the random is going to be unrelated Phase two.

The change in capital is the change in capital between

yesterday and today.

Yeah.

So that's it.

So because this capital is evolving as a state variable,

we're able to get this alpha K from the level

of capital today which is unaffected by today.

Second stage is that tricky.

Um but okay.

But I want to emphasise here that, um, being able

to identify the alpha K for efficient really depends on

the fact that k is a state variable k, unlike

L really means that.

Um, all right.

And then we've also got to adjust that second stage

for this selection into exit.

Uh, and we adjust this non-parametric estimation for the probability

that, uh, you actually survive is a function of your

decreasing function of your for capital stock.

And we have to separately do a kind of nother

control function, which is the probability use of eyes as

a function of your investment and your capital, and put

that into the second stage to control the complexity.

Um, so that's what they do in the second stage

estimate all of this non-parametric.

And moving to the second estimate of this.

Okay.

So, uh, what I advise you to read this paper

if you're ever using the state of command.

Oli.

Pages.

If you're ever using the optimal productivity estimation command in

Stata or whatever, coding, uh, whatever software language you use

it, all of these packages are fully coded up everywhere,

but, um, I, uh, advise you to read this paper

because this, this whole thing about the the Markov process

on productivity and the fact that the capital accumulation process,

um, is such that, you know, our capital stock tomorrow

is determined by our capital stock today and the investment

that we do today.

They're all really key ingredients in this model.

And particularly we need investment to be perfectly driven by

contemporary needs to be, um, the monotonicity of that investment

function.

If we've got any kind of real world facts like

convex adjustment costs such as fixed costs to install new

capital, such a capital is lumpy.

You know, it's a big positive number at zero.

Then we're going to have some problems using allocators directly.

Levinson patrons answer is to use materials.

But actually both Olympiakos and Levinson Kitchen have one major

problem that we have not yet measured, uh, discussed um,

which is also related to this investment function or materials

uh use function.

And this problem is to do with the first stage.

Uh, okay.

So, um.

Uh, we start the whole idea for this approach, for

this control function, is that we're going to solve the

problem that labour is endogenous to current period productivity by

finding something else that is endogenous to this period's productivity,

call it investment or call it materials.

And we are going to take that something else, invert

that function, stick that in back into the original production

function to control for the simultaneous to negative and labour.

Now, for us to do that, we've got to say

that labour varies with, um, productivity in a particular way.

An investment varies with productivity in quite a different way.

Otherwise it's going to become totally collinear.

Okay.

So the problem is, you know, if we stick, if

we say, okay, I'm going to put every possible third

order polynomial with investment into my production function, but only

have labour engineering linearly, then I've got to I've got

to I've got to sort of have there's got to

be something else as well going on with the investment

function.

That doesn't mean that that makes it possible for me

to separate out that alpha l coefficient from, um, uh,

these all these things that I've put in the, um,

control function.

Okay.

So in other words, uh, this is an objection that

was pointed out by Acaba, Caves and Fraser, and it

took them so long to get this paper published, I

think it was eventually published in econometrics.

But, you know, people have been using only papers, you

know, since mid 90s and, uh, with this problem.

Um, but this was, you know, uh, Eventually, uh, published

and, um, uh, you know, we need this investment function

to be such that, um, it's quite hard.

We need l to very independently with the productivity shock.

Very, uh, very independently from the way in which investment

varies with the productivity shot.

So it's, it's, uh, and they say this is a

quote from Kate and Fraser, one simply cannot simultaneously estimate

a fully non-parametric, time varying function of these things, along

with the coefficient on a variable that is only a

time varying function of those same variables.

So, um, they say, okay, in that first stage we've

got a massive, potentially a massive collinearity problem, unless we

think that our investment function is sort of there's something

else going on in there.

So it's evolving in a different way from the labour

function.

So this seems like, you know, once you look at

it, it seems like a really, really valid kind of

objection.

Um, when you look at this sorry, I'm just going

to make this point.

This first stage is essentially an OLS here.

Okay.

And I've got labour capital.

And.

Then all of these functions of investment and capital.

And unless and I'm saying both labour and investment vary

with alpha.

Right.

This is the purpose of putting that control function in

there.

But they've got to sort of vary independently with alpha

right.

Otherwise I can't separately identify alpha L from for example

this phi here.

Okay.

So what am I getting the true alpha at.

Or am I getting something that's kind of kind of.

I'm not sure.

I just don't know.

So again, we're requiring quite a lot of the structure.

Okay.

but do not worry because Ankerberg, Caves and Fraser have

a solution to this, which is also, um, implemented in

our Wooldridge uh, which is to simply say, well, let

me make the first stage, um, of this, this semi

parametric thing here.

So I keep on flicking backwards and forwards.

So this, uh, higher order polynomial here, let me make

this investment function a function not only, uh, of investment

and capital, but also labour, and put all of the

variable and state, uh, factors in this, um, first stage.

And then I'm going to estimate the whole thing, um,

simultaneously the first and second stage simultaneously.

Uh, da da da da da.

Ah.

So the only purpose of the first stage is to

take out this, uh, new in t term.

And then the second stage, in the first stage together

and both are going to give me.

I'm going to deliver both the Alpha L and the

alpha K, both the state variable and the variable factor

coefficients.

So that is kind of uh, uh, I think, I

think where we are now.

Okay.

So I imagine that we've measured it.

So all of this stuff is um, we're assuming the

output is measured properly, labour inputs and capital inputs and

measured properly.

Everybody is a price taker in factor markets.

All of this is specifically to adjust address the biases

in estimating alpha L and alpha K that come about

because we think that firms are making, uh, dynamic input

choices and dynamic survival selection in choices.

Okay.

So ADP isn't Levinsohn Petronas specifically designed to deal with

those two problems.

And I think now these days, papers that you read,

you would expect to see people use the Aqaba Caves

and Fraser or the Wooldridge adjustment to the Levinson petrol

method.

Okay.

Has anyone done this using firm data?

Okay.

Um, so the good news is, as I mentioned, most,

um, uh, the data sets that we have to estimate

productivity, uh, would probably include you would probably need some

measure of output, some measure of the labour input number

of employees, usually some measure of the capital stock.

That's also a bit tricky because what might be available

for firms is balance sheet data, which is the, um,

book value, the book value of the total assets, not

necessarily the exact value of the current value of the

capital that they're using and so various methods to try

and do that.

But let's and then let's say you've either got investment

or you've got materials costs in there.

You can do this kind of code.

It's all coded up and it's you can apply it.

Um, uh.

And I think these days if you, if you, if

you apply those the patent appraiser adjustment to deal with

the simultaneity problems and exit, then you're okay I think.

Okay.

That's the it's that you can just plug them into

the plug it into the code.

But it's important, especially if you're dealing in a certain

setting where there's lots of exit, which there always is

in a minutes type model where there is, um, uh,

perhaps, um, not good data on investment, which will be

the case in most data sets specifically from, especially if

you want to do comparisons across countries, that sort of

thing, which you might want to do in trade data

or comparisons over time.

Um, your data might not either allow you to do

this properly, or you might be imposing a lot of

structure, which exactly the structure that you're kind of trying

to test in your application.

So important to it.

All right.

So yeah.

Questions.

I was just wondering, um, what what their method actually

address potentially, um, borrowing constraints that apply.

No.

Especially not if those constraints affected firms differently.

Okay.

But but the reasoning is that conditional on capital, if

we can use capital as a, uh, some sort of

collateral, then you should still see that fixing the level

of capital I can borrow.

So I will make more investment.

My productivity.

Oh, how do I pay for that investment?

Uh, yeah.

No idea.

Yeah.

Uh, yeah.

Uh, yeah, I think that's not explicitly discussed.

Uh, okay.

I think.

I'm kind of thinking because these methods originally were developed

and applied in specific industries, specifically in the US, that

has, at least in these sort of workhorse versions of

the model.

I haven't seen anything that deals explicitly with any kind

of financing requirements or capital constraints or anything.

That's actually.

Yeah.

Because I was also thinking like if different industries face

different constraints and you want to compare productivity across industries.

Okay.

Yeah.

So that's another issue.

So yeah I mean these production function coefficients probably are

industry specific.

Again.

So that that would uh, it might be important to

include to estimate them separately industry by industry.

I think that would be typical.

Um, now as to whether frictions.

Yeah.

So I think as long as you are okay with

frictions affecting all firms in an industry the same way

there, okay, it would just show up essentially as a

higher cost of capital.

In that industry.

Uh, okay.

All right.

So, um, one paper that I wanted to talk about

in particular, that was it's a really great example of.

So this was this was early on, um, at the

time when Mellis was writing his paper and Nick was,

um, doing her PhD, where she, she basically was the

first one to, um, apply Ollie Pincus type of ideas

in an international question, basically as a test of methods.

Uh, did Thomas talk about captions?

It's really good when you consider the the vintage of

it.

So, I mean, it's really good objectively.

But then when you consider it, it was so early,

early on in this literature, it's really good.

Okay.

So, um, she uses early papers because she was going

to look at, um, the impact of a trade shock

in, uh, Chile and, uh, in the late 70s and

the early 80s.

Um, there was a big trade liberalisation in Chile, and

she's got great data from Chile on all plants with

more than ten employees.

Now she doesn't know.

Firm by firm, which firms export or not, or doesn't

think about import competition.

But she does see, I think I guess, um, uh,

whether or not that was an industry where there was

a lot of, um, uh, exports, you know, suddenly a

lot of exports and suddenly lot of imports or not.

Okay.

And she asks, essentially, do we see a bigger reallocation,

as the model would predict, in these industries that were

exposed to these trade shocks?

And she finds out that there, that there, um, is

a bigger, um, reallocation suggesting the selection mechanisms and methods

are going on.

So that is to say, the, um, the least productive

firms in the industry are more productive.

But those that are terrible leave Um, those that were

good end up, uh, producing much more.

And, uh, factors are reallocated towards high productivity plants when

they export.

Right.

Um, now she has to use only papers because of

a large share of plants exit during the sample.

So she would be very worried about some kind of,

um, uh, selection, biased selection out because, uh, the firms

that exit are not and are not the ones receiving

random are not receiving random productivity draws.

Okay.

So if you look at her paper, I'm sorry I

didn't put it up on the slide, but she has

table two which so so it's really nice.

Okay.

So what she does is she does estimates the production

function with OLS and then and then presents it with

the previous method.

And the coefficients change in the way that they should

change, which is, you know, uh, very reassuring.

So that is to say that the coefficients on labour

and variable inputs are lower under the early papers method

than they were under OLS.

Because, you know, consistent with this idea that variable factors

respond positively to a positive productivity shock, which gives to

the bias, and that the coefficients on capital are systematically

underestimated, you know, or less because of this disproportionate survival

of survival at low productivity draws of large capital firms.

So firms with lots of capital look unproductive and therefore

capital coefficient is lower.

Okay.

So basically what we see is that olive pickers essentially

brings the production function coefficients closer together, lowers the variable

ones, increases the fixed ones.

And with these methods, she's able to show that there's

this massive increase in shift in the distribution.

So it's not within firm changes in productivity.

It's a shift in the overall productivity distribution, uh, by

19% over the period of these trade reforms.

But 6.6% is due to within that increase.

So she's also got that, but 12.7% is due to

the mechanism of the reallocation of production from less to

more efficient firms.

And she's got more pronounced in import competing sectors.

So this suggests that the exit out because of uh,

more competition is.

Uh, a big deal, uh, in this particular data set.

So that was very nice.

Okay.

Now okay.

More practical tips.

Okay.

Um, now.

Uh, believe it or not, even though quite often revenues,

labour, capital, maybe even quantities and prices might be available

in data sets.

By no means are they always available.

Um, but within most of the normal structures, we would

expect variation in other firm outcomes to be perfectly correlated

with variations in our unobserved variable, which is TFP.

So we expect low productivity firms to have low revenues,

for instance, and high productivity firms to have high revenues.

So we might, um, just for reassurance purposes, to test

everything that we're looking for, for trade effects on productivity.

We should also see in revenues.

And there are some papers, including this really well-known paper

by Eric Vuitton's early on paper, um, where he doesn't

even attempt to estimate the firm level of productivity.

It's a paper about, um, quality upgrading.

Uh, in the auto industry.

I think in Mexico, once it's able to trade in

the US or Mexico or maybe a South American country,

I think it's part of Mexico.

And, um, he just uses revenue.

He just looks at firm level revenues and he looks

at the distribution of turnover revenues and somehow relates this

to a model where we've got TFP variation.

And, um, this is one of, uh, a paper by,

um, me, I'm in the et al.

And uh, basically everything, but in, in case we, um,

people don't believe our TFP estimates, you know, which for

all of the reasons that we've discussed today, people might

not it's reassuring to run all the tests just on

on revenues as well and revenues per worker because in,

in our models these are all going in the same

direction.

Um, so, so, so just kind of best practice to,

to run tests on all of the variables that we

expect to see.

Um, and, uh, Dan.

Dressler has a.

Famous paper where he just looks at labour productivity rather

than TFP.

So labour productivity would be value added per worker.

If we don't have good measures on capital, that might

also be acceptable.

And I think in general, we want to make sure

that everything is kind of moving in the direction that

we would expect.

Um, okay.

So let's see, how are we doing on time?

How about can I give you some chit chat on

something else here?

Um, so actually, uh, having said this, that within management,

within minutes, for instance, within all models with firm heterogeneity,

we expect the more productive firms to be to have

higher sales.

Now, uh, I'm working on a paper at the moment,

and, um, I don't know if you guys know.

Marten de Reading's a macro economist here.

So he's also we spoke to him about this because

he's also very familiar with this data.

So we looked we took the Orbis data, which is

the uh, used to be Bureau Van Dyke, now owned

by Moody's firm level database.

A lot of people work with for European countries over

the last ten years, and we did all our best

productivity estimation country by country, industry by industry for, I

think, 5 or 6 large countries.

And so the UK, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Belgium, I

think, uh, and when we estimated, uh, firm productivity and

we kind of said, okay, we've got, we've got the

data on firm revenues, we've got our firm level productivity

estimates, and then we've got the rest of the production

function, which is like inputs and the estimated coefficients.

So we said, you know, revenues are equal to measure

of input scale.

You know what I'm saying?

Alpha alpha l times alpha plus alpha k trans k.

And then the productivity estimate.

And we look at it.

And actually in European data in the last ten years

uh the TFP estimates are not strongly positive, positively correlated

with revenues.

Scale is positively correlated with revenue strongly correlated with revenues.

But this TFP residual is not, uh, that strongly positive

product, which is really, uh, puzzling.

How do you get.

This positively.

Correlated.

Yeah.

So that we okay, so just very simply, what we've

done in the model is, you know, we've got measures

of revenues.

And so this is log log of revenues.

And then here we've got alpha l l plus alpha

k Okay.

And I think we even got materials in there.

Materials expenditure.

And then we've got our TFP term, which let's call

it this.

Okay.

And we've got this is in the data.

This is in the data.

This is in the data.

We you are and this is in the data.

We do our production function estimation, doing all of this

learning and capturing the world bridge and everything.

And we get our estimates for these these production coefficients.

And we get this residual.

And then we say okay.

So now for our firm, for each of our firms

in the data, we can compute what this is.

And we're going to call that scale input scale.

It's kind of the production function weighted uh inputs.

And then this is, uh, TFP.

And it turns out that this is weirdly not very,

very.

Strongly, positively correlated.

With this.

This is very correlated with revenues.

And we don't really understand why.

But it's something to do with like slow adjustments and

in input choices in the U.

In, in European countries.

Um, but it's there in the data.

We've estimated it on subsamples and estimated it on the

whole data set.

And we've estimated it across countries.

And, um, it's not very satisfying given that every model

we've ever done in our lives would suggest that a

model would take a genius of productivity.

These are the most productive firms with consistently high revenue.

So it raises the question for us of how valid

are kind of.

Uh, cooked on assumptions or something.

Yeah.

Details on inputs, quantities or costs are right.

So that's one of the things I wanted to talk

about after the break.

So all of this is sort of conditional on the

fact that we've got great measures of these.

Um, so, um, and that we're all price takers.

So there's several, several things.

So here people usually just use number of.

People.

Here.

This is problematic because it should be units of capital.

But this is never observed okay.

So we might have from balance sheets total assets or

total fixed assets or something like that.

But uh, another thing that people do is kind of

do this inventory method of, um, adding up all of

my historical investments and depreciation with the same.

The actual capital stock I've got is the sum of

my final investments.

Now, to do that.

You really.

You need much more data because you need to know

all of the investments that they've made.

So this one's quite tricky.

Um, and then but materials is good because that's a,

an income statement line item.

So most of these data sets that collect financial statements

from firms will have a might have some estimate in

to.

But by the way, in the UK, UK accounts, if

you're ever using UK data, they don't report materials they

use cost of goods sold.

This is totally aside but you know they may be

problematic, but cost of goods sold also includes some labour

costs.

So we're really in trouble then.

Okay so so we have to treat the UK differently

because there will just be materials inputs like intermediate inputs

and utilities and things like this.

And other European countries may take that.

I'm not sure what they're doing in the US actually

having continuous data set.

And uh, but in the UK.

So it really does depend on the accounting.

Data is available.

That's how it sounds.

Work through everything.

Bit by bit.

Do the best that you do.

The best that you can.

Get in the data.

But even if you did, or even if you have

one, this also got, uh, implicitly you've got these assumptions,

as we just mentioned a moment ago, that the firms

are all price takers here, that they don't have market

power in these industries, and they're not going to sell

access to them.

The quantity choices are not being affected by the fact

that they're also able to influence the price unit prices

that they're having to pay.

And one of the big issues in production function estimation

generally is that, um, we might have data on revenues

rather than quantities because we've got p times q final

product price times quantity rather than Q and some data

sets do have Q, which is great, especially if you're

looking within industry.

You know, you can compare cuz, um, if the data

set just had it, it has revenues, prices and quantities.

Uh, then you might be slightly worried about using revenues.

And there's a big literature, which I'm going to talk

about after the break, which deals with the fact that,

uh, firm level prices are playing a role here in

the measure of revenues.

And that would be problematic if you think firms about

different mark-ups or in, um, industries with market power.

I, you know, there's, uh, some kind of the quantity

choices are being affected by the market.

But talk about that after the break.

This might be like a dumb.

Question, but how much like labour laws affect the.

Affects and variability of the labour.

Yep.

I think that's, uh, that's the question that actually people

have looked into?

Because I think, you know, broadly speaking, we might expect

that in the UK or especially in the US, that

labour markets are much more variable relative to, say, France

or somewhere.

Um, and I think people have, have explored that, but

uh, at least all of these standard production function estimation

methods assumes that labour is variable from fully variable from

time to time, from period to period, which may be

more much more value for, say, annual data than for

quarterly data than we might be particularly well.

All right.

Should we take a short break?

Uh, what do you guys think?

How are you doing?

Great.

Yeah.

Oh, by the way, the budget has come out.

Anyone is interested?

Uh.

Contemporary.

Uh.

Idea, Anyway.

You can.

See the new.

Taxes.

Okay.

We can read that over the new taxes.

I'm feeling like this lecture is kind of a bit

depressing.

I'm telling you all the problems with the current method,

so I think.

I think it's important.

I mean, you know.

Sorry.

I'm just chatting.

This is not part of the lecture.

Yeah.

All of these problems are, um, uh, well known world

active research fields.

That's the point.

So I think it's important to be aware of them.

If you're going to be doing any theory, model or

empirical work that has turnover, productivity is important.

And it's exciting because the active research fields controversial.

Lots of debate.

So we can have lots of work to do, which.

Can I ask you again?

Um, we're saying that basically the trip should be positively

correlated with revenue, because you're saying that that's coming from

the model.

Because if the firm has a firm has fits.

With the heterogeneity.

Right?

Yeah, exactly.

That's the one source of firm heterogeneity.

So say you have a good productivity draw.

They're both going to find it okay to get more

inputs and produce more outputs.

Um if there's a lack of correlation it suggests that

there's some other kind of source of firm heterogeneity, which

is perhaps some kind of legacy capital stock, some assets

that have been around, you know, become decoupled from the

firm level of productivity.

So if you had like a model with some specific

capital, then maybe you could explain part of it.

Yeah.

Or some reason why.

So yeah, maybe I'm just misunderstanding, but if.

You think about different ways of expressing heterogeneity, like in

a way that finds are different in what they use,

for instance, that that would be like if you think

of different like hyphens, that's in the estimation, different like

different alphas, like different weighting of like and that's totally

accounted for.

Right.

But then if they have different capital accumulation functions or

something that would not be accounted for yet.

And so somehow, if you can't exactly say that somehow

a firm I know in the past has received massive

subsidies or something like totally decoupled from its actual efficiency,

then you would expect to see something in the environment

that's changed so much that the, uh, the state variables

that we're seeing and the levels of their inputs are,

are due to some other process Since then, it's just

one mark.

Of concurrent productivity or series of problems.

In any kind of just like abstracting from the model

and based on first principles, we think that higher productivity

should be relaxed.

So so if.

The firm basically is a productivity problem, if I'm more

productive than my marginal product of each of these inputs,

at any level of input is going to be higher.

So actually so I should be getting more.

Yes.

So kind of deviating from that thought we would need

like some.

Different model.

Firms that are not optimising perfectly or um.

Yeah, the past is just playing a much bigger role.

Uh, so for some reason, uh, say capital was randomly

allocated due to some.

I just we just.

But that would also be like not optimally choosing input

vectors, right?

So if you're using the vector, like if you're not

using them optimally, then also you wouldn't.

Okay.

So yeah.

So either you're not choosing them optimally, maybe because you've

got some kind of coupling constraints or something like that.

Or then you would be choosing them.

Have to give me.

There's just got to be some reason in the past

why the state variables are, uh, are such that we've

got a different set of observations where the large firms

where it's not that the most productive firms of a

large firms.

It's it's very uncomfortable.

We have we had those, like we said, as soon

as we present this table where there's not a strong

positive correlation just between these variables, we're like, oh.

But just in a very intuitive way.

Are we willing to accept that large firms are maybe

not the most productive ones?

I mean, I mean, they've just established a position in

the market.

So people demand their product and they just go with

the flow in a way.

It's a it's a puzzle in that we don't have

a model that explains what what the need to say

is possible on estimation methods are wrong.

It's possible the data is mis.

Measured, is.

Possible something else going on, or it's possible that we've

got a much more complicated, state dependent, um, process that's

sort of shaping, um, revenues.

Mhm.

We're going to have to write this one up very

carefully.

Okay.

I'm going to go and get a copy.

I think I'm going to return.

A few times.

Let's.

See.

Thank you.

So much for.

Your help.

Every two weeks.

You know the price The picked me off.

I don't see why.

I want to go.

On here.

Thank.

You.

Thank you.

She.

Took a big chunk of property.

Back home.

Maybe she.

Could.

I'm doing this right.

Now.

Okay.

I don't.

Know how serious this.

Is.

Amen.

So for.

Now.

Let's just.

Go.

All right.

All right.

So I've.

Been trying.

To get back to non-parametric cool stuff that you didn't

do.

And.

I.

Can't recall.

Except for you Technical College.

Has worked for.

The past.

Four.

Years.

That's a long.

Time.

Coming.

I'm not sure.

How important it is.

For.

The company to.

Literary theory.

Dwayne Johnson.

Returning a phone call.

From Trump.

Half.

A century ago.

Cultural critic.

For the.

Cultural Revolution.

Yeah.

All right.

So I'm.

Just going to kind of just feel like you have

to have access already.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Okay.

So I've got two more sort of broad topics to

talk about, but they're all continuing on a theme.

Um, the first one is, uh, uh, papers in trade,

uh, that are about, um, endogenous productivity.

Okay.

So this as we've said, this is a static model.

There's no dynamics of firm is fully described by its

productivity rule.

But we might also have the hypothesis in trade that,

um, somehow the activities of trading or being exporting or

importing or being exposed to import competition or, uh, having

the opportunity to be invested in by a multinational or

something, like there's some kind of aspect of international Integrations,

changes of firms incentives related to its own productivity process

and and might um, make investing to upgrade productivity firm

level productivity less or in particular, more appealing.

Okay.

Um, and, uh, there's a whole I only put some

old classic papers on this, uh, on this slide, but

obviously there's a lot of papers in this, uh, field,

including work by our current PhD students, which some of

you may have seen.

She's, uh, she's a 50th PhD student.

She's looking at, um, firm level innovation decisions in response

to exposure to trade shocks now.

And, um, we've got, uh, some classics that you might

if you're interested in this, you might look at, uh,

Jan DeLuca.

Sorry, that's a typo there.

It's l o e his.

He had an early paper where he, um, uh, explicitly

asked whether there was evidence that firms that, uh, were

actually actively exporting their productivity evolved in a different way.

It's a very simple mechanism.

It's just that Markov process.

He allows the, um, productivity next period to vary to

be a function of the productivity this period, the random

shock, and also whether or not you are an exporter

or not in this period.

And he shows different evolutions of productivity.

Um, the, the paper that I mentioned earlier, where he

does everything based on comparative statics in revenues, is kind

of a reduced form paper where he asks whether there's

evidence that the opportunity to trade leads firms to make

investments that shift up their own productivity and up or

People shift up their own revenues and the data that

he's got.

A classic paper in this literature by Bustos.

Um, uh, okay.

So so the good news is this often shocks.

Okay, so Bustos has a trade shock, Mercosur trade shock

in Argentinian firms.

And she asks what, before and after the trade shock,

do we see firms, um, upgrading their own productivity, you

know.

Are you sorry?

Um.

When we say technology upgrading, to me, that sounds like

there's more changing than just the, like the additive product

type, but that the production function should change as well.

But the line is fixed.

No.

Usually assumed to be.

Yeah.

In all of these papers.

Yes.

It's simply a shift up.

I can spend money this period so that I get

either a more favourable draw of this next period, or

just a shift up in the level of responsibility?

Yeah.

So that that is the approach that.

The weights of labour and capital should be fixed.

So let's go back this way.

Okay.

I know, I know, it sounds like it does sound

unsatisfactory in practice.

It might be different, right.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I mean imagine because, for example, a lot of technical

change that we know and just to be very little.

And this is obviously going to be factor biased in

some way.

We know we've seen a massive transition away from labour

intensive technologies to capital intensive technologies.

And we would be not allowing for that if we

just had our same production function.

But actually in defence of trade places.

This is we usually sort of look at looking at

the response of productivity around, you know, trade before and

after a trade, arguably exogenous trade shocks.

So we might try and say we've no particular reason

to think that the.

The, uh.

There's been, uh, some kind of exogenous technological change as

well going on at the same time.

That might would be the argument that we might make.

Well, I was thinking about the argument, uh, on collinearity.

I think I didn't understand it, uh, very well.

Could you be at the stage and presenting?

Yeah.

Okay, so.

The thing I did not understand, if it is actually

the non-parametric term is collinear to labour inputs.

How can they even get an estimate?

Shouldn't the Oilers be not defined in this case?

Yep.

Yeah.

I mean, if the model is perfectly capturing all of

the variation in the data, then and they were indeed

collinear in the way that Captain Frazer is saying.

You know, there's no reason to think they're not coding.

I mean, they're both monotonically increasing our theories.

They're both sort of monotonically increasing.

And what the productivity draw is, um, however, when it's

estimated in real data, which has got all of these

other things going on, we have opaque methods and they're

very successful in actually identifying a labour coefficient.

And papers like published papers are.

Yes.

And the peak is coefficient is lower than the OLS

coefficient, which totally makes sense.

And we really think that we're getting an improvement here

uh, with our with these methods.

So it's in the model.

It's calling and.

Not, not thinking about it.

Yeah I think.

Uh okay.

Okay.

So some other papers.

So just, just so you've heard these things.

So this this one's really nice.

So the trade shock is, um, Mercosur.

uh, South American Trade Free Trade Agreement, uh, looking at

Argentinean firms, technology upgrading.

And she allows these firms to when offered the opportunities

of trading with a much larger region.

Okay.

Here's the key thing which has in common here, technology

upgrading is often incurring a fixed cost, like some kind

of spend on AI, in order to give you a

technology improvement that lowers your marginal cost.

Uh, so that is going to that trade off is

going to look much more attractive if you've got larger

markets.

So there's often a scale effect going on here.

So that that mechanism is why more productive firms, larger

firms are more likely to invest anyway because they're going

to have a larger market size.

And any fixed cost becomes more, uh, more appealing.

A firm that was only selling in its domestic market

and now has an opportunity to sell in broader markets,

is going to be much bigger.

So the the the total value of any marginal, any

variable cost reduction is going to be much bigger relative

to fixed costs.

So we're going to see more of that upgrading.

So that's the trade off that is made explicit in

these talks about the scale scale effect.

And that's also the mechanism that's in this paper.

Quite a loop now where we we show that when

a Spanish subsidiary is acquired by a foreign multinational and

explicitly in the data says that it starts to export

through its foreign parent, we say that the scale effects

are going on, and that's the changing its incentives to

upgrade its technology.

That's looking at scale effects that are coming about through

joining a multinational group in that particular data.

So now this paper, I put this up here because

these guys.

Um, this is a great paper, but they found it

in the data.

They couldn't explain who was investing in technology based on,

um, scale effects only.

So it wasn't the fact that the largest and most

productive firms were the ones most likely to upgrade, and

they could only reconcile it once they introduced a second

source of firm heterogeneity, which is just for some reason,

there's just another random draw, which is the returns to

investing in technology.

And they show that it's not completely the same as

the the, the heterogeneity in productivity.

And so I think that's an interesting paper to read

because you see that they they had to move away

from a simple model and have this other factor in

order to to explain the data.

And it's, it's not very um, it's not, you know,

it's elegant.

It's just having one firm, uh, one dimension, one dimensional

heterogeneity, but they need it in their that particular case.

I think that's I think that's Canadian, uh, technology change.

Okay.

Um, but these are for the most part, apart from

the local, which has allows for exporting to matter in

the productivity evolution process.

Most of these papers are kind of slightly reduced form,

like we're not going to we're not going to explicitly

allow for trade to change firms, uh, decision making within

a kind of Ollie Peters framework.

We're just going to look at the before and after

and the data and do these sort of assume that

that we have an equilibrium before and after save the

overall data is changed and consistent with what we think

the shock is doing.

But there are also an increasing numbers of papers which

develop structural models of technology choice.

What do I mean by structural models, where they really

do put some functional form on what that it Processes

over time and how the firm can influence it.

And that's very useful because once we put some structure

on that and we estimate what the parameters governing those

investment processes are, then we have an opportunity to do

counterfactuals and ask, you know, what will happen to productivity

growth if we open up to trade in this way,

if we subsidise R&D in this particular way?

So this is a specific kind of question that we

think is particularly important and particularly useful to to really

dig deep into what that investment and innovation function is.

So innovation function that's determining how your productivity evolves.

One really nice paper here.

This is a paper from 2011.

It's really nice.

It's really nice because the question is really industry specific

study which is no more IO than trade, but it's,

uh, it's a anyway but it's really nice.

It's, uh, so basically, um, they say that productivity, which

rather than being alpha for them is omega.

It depends on last period's productivity, whether you invest in

did R&D investments in the previous period, and also whether

you were an exporter in the previous period, and some

AI, some random idiosyncratic shock.

Uh, Epsilon.

And what they're asking is whether participation in the export

market, um, uh, this term affects the, uh, productivity returns.

And so of the overall returns of doing R&D investment

because of the scale effects that people have sort of

studied before, but they're going to more explicitly understand the

complementarities between upgrading, doing investment and exporting.

So they have firms that are uh, at any point

in time differ in their export experience, their capital, their

productivity, exports.

And so their model, they're going to allow us to

write down a model, uh, decision of quantity decisions and

then profits in both domestic and export markets.

And the reason one reason it's really nice is and

paying both R&D and exporting incurs fixed costs.

And I think also sunk costs.

Um, now, of course, you know, sunk costs are particularly

interesting when you've got these dynamic processes going on.

So your state really matters.

If anyway changing your state, you'd have to re incur

the sunk costs to, uh, to flip again.

That's the I sorry if you were if you were

an exporter, you've already paid the sunk cost of exporting.

You can continue exporting at a fixed cost.

But if you cease exporting for whatever reason and in

the future, you want to again start exporting again, you're

going to have another lock entry like market entry costs

that you'll have to sync at that point so that

they sort of play different, different types of roles.

Um, okay.

So why is this a cool paper?

Because it's Taiwanese electronics producers exporting that really big global,

you know, very big important global industry.

So they look at, you know, uh, hardware, uh, semiconductors,

for instance, essentially in Taiwan and in the early days

of these big, uh, industries.

And, um, and they find evidence of both fixed costs

for both R&D and exporting.

Um, so the sunk cost means the past status, this

what you were doing in the past period determines, um,

uh, your activities, your productivity today.

And they can come up with estimates of each of

these, and they show that basically, whether you're an exporter

influences your investment decisions and hence influences your productivity.

And once they've estimated this model, they're able to do,

um, uh, really nice counterfactuals and say, okay, what if

Taiwan actually could trade more easily with the rest of

the world, specifically with countries that are demanding a lot

of semiconductors?

What would this do to the productivity distribution of these

industries in Taiwan over time?

And they can sort of, you know, model exactly how

that productivity distribution would evolve.

So it's, you know, it's a structural model that you

can do that kind of counterfactual.

I mean, it's different from the models of the reduced

form models of, say, boosters of a hook and so

on.

When we compare the two productivity distributions before and afterwards,

do we see evidence of the kind of shift that

is consistent with the theory.

These structural models are more if we if we allow

the investment decisions to be explicitly evolving in in the

way that these theories would predict, we use the data

to estimate these elasticities, then we can understand, um, and

estimate sort of responsiveness to different trade policies.

So that opens up a whole different toolkit.

That's quite, quite nice.

We're not just looking for evidence of the theory in

the data.

We're going to use the data to allow us to

run policy experiments.

Okay.

Um, another paper some of you may know may not

know now, but hopefully in the future you will know

as to, uh, Bola.

She's a professor at Imperial.

She comes to our CP trade seminars on a Wednesday,

and she's very active in this sort of R&D, uh,

literature.

And this is also an R paper But they look

at, um, the relationship between again, same question doing R&D

and being involved in international trade.

And they have an endogenous productivity, uh, draw that's evolving

as a function of the R&D in the past.

And also whether you're exporting and specifically whether you're importing.

Sorry.

So reduced foreign sourcing here makes R&D more profitable.

Why?

Because the returns, uh, you know, if we, if we've

got, um, intermediate inputs that are cheaper, then, uh, the

returns to having a more efficient technology are going to

be greater, and we're going to be more likely to

do that R&D in order to make our production process

more efficient, to complementarities in production.

And, um, and they, they identify this using this, uh,

Norwegian data and a very nice experiment in Norway where

there was what they argue is a sort of exogenous

subsidy to R&D.

They subsidise R&D firms do more R&D.

They firms see how firms start to import more and

they see fast productivity growth.

That's what this paper is about.

Um, and just I'm just going to mention in passing

the these methods of endogenous in the innovation function, which

is the, you know, why they do R&D to increase

their, um, productivity via this innovation function.

Um, builds on a paper by an I o paper

by Dora and Andrew, which is estimated using Spanish data

and lingo very big in this literature.

I think I put that on the reading list if

I did.

I'll just check that that one's on the list.

Doron Belsky and show manager okay.

Reading list okay.

The reading list is on Google, by the way, for

these papers that are mentioning now are on.

Okay.

Here's a nice paper about multinationals, which is again the

same question of um, what are the how, you know,

how the firms make R&D decisions and where do they

realise the returns to those R&D decisions?

How are they impacting their overall productivity?

And this one's different because it has a model of

a multinational.

And the multinational can choose to do innovation and to

grow its productivity fast in its headquarters or in its

affiliate firms and or in its affiliate firms.

And this paper, established as a complementarity between doing investments

in the headquarters and doing investment in the subsidiaries, which

means that the evolution of affiliate subsidiaries depends not only

on, you know, the state variable of PA state variables

for the affiliates, but also the activities of their parent.

So it introduces this interdependency in productivity evolution between different

parts of the multinational.

So this is not explicitly about trade.

In fact it's not about trade at all.

But it's about, um, how international integration of capital markets

and specifically, you know, returns to FDI come about if

you happen to be receiving foreign investment from a very

productive, uh, parent firm.

That's a, uh, a nice paper.

I had to look to see how they actually identify

this.

Um, uh, this morning, actually.

So I was thinking, okay, these guys have a really

nice trade shock they use to identify this, but how

did these guys know that the multinational parent is not

just choosing to make an investment in an affiliate, but

would be doing more innovation anyway, even if they were

not this affiliate firms of the subsidiary.

They don't want to admit to JP paper.

They don't have a great instrument.

They don't have an instrument.

They just say this complementarity is specifically because of R&D

investment spill-overs.

And we don't see the same relationships with capital investments.

And they claim that difference and say, look, if this

foreign firm was just foreign, parent was just buying, you

know, cherry picking the best foreign affiliates that were going

to grow anyway.

We would also expect that to see that in capital.

And they don't in regular physical capital, they don't see

that.

They don't see that.

They only see it in these R&D investments, this complementarity.

So I thought that was interesting that that is sort

of.

They did this paper is not a JP paper because

of the identification, let me put it that way.

But it's just it's just an interesting way of trying

to characterise multinationals.

That's off the record.

Okay.

Um.

maybe I encourage you to read that and see if

you disagree with me, because I couldn't I couldn't quite

see how they nailed that identification today.

All right.

Final topic, um, is on this issue of measurement error,

um, specifically using uh value data as either your inputs

or outputs rather than quantities data.

Uh, we touched on this before.

I'm just going to make it explicit now because here

is a really controversial research area and lots of ongoing

work.

Okay, so in every production function that we see in

micro theory, or we think about when we're thinking about

how firms work, when we care about efficiency.

We would like the output measure to be in terms

of physical quantities and physical quantities that can be compared

across firms.

So something in a completely homogenous good that could be

compared across firms.

But we don't often observe that or say we often

don't observe that.

We instead observe revenues or at best value added like

revenues minus input costs rather than quantities.

Now, actually, some trade data is okay on this dimension

because, for example, some customs data require firms to report

both values and quantities, also values and unit values from

which you can infer quantity.

So that's great.

If you've got that you're doing really.

That's really good.

None of this need need be relevant.

But that's a really nice feature.

Some really micro trade data.

Yeah.

Sorry.

But then I was wondering like it's if it's a,

if a good as a consumer goods have these intermediaries.

It's not obvious that That's true.

Then you have to be really concerned about the value

added stuff.

So you would also want a very good measure of

materials to.

Yeah.

Then you then then you pass the measurement issue onto

the right hand side of the production function.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

The perfect data set probably does not exist.

Yeah.

Um, but you know, if we're just looking at firm

income statements, we will likely just have firm revenues.

Um, now, what people have typically done is say, okay,

from, uh, inflation statistics like, uh, price indices for consumer

prices or let's say consumer prices, retail prices, uh, we

can get industry level price indices.

So let's just divide firm revenues by those industry level

prices to get a measure of firm quantities.

We have done that in the past.

Now the problem with that is that, um, uh, we're

more, you know, we're going to be likely to have,

um, anything that's like firm level prices, any deviation at

the firm level from the industry price is going to

need to a second source of major bias in your

production function estimation, because, um, a firm input choice may

be biased with its final product price relative to its

industry average price.

It's going to give you a bias coefficients.

And then you know what we get in our estimates

of TFP the alpha it estimates the residuals are going

to therefore also include everything that is, um, related to

the firm's actual production efficiency, how many units they can

make for a given level of inputs, but also how

valuable each of those units are in that.

can they charge a higher price for them?

So it's not sure when we get that alpha it,

that it is actually a measure of efficiency that we

care about, because it's both efficiency and the mark-up that

they're able to get.

And our mark-ups are a market failure with efficiency, good

mark-ups and bad in terms of when we look at

variation in productivity.

So it's very uncomfortable for us because so we like

firms with a high alpha it it means they're very

productive.

Oh well maybe it's not only that.

Maybe they're also they're equally productive.

They're just able to charge a higher mark-up, which is

distortion free.

And that's not a that's not a good thing.

So this is a real issue because, um, uh, you

know, when it comes to welfare effects, we don't really

know what's going on.

You know, a mark-up is, I don't know, uh, a

high productivity is high productive efficiency is good.

Okay.

Now, uh, in international, uh, Applications.

If we've got a trade liberalisation, we've got all of

our lovely big models, minutes, etc..

Um, and Lucas learning by exporting all sorts of things

that show us that, um, trade liberalisation, uh, may affect,

uh, or creates incentives to change a firm's productive efficiency.

But also it seems highly likely that any, um, uh,

trade shock is also going to have a big impact

on firm level prices, especially if it's import competition.

Um, which means that it becomes very hard to actually

separately identify whether the trade shock did have an impact

on, uh, productive efficiency, because maybe everything we see in

the data is just coming from changes in prices.

And this is a really sort of fundamental problem.

And just to illustrate that problem a little bit.

Imagine that the true function is q equals beta q

I t equals beta x I t plus tfp alpha

I t x I t is a vector of inputs

that are measured.

Um, beta is a vector of production function coefficients.

Um, okay.

But actually we're trying to measure beta and collect the

residual alpha, right.

Using data where instead of quantities shit we've got revenues

right.

Instead of quantities of inputs we've got expenditures on inputs.

They're related to our discussion before the break.

Let's call expenditures on inputs.

Uppercase e I t um, well, what that means is,

um, you know, when we estimate this, we're going to

get a bias in our, our gamma is not going

to be equal to our beta and our pi.

I t residuals are not going to be equal to

our alpha.

Specifically, let's illustrate some problems.

Let's imagine that, um, we actually have firm specific prices.

This is all in logs.

Sorry.

So this is the log of revenues minus the log

of firm specific prices.

That's actually what quantities are okay.

Because revenues are quantities times prices or at the firm

level.

Um, uh, then you know, what we're trying to estimate

is the beta, uh, here this is e is expenditure

on inputs, Z is, um, firm level, um, input variation,

input prices.

For example, we've got monopsony power in one of our

input markets or um.

Some anyway some firm specific price may be differential.

Um, capital constraints are giving firms different kinds of capital

something like this.

But for some reason we've got firm specific input prices.

Then when we run our regression of R on E,

uh, we are going to be getting an error term.

Uh, the residual will consist of true productive TFP plus

the price term minus beta times, or plus the final

product price term specific final product price term minus beta

multiplied by d um uh factor price firm specific term.

Um.

And our estimates of beta are going to be, uh,

correct only under very restricted conditions.

Um, uh, you know, specifically that pit is kind of

not varying by firm or zit, and zit is not

varying by firm.

Okay.

But as soon as we think either about as possible,

we're not going to get the right beaters, and we're

certainly not going to have the right measures of fermentable

productivity.

Okay.

Now, the thing is that both of these are missing

data problems on prices is likely to give us, um,

lead us to underestimate beta.

The reason being is that, you know, this is positively

and Z and is negatively.

Um, so imagine that, um, uh, it's Z doesn't vary

by firm to start with, and it's just P that

varies by firm.

So our actual error term that we get is alpha

I t plus pit.

Well we expect you know if firms that have a

higher output price they're going to they they're going to

be restricting their quantities somehow to to get that higher

output price source, less input, therefore having lower expenditure on

um, uh, um, inputs.

So the coefficient beta is going to be under um,

uh, estimated because it got a big positive here in

P, they're going to show up with a lower E,

which means that we're going to get a lower value,

a lower estimated uh coefficient on the input beta.

Similarly, if the final good price doesn't change vary by

firm, but the input price varies by firm.

So the actual error term is alpha minus ZT.

Firms with higher input prices are going to have a

higher expenditure or less equal.

And so because that um, it's better that the price

is entered negatively, a higher input price is going to

lead us to have a lower.

Um, uh, I mean that the error term is going

to be sort of negatively, uh, when when we've got

a low error term, we're going to, uh, have higher

expenditures.

So our beta is going to be underestimated still.

Okay.

The bias is the bias is different.

But because the bias is work in different directions, but

because there's distortion, returns enter with different signs.

Both of them lead us to underestimate beta.

So what can we do with this data problem?

It's fundamentally a data problem.

And the data is a measurement problem.

Our measures our output and our measures of inputs are

not good enough for values and not quantities.

Well, one very simple, uh, approach is to, uh, look

at an industry where you can plausibly argue there is

no firm specific variation.

So some kind of commodity industry, um, that is where

everything is traded at the same price.

Then variation in revenue is just variation in quantities.

Very nice.

So when you see people who papers on say, the

concrete industry or other commodities or something that is, you

know, at least arguably a commodity industry.

This is often what's going on in the background.

It's very good.

Okay.

Currently doing a paper on gas, the gas industry.

And we have a quoted spot price on the, um,

from, you know, terminal in the LSE library.

And that spot price allows us to take revenues and

kind of get to quantity straight away.

Um, okay.

Then the other approach might be to really work very

hard to find a great data set that's got firm

level prices or unit values that allow you to find

prices, uh, sorry, or uh, unit prices, sort of unit

values or prices or some kind of per unit measure

that allows you to take revenues and then decompose revenues

into prices and quantities.

Or in the absence of these two things, which are,

you know, relatively speaking, quite rare And, you know, lots

of industries that we care about, there is going to

be priced very interested in that first variation.

Then we might sort of instead make additional assumptions that

will use additional data that are going to permit identification.

So I keep on returning to the same people here.

But Sir John DeLuca, in productivity estimation, Yann DeLuca is

the person to to know what they're up to, by

the way.

But there's lots of papers around.

Um, so what, uh, what he does is basically I'm

going to put a ton of structure on demand, and

then I'm going to instrument, and then I'm going to

I'm going to use the context in my setting to,

um, uh, have exogenous variation, exogenous shocks to demand, which

is going to allow me to separate out demand responses

in revenues from anything else that's going on.

But it requires him to put a lot of structure

on it.

So this is I think, I think this was um,

this may even if it's like a massive paper.

Um, and it's and it's all about addressing output, uh,

price by.

So it assumes the way there's the assumes away any

input price variation.

So firms the price take is in fact demand hit.

And then he's going to say all of the firms

in my setting, which I think are Belgian textile firms,

let's assume that they have a CS demand system such

that they are charging, um, uh, constant mark-ups.

So, um, when I understand how they respond to how

that how their revenues change with a for demand shock,

I can understand coming into where the new demand function

is and anything, any other variation is due to, uh,

productivity variation.

Um, and what is the demand shock that he uses?

He uses a quota reduction.

So that's the trade shock that he, uh, uses.

And when he does that to kind of sweep out

use, you know.

So I'm just going to look.

I'm going to use this, these trade quotas to sweep

out the variation in productivity that is due to changes

in prices.

I am going to be able to isolate the changes

in the revenues that's coming from changes in productive efficiency.

And he finds out that I'm not controlling for the

changes in demand or instrumenting the changes in demand would

lead him to massively overestimate the production, improved productivity, improvements

of the trade liberalisation.

If, uh, if he hadn't made that adjustment, that is

to say, prices are going up in the trade liberalisation

in his setting.

So when, when firms look more productive, uh, after the,

um, trade liberalisation, in part because they're charging higher prices,

in part it's because they've got more productive.

But also there's.

a big price effect.

Um, I think rather than go through this, I'm going

to encourage you to read that paper because I'm, I

can't remember the details of how he actually does that

demand shifter.

I will let me spend a minute reading this.

Um.

So how does he.

I think he uses the demand, the quota as a

as the demand shifter.

But then he's also using the change in quota as

a, as the shot of productivity efficiency as well.

Yeah.

Does anyone know this paper?

Yeah.

No.

Yeah.

I was just going to ask, like, it's a bit

complicated.

Too intuitive for me.

Why does the prices go up in a trade liberalisation?

I would think they would stay the same.

Yeah.

So it's Belgium textiles firms I think they must have

started exporting to.

And then there's no I think.

Yeah.

So they.

Yeah that's interesting isn't it?

Because if there was a quota, we would have expected

prices to be higher anyway because they couldn't.

Um.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Other firms are coming into the market and competing with

them.

I tell you what, this would be a very good

exercise for me.

Next week I will answer that question because I should

understand what's going on in this paper.

De Luca 2011.

Why do prices go up with the trade liberalisation?

Again, it's kind of like the same thing in the

Chilean paper that we were talking about before.

I would expect, actually, that, uh, this would the gains

in productivity were underestimated and overestimated because.

You would expect prices to go down, especially where they've

got import competition.

So I'm just going to build on that logic by

saying, I think this particular trade shot must be these

Belgian firms are now able to access new, uh, export

markets, and perhaps those export markets have, uh, these big

positive demand shifters whereby they're able to charge higher prices.

That might be an explanation, but I can't remember whether

or not that was the explanation.

Um, uh, so, uh, what this does is he has

I can remember so in this production function, instead of

having so he's got p times q on the left

hand side, which is revenues, and he uses the, uh,

the responsiveness of revenues to the demand shock to kind

of neutralise the change in prices.

But I can't remember the details.

I will I will come back to this paper.

This is a this is a good one to look

at if you feel that you have, uh, your research

setting changes in prices might be important and you've got

some additional way to identify demand shifters.

Okay.

Now.

Without that, he couldn't do what he.

What he does because he needs something to sort of

neutralise the price shocks.

That's a that's what I take away from this.

There's a very specific, uh, setting.

Okay.

All right.

I want to get on to this, uh, new, new,

a stream of the literature, which is about how we

might actually try and estimate, uh, firm level prices by

estimating firm level mark-ups and, um, uh, and if we

can do this in a, uh, empirical approach, then we

can, um, separate out, uh, firm mark-ups and firm productive

efficiency without having to make some big assumption about the

demand system that allows us to translate demand shocks into

what it's doing to revenue.

So.

So in the DeLuca paper, 2011, it's very important that

he's got these serious demands, because the constant Mark-ups mean

that the firm's mark-ups aren't changing with the demand shock.

But there are lots of reasons why we think we

might have firm, specific mark-ups.

Um, you know, I that is to say, there are

firm, specific demand shifters, let's say, which give firms differing

amounts of market power and ability to charge a different

price.

So any kind of model of differentiated oligopoly is going

to give you some kind of, uh, mechanism whereby firm

mark-ups vary within an industry wide.

Um, yeah, that's a good question.

But the longer, uh, deals have relative prices.

I don't think so.

Uh, because in his slides.

Did I say they do.

Is dependent on price relative to industry price?

Uh.

Right.

Okay, so but only the industry price is observed, and

they have to try and estimate what the, uh.

Ah, industry operates.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Uh, but it's a, it's a, it's a by own

price relative to industry price comes only from the variation

in your marginal cost because you've got a constant mark-up

with the CSS demand.

So I think that's.

What it's always been.

Yeah.

Okay.

So yeah that's right.

Anyway.

But let's say we don't want to assume constant mark-ups

because we're unhappy with CSS for, uh, multiple, uh, magnitude,

um, multiple reasons.

Um, uh, well, if we could somehow, uh, estimate separately

firm level mark-ups and firm level productivity, then it would

be great, because this really, um, opens the door for

us to really understand, uh, welfare effects, because, you know,

we've got prices going up, moving, and we've got marginal

costs falling at the same time, potentially we, uh, we

can't say anything about welfare unless we know what direction

both of those things are going.

And, um, and, uh, this paper, the local environment scheme,

has become very, very widely used.

It's a methods paper for estimating firm level mark-ups from

commonly available data.

And it explicitly builds on all the papers.

So I'll show you the what it actually does.

Um, and it combines all of the method.

Exactly.

It is all it is essentially.

But it combines olive pickers with another firm optimality condition

and the firm's optimality condition, We're going to assume it's

a price taker in the factor markets, and we assume

that the firm is choosing the amount of input such

that, um, its own marginal revenue product at that level

of the input that it's choosing is equal to the

factor cost.

You know, cost minimisation, basically it's it's using the inputs

up to the point where the marginal revenue product is

equal to the factor cost, but that marginal revenue product

is a function not only of the um, marginal product

coming from the production function, but also a function of

the firm's specific price, because marginal revenue product is marginal

product times price.

So let's um, so when we understand, um, uh, when

we look at how much the firm is carrying on,

I'm going to explain you the next slide.

So let's say we've got our production technology.

And this is just writing a more general form of

what we've had before, where our revenues, our output as

measured by revenues, is equal to some function of variable

inputs and the excess, um, quantity of inputs.

And we've got one to V of these inputs, the

labour materials, etc..

We've also got some um state variable inputs that are

determined in previous periods.

We'll call it capital.

And we've got a productivity shock which we're now seemingly

calling Omega.

Uh, it, uh, we're going to assume that this production

function is continuous and price differential well differentiable with respect

to each of its arguments.

Uh, and I've already said this.

Now, in addition to what we've done before, we're going

to assume that produces a cost minimising and therefore their

input choices are going to be governed by this Lagrangian

where here we've got um uh total costs.

So this is a, the factor costs the firm is

facing in each of its the input variable input markets

R is the capital cost, K is the chosen uh,

capital.

Over all of the variable input inputs is going to

be minimised subject to the constraint that, um, we've got

this, um, uh, in the uh, the output is equal

to the level of output that we can.

We've got this multiplier here, um, lambda.

Now this gives us a, uh, this cost minimisation gives

us an optimality condition for the choice of every single,

um, at least variable input that we can vary in

time t and that first order condition determining the choice

of each variable input is going to be when the

this is the marginal revenue product equals the factor price.

This is the factor price, uh, for each of our

variable inputs.

And this is input by input.

So we we've got v uh number of these first

order conditions here is our factor cost.

And here is our multiplier uh multiplied by the derivative

uh, the marginal product.

So the change in output with the change in the

level of one of those, uh, inputs.

And this the first order condition can be rearranged.

And if we, um, uh, we rearrange it, we divide

both sides by this lambda.

We multiply both sides by x over q.

Why might we want to do that?

Because multiplying both sides by uh x over McCue gives

us gets closer to something we might observe in many

data sets.

So what have we got on this side here?

Uh, we've got the, uh, d q over q divided

by d x over x.

That's the output elasticity with respect to that variable factor

x.

Okay.

So if you put that under there and put that

under there, we can have the output as how much

output changes on the margin with a little bit more

of our variable factor x v.

Okay.

Um on the right hand side we've got one over

this, uh, multiplier here.

But then we've got um, uh, the total expenditure on

that variable factor divided by total revenues.

Total output.

Now this is good because this one we see in

data.

So this could be total wage bill for instance.

So we we we don't know what the wage level

is a prefer.

We perhaps like this stage at least don't know how

many employees have got.

But we can see in the income statement how much

they're spending on, uh, labour employment.

So we can also see total revenues.

So this term is uh, identify as measurable in the

data.

Now what does what does this mean.

Okay.

Well if we then wanted to say, well the mark

if we're interested in estimating firm level marker and I'm

going to define firm level marker as the ratio of

the firm level product price to this, um, multiplier.

Why am I able to do that?

I'm able to do it because, um, it's the multiplier.

So it's a measure of the marginal cost of production.

So what I am.

So if I say this mu is equal to this

over this and I'm estimated interested in estimating, you know,

and I don't observe P or uh, these uh lambda.

Okay.

Um, then uh, that's okay.

Because look, if I, if I can measure this thing,

which is my output elasticity with respect to a variable

factor, and I can divide it by this thing, which

is the share of revenues that I'm spending on that

variable input.

And I'm going to times that by why do I

get the p from.

Ah sorry.

Oh sorry.

Yeah.

Okay.

I've, I've already multiplied this by sorry.

I just do one thing that is exactly that.

That is exactly that.

Ah.

It's just.

It's just.

Sorry.

So I have, uh, this thing rewriting this lambda as,

um, uh, one over lambda as p over lambda.

And then dividing by P is what allowed me to

write this as my share of X share of total

revenues on, uh, that variable factor.

And I can get an estimate of that mark-up mu

by dividing this by this.

This is data.

If I can estimate this, then I can get this

thing.

So, uh, this is straightforward.

If I can estimate this output elasticity and what these

guys do in their papers say, well, we can get

an estimate of this output elasticity because we can use

only pictures.

Levinson picture and Aqaba caves and Fraser to get an

estimate about how that that output elasticity is with respect

to any of my variable factors, it is simply my

production function coefficient.

Okay.

That's what that that's what that alpha L is in.

Uh, Ollie Parker's production.

Uh, in the, in the production in the production function.

So I'm going to use all of the methods that

we talked about in the first half of this lecture

to estimate output elasticities.

And I'm using this method because I explicitly want to

solve for the endogeneity problem to get a good estimate

of that output elasticity.

And then I'm going to simply divide that output elasticity

by the share of revenue spent on the uh, that

particular input let.

So let's let's say the variable in part I've chosen

to use as labour.

Then I'm going to use I'm going to get my

alpha L from production function estimation.

I'm going to divide my alpha L by the, um,

the share of revenues that are spent on, uh, labour,

my labour costs.

And that gives me an estimate of mu just from

this cost minimisation.

It's very it's very elegant.

You know, it's like micro, uh, producer theory.

And then in this paper, uh, they, they do this

in one specific question, uh, one specific application, which is

because they want to understand if exporters have higher mark-ups

because, uh, they will only have higher mark-ups if we're

out of this demand world.

But there are various theory papers that give us frameworks

to allow firms to have variable mark-ups, for example, this

is not linear demand, which Thomas may have mentioned.

So yeah.

So it's uh, it's it's it's it's one of the

it's basically the other workhorse model.

It's a general equilibrium model, but they have a linear

demand which allows you to understand different markets.

Um, and this is Bernhard.

Bernhard, Bernhard Eton Jensen and Cottam also has a demand

system that allows for variable mark-ups.

Uh, let me try and remember the mechanism there.

Uh, ah, that's the that's the extension of Eton Court

and I think where uh, the price.

So, so we've got some country level heterogeneity and the

price is not your own marginal cost plus trade costs.

It's the price of the second most productive, uh, draw.

I understand that you've got some market power.

If you're the most productive exporter in a firm, that's

what's going on in that paper?

It's an extension of Eden Court.

And, um, I.

Have to implicitly assume that monopolistic competition, then, is not

just from the heterogeneity.

Uh.

And I don't think they have more realistic competition.

I think they they have some, uh, who are because

of product differentiation.

So, so here it's an interesting extension.

It's coming from basically differences in the delivered prices that

are coming from heterogeneous draws from the production function and

also heterogeneous transport costs.

Yeah.

I can't I can't remember what differentiates firms.

Uh, I think I think that's actually a firm level

of heterogeneity.

And then uh, linear development, uh, for uh.

But they both give channels whereby firms can vary in

mark-ups.

So, you know, it's not actually completely alien to trade

literature to have varying mark-ups.

Um, maybe they or maybe firms mark-ups vary because they

differ in quality.

Maybe other reasons why?

Um, once we sell in the export market, this export

market has a different elasticity of demand, and this allows

us to charge higher prices.

Something like this.

Um, okay.

So they estimate their model on Slovenian manufacturing firms and

they find, unsurprisingly, significant and varied firm level mark-ups.

So they sort of really put a nail in the

coffin of a serious demand system in this particular setting.

And they also find that the firms that export, uh,

generally seem to have a more, more, uh, higher, um,

Mark-ups and moreover starting to.

So that's a sort of could be a selection or

treatment.

But they also find a selection treatment effects are starting

to export is associated with firm level increases in mark-ups

over time.

Um, and you know, they also separate out firm level

heterogeneity in productivity efficiency okay.

Now so this this one this one is you see

a lot of this paper um, and I put on

it that is super controversial because we've got econometric.

We've got some arguable econometrics problems in here as well.

But nonetheless, um, this is a great application of their

method.

This, this paper looks at how firm level mark-ups in

India respond to trade liberalisation.

And what does the trade liberalisation do in this case?

It allows Indian firms to import intermediates at it's an

intermediate goods at a lower, lower unit cost, very lower

prices.

And so that's good.

That's great for uh, firms in India, they have imports

inputs at a lower price.

And indeed they find that the using this decomposition method,

they find that, yes, the production, the total production cost,

including the prices of inputs goes down for these Indian

firms.

But the the the price is they go down, but

not by as much as the costs.

So they see that firms after the shock have both

lower cost but also higher mark-ups.

Okay.

So there's something which is inefficient.

So that's kind of offsetting the gains from this trade

liberalisation in terms of access to low cost intermediate inputs.

Now this one is.

Um I think.

That's a huge paper.

Uh, this one is very ambitious.

So, um, this spans many fields, but it essentially as

far as, uh, just a couple of sentences on the

highlights is it traces out of over time, industries have

become much more concentrated in the US.

Okay.

So we see that the largest superstar firms, we see

that the largest firms in the average industry have a

much larger market share.

So the index is increasing over time, over decades in

the U.S at the same time.

So market power is increasing.

And consistent with this, we see massive increases in mark-ups

at the firm level, um, over time in the US.

So this is uh, very bad calls for more regulation,

uh, increased mark-ups of bad news all around.

Um, and, uh.

This, uh.

Uh, these authors don't open up.

They are trying to now do the same thing globally

and see where the global markets have experienced the same,

um, kind of overall trends.

Um, this one struck.

This one has been I think whoever has been refereeing

this, they're giving them a very hard time because I've

seen this presented like I at least five years ago.

And, uh, so it's but anyway, one of one of

the reasons why it's controversial is the following reason, as

pointed out by these guys in a working paper, it's

like, okay, I understand the logic as it's kind of

set out in, um, in, uh, the local environment scheme,

but it really relies on being able to generate good

estimates of alpha L the output elasticity with respect to

a variable factor, say labour.

Okay.

Because if the mark-up is simply that output elasticity divided

by the revenue share of that variable factor, that's the

equation that they put in place.

Now if we have got a good estimate of um

output elasticity, then we haven't got a good estimate of

mark-up.

Okay.

And then the way that these guys write their working

paper, it says, well, hang on a second.

How on earth can you get a good measure of

output elasticity when you're when you haven't got quantity data,

you're using revenue data to estimate that output elasticity.

So yes, the paper's methodology does everything to control for

the simultaneity bias in that alpha L, but it doesn't

do anything to address the bias that may be coming

in alpha L because we use some revenue data rather

than quantity data to estimate it.

And when is that a problem?

Well, it, it, um, it is a problem when we

think that, uh, firm level prices might be doing something

to distort the, um, uh, kind of, um, firm, uh,

the estimation process that exists within the structure of the

kind of method.

So it rules out, you know, we can't have any

heterogeneity.

We're relying for a moment in the final price, but

we can't be allowing that market power to influence how

we express the unobserved productivity terms.

So that should be a subscript in in terms of

these unobservable that we're using in our proxy function, which

we then invert to use as the control function.

So these guys are they're quite brutal.

And they kind of say there is a circular logic

in um.

DeLuca and a partner ski.

And, you know, we're trying to solve one problem.

But that problem may be, you know, if we solve

this problem, but we we've only solved it under certain

assumptions.

And those assumptions may be violated by the very thing

that we're trying to solve in this paper, which is

the variable prices.

So this one is interesting, interesting to read if you

want to weigh in on the Mark-up estimation, uh, debate,

which is, uh, very illuminating.

Now, this paper written by one of our colleagues.

Um, uh, the working paper version I think is from.

2020, but I just saw.

Yesterday it's RNA.

And econometric.

So this is, uh, this is well, um, and sort

of, you know, consistent with that, it's well worth reading

because it seems.

Okay.

We have broadly speaking, we've got a summarising somewhat what

they say, but we've got a lot of problems in

productivity estimation, but given the data restrictions that we often

face, how well can we do?

How close do we get to actually estimating mark-ups properly

and estimating productivity properly?

We are going to, first of all, simulate a data

set to see how well these methods do when there

are some biases.

And then we're also going to use some of the

best data that we have got which has got unit

values, which is French import data.

And we are going to um, uh, show how big

these different biases are.

And one of one of the good things that I'm

now subsequently using the paper and this thing becomes I

was like, okay, this problem of estimating alpha L when

you've got firm level prices is is there it distorts

your estimates of the mark-up that you get with or

that you get with from a business.

But it doesn't mean you.

Need to throw away the.

Whole method.

Why not?

Because the the bias is the same across all firms.

This is what they conclude in their paper.

The bias is the same.

So if you're interested in just in sort of ranking

or in relative positioning, then we still have a lot

to learn from applying the, uh, um, uh, DeLuca and

Markov estimation, which is great, and it's really useful.

Um, so I'm using it in a paper at the

moment where we just care about the ranking of firms

in an industry rather than the absolute levels of mark-ups.

So we, we rely on this paper to, um, um,

to help us make that point thinking, you know, the

data isn't perfect, but we, we infer what we can

from it, knowing the limitations of these, um, the assumptions

that are imposed by the structural, uh, estimations.

Okay.

And that was all I wanted to say today.

Um, Let's just do a quick recap.

Some heterogeneity completely dominate trade literature these days.

If we want to do any empirical work, we're going

to have to estimate firm productivity.

We have to estimate it because it's not observed if

it's computed as a residual.

We therefore sort of have to embrace all of the

limitations of the data that we've got.

And all of the, um, uh, methods that are available

to us in sort of the structure that are imposed

by those methods, and they may be more or less

constraining for us.

Um, so but the important thing is to pay close

attention to what you are implicitly imposing, uh, in the

setting that you've got.

And if possible, uh, see if there's anything in your

data that can help you provide some sort of better

identification, something good to do with these biases, ideally unit

prices.

Um, and.

As I said, it's a very.

Very important and very active research field.

And everything that goes on in productivity estimation is super

relevant for empirical work and international.

So I'm going to wrap it up there and there's

a reading list on Moodle with the papers that I've

mentioned today so far.

So okay any any questions any thoughts.

Please email me if you want to discuss more.

And uh yeah.

As a practitioner okay.

Great thing.

I was looking for the two papers on the heterogeneous

mark-up.

I didn't see them on the reading list.

Oh, really?

This one?

These two?

No, about the other ones.

Other list?

Uh, I think it's the manage, uh, the.

Oh.

These two.

Oh, no.

Okay.

Sorry.

They're not about productivity estimation.

The theory models.

Okay, let me add those to the reading list as,

uh, as we will.

And, um.

Kind of is then like a standard opinion or fact

about like mark-ups that follow like a distribution or something,

or hasn't that really before?

I think we would then defer to IO and say

it's all industry specific and it's all really all.

Firm level stuff.

So it's not like that.

It's like a well accepted fact that there's a distribution

of mark-ups.

As well, unless we've got some very good reason to

impose, uh, that all firms are selling at industry prices,

such as it's a commodity product or a regulated product

in some way.

Then I think we should go in with the assumption

that there might be further variation in mark-up, given what

these big pieces are.

Okay.

Okay.

So that's a b e JC 2003.

And then let's.

Lecture 6:

So.

Yeah.

It's usually so busy, right?

Believe it or not.

Yeah.

But do you actually, when we'll get the proper set.

Oh, yeah.

I mean, I.

Don't know, but we're supposed to deliver it by next

Tuesday, right?

Yeah.

I don't think that's a good thing.

Okay.

Okay.

I just I don't see you undermining me because I

couldn't really.

Okay.

You were the one that know everything clear from the

beginning.

Uh, yeah.

See, I'm not up to date with things.

Like.

Normally not.

I'm working.

On it.

I'm a bit this.

Time, but it's not the.

Time to build it.

No, I'm.

Looking at the room for.

Five.

Four.

Seven.

Nine.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I can send.

Them back.

Yeah.

Can we ask you the same question again?

Yeah.

The problem is I'm looking here, travelling on Friday, and

that's why I'm really worried.

No, he said last week.

I haven't said that.

Okay.

Uploaded last week.

Yeah.

Oh.

That's very good news.

So you're doing the renovation the next time.

So what?

Are you talking about?

You.

Are okay.

Right?

Yeah.

At least we.

Know what this is talking about.

I.

Am so.

Excited.

Next week.

Next.

Year for the.

Man.

Yes I did.

Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

It's not next week.

It's next week.

I thought it was.

But I wasn't.

I didn't know the email.

No.

Did you get a paper sign?

Did you email him asking for a paper?

No.

We don't need to ask for paper.

Just always in the back.

I don't think anyone is interested.

I think this is the last class for us.

Well.

I wasn't there, so maybe you should text him.

But anyway, we didn't have a.

Present or anything.

I think it's silent.

Yeah, I think so.

01237.

Just so everyone got it.

Oh, really?

Oh, it's a metro.

She's presenting next Wednesday.

Yes.

Yeah.

Is it the groom present?

Yes.

I'm leaving tomorrow.

And then coming back on Tuesday night?

Yes.

That's why it's so cool.

Right.

Yeah.

So?

I can.

Coordinate.

Like I'm not sure.

Yeah I'm talking about this.

Mhm.

Yeah.

What's going on here.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Desktop.

Is your favourite.

Field of your.

Timing is.

Always off.

I think it's hard.

Because there are some way.

Oh my God.

Sorry.

I'm just trying to get my slides off my laptop

onto the, uh, projector.

It's opening on the laptop.

Edit.

Copy.

Paste.

Okay, there we go.

Let's see if I can go for that.

Okay.

All right.

Oh, did I not put on the Moodle page?

Yeah, I'll do that.

We got so many interesting people.

No, I wasn't there.

Okay let's do that and let's.

Put it on Moodle.

I.

Ate it.

All right.

Let me make sure this.

Is projecting on.

You.

Okay.

Okay.

Yeah.

Okay.

Next week was next week.

Yeah.

Two weeks.

She's travelling more than coming back, right?

You know, try and zoom calls.

I'm ready.

Okay.

Okay.

Whatever the.

Question was.

Okay.

Here we go, folks.

Immediately it's gonna pop up on Moodle.

I just have it.

There we are.

Okay.

Okay.

Can you see it?

Yes.

Great.

Okay.

All right, folks, we've got three hours and we've got

some methods to learn.

Um.

Now who?

Um.

USP is that?

Yeah.

So who just came from the international seminar?

Excellent.

So in the past, we just had a model where

a paper where in the very end of the.

So the bulk of his presentation, very interestingly, was describing

a story in giving as reduced form evidence about the

role of the nature of the production function for a

firm in a given city.

Um, uh, in the olden days, uh, at the beginning

of the 19th century, in explaining the development of the

city and the real wage level of the of the

in the city today.

Okay.

Now, he didn't do spend much time in the paper

talking about the model that he has today explaining real

wages.

Okay.

But there was one in there.

Okay.

So perhaps the last 20 minutes of the paper were

a model where individuals workers were choosing where in which

UK city to live in.

And their decision was based, was driven by and which

sector to work in, and their decision was based on

variation across cities in the payoff that they would get

from those cities, which was going to be some kind

of consumption externality, some kind of consumption amenity.

And then the real wage.

Okay.

And also firms were choosing where to enter, what to

produce, uh, where to trade with based on trade costs,

etc..

Now the location choice of households in that is the

same model.

I expect you didn't go into details in this paper,

but I haven't read the paper.

But, um, you know, I think people in the room

were kind of comfortable that they understood what all of

that was about, because it's very much like, I think

I'm guessing, uh, Caliendo, Dvorkin and Perot.

That you in this course discuss?

Thomas tells me quite briefly at the end of his

lecture for about, I think, Labour, trade and Labour.

Where do you choose to to live?

Okay.

Now, the in the very heart of that model, which

is at the very heart of this particular paper we

just saw in the trade seminar, is each household making

a discrete choice?

Okay.

And the discrete choice, as I said in, in that

setting and you know, so class is a sponge, um,

uh, in the we're going to revisit the model structure

today is basically just a very, very, um, rich decision,

because what the model requires you to do is calculate

the payoff of being in any location in time T

okay.

And there's going to be wage differences.

It's going to trade cotton.

And, uh, in a.

You make it even more fun, which wasn't in this

paper by having a dynamic discrete choice, which is where

I live today, is going to give me some payoff.

And from where I am today, I can move into

all of the other possibilities in the next period.

Now, in order to estimate that model at some point

in the model is going to be the requirement to

actually calculate what those values will be over every possible

location that you could be in, in every possible industry

that you could be in, the combination of those two

things at each point in the future.

There's a very rich kind of setting.

So what we're going to build up to today by

hopefully before 5:00 is sort of from the bottom up

to the the mechanism in Caliendo, uh, Falcon and Perot,

because these sort of urban spatial spatial models have become

really a workhorse tool in the empirical kind of toolkit

of, um, well, many different applied micro fields certainly trade,

urban development, um, etc..

Um, I am also going to refer, uh, I didn't

put it on the reading list, but I should have

done refer you to one of our trade job market

students last year from listening.

I don't know if any of you ever saw his

job market presentation.

Uh, but anyway, uh, it's a great paper.

I'll talk about it later, but that also has, um,

uh, one of these types of models in it with

some extra bells and whistles.

And he uses that model to, um, uh, take to

the question of structural transformation in China.

It since, you know, over the last 50 years, from

agricultural, uh, activity to Manufacturing across different locations in China.

And he, um, has this exogenous development of the local

labour force based on social policies, which including the family,

uh, planning policy of one one child policy.

And he uses that to, uh, that process to kind

of shock the size of the labour force in each

market.

So he has the same machinery in there.

That's what's so very cool paper.

All right.

So that is where I want to get to today.

Uh, but the overall topic of today is, um, really

how to think of, um.

Answering an economic question where the, the question of the

economic agents in the model, be they firms or be

they households or both, um, can be modelled and Understood

as a discrete choice, and it requires a particular kind

of mindset because we're so used to in our models

thinking about optimality in continuous variables, marginal costs versus marginal

benefits.

But discrete choices are, in their nature, binary.

We've either we're either not making that choice or we're

making a choice like full on.

Um, and so when we're thinking about, um, learning from

data about the factors that influence those discrete choices, we

have a kind of different set of estimation methods, which,

um, uh, you know, it's sort of useful to I

think we think it's useful to sort of take a

step back and, uh, think about how to structure the

question we're trying to answer, how we build a model

around that, and then what we're actually doing in the

in the empirical work when we are estimating a discrete

choice model.

Okay.

So this this lecture is supposed to like last week,

be practical.

What do I do when I'm confronted with a data

set to that's going to help me answer my question.

And at the heart of it, I'm trying to understand

something about either preferences or production functions from discrete choices.

All right.

That is the setup.

So we are going to do that.

Um, uh, in the and of course applications to international

economics, we are going to uh, revisit a couple of

papers that, you know already.

We're going to revisit them with this kind of practical

lens, which is how do I use these models in

my own, uh, research going forward?

And so we're going to, uh, recap the role of

the very critical type, uh, type two extreme valuation in

Eaton Cotten model, which is the Fréchet distribution that they

use.

And there we have a distribution that's helping us.

So that paper the name is you know technology.

Technology, geography and trade.

Okay.

2002 Econometric paper.

Uh, the Fréchet distribution is the tool by which they

characterise both technology and, uh, trade.

I'm sorry, technology and geography.

And from there comes the predictions related to trade.

It's, uh, it's it's also really nice to sort of

think mechanically about what that distribution is doing for us

in that paper.

And then I'm going to build up to Caliendo and

Perot, which is, uh, as I said, become a bit

of a workhorse.

Now in Caliendo, Dvorkin, we've got all sorts of discrete

choices going on.

We've got firms making discrete choices.

We've also got households making discrete choices.

We've got type, uh, I think we've got the eating

court, um, kind of, um, idea or something along those

lines on the, on the firm side.

But particularly I'm going to look at the household side,

which we, um, are going to use the tool of

a type one extreme value distribution, which is a Gumbel

distribution and modelling the discrete choices of households in there.

Now we're using these distributions quite differently across these two

big papers.

But we're going to kind of, uh, do both of

them and try and compare and contrast.

Okay.

Now this is my introduction, which I've kind of already

said.

But let me let me just repeat it.

Uh, um, so, so I think these tools are incredibly

useful because it just so happens that many economic decisions

are discrete in nature, not only where to live or

where to work, but also, in a sense, you know

what product to buy.

If we're a firm, which we be looking at a

lot in international economics, any kind of extensive margin decision

can be modelled as a discrete choice.

Do I export to this country or not?

Uh, and uh, do I import from a particular country

or not?

And then, you know, conditional on that answer, if the

answer is yes, then I've got a continuous decision, which

is how much which my intensive margin.

But, you know, in a way, often the, the thing

that's jumping out at you in the data is the

extensive choice export to a country or not.

001.

Um, and because the data looks different, the outcome data

looks different.

It's a continuum or or a discrete we uh, binary

we have, uh, different approaches.

So the thing is with discrete choice model is the

tool is uh, the idea which is really at the

heart of all of these things is there will be

a modelled probability.

Okay.

And that modelled probability is going to be the probability

that a particular choice is chosen or a particular outcome

is observed.

Now, actually in the data, it's going to be A01.

Broadly speaking, for any choice.

But our models will give us probabilities.

And then we're going to be looking for model parameters

that match those observed, that match those model probability probabilities

as a function of model parameters to the zero ones

that we see in the data.

That's it.

So we're where there's a lot of I would say

probability theory in this whole area.

Um, now what we're looking for then is a way

to, um, uh, use our, uh, our economic insights to

take the hypotheses and the mechanisms that we think may

be at work in, in determining behaviour and try and

understand those decisions, relating them to not only the characteristics

of the different options themselves.

Like, do I like to live in this city because

it's a great city?

Do I like to live in the city because it

pays a high wage?

Because it's close to other cities, because there's lots of

available goods, something like that, but also my own attributes.

Sometimes, you know, I'm somebody who's already in a sector

that is well-paid in this particular industry, this kind of

thing.

So there's therefore going to be the idea of the

interaction of the of the agent making the choice and

the choice being made amongst the different alternatives.

So we want to make, uh, make possibly make rich

models, depending on our hypotheses that give us, you know,

really quite sophisticated probabilities that tell us about what is

influencing the outcomes that we see in the data.

Okay.

And the good news, you know, once we've got this

set of tools, there's lots of situations where the actual

data that we have, um, might be binary.

Um, but what we're coming up with, just to repeat

myself, is a model of the model of the probability

that a given alternative is chosen.

Okay.

Now, if we had the perfect model, then our model

would give us a prediction that was either 0 or

1 for every explanation.

Okay.

We're not going to have the perfect model.

And in fact, we're going to kind of use the

fact that we don't have the perfect model because the

data is there's going to be all sorts of UN

model things, and we're going to use the properties of

the, uh, of, you know, random variable distributions of random

variables to kind of explain why we're not actually at

0 or 1.

There's something else random going on in the model that

allows us to generate a model that is going to

have a probabilistic outcome that we relate to the data.

Okay.

So the keys to the nature of these distributions of

these random variables are going to be key.

So sorry.

Just to recap the data.

You know we're going to if the model were perfect

it's going to give us a zero or a one.

Um we want probabilities.

We want somehow something in the model that is going

to enable us to get something between 0 and 1,

because that's probably what we're going to see in the

data.

Not everyone is going to make the same decision.

We don't uh, so what we're going to have is

a random variable.

That and a draw of that random variable that can

take us anywhere between 0 and 1.

That's what we're going to see.

So that's a bit abstract at the moment.

All right.

So what are we often things that we are important

to have bear to define in our setup of a

model.

And to make sure that we specify correctly, um, and

all of this most discrete choice models that we see

are going to have a really well specified choice set.

Okay.

So we're going to know and it's going to sort

of be an exhaustive choice because we in the model,

the probability of doing each action has got to sum

to one, because they will be taking one choice out

of all of these different actions.

They've got to be exhaustive.

They've also got to be exclusive and they've got to

be finite, you know, discrete in nature.

Now, um, in empirical applications, um, not in the two

trade ones that we will focus on today, but in,

in a lot of the applications to industrial organisation, for

instance, where we're trying to use data on, uh, purchase

decisions in which good have I chosen to buy out

of a set of choice probabilities?

Um, uh, we will, uh, often introduce the tool of

an outside option, which is buying nothing.

Okay.

Because the majority of people in our data, depending on

what we're looking at, might choose to buy nothing in

any particular period.

Okay, so but if that is the case and our

data do include agents who aren't doing anything, we would

certainly want to include that outside option of doing nothing.

And in fact, sorry.

Let me recap.

I think in Caliendo Dvorkin, in parallel, there is kind

of the probability you stay put, which could be thought

of as an outside option.

And then we're interested in the probabilities that you move

from where you are to, to some other place.

Um, okay.

So we've got a choice set.

So we've got to make sure that we specify that

clearly.

So every discrete choice model will sort of start off

with, you know, there are AI agents, there are N

destinations, there are L origins.

And, you know, some sort of definition of what the,

um, environment looks like.

Um, we will also be very clear about what they

need to be very clear.

As always, I would like not limited to discrete choice,

but what the objective function is, what we're trying to

optimise?

We're trying to maximise utility.

We're trying to minimise cost.

So in uh you can call to the uh the

decision structure is I'm a country, I'm going to be

consuming a particular good.

The choice is where do I import it from.

Uh, where I will import it from the country that

can deliver it at the lowest delivered cost.

Okay.

That lowest delivered cost is going to depend on that

country's technology and also the bilateral transport cost between that

country and our country.

And maybe, you know, if transport costs are generally very

high, I might choose to produce it and consume it

myself.

Okay.

So that's going to be what the sort of objective

that we are going to have in the back of

our minds, forefront of our minds.

For in eating cotton and in Caliendo and apparel is

the household side of the issue of the model is

each period, each household, or each worker?

I think each worker is making a decision about, as

I said, which sector, which, um, location.

And I'm going to be, um, making that decision to

maximise the present value of my current and discounted future,

uh, consumption utility, which is going to be my consumption

payoff and my ongoing option value of moving from there.

Okay.

Um.

And then I have to make an assumption about any

random variables that enter the objective function.

And this is where all of the magic is going

to, to be.

Um, and you know, there is there are there's quite

a lot of structure in, in, uh, each of these,

uh, possible choices that we see in the literature.

And that's something we're going to focus on today.

And ideally, if we're lucky, you know, if we're dealing

in a if we can, it'd be nice to have

a closed form solution for these probabilities, because we've had

very nice theoretical moments that relate the model parameters and

in terms of probabilities for taking a particular action to

the zero ones that we see in the data.

Okay.

Now if they're not closed form solutions then we're going

to have to do some sort of complicated, uh, uh,

estimation, maybe a more complicated estimation routine, but the nature

of the, um, uh, predicted probabilities, uh, predicted probabilities based

on the model is going to depend a lot on

what assumptions we make about the nature of the stochastic

element in the in the model.

Okay.

All right.

So without with that big setup.

So that was already quite a lot of setup.

Let us approach Ethan with an open mind Okay.

So and from the perspective of what's going on in

that estimation okay.

And what's the problem that they need that estimation to

solve for them.

Okay.

So eat in court.

And really when you go back and look at it,

it really is a um a very general framework.

They it's a model of the, the importance in determining

trade patterns and ultimately gains from trade.

The, the determinants of trade, how much of it is

coming from some sort of absolute advantage of a particular

country, and how much of it is coming from comparative

advantage across countries, in particular industries?

Okay.

And once we understand how those two elements of of

a production function really at the country level are determining

who is trading what.

We have a really nice framework, structural framework that allowed

us to do all sorts of comparative statics if we

wanted to.

For instance, increased trade costs.

We could see what happened if we wanted to put

in a productivity shock in a particular country or set

of countries, what would happen to trade?

What would the implications be for gains of trade?

So we can do experiments what we want to we've

got that structural framework.

Okay.

Um, so we are going to, um, uh, with the

idea that we, at some point in our lives, might

want to use an eat and quarter model to do

a structural evaluation of some, uh, shock technology.

Shock trade shock.

Let us understand what we need that model to do

for us to relate it to the data that we've

got.

Okay.

The data and the data that we will have to

estimate this model will be bilateral trade flows between countries.

So, you know, the the very sort of heart of

all empirical trade work is how much does the UK

import and export from every other country in the world,

and the same for every other country.

How does it we might have a panel.

How does it how has it changed over time?

We've essentially got an n by n matrix of trade

and n by n by t matrix of bilateral trade

flows at different points in time.

Now if we wanted to get very detailed, we might

have some sort of sectoral heterogeneity.

But ultimately we're getting trade flows okay.

And what we end up and and we want to

use that data to tell us about the importance of

tech, of the state of technology and the state of

trade flows today in determining those trade patterns.

Okay.

Okay.

So that's what we're we're going for.

That's what we're sort of.

So we need a model that is somehow going to

generate predictions for those volumes of trade flows, where those

predictions are functions of the parameters that we care about,

the geography and the technology.

All right.

So that's where we want to end up.

But you know, we've got the data.

Then we'll have the predictions.

We stick them together and we get the estimates and

the model parameters.

All right.

So that's where we want to get to.

How are we going to use the discrete choice sort

of mindset a random uh stochastic element.

This distribution and um the kind of setup of the

model to get there.

Let's start.

You've all done this.

So I'm going to go through this quite quickly.

Um, but we've got let's think about choice sets we

have in this model N countries.

But every country can play two roles, okay?

It can be the exporter of a good J and

it can be the importer of a good J.

So when it's in the role of importer it is

going to be country N.

So the think of the consumers in that country, they

are n they are going to be consuming some kind

of bundle of goods that are going to come from

all over the world in that country, n that firm,

that country is also going to be a producer.

The firms in that country are going to be indexed

collectively by AI, which is going to be that country's

activities in the role of exporter producers.

Okay.

So given that we've got each country playing two roles,

and by the way, we also might think we've got

a continuum of goods and we're going to index those

different goods by J.

We've already got kind of quite a few dimensions going

on here.

Oh that's going to reach that screen.

Sorry.

Can you read that.

Oh it's really annoying.

Okay okay I'm going to now jump for this okay.

Sorry.

This is going to be not my most eloquent moment

of the day.

Okay.

Well, it's not gonna work.

Okay.

Let me just.

Yeah.

If I if.

I'd be feeling a bit more energetic, I could have

made you jump to the actual handle.

Right.

Okay.

No.

It's supposed to kind of click into place, right?

So you know how it works.

Oh, God.

Okay.

All right.

Performance element.

Okay.

Right.

So we've got, um, uh, for every possible good J.

We have country N making a choice about where to

import it from, and it's got AI choices.

It can import it from any particular country.

And it's going to make a choice based on the

delivered cost of that.

Good J from country I showing up at the ports

in country N, and it is simply going to pick

the good that has the cheapest delivered cost.

And the delivered cost is going to be denoted Uh,

p uh sub and I delivered cost of an import

from end to IP and I depends.

And it's going to depend on a couple of things.

It's going to depend on the bilateral trade costs.

So trade model is always going to have some trade

frictions some transport costs in there.

Um and we're going to make them I think typically

we assume they're the same whether it's ni or I

n we're just going to have some iceberg costs proportional

to distance usually.

Um, and then we're going to have.

So that's the sort of trade.

That's the geography bit.

You know the fact that there are distance between country

N and I.

And then in each country I the possible exporters, uh,

there's going to be a production cost.

And we think of that as a essentially, you know,

a constant marginal cost c sub I and that C

sub I is going to be the draw from a

uh, distribution.

And that draw is going to be telling us the

country's efficiency or productivity in producing a good job.

So the lower is the cost, the higher is the

productivity of country I in producing.

Good job.

So if we get a really high draw of z

sub I for good j, that means a low delivered

a low production cost.

We are going to be able to all else export

that, export that good and deliver it to every other

country and at a lower delivered cost once it gets

there.

Okay.

Um, now the reason why.

So across every country in the world, they're all going

to have this draws AI.

But the reason why it's not the single country with

the lowest Z that's going to end up exporting that

good everywhere, unless in a very extreme case, what's going

to discipline.

That is the fact that that country AI is differently

far from all the other destinations.

So it's going to tend to.

If it's even if it's really productive, it's going to

be costly to send it far away.

So that's the transport costs are going to kind of,

uh, discipline this.

Um, so, uh, country N is going to buy that

good from the, uh, producer who can deliver it most

cheaply.

And this is the discrete choice.

It just buys variety J from one other country.

That means it gets zero of variety J from every

country apart from one.

Okay.

It's a binary zero one.

Okay.

That's that's lying there in the heart of this, uh,

model.

Now, that's not what trade data looks like.

You know, it's it's not A01.

There are going to be volumes.

So the trick here is we said we make J

one particular industry in a continuum of industries.

Um, and.

Okay, we'll come back to that.

So, uh, now what is this efficiency parameter or production

cost?

It's going to be a draw z I for each

country I makes a draw from a country specific productivity.

Uh, uh, product product, uh, what's called the productivity distribution,

which is essentially a modelled as a PDF.

Okay.

And uh, which is going to be, you know, the

probability which is going to give us a CDF, which

tells us the probability that any draw from that distribution

is less than zero should be a less than or

equal to um, now, because the delivered price, we're going

to model the delivered price as um.

Uh, the cost like the cost plus the transport cost

divided by the productivity draw.

So the higher is the lowest the delivered price, the

higher is C, the higher is the price, the higher

transport cost, the higher is the price.

But because we could rearrange this and write z equals

c I times d and I over p and I.

It means that this delivered price is also a the

realisation of a random variable.

And that is going to be our kind of stochastic

element in our in our model.

So the objective given that the country is a cost

minimiser it's going to pick the one cheapest arrived price

it.

We can write down their objective function, which is to

pick the minimum price out of all of the particular,

uh, possibilities that it's, uh, faced with.

Um, that's mine.

Something to say here.

Now here we've got it's kind of in a way,

it's a competitive model.

There's no mark-up in this model.

We've just got the firms aren't making any profit because

the price is simply the marginal cost multiplied by the

transport costs.

So we've got no profits here.

There are extensions of this model which do allow for

some kind of monopolistic competition, where the price that the

cheapest guy pays is the delivered cost of the second

cheapest guy.

But that's that's a sort of tweak on the, uh,

the nature of demand, I guess.

All right.

So we've got we've got a choice set, we've got

our technology, we've got our objective function.

And here, here is where the magic kind of starts.

Um, the we are going to think of okay.

Now we don't the country n is going to import

goods from just one of these other countries.

Okay?

Given our setup, we can write down an expression for

the probability that n is going to import j from

any one country.

Pi is the probability that country has the lowest delivered

price, which is the probability that P and I is

less than p n every other country other than I.

Okay.

It's got to be the minimum of those prices.

Now, uh, if if all industries J are being drawn

from the same technology distribution, then the likelihood that N

imports J from us is the probability that I's prices

that I was not good J.

And it's also going to be the share of all

goods for which I is the lowest, and it's going

to be the share of all goods that country n

consumes that it gets from country I.

And it's going to this is now going to start

looking like the bilateral trade flow divided by the total

value of i's consumption.

Okay.

This is what this this probability is going to play

uh, multiple roles Okay.

And now we're going to, uh, implement the magic bit

by making an assumption about what that productivity distribution looks

like.

We're going to assume that countries efficiency distributions are country

specific, reflects a country specific technology.

And um, that is a that efficiency distribution is a

Fréchet distribution, which is the type two extreme value distribution,

which means to say that it is going to be

a draw from a distribution whose CDF looks like this.

Okay.

Um, you will notice that there is one country specific

parameter here, and there is another parameter here.

The country specific parameter is uppercase t sub I.

The non country specific parameter is the uh is the

theta here.

Now these are summary measures of absolute and comparative advantage

respective, respectively.

Uh, both positive um and.

In the paper they are given microeconomic foundations which come

to on the next slide, I think.

But T is referred to as the location parameter.

And this one governs how, um, the absolute advantage of

country I.

So, you know, we're going to have our, um where

am I now Fréchet distribution.

Okay.

We're going to have um.

You know, Fréchet distribution looks something like this.

Okay.

Um, and, uh, a higher t means the whole thing

is just shifted to the right.

Okay?

Which means that for every industry, the probability of Z

being at least as big as something is high, as

a higher proportion of the distribution just means they're more

efficient at everything in expectation.

And then we've got the uh, uh, theta.

Theta is the parameter that governs the extent of comparative

advantage globally.

And theta is kind of the thickness of this distribution.

And in in all of the models typically assume that

theta is not country specific.

It's a global parameter may evolve over time, but it's

a global parameter.

And let me make sure I say this the right

way round.

A bigger theta means less variance.

So Fréchet with a smaller theta is going to look

relative to the black.

One is going to look kind of more like that.

Um, that means that a lower variance is going.

To.

Look, uh, sort of thicker.

Gonna look more like that.

Okay, so this is low feature, and the red is

high.

Feature kind of goes to the opposite way than you

would imagine.

I just kind of compresses distinctly.

Now how what's the logic, the intuition for why this,

uh, this parameter governs comparative advantage is the following.

If every country for every good is making a draw

from the red distribution, then, uh, the countries are going

to kind of be, um, uh, similar they're going to

probably have pretty much the same production costs.

More and more similar production costs are going to be

distributed over a smaller range there, which means that the

chances that any one country is the dominant producer, i.e.

like so much lower cost than everybody else, so that

even dwarfs transport cost differences and they end up exporting

everything but manufacturing.

Just this one good.

And supplying the whole world according to some comparative advantage

is going to be much less because in all likelihood,

it's not going to be that much cost difference between

the countries.

Okay, not much trade based on comparative advantage.

It's going to be trade that's kind of governed by

trade costs.

Now on the other hand, if we've got all of

our countries for good J making draws from subject to

the location, let's say, well, let's fix T.

So let's say t is the same across all countries

for now.

But if it's if the if they're all draw, if

all countries are drawing from this big fat distribution, the

blue one is the efficiency parameters.

Then you know probably there's going to be some countries

out here that are just really good at particular varieties,

and those countries are really going to have a comparative

advantage in producing those varieties.

And in all likelihood, we're going to see quite a

lot of specialisation of the productive resources in that country,

making that one thing and exporting it everywhere.

So a lot of trade, we're going to see a

real, uh, trade in quite specialised goods.

So it's just a really, really neat way of summarising

a hell of a lot of stuff with two parameters.

And I hope that I expect Thomas tortured as a

continuation of Bush, Fisher, Samuelson, where you sort of, um,

have this sort of comparative advantage based on, um, you

know, trading off inputs used in relative input use in

different sectors.

But here we've got sort of another way of thinking

of it across countries.

Who is, um, who is who is going to be.

You know how when we say is theta governs how

concentrated is global production of any one good in any

one country?

Let's say that's one way.

That's one sort of, um, way of thinking about what

the theta parameter tells us.

All right.

So in this is this is technology, the shape of

the of the Fréchet distribution, what the product productivity draws

are look like.

So in the paper they motivate this as a kind

of consequence.

This these productivity draws at the country level as the

consequence of some kind of innovation and diffusion process where

maybe any one country may be making multiple draws, but

then it picks the max of that of those draws

and, um, that, uh, when we've got many, many Draws,

uh, then that Max becomes essentially an extreme value distribution.

What do we think the max is going to be?

How is that max going to be distributed?

And the end result from statistics, the distribution of a

maximum of a set of drawers over many, many drawers

converges to only.

There's one of three possible extreme value distributions.

They could have chosen one of the three Gumbel Frechet

survival, but they chose Fréchet because it's kind of the

simpler, simplest one.

But more importantly, it is so elegant that it leads

straight through to the distribution of efficiencies.

Will also govern the distribution of delivered prices.

Okay, which is going to be what we, in the

end relate to our trade flows.

Uh, data.

Okay.

So that's that's sort of the micro foundation of what

this distribution looks like.

It's the is the distribution of the maximum over a

technical technology distribution process.

Okay, now, because country has a distribution of efficiencies, which

was going to be this is the, uh CDF of

the pressure, then, you know, the probability that, um, uh.

That, uh, an actual draw Z is below any threshold

is given by this.

Oh, sorry.

Yeah, it's given by that now.

So one minus that is the probability that the, the

productivity is kind of above that threshold.

And we can write down an expression for the distribution

of delivered prices by doing this substitution.

Rearranging that to write z z as a function of

pi, we can write down the distribution of prices that

country I presents to country N across all varieties j

as being equal to one minus uh, this CDF up

to the uh value of that draw uh z which

is here the marginal cost production cost uh divided by

p.

So this is an expression closed form kind of expression

for the prices that country I presents to country N,

and it's telling us everything we need to know about

that country.

I it's got the T in it.

It's got the theta in it, it's got the CI

in it and it's got the bilateral trade costs and

I.

Okay.

And then we aggregate across possible source countries.

I up to the price index at the receiving country

country n taking into account there's going to pick the

minimum okay.

And here's, here's some more uh magic.

So we're trying to now think about the distribution of

the price that country N is paying for any good

J.

Well, the lowest price for any good in country.

Sorry.

Uh, a is going to be less than P, some

threshold P unless every source is country.

Every source country's price is above that P.

So what we need is the distribution of one minus

the probability that all prices are greater than p.

Okay.

That's telling us the probability that the price is what

the lowest price for country N is.

So we're going to have.

So if the probability that country i's price is greater

than p is one minus the distribution we had on

the previous slide, one minus one minus this, we're going

to lose track of the one minuses.

But this is uh, we're going from um, uh, less,

you know, price greater than to price.

Uh, less than.

Sorry.

From price less than two.

Price greater than.

The probability the country has.

Price is greater than P is this expression here.

So then the probability that all.

And here's another nice thing.

The probability that all country prices are greater than p

which means that the because we're going to select the

minimum of that is that P would be the minimum

price that we would get.

And we're assuming that each of those country draws is

independent.

We basically write down one of these expressions.

We need this condition to hold and we need it

to hold for country two.

And we need to hold up the country three and

country four and all of the other source countries.

But because they're independent draws, we can write that as

the product of across all l of these different.

Um, so across all eyes that she said that's not

the case, I.

Of these je NE, uh, price distributions.

Okay, so now we can write down this closed form

expression for the expected price at country N of any

variety J, conditional on the expectation that N is importing

J from the country that from which it can buy

it most cheaply.

Conditioning on the technology and the geography of all of

those possible source countries.

That's what we've got by this point here.

Okay.

Now we are going to um, uh uh, call this

bit the bit in the exponent.

We are uh, we are going to take that, uh,

product of the exponents.

Take it inside so it becomes the exponent of the

sums.

and we are going to define g n as one

minus the exponent of this term here, where this phi

term is the sum of these, uh exponentiated terms in

here across all of the different countries in the world.

That's just using our sort of exponentiating rule.

Okay.

So we've got a nice expression.

And seeing as we've made this notation change, it looks

even simpler than it is.

But it's got T and all the T's in there

and it's got, uh, theta in there telling us about

technology, transport costs and, uh, input costs.

Okay, so returning to the title of the page by

now, we've got an expression in our model, which is

the price.

And it's the price which is.

Model parameters related to technology and geography to the trade.

Okay.

All right okay.

So now we're going to think about a slightly different

probability using our distribution of the minimum delivered prices for

each.

Good.

And we're going to ask what is the probability that

country AI provides a good at the lowest price.

So they're going to be buying it from somewhere.

What is the probability that country AI delivers it at

the lowest cost.

Well it's the contribution of country AI to this overall

fee parameter.

So it's going to be how much of that probability

distribution on the previous slide is accounted for by country

AI.

And this is so this term here is referred to

as country and price parameter.

It's all about the delivered Olympic prices.

And so this is the probability that country AI provides

any good at the lowest price.

But because all goods are draws from the same distribution,

it's also the probability that country n buys buys um

any good j from country.

So therefore it is also the fraction of all goods

that country N buys from country AI.

And because in this model country NS average expenditure is

not going to vary, um expenditure per good is not

going to vary depending on um where it comes from.

The probability the fraction of goods that country n buys

from country ie is also the fraction of country ns

expenditure on goods from country I.

Okay, Now we have a term that we can measure

in the data.

So we take all of the all of the consumption

expenditure on consumption in country.

And we take the value of imports from country I

to N.

We put that second term in the numerator, total expenditure

in country n in the denominator.

And we have in the data this probability.

Okay.

That's so we've got okay.

The probability is this because all goods are the same.

It's also this because we're spending the same amount of

money on on all goods.

It's also the share of expenditure which is what we

can get in the data okay.

So at this point we've got theoretical predictions for the

value of, you know, the share of all consumption that's

being imported from country I This is what's kind of

a gravity equation, right?

It's the the fraction of our expenditure that we're spending

on goods from a particular other country.

And we've got it in the model by starting with

this productivity distribution and saying, okay, now we're going to

work with the properties of those distributions to say, okay,

well, we can actually write down this expected share of

all expenditure from that country.

So that's what the model will do in the estimation.

It's going to put the two together I think probably

through what's it going to be.

How did anyone know how to estimate it.

I mean it could even be as simple as it's

going to be some nonlinear least squares, I think, estimation

method.

And that is going to give you theta and also

going to give you the Tis.

So the T the variation in the data that's going

to identify t is going to be if there's a

particular country that's just exporting more than its fair share

everywhere, given its geographical distance from all countries, it's going

to show up as having a high T.

Um, if it's sort of exporting more everything, the degree

of specialisation is going to allow, the variation in the

data is going to be what it is that gives

us our estimate of theta.

But this comparative advantage parameter.

Um, and so this is sort of the useful properties

of uh, eating cotton.

All right.

I have I actually have eaten quantum paper open on

my computer when we break for five minutes.

I just checked that they do use nonlinear least squares

to actually bring the data to the, um, uh, model,

but I think they have to, because this is obviously

a nonlinear.

And as they take logs of it, can anyone remember

it?

Okay.

All right.

We'll see what they do.

Okay.

I'll ask that question.

So does everyone feel confident now armed with a matrix

of bilateral trade flows, you could write down a theoretical

expression which relates variation in those trade flows to technology

and trade.

Yes, because it's just exactly what these guys do in

this one.

Thank you.

Okay, so that was all I wanted to say about

eating cotton, but I know you've done it before, you

know.

So this is part of a, uh, the structure and

a lot of papers that we see all the time.

Um, uh, so, you know, to some extent, I'm sorry

for giving putting it to you again, but I want,

really want to emphasise where the discrete choice is coming

here.

Okay.

It's coming from each import.

Fundamentally it's not it's not what we see in the

data.

It's kind of, um, giving us is what is allowing

us to write down these probabilistic terms.

It is the fact that each country is minimising its,

uh, import costs by choosing just one source country for

every product variety, J.

And the probability that any one country is that lowest

cost is coming from the, uh, the expression for is

coming from the properties of the fresh distribution, same goods,

same expenditure allows us to move from, um, uh, the

probability of any one good also being the probability of

all goods also being the value of total trade flows,

the share of value from total trade flows coming from

each country.

Okay, so that was all I wanted to say about

that.

Now we are going to go back to on topic

two.

Uh, I think on the first page I had a

roadmap.

Yes.

We are now going to address the the other type

of, um, uh, extreme value distribution that we see a

lot in international applications, which is the type two, uh,

distribution, which is a Gumbel.

Now, these distributions are most often used quite differently.

Okay.

The whole point of Fréchet in the in quantum is

we want to estimate the parameters of that productivity distribution.

The whole point of using the type two extreme value

uh distribution in a model and an estimation is because

we want to, um, uh, in a sense, uh, integrate

out this randomness.

And we're then going to relate what we see in

the data to, uh, observables.

Okay.

Abstract.

We'll get to what it actually means.

Okay.

So, uh, rather than the quantum sort of question, which

is to estimate parameters of a distribution, often our research

question might be quite different.

Okay.

We want to, um, understand about, you know, preferences or

production functions, something like that.

From the choices that are made in the data and

how and relate those choices to, um, characteristics of the

different choices Themselves or of the decision maker.

Okay.

Now, um, the econometricians who pioneered the use of these

models in micro is McFadden won a Nobel Prize for

it in 20, in the year 2000.

And all of his work, the Nobel Prize winning work

is to say, okay, we are going to capture everything

that is unobserved in the objective function of the decision

maker, um, by um, uh, saying that that unobserved heterogeneity

follows some is a draw from an extreme value distribution.

And for every choice, we're going to give it a

random draw from that distribution.

And if we see the consumer, let's say, or the

firm behaving in a particular way.

That makes no sense given the observables.

It must be because they had a really that choice

had a really high.

What we see them doing had a really high random

draw from the unobservable.

So this is the only way that our model is

going to rationalise the choices that they made.

Okay.

So we're going to say that that's going on in

the background.

We don't care about that.

It's randomness.

We can't relate anything to it.

We want to understand how those consumers or the firm's

choices are related to the observables.

How can we sort of handle this unobserved preference heterogeneity

going on that's governing choices and kind of leading to

what looks like randomness in the data, but actually is

capturing everything that we don't observe.

Okay.

And we're going to put different properties on what that

unobserved term is, which are going to allow us to

sort of get rid of it, in short And specifically

we are going when we say that that unobserved bit

is a type one extreme value error.

Um, then we'll see that our choice probabilities can be

expressed as these, um, uh, multinomial logit, uh expressions.

And those are going to be our a choice probabilities

okay.

So multinomial logit McFadden discrete choice unobserved heterogeneity in governing

actions.

All right.

Now this here begins the kind of build up to

Caliendo talking in pyro okay.

But we're going to build it up quite slowly.

And we're going to take a brief talk detour through

demand estimation in IO.

But, uh, just so you've, you've seen some seen, uh,

well, one particular paper.

All right.

So, and I know a couple of you are doing

IO or have done IO.

So this is going to be, uh, more familiar to

you, I think.

All right.

So let's imagine that we want to understand something about,

say, consumer preferences or household preferences in Caliendo, uh, uh,

et al.

And, um, uh, we know that each consumer or each

household, each worker is making a discrete choice between uppercase

N alternatives.

And that's going to be the choice set.

They're going to be doing one of these things from

one to uppercase N.

And any possible choice that they make could give that

consumer a particular payoff.

And we're going to model the payoff of that consumer

as something like the expected utility that they all get

from that, uh, term, which could be something, you know,

they've got to pay the price for it.

There could be some value of that particular good.

That's the price they have to pay for it.

Plus some unobserved shock epsilon I okay.

Um, and that epsilon I is going to be a

mean zero distribution and it's going to be a random

variable and there's going to be a realisation of it

for each particular choice I.

Okay.

So we might think of this as the I is

kind of the price.

And this is a random preference draw.

Now this VI would be the mean value of I.

And then there's going to be, you know, uh some

random bit as well.

Now if there's I different alternatives and we're going to

have sorry n different alternatives and we're going to have

n different draws.

It's going to be the nature of this joint distribution

that is going to be sort of, uh, floating around,

governing the nature of the draws, governing the choices that

we see.

And we've got to be quite careful at this point,

because everything that we don't observe is going to be

captured by those epsilon trolls.

Okay.

And here is something.

It is it is a kind of just a bit

of a, a moment to pause, because in much of

the work, we're going to assume that those, you know,

at least the bits that are unobservable to us or

some part of it are sort of independently distributed, okay,

which may or may not be appropriate.

Okay.

And in fact, you know, one of the big papers

in this field, the Barry Levinson papers paper that the

demand estimation model that sort of moves away, use this

as a starting point and then it builds on it,

kind of tries to put some more structure on what

these terms are and allow for some different correlations within

those terms, which we'll come to that.

But we it really needs to be plausible that whatever

we're sort of leaving out there in those error terms

that we're going to capture by, it draws from a,

um, extreme, uh, value distribution, distributed type one, in order

to move from those to closed form solutions of probabilities,

we have to assume that they're independently distributed, which may

or may not be appropriate.

So we just raise a flag and we just kind

of ask ourselves how valid is that assumption.

But you know, if you've got the same person making

decisions and they have particular preferences over on observables, it's

quite likely they'll be correlated.

So you have to make a sort of strong case

to claim independence.

But anyway, uh, we're going to have some distribution later

on.

We're going to put some, uh, assumptions around what that

distribution is.

Now, the just the elegant simplicity of discrete choice is

that, um, uh, we've got this kind of revealed preference

logic going on that because in our model, each consumer

can only make one choice or makes one choice their

exhaustive and exclusive.

It must be that the choice that they make is

giving them the highest payoff out of all of the

options in their choice set.

And everything comes from this assumption that they're doing the

best that they can.

Now, that's only going to be the case in this

very simple model.

If negative v I plus epsilon I, I either pay

off from good I is greater than their payoff or

greater than or equal to I suppose.

But let's just say for simplicity greater than the payoff

that they get from good J for all other possible

choices.

So it's got to be greater than negative j plus

epsilon j.

Now the problem.

So this being bigger than this is going to depend

on the realisations of epsilon I and epsilon J.

Now because they're going we're going to model this as

draws from a particular distribution.

We can write down an expression for the probability that

VI is greater than v j for all other j

okay.

And it's going to have j minus one bits in

it, because we need epsilon one to be less than

uh v one minus VI plus epsilon I.

We also need um epsilon two to be less than

v two plus VI minus epsilon I just rearranging this

inequality for each one.

We need that to be true for all of these

other epsilon draws.

Uh, we need epsilon.

We need epsilon, um, uppercase I to be less than

the value of, uh, of uppercase I minus VA plus,

um, epsilon I.

Okay.

Now, once we have expressions for these distributions, uh, for

this joint distribution, then we can figure out what this

is.

But what it is in general terms is we're going

to be integrating out uh, over all these possible.

Um, Epsilon draws up, um, up to the boundary of

the, of where we need the Cut-Off to be so

we can write it out as a sort of nested

integral over the, um, uh PDF which or in terms

of the um, uh c uh CDF over the whole

range of epsilon across all of the different dimensions of

this problem.

Now, this is quite a complicated statement.

And we're going to simplify this using the logit.

Uh, in a minute okay.

But you know, it's all coming from this notion that

the consumer picks the option that they prefer.

So just and now I'm going to illustrate another caveat

associated with this kind of, uh, approach.

The first caveat is let's see.

We've got to make sure we're we know what is

left in our unobserved term.

And if we're going to assume independence, we have to

make a strong case that that independence assumption is valid.

We are also now going to make the case that,

uh, we can use this is going to tell it

because it's coming from the rankings of the goods.

It's like it's you know, it's kind of right back

to Micro Theory 101.

So which bundle do you which good do you prefer

over the other.

There's, there's kind of an implicit normalisation.

We don't know about the absolute level of preference.

It's just coming from rankings, which means that it's going

to be sort of defined up to the preference is

going to be defined up to some, uh, some normalisation,

you know, some some reference type product, because we haven't

got any levels.

We've just got these comparisons going on.

So for instance, if we had three goods in this

economy, then the probability that the consumer picks good one,

um, is the probability that, um uh, Sorry, Epsilon two

is less than the difference in the valuations plus the

draw of epsilon one and the epsilon three is less

than the difference in the values plus epsilon one.

And we could write down similar expressions for the probability

that they pick good to, or the probability that they

pick three.

They probably prefer good three.

But in these, uh, probabilities we've got some dependence going

on.

So if we defined E to one as the difference

between the, the two draws for good one and good

two and e to two, as the difference between the

two draws e to three.

Sorry, epsilon e to two as the difference between epsilon

three and epsilon one.

Then we could rewrite these probabilities just in terms of

the values which are basically going to be our observables,

our prices, let's say.

And then just the two terms e to one and

e to two, because these are all dependent on each

other.

So if we've got three goods, we've kind of got

them.

The choice probabilities are going to be expressed as the

events that involve the random variables E to one and

need two.

Only two variables for these each of these three probabilities

because they've got to sum to one.

Um, and the average utility difference is coming from the

bilateral comparisons.

So we're going to have uh, some, some kind of

normalisation, some reference.

Good.

In the model, it's all about the, the relative preferences.

So that's the other thing going on.

So here is kind of setting the scene quite sometimes.

Nice to have an outside option okay.

Because if one of our options is doing nothing it

maybe feels a little bit comfortable to say okay, the

utility from doing nothing is nothing is zero.

And then this will all and then any payoff that

we get is going to be relative to the, uh,

the payoff from doing nothing.

At which point.

Well, normally it's kind of compared to zero, but it's

we've still got that, um, uh, normalisation in it.

Okay.

Right.

So this is, this is kind of going on in

every kind of discrete choice, uh, model, given what we

see.

Um, and then the thing is that we can write

down closed form, um, uh, expressions for these choice probabilities.

The probability that I prefer good one versus good two

versus good three or good two or something like this.

Um, it's going it's only going to have this closed

form for special distributions, one of which is if we

assume that the epsilon draws follow a type one extreme

value distribution, which is also known as a Gumbel distribution,

which you will see looks slightly more complicated than a

Fréchet distribution.

Here we've got the PDF being epsilon.

So being the exponent of minus epsilon multiplied by uh

the exponent of the negative exponent of minus epsilon.

Okay.

Um, and what we're going to do over the next

two slides, which is really going to be a bit

of a drag, but good to see once.

And in fact, that might take us nicely up to

a break.

Actually, what we're going to do is derive from these,

um, functional form assumptions about what the distribution is derived.

Perhaps the most famous expression that we see in all,

um, um, multinomial logit choice models, in which we actually

sort of model with the functional form as the probability

that we pick option ie is the exponent of the

mean value of option ie Over a sum over all

of the options of the exponent of those mean values.

Now you will notice that in these probabilities no epsilons.

We've got rid of the epsilons.

We're writing down the probability, the sort of mean probability

that option ie is chosen just as a function of

these observables.

The V's that we started off with, which we might

call the price data.

Okay.

So this is very this is very nice.

It's like a massive simplification.

Now we have got our two flags going on that.

In order to get rid of those epsilons we will

have to assume that those epsilons are independently distributed, which

may or may not be valid given what we're trying

to model, what the decision we're trying to model.

And second, that it's all relative to some to one

choice that the consumer could make.

Okay.

So it's going to be how much more happy are

they.

You know with with this particular I choice I related

to something else.

Okay.

Now, the particular discrete choice model that we're going to

model with these probabilities is, as I said, the multinomial

logit.

All right.

Now who is ready for the derivation.

Okay I don't think I am, but we'll see how

far we go.

Nothing like a change of variables to get us going.

Oh, right.

So.

If we are willing to assume that these epsilons are

independently distributed, we know that epsilon I.

For in order for, um, choice I to be the

most preferred choice to be giving the consumer the highest

payoff, it must be that that draw of epsilon is

sufficiently high such that the consumer prefers option ie I

to all of the other, um.

Uh.

Each other option.

Which means they've got to prefer good I to every

other option, which is going to be as we could

write down these a product of these different probabilities.

Each of those probabilities is coming from the PDF that

we're assuming is governing the distribution of those epsilon draws.

And we've got how many options have we got in

this choice set.

We've got uppercase I options.

We write down those probabilities multiplied by each other.

We can summarise it with this product term.

It's the product of the probability that option is preferred

to each other.

Option okay over all of the other options which is

going to be uppercase I minus one because it's being

compared to every other item.

So in this exponent of the exponent, we have the

difference in the observables and the, uh, the value of

that random draw of the, uh, epsilon.

Okay.

Now what we might want to model that probability at

is the expected value of this thing.

So how do we find the expected value.

Well, the expected value is going to be uh, every

possible value.

It could be weighted by the probability that it's that

particular value over the whole, uh, uh, negative infinity to

plus infinity over all of the possible values that, um,

that variable could take.

So in this case, what is that?

Well, it is going to be, uh, this expression here,

which I've written down.

So it's, it's got to be at each possible value

of that epsilon draw.

Okay.

Uh, it's got to be, um, we need the sort

of probability that it's high enough for this condition to

hold at each possible draw, it could be weighted by

the probability that the epsilon draw is actually that value.

So multiplied by the density function that's underlying it.

Okay.

Now here we have we again use our trick that

the the product of a set of exponential terms is

the exponential of the sum.

So we move that product term inside this um exponent.

And we can express this probability as the integral over

all possible over the whole range of epsilon I of

this.

Um.

Uh, Idiot.

Sorry.

That is the CDA.

Um, up to this particular, um, threshold value, which is,

uh, taking this inside the parentheses.

Negative one.

So, so take out a common factor of negative epsilon

I and we've got one from there.

And then we've got the sum over all of these.

Take out this epsilon from here.

And then we've got VI negative VI minus PJ.

So that's that expression there.

That is the probability written as an integral.

Now the fun part okay.

We've still got these epsilons floating around here.

But we don't really know how to relate that to

the data that we've got.

So I'm now going to do um a bit of

notation.

And I am going to define.

This term in parentheses.

Here is the parameter lambda.

Okay.

So lambda.

You will note that having taken out this common factor

of epsilon I.

This term in parentheses is just a function of the

observables.

Okay.

So I've got here minus epsilon I multiplied by lambda.

Just you see why I'm doing this in a second.

So if I define lambda as this function here which

is equal to this term here which is just an

observable thing, okay.

Which by the way later on I will use noting

that the exponent of this lambda is just going to

be this bit without the log in the front, it's

just going to be the bit in parentheses one plus

this.

You see why I've defined it as the log in

front.

Sorry.

Let me go back.

Sorry.

I'm going to define this term here as, um, the

exponent of, um, the exponent of lambda, which means that

I need lambda to be the log of this term.

That was a mistake.

Then the probability that I prefer option I.

This is the expression that I had on the previous

slide.

But I've substituted in this lambda I here okay.

What you'll note that I can do now is write

this expression as it's just I'm just rewriting this probability,

um, as um, the sum here of negative epsilon I

minus lambda.

I'm taking out this, uh, combining these exponential terms there.

And now I notice that, um, you know, I've still

got these epsilon i's floating around.

And that's, uh, not very satisfying to me.

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to

do a change of variables, and I'm going to let

eta I equal epsilon I minus lambda I or equivalently

epsilon I equals eta I plus lambda I.

Then I can rewrite this probability as I can see

how I'm going to do it.

Take this lambda over here.

Then I'm left with epsilon to the minus.

Um eta I multiplied by e to the minus the

exponent of the minus exponent of e I over all

values of eta I over the whole range of eta

I.

Now I have a term that is basically a PDF.

It's the PDF of this.

This type one extreme value distribution integrated out over the

whole range.

Here it's here.

It's not integrated at a whole range because I've got

these different terms going around.

I've got both an Epsilon and a bit here because

of the change of variables.

I've got an expression where I've now got an integral

over the whole whole, uh, distribution, which is equal to

one.

So I've been able now I can write the probability

that I is the preferred option as the exponent of

minus lambda I.

Now in that.

In that.

Lambda I, I've got uh, only observables left.

I've got rid of all of these epsilon terms that

are on observables.

Okay.

So the critical thing is this change of variables.

It's allowed me to integrate out all of the randomness

and leave me an expression for my probability.

That's just in terms of observables okay.

So that's the the magic bit of this thing.

So let's just revisit I mean it's just math basically.

But I, I always have to I get a little

bit confused with the what's in the exponent, what's not

in the exponent.

But following through the rules.

What we've been able to do is by introducing a

new term, um, that is just a function of the

observables doing a change of variables to write the epsilon

term separated out into something that's observed and something's not

observed, integrating out of the whole, uh, over that, uh,

new variable that we've defined gives us this probability just

in terms of the observables.

So that is what we wanted to do.

Okay.

So intuition.

We don't know what these random draws are across all

of these people.

But on average they're going to be mean zero.

That's that's essentially what this whole process has done.

So on average, if we've got lots of people making

these different draws, on average, the expected choice is going

to be governed by these observables.

You know we've got enough people, some getting positive draws

of epsilon.

So I'm getting negative draws of epsilon for all of

these different alternatives.

We're kind of averaging which we say well in expectation

there means zero.

Let's wait it out by all of the possible, um,

draws that we could get at mean zero, which gives

us a probability just in terms of okay, keep on

saying that.

But that's that's the key trick in any multinomial logit

model.

Okay.

a couple of comments on just things to have in

mind when you're doing this kind of estimation.

What a consequence of this fact that everything is kind

of, um, related to shares in expectation is that, um,

and that we've got these kind of independence things going

on.

Is that for any comparison of two goods?

Um, uh, they it's kind of suffers from the when

we're comparing these sort of utility or the payoff of

what the expected share of two goods they suffer from

what is known as the independence of irrelevant alternatives, property

or idea.

And this is all coming from the independence assumption and

this sort of, um, normalisation.

But we can see from the formula that here the

probability of any one thing is in the numerator.

We've got the observables of that chosen option.

And in the denominator we've got a term which is

summed up over all of the different options.

So if we wanted to compare pi to PJ those

denominators would be the same and they would drop out.

And so the um sort of the likelihood the, the

ratio, the sort of um, uh, the ratio of the

choice probabilities pi over PJ is, is just, you know,

epsilon minus, sorry, the exponent of minus VI divided by

the exponent of minus v j because that denominator here

cancels and it's the same set that.

Yeah.

And we're left with an expression for the logs for

the choice ratio which is just the exponent of the

difference in these mean values.

And that's really quite restrictive because it means that, um,

you know, if we if we're going to on the

next slide, we'll derive things like own price elasticities, cross

price elasticities.

If the price of any one good goes up, then

the cross price elasticities mean that the consumers will leave

the good whose price has gone up, and then we'll

redistribute to other goods only related to the market share

of those other goods.

Okay, so if there's another good that has a really

large market share, then the majority of consumers are going

to leave the good whose price has gone up and

shift in exact proportion to that.

Uh, other good.

Now that's fine.

If we think that those goods are kind of good

substitutes for or equally good substitutes for each other, but

often in many scenarios, they won't be.

We won't have this nice independence.

Okay, so this is this is an upsetting property of

of logit models.

And it's always a criticism that you will hear.

And it comes from the assumption of independence in the

draws.

But you can see, as I have already said, you

can see the impact of the IEA.

So so let's say we used so what you would

do in the data is right.

You would have um, uh, basically a theoretical prediction for

the market share of good AI that's coming from the

observables of good, ie relative to the observables of all

other goods in the market.

Now, we could also express this as sort of log

log odds, by the way.

So if I looked at these, the choice probabilities and

took the logs of this, it's going to be this

linear function, which is the difference between VI and BJ

taking both sides.

So there's a really nice, uh, close relationship between log

log odds ratio, which is the log of choice market

share of choice probabilities and the observables.

And this moves us from a, a kind of range

of probabilities between 0 and 1 to basically a linear

a linear function.

So that's good for um estimation.

Um, so as I say that's that's very nice.

But this functional form here also gives us this slightly

restricted property.

If I were to find the this is not a

prize.

This is um, a probability which I relate to my

market shares in the data.

Therefore it's kind of like a quantity.

So if I wanted to see how the sort of

own price elasticity, how this quantity responded to a change

in the value of worn goods.

So let me look at the derivative of pi with

respect to VI.

Well, I'd have to use the quotient rule here to

take that derivative.

What that derivative would actually be if I called, for

example, f of VI equal to the exponent of negative

VI and g of VI equalled this one plus the

sum here.

And then I did, you know, g times the derivative

of f plus f times the derivative of g divided

by this uh g squared.

It would simplify because we've got so many exponents in

there, such that the own price elasticity is going to

be just a function of the market share, or just

a function of the price.

And the cross price elasticity is just going to be

the product of the two market shares, which is also

somewhat, um, uh, unsatisfying.

It's just a lot of hanging on the on the

market shares.

That's kind of a a problem with um, uh, multinomial

logit.

Okay.

Why don't we take a ten minute break and then

we're going to come to BLP, who tries to improve

on these air properties.

We're just going to do that briefly, and we're just

going to do it because, um, it's kind of, I

think received wisdom that, you know, it's good to see

at least once, at least once.

For those of you who are doing I've done it

and I and then we're going to go on to

see how these multinomial choice probabilities appear in Caliendo Dvorkin.

And that will be the end of it.

Yes.

Question.

How often is the story used today?

Uh, yeah, a lot, yeah, a lot.

I mean, for example, the model today in our seminar

had one uh, I it didn't actually say it is,

but I'm pretty sure it was there because, um, uh,

you know, because they had the choice of which location

I should check.

I've actually read the paper, but the the choice of

which location to go to, um, is going to be

a function.

The a function of the observables.

Um.

Uh.

Let's call the observables at the city level, things like

the I think he had amenities.

He had um, uh, real wage differences across cities and

some unobservable individual preference for that particular location.

And that would have that the distribution of that idiosyncratic

preference for that location would have been a logit draw.

I will again check that.

So that's two things I have to check.

All right.

Uh, estimation in EC and um, logit in today's seminar.

Uh.

It's much more acceptable in trade than in AI.

Oh, by the way.

Uh, because, you know, it will be one ingredient in

a massive general equilibrium trade model.

But trade people are always vulnerable to I o people

in the audience saying, oh, you know, these location choices

are going to be correlated, for instance.

And at some point you would have assumed that they're

not correlated, which would have enabled him to write down

the choice probabilities and match them to the observed population

shares in different markets.

All right.

Let's have a ten minute break and let's regroup at

five.

Sorry.

1550 which is 10 to 4 okay.

All right.

We've broken the back of this lecture.

The next part is not as, uh, daunting.

Okay.

Sorry.

Just understand if.

Your microphone did demands using a six utility function, you'd

have exactly the same implications in terms of substitution on

price and cross price.

Substitution.

C s.

What would the.

Market shares.

Be?

I don't think so.

I think the market share has just come from the

relative price differences.

So there is going to I mean maybe yeah maybe

if these these were if this is the price index

and this is the price of the index.

Yeah I think it will look something similar.

Yeah.

Okay.

So then if I'm thinking about using the C s.

Right okay.

So what.

So b so this is actually a good jumping off

point for what.

So B who would not be happy with the not

be happy because of this these uh market uh.

There are.

Restrictions on how you substitute the tubers, which would also

be the seeds.

Yeah.

Thank you.

Okay, let's move on quickly from this.

Have you going?

I'm going to go and get a cup of.

Tea, and.

I'll be, uh, sure that that.

Is.

Still useful.

That's.

Okay.

Okay.

Here we go, sir.

Come.

On.

What?

Are you.

What do you mean?

I don't know.

You know we don't want the whole UK.

Okay?

Actually, you've.

Got.

To be.

On the lookout for Jones.

Explore the potential for.

How you can change the channel.

Not the most important.

Especially if you.

Have channel tunnel that is football.

The most important.

Thing is often.

The hope that.

I see that possible.

Do you think you want to.

Do that?

Well.

I think we will do it.

Do you still do it?

The whole part and the whole.

Why are you 45% sure?

What do.

You.

Thank you so.

Much.

So I just wanted to get your vision on that.

I mean, I was.

I.

Was.

Totally.

Free.

To write this little black label.

I mean, this.

Is different from the.

Competition.

So much power so far.

This.

Year.

Nope.

Nope.

Nope.

Nope.

Nope.

So here.

We go.

Jupyter notebook.

Jupyter notebook.

Do you want.

To do what?

You want.

Them to.

Do.

This.

Oh.

No.

What are you talking about?

Do you see it?

See what you want to.

See?

I can't.

Waste.

The memory.

She.

Forgets to answer the talking.

It seems that you.

Should drop.

By to get your hands.

On the whole.

What is.

Wrong with.

Me?

I.

Was not.

Surprised?

Yes.

Oh, the previous one.

Um.

Maybe not.

Yes.

I wouldn't be surprised if there's just want.

Oh, right.

Sorry.

Yeah.

Sorry.

This is.

We've got all the choices here.

You're right.

I think we need to.

But, uh, because, uh, you have I does not.

Yes yes yes yes yes.

Thank you.

Okay I think.

So.

Okay.

Okay.

Thank you.

So much.

For your.

Call.

All right.

I want to get started again so that we get

to the actual big trade workforce.

Okay.

So I'm just going to talk briefly about BLP because,

um, uh, so the problem with the multinomial load, as

we just mentioned, is the I the independence of a

relative of irrelevant alternatives is a very unsatisfactory property of

it in certain applications, not generally in trade application, which

is bigger than some businesses.

I mean, it's still not ideal, but in a, in

a, in a IO application where you're trying to estimate

demand and we we don't really think that these errors

are going to be independently drawn, that we we're going

to think that certain people are going to like a

collection of varieties versus all others differently.

So the BNP explicitly sets out to try and do

better than the multinomial logit Specification and their application is

estimating demand for cars.

From information about which car, uh, model of which car

each individual household buys, if any, which aggregates up to

the market share of different cars that are bought.

And the data that they have is the share of

different cars that are bought in any one year.

And they also have data on the distribution of various

demographic characteristics amongst the population of potential buyers and potential

buyers.

So in their model, they have a the objective function

is the utility of a particular consumer, and it's the

utility that a consumer gets from a car, and it's

a vector of individual characteristics, which is depending on the

characteristics of each car, some unobserved shock epsilon.

Also, you know the individual characteristics of the person, like

that age, uh uh, family size, income, that sort of

thing.

And the observed and unobserved product characteristics of each X

and its things like miles per gallon.

Uh, what else?

What?

The price of the car, of course.

Let's just call it price and miles per gallon.

And also some unobserved attributes of the car, uh, and

the price.

So if we just had if we just went from

the very simple choice model that we had in the

previous few slides, and we wrote down the utility that

a household I has for product J, we could let

it be a function of the characteristics of that product

J.

So the miles per gallon that a car has some

average preference for that beta minus some value of the

price that you have to pay.

Plus some unobserved product specific term that everybody gets some

utility boost, like a demand shock for that particular product,

plus some idiosyncratic error draw epsilon.

Let's say we did that.

That was our model.

Then the mean utility for a particular model J would

be x j beta minus alpha PJ.

Plus I think it's a c.

This Greek letter c sub j.

And if we're willing to assume that the epsilon ij

was i.i.d. type one extreme value distributed, then the um,

uh, we would get a prediction for the market share

in the overall population of people.

The market share of product J could be written as

in closed form as the choice probability that we had

a couple of slides ago, the exponent of minus this

mean bit divided by the sum over all of the,

um, uh, uh, exponents of the, uh, mean valuation.

But it would have the unappealing substitution properties that came

with that.

So BLP says we want to make we want to

move away from those, um, uninteresting substitution properties.

And let's put another term or another set of terms

in the utility function.

And yet let the utility that household I gets from

product J also depend on characteristics of household I.

Okay.

And the interactions between those household characteristics and the characteristics

of the product.

Okay.

And we're going to have another set of coefficients these

sigmas that tell me about that overall of the k

Characteristics.

Or.

The kind of the household or the, um, uh, sorry,

K is the product characteristics.

So this is going to be some sort of random,

uh, a variable that tells me, um, how much variation

there is in preference for characteristic j based on the

distribution of, uh, different households in the population.

Now, the thing is that, um, what this introduction is

going to let us do is allow for sort of

correlated preferences, um, over different characteristics.

So a household will be able to, for example, have

a preference for, uh, cars with a certain miles per

gallon rating relative to other cars.

That's not just reflected in the market share if they

share characteristics, the product share characteristics.

We're going to see cross price elasticities that reflect those

shared characteristics.

So substitution patterns that are more realistic let's say capturing

something more fundamental about demand.

And once we've included this term here, we're going to

be left with a sort of smaller unobservable less.

We're going to be asking the unobservable to explain less

of the overall, um, data.

And we're going to then just assume this bit is,

um, uh, extreme value type one distributed.

So we're kind of taking some of the, uh, the

residual out and explicitly modelling it and allowing it to

be interactions between household and product characteristics.

Now, if we do that and then we're going to

depend on what we're going to do, we're going to

let these household characteristics also be random draws I think.

And then we're going to match it to the actual

distribution of demographics in the population.

So the so then we'll have going to be that

the contribution of x k units of the kth product

characteristic to the utility of individual EI is going to

be not just that beta parameter that we had before,

but also this extra term which reflects um, consumer level

variation.

And then we're going to use this ETA term here

to scale that, uh, additional variations such that the mean

and variance of the marginal utilities associated with these um,

characteristics is going to have a mean of some kind

of beta bar and some standard deviation scale, the scale,

the importance of that household level characteristic.

And then so that means that the utility that each

person I gets from consuming good J can be decomposed

into a bit that shared with all other consumers the

sort of mean valuation for that product.

And then this idiosyncratic bit, which is this interaction term,

plus the uh, type one error and this mean thing

is going to be the mean valuation minus the price

plus the common, uh, shock for that brand that's experienced

by everybody.

Okay.

So we've got a slight more generality in this model.

We're going to let these new depend on the interaction

between consumer preferences and product characteristics.

I've already said this.

Consumers with a preference for large cars will attach high

utility to all large cars.

More realistic substitution patterns.

They're going to be more likely to switch to another

large car if the price of any one large car

goes up.

But with all of this extension, we no longer have

these.

um, uh, market shares is the choice probabilities because we've

got these, uh, interaction terms in them.

So BLP solves this via a, um, a sort of

computational problem, uh, problem player, uh, simulation.

And what it enables them to get is very nice

estimates of these betas.

So what they do, uh, and, uh, this is kind

of like a what we just had on the slides

is a simple random coefficient specification.

Rather than having those news just be random draws, they

relate them to the distribution of relevant consumer characteristics in

the population, such as we're going to let older households

like larger cars.

We're going to let wealthier households like higher MPG cars

and then specify the functional form of that interaction.

So the whole thing about this BLP is it moves

away from the independence of irrelevant alternatives to allow for

these extra interactions between household characteristics and product characteristics, and

then the rest of the model nests this demand into

this sort of, um, utility function that includes other goods

that the consumers can spend their money on and then

relate it to sort of income distribution as well.

And it gives them very precise estimates.

So the the claim to fame of this paper is

that you really they really get good cross price elasticities

for these particular demand.

So you know any what data do you need.

You need data on market shares.

Ideally you need data on prices that can be tricky

for this particular uh estimation approach.

And uh, you might need something about demographics of the

overall population.

Um, but with that data, you can do this and

you need an instrument for price.

But with that kind of data, you can, um, do

this sort of demand estimation.

Uh, what instruments for price do people use?

People use cost shifters.

So anything that is shifting price around that's exogenous to

any of these demand shocks, both the interactions and the

idiosyncratic terms.

So something like um, uh, cost shocks and other price

shocks and other markets, exchange rate shocks, um, shocks to

the price of inputs like utilities.

Something like that would be a common instrumentation strategy.

But there's various approaches in the literature.

Um, and so, you know, many I, um, used estimated

a vlp model in this particular paper, which was a

specific setting where it was kind of an international setting.

wanted demand wanted to let demand for a household product

vary across countries in a way that was more realistic

than a C in a CSS model.

So I estimated demand separately for each country, and out

of five, I think five European countries based on so

specifically about how consumer products firms are organised, so used

laundry detergents and looked at how demand varied across countries

and use those that variation across demand across countries to

um, study how multinational firms organised themselves internally to produce

from one central location in seven different, uh, markets.

But in that model, I had a utility function where

the utility household I product J and Jay was a

particular brand pack size and format of laundry detergent.

So like Ariel Liquid Giant Pack in a particular week

in a particular country was a function of these product

characteristics, uh, brand and format, let's say pack size and

price, some product level shock governed by a set of

market of country market specific parameters, and then the random

coefficients part where I allowed preferences for pack size and

price to differ with the differ by country, differ with

demographics by country, differently across countries.

And there was also a logit error in there which

I used to write down the choice probabilities.

Um, turned out that demand varied by country, and that

was a bit challenging when you had.

You wanted to centralise production because there were economies of

scale in production, but you had to choose packs and

brands and formats that catered to the demand in each

country.

And what kind of compromise organisation did you have to

make to choose between tailoring demand to local conditions versus

taking advantage of economies of scale?

That was this paper.

Uh, I'm currently working on another paper, so I'm just

going to do this quickly to talk about the papers

that I know the best.

This is another paper where, um, uh, it's an international

question as well.

It's about the gig economy, and it's about choosing a

worker.

It's about an employer choosing whom to hire across different

countries, um, and working on this at this very moment.

So in the under revision, uh, where we have the

agent making the discrete choice is the employer there, choosing

which job applicant to hire.

And those applicants come from different countries, and they choose

the applicant.

That gives them sort of the best value per money

for the hour, so gives them the best expected, um,

labour, which is going to be a function of that

worker's characteristics.

And there's going to be a logic shock in there

as well.

And there's going to be an hourly wage that you

have to pay for workers with different characteristics.

Now, um, here we don't do anything like a BLP

model, but we break independence of irrelevant alternatives by allowing

um.

Uh, worker, uh, employer type to, um, affect propensity to

switch to the outside option.

So we've got another parameter in the employer's pay off,

which takes on a positive value.

If they hire on the everybody, they hire on the

platform and takes on the value of zero.

Or sorry that if they hire a worker at all

and is equal to zero, if they don't hire any

worker in that period.

And so this shifts around the average value for hiring

a worker versus not hiring a worker.

And we estimate that in the model and have some

sort of employer heterogeneity.

That is kind of the average taste for hiring workers.

So that's a discrete choice framework that we use to

estimate essentially demand for hiring an international worker.

Um, from and once we've got demand, we can estimate

the kind of mark-ups associated with hiring an international worker

and how the surplus that's in, in this price, how

much surplus, how it's dividing the surplus of the difference

between the willingness to pay um, less, the workers marginal

costs, how that wage is dividing the surplus, and who's

getting each, uh, surplus.

So, uh, that's that paper, uh, available as A and

B or working paper, I think.

Okay.

But anyway, an example of a discrete choice model.

It's kind of like BLP, but it's not we don't

have interactions explicitly with employer characteristics and the worker characteristics.

We have a just a shifter for the employer characteristics

in that.

Okay.

I won't talk through that because I want to get

to dynamic discrete choice.

Um all right.

Okay.

So that is all I wanted to say about product

estimation.

Okay.

So if you ever see a model with type one

extreme value.

There's going to be a logit in there somewhere.

We always have to ask how valid is are the

restrictions of the logit model?

Do we believe that AI is relevant in over the

area that you've defined it?

If we've really done everything we can to take out

any source of correlation in the draws into the utility

function, such with the random coefficients model in vlp or

some other way to break idea.

Um, then we might be willing to buy the logit

assumption on the kind of residual idiosyncratic error that's there

and that.

But you always have to, I think, justify that, uh,

independence assumption.

And, um, by the way, another way that you might

see that breaks that independence, uh, requirement is a nested

logit.

I meant to mention that.

Okay, you could have a nest, which is, you know,

which is what we do in is often in a

serious demand function where we're going to allow for one

elasticity of substitution between top levels of the nest.

But then within each nest, we're going to allow for

another substitution parameter between the varieties.

And that kind of nested logit also breaks it to

some extent in that, you know, the elasticity of substitution

between products across nests is going to be different from

the elasticity of substitution within nest.

So it just gives a little bit more richness to

the substitution points.

All right.

Now dynamic discrete choice.

I've got ten slides and we've got 45 minutes.

No problem.

We're going to maybe even finish early okay.

All right.

So uh now this is really, um, uh, a language.

It's useful to work through these models in detail at

least once, because you will see them a lot.

I mean, we do see them a lot.

And a good.

And the reason why, you know, we enjoy teaching.

Caliendo well, one reason Caliendo uh, Dvorkin and Perot is

because all the code is available.

So it's a good it's a good, uh, resource.

That's I mean, often the code is available.

This is anyway, this has become widely used.

Okay, so, uh, an increasing number of international papers, including

spatial it all spatial models really are going to have

some element of, uh, discrete choice in them of the

type that we in a static setting, we might have

the kind of, um, logit model that we just described.

We might take it up a notch by also having

that static, that contemporaneous choice about where to locate in

any particular period also depend on the continuation value of

being in that period.

That continuation value is summarising.

Um, once I'm in a particular space, all of my

options in the future from that state.

So where I am in any period is a kind

of a state variable.

That's going to depend where I, uh, how costly is

for me to move in the future?

So that's what makes it dynamic in every decision I'm

considering today and the in my future.

Um.

Okay.

And, uh, if we're trying to, um.

Um, use a set of data, for example, Migration data,

that is the transition from one state to another.

And we actually, of course, think that the decision to

move today is not just is it worth my while

to move, basically comparing what I'm going to, what's going

to happen tomorrow.

But that variable becomes my state variable.

And so the future is relevant when I'm thinking about

where to move from today to, to tomorrow.

Um, okay.

Now within that and in fact within the contemporaneous payoff

and also within the future value, there's just a lot

of, um, figuring out what my payoff will be in

any location at that time relative to all the other

places I could be at that time.

I'm going to do that for today, for now and

the future.

And then I'm going to pick the choice today that

gives me the maximum expected present discounted value today.

So what I need from my model to to do

is at some stage in the model, it's got to

allow me to write down what the expected, you know,

what the present discounted value is of being in every

single possible state that I could be in today.

Okay.

And if I'm going to try and estimate this model

based on not population shares today, but movements between places,

uh, I also want to, um, uh, use my model

sort of today versus tomorrow to kind of come up

with theoretical predictions for those transitions.

And that's what I'll match to the data.

So that's what we what we'll see a lot.

So I want to see how I go back.

Um.

All right.

So the kind when we're thinking about migration, we might

try.

And instead of using data on the levels of market

shares, we might is essentially using data on the change

in market shares, which is essentially migration flows.

Like how if we think of market shares as being

population shares, how many people live in each location at

each point in time, then the change in that distribution

of people across location is given in the migration, the

change in the flows.

How many people are moving from one location to another?

Uh, because the migration from I to J is the

sheriff people currently in I who think that moving between

I and in move to put themselves in j tomorrow

is going to be the future payoff.

Okay.

So that's sort of the what we're going is kind

of the difference data.

The changes in the data.

Okay.

So to build up to the model there I'm going

to introduce another widely available code teaching resource, which I

think if you're going to start writing down and building

a dynamic discrete choice model, this is a really good

place to start.

It's, um, uh, Abraham Klein, I've got the link at

the end of these lecture notes, and they estimate the

simplest dynamic, discrete choice model you could have.

And it's coming from an absolute canonical paper in this

literature by John Rust, which is about a, um, a

bus, a bus company choosing when to replace their engines.

But it's a really they can choose to replace them

now or replace them in the future with the buses.

Okay.

But they apply it to a more general setting, which

is an entry game which is of a firm choosing

whether to enter a market in a particular period or,

sorry, serve a market in a particular period or not.

Okay.

Now, if they move from not serving it to serving

it, that's entry.

If they move from serving it to not serving, that's

exit.

It's kind of like a change in the state going

on, but it's also a discrete choice.

I make it every period.

Do I am I active in this market or not?

And they let the payoffs depend on, uh, some state

variables, a state of being active or not ex, as

well as some unobserved draws.

And those unobserved draws are going to be epsilon in

each period t associated with not being active zero and

an epsilon draw that's associated with being active one.

Okay.

So in this kind of dynamic discrete choice settings, we've

got drawers for each choice and also each period.

And usually we assume that they're drawers from the same

kind of distribution.

Um, but uh what makes it dynamic is that the

firm's choice in the previous period, um, is going to

affect their choice today like a state variable that they

bring into today because they're a sunk costs of entry

and exit.

Um, and they assume that all firms are inactive to

start with.

So the state of the initial conditions where everyone's status

is just going to be zero.

By the way, this reminds me of an unanswered question

from last week.

Uh, olive pickers, what do they assume about the salvage

value?

And is the salvage value going to be varying with

capital?

Was that was that your question because.

Of.

Firms differ in size because the firms differing in size

is a very in terms of capital stock is a

very important part of this of all the speakers, because

it gives it's what gives rise to the selection bias

that given a productivity draw, that's the same productivity draw.

Firms of different capital stocks are more or less likely

to exit.

So that's the selection bias that they focus on.

But it seems very natural to say of course, the

salvage value also depends on how much capital they've got.

The more capital they have, surely the more attractive exit

is because they can realise more cash from selling this

salvage value that is assumed away in the paper.

So it turns out that that salvage value is assumed

constant.

I didn't see any discussion of that assumption.

It's just mentioned.

But so if that bias exists, it's in it's in

their parameters somewhere.

But they didn't they didn't explicitly model it or now.

Okay, so this is the sort of setup of this

simple dynamic discrete choice model.

So we are going to say that each potential and

each firm, we fixed the number of potential firms, firms

and potential firms to start with.

We're going to have an objective function.

And our objective function is going to depend on us

that what we were doing last period, and our objective

function is going to depend on the, um, the value

of being present in this period, what we were doing

last period.

So our kind of state variable and some random draw

of, uh, being inactive, this is the payoff from being

inactive, okay.

And that's what the function is going to be.

And then the payoffs from actually being active, this x

is now going to enter.

There also a payoff of the payoffs being function of

the payoffs being active.

And what we were doing last period a different draw.

And we're going to allow this to be a linear

function.

If I'm being active beta zero plus beta one, sometimes

specific draw a random idiosyncratic, uh, time specific specific draw.

And then we're going to let this you're either active

in previous period or not.

And if you're changing you have to pay some kind

of transition costs.

Delta zero and delta one.

So delta zero and delta one are exit.

And entry costs at the firm only pays if it

changes states.

So gross of these costs.

And active firm is making profits from being active uh

including its shock.

And an inactive firm just has some random shock.

And then if you're actually changing states, you may incur

one of these entry or exit costs.

So yeah, this is what happens if in the last

period you were active, you have to pay an exit

cost within the last.

And that's where you're active and now you're not active.

You have to pay an exit cost.

If in the last period you were not active and

you become active, then you have to pay entry cost.

Okay.

And the name of the game in this paper is

to estimate beta in this exercise beta zero, beta one,

the delta zero and delta one and somehow get some

sense about the value of entry.

Okay.

Um, they're going to make some assumptions.

And these will be assumptions that we have to make

in a more complicated setting.

The state variable has some finite support.

So there's going to be some value from being active

each period from its initial value.

This uh, value of being active is going to follow

a first order Markov chain with some probability, uh, of

transition.

And that payoff is going to be evolving independent of

the firm's choices.

The profit shocks, the epsilons are also independent of the

firm's choices, and they are going to be, um, distributed

type one extreme value.

Um, and uh, they're going to basically what the values

of those draws are going to affect the choices, and

they're going to affect them dynamically because it's going to

affect, you know, how your state going into the next

period.

Um, and, uh, so as far as the firm is

concerned, the x t and the epsilon draws are exogenous,

but, uh, they're um, uh, evolving, uh, through the, the

state.

And the firm's only choice variable is whether to be

in or out.

Okay.

Um, and we're going to assume they have rational expectations

about future states, and it's going to choose the action

in each period that maximises its expected flow of profits,

discount this discounted flow of future profits.

Okay, so this setup allows them to write down both

the flow payoffs, what they get each period.

And also this sort of Bellman equation which is summarising

the continuation value, which is the maximum over the uh

in each state, choosing the maximum in that period.

They code up this simple model in this code that's

publicly available.

Um, and, uh, you know, we can compute the mean

payoff over all of the expected epsilon draws, uh, for

each profit and pass pair of possible states that they

could have been in the Bellman equation is the contraction

mapping.

Um, uh, that's going to give the expected discounted profits

in expectation net of these epsilon draws.

Um, and it's kind of all following this dynamic specification

depends on the transition matrix.

Also depends on the discount factor which is another thing

that we're going to enter an estimate.

So we end up with the code for simulating the

data estimation of the model.

And then it's going to just spit out estimates of

the parameters of interest.

So if you're looking for a very straightforward way to,

uh, a sort of starting point, to have a, a

dynamic problem that has this Bellman equation solution, this is

a nice one to, uh, start with.

Put the link at the end, and I'm going to

refer to certain elements of this when talking about the

sort of key parts of the location decision in Caliendo

and talking okay.

So context reminder.

So let's do here what we did with the eating

quarter model before.

I know you've seen this paper.

You discussed it in lecture four.

I spoke to Thomas about it and he said he

went through it quite quickly.

Um.

Uh, so let me give you a brief recap of

what the research question of this paper is.

It's it's wanting to, um, uh, quantify in a really

comprehensive way the impact of import competition from China since

China's accession to the WTO in 2001 on US households.

Okay.

Now, the model of US households, um, is part of

a broader model where we've got, uh, trade and intermediate

goods.

Why do we need that?

Because we're importing the intermediate goods from China as well,

and also trading in them.

Uh, firms are in a particular sector and location, and

households who are providing labour to those firms are also

choosing which sector and which location to be in And

the.

That means that people are making migration decisions on two

dimensions sector and place.

Um, and each of those decisions has frictions.

Okay.

So an important part of this model is what role

do the frictions play in impacting the welfare of households

to the Chinese shock.

So if everyone could move in a costless way to

a different sector, once a given sector started facing import

competition from China, then the welfare effects would be much

less negative.

So there's some.

So there's already the good price effects.

But this is the employment effects on the real wage

that might be negative.

Oh okay.

So what we've got on the firm side is I

think it's kind of eaten cotton.

So we've got firms are drawing their productivity from a

fresh distribution Which is going to allow us, following the

logic that we had at the beginning of the lecture,

to write the share.

And by the way, different places in, in the US

at different, um, markets, so different.

They played the role here of different countries in the

eastern quarter model.

And we've also got imports as well, also playing the

role of a different, uh, source market.

So we're going to be able to write the share

of total expenditure in market NJ on goods j from

market I.

Okay.

Um, and then on the labour supply side, we've got

households who are the consumers also supplying a unit of

labour and elastically choosing where to live and work.

Uh, they, how do they make these decisions.

Well they've got transport costs going on, relocation costs.

They've also got real wage differences across sectors and locations.

And uh, they also are going to have syncretic preferences

for each location sector, and that idiosyncratic preference is going

to be an ID draw from a type one extreme

value distribution.

Okay, so if there were no friction, sorry.

So that if there are no frictions in these relocation

costs and there were no idiosyncratic preferences, then, um, everybody

would move to where the real wage is higher.

Okay.

So the relocation costs are definite frictions, but in a

way, the idiosyncratic preferences are also acting as, um, drags

on adjustment, let's say, by the way, that is also

the same mechanism that we see in models of monopsony

power, imperfect labour markets these days.

This is a total aside, but we see a, um,

also a discrete choice framework, they're often where the mark

down that a firm can offer to a worker, which

is pay them a wage below their marginal product.

They're able to do that if those workers have some

sort of idiosyncratic preference for that particular company, which gives

the company some kind of market power over them.

There's also a discrete choice set up in there, which

is often a loaded set up as well.

So that's another setting where you will see these kind

of models quite often these days.

But that's separate.

That's not that's not in this this model here.

We've got a preference for a location, not a particular

firm.

Okay.

Uh, ah.

And the estimation.

So I mentioned that this already touched on it briefly.

We have dynamic hat algebra, um, to, uh, solve this

model.

Now, what is dynamic hat algebra?

Okay.

Now let me say this very carefully okay.

so all of our discrete choice framework, taking into account

the current value of discounted future profits, tells us in

every time, uh, and every current state that the person

is in current location and sector, that the person is

in, what their payoff would be if they if they

happen to be in any particular state, like what they

get from staying put and what they get from moving.

Okay, that's what the model will deliver in these choice

frameworks.

Okay.

So for example, a variable that you might get is

the share of the population that is in location you

know, industry.

J insect in location n okay.

As a function of where they were to start, you

know, where they were in the previous period, frictions and

then some preference normalisation.

Okay.

If we were to, uh, what do we need to

do if we were to differentiate in the model that

variable with respect to time?

Okay.

And uh, take logs of it, we would have an

expression for the change in those payoffs, which we could

map to the migration shares.

So dynamic algebra is kind of constructing the log of

the change of the variable in the as predicted by

the model, and then matching it to the empirical data

on the changes in the shares that we see in

my coming from migration flows.

Okay.

So migration flows will tell us the number of people

that are moving from one particular sector location to another

particular sector location.

And, um.

That that migration flow is an expression of the change

in the share of we sort of put it all

over the denominator of the total people.

I think that's right.

Okay.

So when you see dynamic algebra, that is all that

we're going to get from our model.

Changes in the changes over time in the logs of

key variables.

Sorry, the log of the change with time.

What if which.

Way is it.

Yeah.

Differentiate it with respect to time and take logs.

That's what we do.

And matching it to the data.

Uh, no, that's not what we're doing.

We're taking logs of it, and then we're differentiating the

log with respect to time.

Yeah.

Okay.

And that's what we match.

All right.

So but before we do that, what's the underlying structure

of the model that gives us the predicted levels.

That is to say what share of the population will

be in any particular location at a certain time.

So in this model we've got what the objective function.

So that.

So going back to the very first slide, what do

we need in a discrete choice framework.

We need a choice set.

Every single household has to choose something every period.

Now they can stay put in a particular sector in

a particular location.

Or they can move.

They can pay the relocation costs and they can move

to a different location.

But they will be doing something either staying put or

moving to somewhere else.

Okay, that's the discrete choice on the household side.

Um, what are they choosing to Maximise.

They are choosing to maximise the present value of the

payoff today and the future value, which is going to

be the payoff they get from consumption today in location

N in sector J.

So that's consumption today in sector N, location J, which

is going to um, be constrained by what their real

wages given the sector that they're in and the location

that they're in at the time.

Right.

And, uh.

This thing.

Also contains the future.

Okay.

Which is um, out of all of the places they

could go to in the future.

Uh, what the what the value would be of being

in that place in the future, less the transport costs

of moving between different places.

Uh, plus, sorry.

Um, so all of the places they could be in

the future, the transport costs of getting where they are

to where they would realise this kind of value, plus

some idiosyncratic preference for that particular sector, place, location.

So this is like a huge, huge object because we've

got many locations in the in the US, they estimate,

I think I can't remember how many sectors we've got,

but let's say we've got multiple sectors.

So we're actually trying to put some value.

We're going to ask our model to put some value

on this whole, uh, huge matrix of options.

Okay.

Now a really important term in um, this model is

this new term here, which is the migrate is called

they call it the migration elasticity okay.

And it's the normalisation of the logit error here.

So this this is a logic draw, but the magnitude

of this new tells us how much influence that idiosyncratic

logic draw has on their location choices relative to, say,

the relocation costs.

And also so if we see big so what?

And what gives us this elasticity in the data, if

we see massive differences in real wages across locations, okay.

And you know, we know that the transport costs are

some amount being related to distance or whatever, or.

We fix that.

And we seek a lot of people not moving in

response to some kind of constant across people.

Um, uh, uh, transport relocation cost, then this, new town

must be really big because the random shock is keeping

them in their spot rather than letting them, leading them

to move to the place where the value of being

in that place is higher.

Okay, so they introduce it in this model as the

normalisation of the logit shock, which is it's like a

I mean, calling it elasticity.

It's kind of a it's not elastic in the way

that we think of it.

I mean, it does I suppose it does tell us

the responsiveness of the responsiveness to real wage differences.

So how big the real wage differences have to be

in order to induce movement?

We've got a lot of, uh, reluctance to move.

Then it's going to be coming from the fact that

people really love staying put or, you know.

So their counterfactual will be Between 0 and 0.

Right.

So what do they what do they actually do in

the, uh.

I think what they do is they're going to expose

particular regions to import competition, which is going to drive

down the prices, uh, in particular locations, which is going

to drive down the nominal way, uh, drive.

Uh.

The import competition is going to lower the real wages

somehow in a particular location.

And we're going to see that even after those real

wages change because of import competition from China, we're not

seeing sufficient relocation.

And so that is going to be rationalised in their

model.

We're going to see some relocation, but there's going to

be variation.

There's going to be not 100% relocation.

So to the extent that there's not 100% relocation, that's

going to be mean.

These people must have received high draws for staying put.

That's that's what is.

That's the experiment in.

The data in.

This term is for our own sectors is the same

one.

Yep.

All sectors, all time periods, all locations.

It's a it's just a kind of average elasticity that

they, that they estimate.

But it is kind of different.

It's floating around in there.

It's not floating around in um.

Uh, these sort of simpler models that we've, we've had

before.

Okay.

So what does this give us?

Okay.

So, uh, this is a little bit of a, all

of the meat of this derivation is in appendix A1

of this paper.

There's some really big kind of, um, Exercises.

But what I want to point out is that the

complication that's coming from the dynamic bit is in, you

should think of it as kind of separable as the,

um, uh, separable from the, um, usefulness of the logit

shock that's sitting in the utility is what we're what

we're still going to do is integrate out that logit

shock in exactly the same way as we did when

we first introduced these type one errors.

It's just that the utility is going to be, um,

dependent not just on today's payoff, but on the future

payoff.

It's going to have the same change in variables property

that allows us to take out, uh, the mean parts

of utility and express these transition probabilities, express these population

shares as functions of the observables, which is then what

we're going to differentiate logs of and differentiate with respect

to time and match of the data.

Uh, but before we do that, uh, we need to

find this continuation value.

Uh, the continuation value also has, it has this sort

of maximisation discrete choice.

In every period I'll be picking where I, where my

value is maximised.

Now that value is, includes the continuation value.

But it's, uh, going to have one of these idiosyncratic

draws for every place, every sector, every time period, uh,

every household.

And the starting point to note is that this extreme

value, the max over all of these different options, um,

uh, because of the distribution of assumptions on this can

be written as the expected value over all of these

random draws, just in the way that we did when

we were deriving equation one earlier on in this lecture.

So underlying it, we've got sort of, you know, the

expected value of any of being in any particular location

is going to be a I'm sorry, the maximum over

these things is going to be the, um, probability that

any one location sector gives you the highest expected payoff,

which is going to be, um, the probability that any

one particular location sector is the highest weight, uh, weighted

by the PDF of all of the possible draws of

that particular value of the random variables, which we can

express in.

This form.

As over all locations, over all sectors.

Um, the pdf, uh, this is the.

Uh.

What if I got here was this big?

Let's talk about this big.

If I wanted to say here, this follows exactly the

same structure as we had earlier, except that our average

utility has got this much more complicated form.

Oh, yeah.

Take every value.

That we could get at this.

Uh.

Okay, let me recap.

It's got to be bigger than all of the other

possible location choices.

So we've got this product term in because it's a

sort of independently.

It's got to be bigger than all of them.

Then we've got the expected value of that epsilon draw,

which is going to be, you know, the PDF, the

kind of weight for that probability.

And then we've got the actual a payoff from that

conditional on the value of that actual draw.

There's three parts to this expression.

We're going to find, uh, that, uh, all of the

um, this is expected maximum over all of the places

we could be today, over all of the sectors we

could be today.

And this is a massive great big matrix that is

estimated, uh, in there, which, you know, the code will

give you the ability to estimate all of these things

are normalised by the, uh, migration elasticity, because it's telling

us how important this draw is relative to the other

elements of the model, which are sort of more observable.

So what I want to say is it looks incredibly

complicated.

Appendix A1 is very complicated.

We've got a lot of algebra going on, but the

interesting the power that we're getting from the logit error

terms is exactly the same as the structure that we

had earlier.

I'm just going to leave it there.

Okay.

So how do they go about solving that?

Well, because we know the CDF of the type one

extreme value distribution and the PDF, we're going to substitute

for those two terms into the, um, uh, expected utility

of being in any one particular place.

Uh, we've got two change of variables.

One is just a normalisation.

Um, uh, so that the shock is mean zero and

the, uh, new parameter is telling us kind of deviations

from that, uh, mean.

And then we're going to do the same change of

variables that we did before that allow us to write

down this choice, probability just as a function of the

observables, by integrating out everything else that is this, uh,

equivalent of this sort of, um, we called it a

new earlier, but it's this lambda thing.

We, uh, integrate out the random terms, and this gives

us an expression for the, um, expected value of being

in any one location.

And then this gives us this very simple, um, expression

for what this, uh, value is for each location.

Relatively simple.

I mean, this is still the Bellman equation and this

is the transport costs, but it's all, um, parameterised by

the one over this elasticity, which, I mean, it's quite

elegant algebraic.

It kind of shows up now it's kind of looking

like a bit like a returns to scale.

So how big is this random shock that can kind

of, um, uh, you know, for any given random shock,

how much of a role is it playing in determining

the relative payoffs of, of different places?

So I'm already summarising this, but I all I want

to do here, rather than go through the algebra, is

kind of take the key expressions in this model and

show how they are in structure, similar to what we

did in the very simple version.

Okay.

Okay.

All right.

So all of this from this we get, um, the

payoff of being in any particular location which we can

map to the shares of people that are in any

one particular location.

And then we're going to define a new term, which

is eta.

And the fraction eta is the share of workers that

relocate from market NJ to market IK in time t.

And it's equal to the probability that any given worker

in NJ moves, which is the probability that they find

being in um IK more attractive than being in, uh,

market MH and indeed any other market.

Um, sorry.

Any sorry.

They're in the Where are they?

They're in the market.

NJ so if they move, they have to find a

K more attractive than NJ and every other possible place

that they could move to.

So here we have this, uh, extreme value, uh, step.

The derivation, uh, follows exactly the same process as we

had in this lecture, moving from equation one to equation

two.

And we have the migration flow as the probability that

these people want to move from one region to another

over all of the possible, um, uh, choices that they

could make.

Uh, so their equation three has the same structure as

our equation two, which is this sort of, uh, share,

uh, model.

Okay.

Uh, all right.

That's what I wanted to say about this.

So.

Right.

So let me just summarise here.

They're really interested in this migration elasticity, The migration elasticity

nu is the normalisation of the logit shock.

The logit shot works exactly in the same way as

it does in the very simple model.

The whole thing looks much more complicated because of the

dynamics of the problem, but the dynamics of the problem

mean that in the payoff from any discrete choice in

any period contains not just the payoff to day, but

also the future payoff.

And that future payoff is also a maximisation over all

possible choices.

Um, so what I what I hope is that when

you if you come to use this model or try

and understand what's going on in this model, and you

look at some code, you know, you can break it

down into these different component parts, and it doesn't seem

quite so massively overwhelming as it might do when you

first look at appendix A1 of the paper.

Um, the things I'd like to sort of leave you

with overall for any time that you're either consuming a

discrete choice model, or you're thinking about trying to get

some tractability on a problem, using data on discrete choices

that people have made in some data.

Um, there's always this trade off between, uh, wants to

impose some distribution for what?

Those, um, uh, for the unobserved terms that are governing

discrete choices you make.

You're making a trade off between imposing, you know, getting

some tractability because of the nice properties of some of

these distributions versus, um, making some assumptions about what is

left in those error terms and what they actually can

be summarising and what they can be looking like.

And we often jump straight to, oh, and there's a

completely idiosyncratic independent across time people, places, everything kind of

draw, which is, you know, sometimes satisfactory, sometimes not.

But I think you have to be, um, uh, you

know, able to explain why you think that those shocks

can be completely idiosyncratic.

Um, and, uh, you know, the, the distributions that we

see a lot of are really tractable.

That's why we see them a lot.

There's really complicated problems that, you know, get some nice

properties.

Um, the fresh air is really nice in terms of

deriving these, um, import shares, micro foundations of a gravity

equation.

Extreme one, uh, type one extreme value distribution.

Really nice in that with this change of variables technique,

you can get rid of the randomness and write down

the choice probabilities just in terms of the observables.

That's the nice aspect of that.

Um a couple of sources that I thought were really

good at breaking down some of these elements.

I've put it in references at the end of the

slides.

This is a lecture, an IO lecture from a professor

at Johns Hopkins.

Uh, what's exactly going on in the derivation of these,

um, uh, choice probabilities in extreme type one value distributions?

And here's the link to this very simple dynamic discrete

choice code for the entry and exit game.

Just so you've got that in addition to the Caliendo

et al code that is available online.

Uh, all right.

I think I'm going to wrap it up there.

It's a few minutes early, but you know, what the

hell?

We got to the end of it.

It's rigorous.

Uh, I mean, not that rigorous.

It's kind of like how to use these kind of

things.

Next week, Thomas is back.

He is doing his fifth lecture next week.

Um, and then after Thomas, you've got Daniel on spatial

models.

So you will start seeing a lot of papers with

these kind of location decisions in them.

All right.

So I'm going to leave you there.

I hope to continue to see you or see more

of you at trade seminars on Wednesday lunchtimes 1230 till

two.

If you come at 12, there's lunch.

And so I encourage you to come to the workshop

at 11, stay for lunch, stay for the seminar, make

a day of it.

Um, and yeah, best of luck with the rest of

the course.

All right.

So thank you very much.

And yeah, I hope to see you again in the

seminar.

It does make for a long Wednesday, I must say,

especially if you're actually giving the lectures.

But of course, great to have the referee report and,

uh, research proposal.

Right?

Yes.

So.

Yeah, so I think so.

I think Thomas is in charge of kind of coordinating

all of that stuff.

But, uh, yeah, I mean, to the extent that you've

got a paper that is interested in one of these

has got these estimation methods in them.

Yeah.

Please feel free to do that.

Yeah.

All right.

Yeah, definitely.

Um, do you think it's hard.

To keep track to.

This time if you.

Want to introduce dynamic decision making on firms like firms

also.

It's kind of hard to think about some decision making

here.

I feel like like the authors attribute all like responses

to like the shocks to like the.

Okay.

Right.

So in these big trade general equilibrium models, that's true.

So firms will make their location decisions over a period.

There'll be like total mobility of capital.

Everything is now in Iowa.

That is not the case.

So there will be these big entry models that often

have these Markov assumptions that everything relative, everything relevant in

the past is summarised by my state variable today.

And I modelled the entry decision as in that that

very simple game or some version of this.

And I can if they even introduce some kind of

element of um, uh, market power.

So I'm making some expectation about what I think the

level of competition will be like in that market.

So those papers do exist, but that that kind of

framework is less, less present in the, um.

Trade literature.

But it's I mean, it's really important.

I mean, you know, there's no reason to think that

capital is perfectly, you know, especially if it's specific plants.

I think we can we know.

But it's I think it's worth thinking.

Okay.

It's okay.

Yeah.

Oh.

I don't like it.

I.

Don't.

Oh my God.

Lecture 7:

I haven't heard that way, man.

No.

Not yet.

And then you're finished with this?

Yeah.

So?

I can give her a taste.

For what?

Taste and IP of coffee taste.

I don't know what you want.

What you think I like?

You like coffee and, uh.

And and would you drink the same coffee at 6

p.m.?

It doesn't, it doesn't it doesn't it doesn't it.

Doesn't it doesn't go back.

It doesn't go back over the span of 12 hours,

like less than two hours every day.

It doesn't know why.

I don't know.

Would you be.

Would you rather be Always swallowing.

So.

Why are we back on this barrier?

Like harassment?

Like.

No.

It looks.

Like.

It was started by me.

Everybody at the table was thinking.

Don't fucking put it on a woman.

You.

Think her baby is a perv?

And I know it's morning.

I know she was on the clock.

I don't know.

What your legacy behind.

You.

What?

Do you want to say?

The last.

Names and shorten the first.

Time.

I did.

When did your parents pick it through?

When they were naming.

Names.

You're never going to charge them the first name.

You know, there are people who like.

Making themselves better.

Mhm.

Mhm.

Henry could do it.

You look excited.

I'm such good.

hard.

I know, I know, I know.

Okay.

Where is it?

Yeah.

It's up to us.

Yeah.

It's not the worst today.

Where is it?

You had some.

Setbacks.

No.

It's not.

I fully intended.

To say this.

Because.

I stand by what I.

Oh, no no no no no.

That's fine.

No, there is no way.

Never mind that.

It's okay.

Hello, everyone.

I'm doing well.

And I'm ready to give some great presentations.

Um.

So.

Should we start?

Let's set up a running order so we know which

order everyone, people are going to go in.

I am indifferent as to what order the different groups

go in.

Would anyone like to volunteer their group to go first?

Yes.

Okay.

This is the first hand raised.

So first.

Second.

Okay.

First.

Second.

Are you the same group?

You're the same group.

Who wants to go third?

Okay.

Third.

And then the remaining groups last.

So first, second, third, last.

Um, age group has 40 minutes.

I will hold you that, um, if you watch student

presentations in workshops, the inability to keep to time and

manage time correctly, it's one of the kind of the

most obvious mistakes people make when they're learning to present.

So it's useful from an early stage to try and

think about how you are going to manage your time.

Um.

What else we'll take, we'll, we'll do.

What we'll do is we do two presentations and then

we'll take like a ten, 15 minute break, and then

we'll do the second set of presentations.

Ah, encourage people to ask questions during the presentations.

I think it'd be great if everyone can like, try

and at least ask one question at some point during

the presentations we're going to have.

So people get used to kind of taking questions and

responding to them.

Uh, and otherwise, I'm looking forward to your your talk.

So the first group want to, uh, come up.

Yeah.

Have you got it on a flash drive.

What have you got it.

Ah.

Are you.

Listening?

Yeah, I think you got.

Stuck at the entrance.

Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

That is.

He's from, uh, UCLA.

He's from UC.

Right.

Yes.

That's different.

Yes.

They are a little officious.

Um, but let's.

Does someone have the presentation to load up while we're

doing, uh, that can play again.

Yeah.

Yep, yep.

If you want to do that, that is fine.

Okay.

Sorry, I.

Have a clicker as well as I.

Pull it off.

Um.

Has a USB in the.

Question is, does this have a new spin?

It doesn't.

I'm going to be okay.

Yeah.

Thanks.

How much effort do?

Shall I open it in?

So I can open this.

In which do we use to open edge?

You don't have it.

You have a preview.

How dependent are you?

So you can start with Harden.

As the end is coming.

Yeah.

There's no.

Slideshow.

If he was at the entrance then he should at

least pass.

Um.

And then we can do extend extension.

Do you want them?

Anyway.

Just for.

The.

Slideshow.

Sorry.

It's a quick preview.

Okay.

Yeah.

The other version.

Okay.

So different download.

Sorry.

One second.

Trying to stop this.

I never know.

I don't know where to stop.

I.

Know.

Okay.

There we go.

View slideshow.

So, should we start?

Yes.

That's good.

Let's get started.

Go for it.

Have you connected?

Yeah.

Uh, so, meeting men and changing your job and money.

That's not here.

Yeah.

Sure, year, which led to the end user.

You get to represent imports and exports and quality measures

of exposure and estimates of incidence by bulk carrier and

cost.

No they don't.

And so and so individuals participate in a trade in

the water economy.

Right.

They either own or they work or they sell to

parties or exports.

So but how does trade affect inequality?

That is how people are exposed to international trade and

how this exposure affect these trade quality, either importing or

exporting.

So to answer this question, the paper is going to

separate the trade exposure or the trade effect by conditions.

It's being the export Exports channels, that is, foreign goods

are going to find consumers and firms are going to

demand, uh, domestic factors in different proportions and home consumers,

which is going to affect the relative demand and then

relative prices and then import channels that when you have

a foreign goods entering your market, the demand for domestic

factors by the market, firms and consumers are also going

to change.

So an interesting question is are you going to first

use a simple supply and demand framework for amateur and

to measure exposure a really cool data for like the

firm's training data, employer employee commercial data so they can

see who we're sending to whom, who is working to

whom, and firm ownership and firm level of protection so

they can see a lot of nice data and to

measure the incidence of the earnings inequality.

They're going to, uh, that estimate the effect of demand

for them.

Then they have the eaters made those these substitution between

goods and factors.

And, uh, and then you're going to run the counterfactual,

the comparing or, you know, the trade economy and you

how is the exposure incidence.

And when he goes to an alternative economy would be

compare the trade economy.

So if your economy and then after that also compare

if they're between 2009 and 2015 was the trade economy.

How was would be uh, how is uh, inequality?

And if you were, uh, ultra key for this five

years, eight years, how would we data inequality, changing inequality.

So the literature this paper is mostly dated.

That is the original factor approach by Deardorff and year

of failure is repeatedly cited in paper.

And what is the difference?

First is the measurement right.

Uh, x is this really good data?

They can scramble data, allows them to see the individual

level of the exposure and have a more granular factor

instead of just getting non-college-educated and all they care, they

can see why the individual will have a really, uh,

factor factor, uh, really granular factors.

And the institutional side and the regional factor approach.

They assume that firms, uh, home firms and foreign firms

are purchasing the same goods.

So we have perfect substitution between foreign firms and domestic

firms.

So when the estimate the 60s, is not afraid because

you're afraid and scared of the infinite.

So it's mostly about tackling this in module.

The the elasticity of trade between goods would be infinite

in the original world.

The original approach and safer wouldn't be at the centre

of the model.

And because of the really nice data, also they can

allow them to see how trade affects inequality and have

this kind of relationship between theory information, which gives them

a higher, uh, predictive power to a time when a

better time, a time of the day.

So just a quick review.

So when you talk about the exposure is not evenly,

it's how you are exposed for, uh, the exports and

imports doesn't mean which one is more than the other.

So expose here more to the relative.

The man increases when you go into the ports is

the middle class.

So when you talk about in sports, which one?

When you increase imports, the relative demand for the factors

would affect more the rich the like the more Asian

economy.

And when you compare with the target economy, you can

see the import channels on the export channel.

So because import channel is strong reach for the fact

increase the relative demand for the retractors or the factors

on my reach.

You're going to have uh, increase in learning inequality.

More so 70% are at the 90th percentile and those

in the median.

And when you just look for the top, uh, percentile,

it's either the person.

So we have an increase in our inequalities.

So this is a road map.

Now we're going to talk about uh I just talked

about motivations changing.

And I'll talk about matters.

Uh, Ben is gonna talk about the effects of inequalities

and give an overview of the context.

Right.

So I'm going to talk about the method, uh, the

old test used in this paper.

They first provided a very general framework, um, to study

how, um, inequality or like, popped up prices and then,

uh, the decline in the silver metal exposure based on

improving the model and then using very like amazing data,

the calculator traces all definitions, um, at the individual level.

And then which I'm going to explain there.

Um, just gonna explain how they estimated This is, um,

authentication using city IDs.

So let me talk a bit about the environment.

So the domestic consumer in them or the consumers are

able to talk to LA and then uh, choose the

consumption of goods.

And then the supply is denoted by L capital la.

And if domestic firms use the domestic partners as well

as domestic and foreign intermediate to maximise their profit, and

they define the domestic part of the system.

Uh like this.

And then there's three components.

First is the domestic factors here.

And B here in the middle is associated with the

domestic market.

And then the D is the total expenditure.

So basically the product of To, uh, to my thesis.

And, uh, the capture of the body of high altitudes

demanded by domestic consumers.

So?

So F represents the total quantity of factor F demanded

by domestic firms to produce the final goods demanded by

the consumers.

So the important assumption here is a complex combination of

factor markets and also the existence of unique domestic prices,

um derived from the system of typical conditions.

And then and we are interested in how trade in

general affects prices w to see that uh, in the

effects of inequality.

So following the, the old paper, uh, they defined an

export star using a.

E And.

Where is the total foreign expenditure of domestic exports?

So we hear it's kind of similar to the last

slide.

So we capture the value of total financials demanded by

only like 40 countries.

And then the authors of that in considering the dividend

the domestic product, the domestic demand equals to monthly supply

minus the quantity of exports.

And this holds for all parties.

So they take the ratio of the f and the

baseline by factor n.

Talk to zero to divide this relationship.

So relative demand is equal.

Uh domestic demand is equal to the domestic relative supply

divided by the relative an export explosion like this.

So when equilibrium shifts from trade to autarky there, we

can consider two tunnels.

The first one is exports.

And so exports goes to zero.

So as you can see from here, um, ls to

export Moscow's zero, which affects the WTO in equilibrium and

then import.

The.

Other countries import tunnel.

So domestic demand for your goods goes to zero.

This can be represented by the price.

For your goods price goes to infinity.

So this is uh, data prices.

Okay.

So we can consider these changes in this figure.

So the exports are now.

Um, I show you the last video, like, uh, it's

actually calculated by, um, export one exposure goes to one.

So this is the shift of vertical design to this

level.

And it affects the factor price.

Given the original equation um uh for this price.

And then given this relative export exposure at one, we

can there's another um, direct effect on factor prices from

the price changes through the inverse, like the shift of

inverse filter function.

Yeah.

So this is basically the order of trade.

But we are also interested in like the the body's

own response of like factor prices to trade.

So now we look at uh um like export exports

to some measures.

Exposure measures to change.

So this goes to next slide.

So first I'm going to talk about exposed exposure.

So a sporting exposure is defined as a ratio of

a factor of export.

The share of factor exposed in the total supply which

can be affected by the total foreign expenditure on domestic

exports.

So they basically capture the extent to which the factor

is affected by the export of the foreign exchange on

domestic export.

And then define the individual specific export exposure by taking

an average of this.

So the export exposure measure which is by the share

of individuals are associated with each factor.

So by declining by the measure.

Like this.

It's helped a share of individuals arguing that derived from

export like rather than domestic consumption.

So this is the definition of export exposure.

And then the next one.

Sorry.

So you're also interested in, as I said, like, uh,

how domestic, um, relative factors that are affected by the

2014 prices.

So at the older device, we can write the above

equation under the parametric assumptions.

And then single system substitution across goods, which is a

key parameter you're going to estimate for the in the

consumer's preferences.

And then i.e. here is defined like this.

So S is the social factors.

If the demand used to produce finance for them, and

I know this, and then the remaining stars are related

to some animals.

Can you go to the next slide.

Okay.

So basically what they want to capture here is how

intensive and technologies are important inputs compared to other industries.

Competitor.

So it's a it's not very like intuitive.

But basically they define an individual individual specific like okay.

So that means that so when the price falling prices

changes the funds experience, the price change is proportional to

this, um, intensity of um for inputs into the production

process.

So and domestic consumers shifts like substitute their spend less.

Um.

Yes.

Spending less money for the first that, uh, that relies

more on the, like, um, for the neighbours.

So this is basically capture this kind of process.

So they define individual specifically for the exposure in a

very similar way to the export exposure.

We see the last slide.

So the key message from this is as long as

sigma is greater one higher in auto exposure.

Um the individuals with higher import exposure tend to be

more exposed to in more competition.

So that's the key message from this slide.

Okay.

Okay.

So.

So we've got the.

Distribution of uh export exposure import exposure.

So the left shoulder export exposure is higher in the

middle class, so that they derive the knowledge of its

earning from export rather than domestic consumption.

So from this channel like the middle class that is

more complicated.

And the front part also the import distribution, import exposure.

And it's mainly higher among the lower.

So it's lower for the higher income individuals.

So lower income individuals are more exposed.

This part uh higher inflation also means the more exposure

to uh import competition.

So the community does more exposed to equal competition.

And I think the most interesting thing from like these

findings are.

So this part is consistent with all these like classical

predictions such that like the so it model like scores

high school uh high income.

And the result would be those who lose all condition.

But this part like this is inconsistent results from the

picture reductions.

And why?

Because it's in a problem.

They impose most of the categories, uh, so that most

of the inputs are, um, with its.

Machines.

Yeah.

So this kind of technical stuff used by firms employing

more like high skilled workers.

So and with price changes, uh, foreign foreign practices, uh,

so the highest your workers uh, less no factors owned

more by like, high skilled school kids are less likely

to be substituted by 45, so that's why.

Yeah, that's the reason why this saves lives is probably

young people's lives.

So to kind of kind of review that way.

The reason that the export and import exposure across the

income distribution is because the point is it made because

people at different points of.

Distribution work in.

Different industries, or they were working at different types of

firms within industries or something else.

And what's the what's the underlying variation in the data?

I think.

Okay.

I think they.

Have support.

Now.

So they the labour.

Factors are defined by region times um times education level.

So my answer would be that this depends on a,

um, how well educated people are and, and also where

they work.

So it's if the so for the input channel, if

they're, if some regions are more exposed to trade for

certain regions for instance what kind of industries they allocated.

Um, that would then have an effect on the income

of individuals.

I think it's also quite interesting because they're mainly using

like the spectral content approach.

And I'm understanding correctly that one of the main contributions

is that usually we produce like very cost like input

output measures to do so.

So you can't really pin down the distribution of income

percentiles.

And they have like very specific data.

So the standard approach usually just is kind of low

skilled and high skilled workers.

And that's the only distinction that they make in the

input output matrix.

And here they kind of boil it down to some

work at hand.

So for each work, we know where they work or

they know where they work and hence what their labour

income is.

So you kind of deconstruct this matrix.

So it gets very, very granular.

And hence they can construct all of them sometimes.

Yeah.

So explain this.

So I'm going to introduce the do they.

Do method that the authors use to connect data to

the model.

So they have very powerful data sets um including the

um from the from side to the consumer side so

that they can measure you can see that they have

that they have Social Security and they have this, um,

so they basically they have this from the foundation section

as well as to the employer to employee data.

So this allows them to map the whole, um, Production

and consumption map in this economy.

And so they have everything they need to, to, uh,

measure the, uh, I suppose, exposure.

Uh, and so it's important for exposure and then to

estimate two key elasticities that will be used in the

counterfactual analysis.

So the time period is from 2009 to 2015.

And they have this.

Yeah.

So uh, 2.9 million individuals in sedentary groups by education,

uh, times problems.

They have, uh, one extra for cigarettes and we have

1.5 million firms, uh, in 60 to, uh, 62, uh,

industries.

So this is data and they are estimating, um, the

logistics of substitution between factories.

So this is performance.

Um, so you can see this is our estimate and

they're using a, um, this formula.

So this is just derived from uh, by taking logs

from the direct model.

So, um, so here is the factor expansion also in

the data.

And this is the vector data.

Um, and these are basically facts.

And this is the product of the start of this

product which is correlated with this domestic vector price.

So uh, how to deal with this uh issue.

So they use um common used share from Iris.

So the intuition is that um, they are aggregating um,

the product level, they're aggregate, the uh, factor level exposure

to the product level exposure.

So here the, uh, you know, the product.

So they are using their they are, uh, constructing the

product level exposure so that they will have a, um.

They will do such things that is not correlated with,

uh, the factor price because of that, uh, the actor

is a small open company, so domestic product shots is

not correlated with, uh, the global export and import shots.

So here are the, um, they are using the global

export shot at global import shots.

Uh, so these are the deviation from uh, for, for

a substitute.

Good.

That from the average level.

So this means that if this product is, uh, exported

or imported more, they are more likely to be exposed

to this trade function.

So this is the intuition.

Yeah.

And then they are estimating this elasticity of substitution between

goods.

So this is um uh, similar things.

But uh, there this is a little bit more complicated.

But there are also uh value is also the same.

So this is the, the expansion that are also in

the data.

and this are two phases.

The first is the prices because they are using domestic

factories to produce news and their use of using uh

foreign intermediate into uh, in the maintenance, uh, to, into

their production.

So they have two prices and they should instrument these

two prices separately.

So for the domestic price.

Um, so now we are, we are estimating things at

the formal level.

So we are uh, again need to, uh, use these

previous events.

That is on the product level.

And then we are, we are computing its uh, weighted

average using this factor.

That is the factor, uh, share used to produce, uh,

the products.

So this is the product level.

And then by taking this weighted average, they get this

uh, from the annual, uh, and, and then for the

um, for of, For the foreign price.

Uh, because the foreign.

The foreign import is in.

So it's good again.

So we're just doing exactly the same thing as what

we did for the, uh, product negatives.

So there's this, uh, the, um, ship share is they

are using to estimate these things.

Okay.

Um, so now that we've done all this work, let's

go into the results and hope that they're pretty nice.

Um, just a quick recap.

So what we said is that you an individual's income

is affected by trade, mostly through which factors their supply.

And then how do the prices for those factors change.

And then luckily, we can change the we can, uh,

split those in those price effects into the export channel

and the import channel.

Um, so we're going to have an the counterfactual, obviously,

because Ecuador is an open economy, counterfactual is going to

be the end in open counterfactual is going to be

the key.

So what they're doing is that they're first shutting down

the import channel by, um, taking the prices for, for

imports to infinity.

And then they're shutting down the export channel by bringing

the relative export exposure to one.

What I then do is, is that from this we

want to we want to get the change in factory

prices, and we can split them aside by exports and

imports.

And then from the data, we're going to get the

factory income shares for a given individual.

So how much of an of the income is coming

from, from a certain factor, which we said was province

times um education level.

And then we want we are or they are going

to recover the changes in individual rise in income that

is due to the export channel of the import channel.

Now we're going to get the overall incidence from that.

So these are the baseline results.

So we've got the percentile income on the x axis

um percentile of total income.

We've got the change in income on the y axis.

The.

Step.

So each observation while these are bins of percentiles.

So they're taking the average change in income for a

given percentile.

And they're taking in blue.

It's the change in total income.

And in red is the change in labour income.

So excluding capture income.

And then on the left we're starting with the export

channel.

And yes it does look relatively flat.

One point to make is that they are normalising the

median income for the median income.

They're normalising the change to zero.

So we're not talking about level changes.

We're not saying that export channel is bad, and for

many people the input channel is right, which is talking

about the relative changes.

So the inequality effect of trade.

And the main takeaways are that the export channel is

likely to reduce inequality, especially in the let's say upper

75 uh percentiles.

And the input channel is clearly reducing a lot of

inequality.

Whether we're just looking at the.

Labour income or whether we are also looking at the

including capita income.

And there you can also see there's a huge inequality

of effect of capital income changes that are due to

trade.

And most capital is in most places is going to

be held by the, uh, by rich people.

And, and because the effects go in different directions, we're

looking at the overall incidence.

and then we can see that the input channel is

actually dominating and the export channel is just attenuating the

results a little bit.

Um, I think we talked a bit about the mechanism

when we looked at the exposure.

So for the import channel it's again, if machinery and

inputs are mostly important firms which mostly hire well-educated rich

people, um, if that's the effect of if that's what

you're importing, then the input channel is going to have

this, uh, worse effect for the lower income, um, percentiles

and the better effect for the higher income percentiles.

But again, this is all relative.

Um, I personally spent about half of yesterday trying to

think about, okay, but this is actually the effect of

auto key.

Or is this the effect of having an open economy

and trade?

Because what they're what they're doing essentially is saying, okay,

um, we're taking those factor shares or factor endowments.

We take them as fixed.

So every individual has a certain factor endowments and then

supplies them.

Um, so to me it just sounded more like, okay,

um, we have this open economy and we take today's

open economy in Ecuador and suddenly in, in impose autarky.

Um, there's not going to be any trade, but the

factor shares stay the same and it's a bit of

a tradition.

Or maybe it's just this is the question that they

wanted to answer.

Um, and because, I mean, one of the things is

the province people might move, obviously people might get different

level of education.

Um, and then also the splitting capital into oil and

non-oil, I'm not sure whether Ecuador would have as much,

um, would produce as much oil if they couldn't export

it.

Um, then and I spent a long time on it

and I thought, oh, this is a huge criticism.

And then I really realise I'm not the only one

looking.

Thinking about this.

The authors did too, and I just skipped this page.

Um, because they're looking at the robustness with respect to

these things.

So the main things we would be looking at, I'm

about to finish.

Summary.

Um, the most interesting things are the allowing for perfect

mobility across provinces.

But I understand this correctly that just, uh, the labour

factors are now only split, are now only split on

based on the education level.

And that's the green line.

And you can see that this.

So the baseline is the blue line.

And then changing to the green.

So there's this is the model is very or the

predictions are very sensitive to to the mobility.

Um and then the second thing is they also add

an informality sector, which is going to be the purple

line where they just add one informal firm to each,

to each industry, and that one is only going to

export domestically.

And then if we include this in the model, then

the inequality effects of the input channel are going to

be even starker.

Yes, I think we're almost running out of time.

You know, you started, um.

1:10, a few minutes.

Okay.

Uh, and you're free to do any questions.

Um, so this kind of ties a little bit to

more than it already has, but we've done all of

this model, and now we kind of want to put

it a little bit into perspective.

Uh, so a little bit, um, that idea that we

had with kind of the external validity.

So we're looking at obviously very specific.

And additionally it only uses UAC.

So we don't really have any exchange effects.

And if you think about it you could argue all

doesn't really matter because we have prizes in there.

And I do think that we have domestic prices and

foreign prices in the model that kind of walked through

the background and really make a big difference if we

include expanders.

Um, but on the other hand, even kind of, um,

if we just kind of ceteris paribus compared the situation

of exchange rate versus no exchange rate, then they would

kind of add an additional effect in a way that

if you have a very weak currency, then the import

channel will be kind of, um, attenuated in a little

bit, because if you import, if you're opening to import

and the currency locally is kind of like the import

and export in your local currency as well, then that

obviously incentivises more export and also your local prices are

in a way more competitive to the foreign prices.

So kind of the weaker local currency, Incentivises, uh, like

it tends to import and vice versa, kind of a

stronger local currency would probably exacerbate the import channel.

So that could again have effects on the inequality, because

we are already seeing kind of export and import kind

of in different directions.

So if you have to import China and it can

be a dominant channel and you play around with that

one, that should also have effect on the inequality.

So really if you buy to a different country maybe

it will be the same, but they will not be

the same.

Um, yeah.

And another thing that we were discussing together is this

idea of kind of monopolistic competition.

So we didn't show you like a fully fledged model,

but essentially is like a very simple model where X

and everyone is like homogenous.

So we have homogenous fans and consumers will have a

competition and consumer tends to gain and then after competition.

And the central part of the model is that we

can eliminate domestic prices by having this price equals marginal

cost condition.

But if you had monopolistic competition and many more, so

that would make the other way more complicated to do

it.

Um, but secondly, also maybe the dynamics would change a

bit because you can charge mark-up and the monopolistic competition,

and maybe these mark-ups affect kind of how you react

on a trade versus no trade, because in order key,

maybe you have more liberty to charge markers versus and

uh, like if you're open to trade then this competition

effect is very important, which is kind of based on

price tags might be going in a very different direction.

Um, yes.

And then um, I had another two thoughts that we

also think about.

And this may be kind of a little bit more

relevant to the current debate.

Um, first of all, we kind of thinking about how

it affects inequality, but we're just looking at a static

image that we have in mind.

And obviously this idea of authority is very hypothetical.

So anyway, we have this, um, export channel and the

import channel, and we're saying the export channel decreases inequality,

import increases inequality, and import channel is stronger.

But we are only looking at that at one point

in time.

And the model also only makes predictions about point in

time.

So it's not a dynamic model.

Um, yet when we look at the data, a kind

of simulation approach where you say, okay, we are looking

at how this can change over time and then finding,

okay, inequality kind of decreased.

Meanwhile the continue and the auto key will decrease by

then.

But then again this idea of having like the relative

inequality and the trading authority, um, yeah, doesn't necessarily hold

anymore at any given point in one time because then

this relationship can be forward.

So that kind of something make something happen or something

I found kind of interesting and maybe something to think

about, but also kind of abstracting from the model.

It has very interesting and very current policy implications.

For instance, I mean, everyone's speaking about protectionism and everything

since last week today.

So if you think about how our model would react

to all of these concerns, basically if you have protectionism,

you're kind of starting off this import channel by keeping

the others unaffected.

And this is actually kind of interesting because if you

look at our model the overall impact is positive.

So you want trade in a way.

But then the positive effects don't accrue to the upper

class if you cut out infection.

So if you cut out the impact channel then middle

class and income.

They were super happy.

But specifically like the.

High income individuals would be the ones who are losing

out.

Yet somehow in society is perceived as something good.

If you have very protectionist policies, especially by individuals, which

is a bit counterintuitive.

So maybe they should be prepared.

Yes.

Um, do you have any questions?

This was our intention.

Have any questions?

I didn't question about the experts versus, uh, us media

defenders, and it's but, um, so overall, uh, the, uh,

yeah, the expert channel generates negative information, which is very

easy.

If you show that you can show it a bit

in the matrix, then you have the information and an

explosion And you have like poor, middle and rich.

And then you can say kind of indicators like if

you go from like Turkey to trade in a way

like the poor in expectancy and through this.

So I should know this.

Um.

But this is kind of a nice thing that I

was thinking about because technically, like here, your income is

going up, but relative to the others.

But the middle class is like benefiting a lot from

opening to trade and the rich benefiting the little bit.

But then on the other hand, like you have, this

kind of goes away and here comes the poor, uh,

like whereas after, I mean, a little bit better and

the rich channels of wealth.

Is.

The confusion with the graph.

Right.

So they normalise so that the 50th percentile has a

zero effect.

So it's already.

2 to 50% time.

That's why.

Then you can.

See the shape.

On there and.

Yeah.

Yeah okay okay.

And then you can see kind of in the way

like this one.

Like this is really like the expert channel.

So here inequality is decreasing.

And then here like this really don't like it.

So the inequality is increasing okay.

So based on both export channel and the positive effects

on income like aggregates okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So the model is a little bit tricky to understand

because when I was thinking about this I was looking

at this and I was like, oh, this is so

weird because in aggregate like these are like way worse

off the channel figure and then these are way better

and these should be indifferent, but they're not really talking

as much about level effects.

So we're only talking about kind of the relative effects

in the society, and then they're kind of breaking it

and saying, okay, in levels, they should also be better

off and bolder, but then you can't really apply this

to.

Any other questions?

So we talked a bit in the lectures about water

dominance and style results.

But the China shop on US labour markets and the

kind of calculable comparative paper about quantifying that.

That's obviously.

A very.

Different conceptual framework to use.

What is used in this paper.

How might you do you think it would be.

Straightforward to.

Reconcile those two types of papers, or are they fundamentally

getting at different mechanisms?

That's a bit of a broad.

Question, right?

So I mean, so.

We also don't have a lot of talk about fractional

labour markets and local labour market effects.

Um, and you know the colour model.

There are these reactions to changing jobs, whereas here is

kind of the underlying competitive.

Yeah.

Mhm.

If you had kind of some form of labour market

frictions in this model.

Is it obvious how that might change the results.

I mean they do have frictions in the labour market

right.

So in the baseline model they're not allowing for any

migration across problems.

Okay.

Yeah that's the friction.

Um they also don't allow people to reskill.

So you either went to college or you didn't.

Yeah.

But if you then you're not not allowed to adapt

to that.

Um, they don't have any of the.

So factor supply is not a labour supply.

It's not industry specific.

So that's maybe the friction that you are thinking about,

right.

I mean I would really like to have a Invitations

are in a way.

All of these things are not allowed for the optimal.

So in a way, I consider this inequality things in

a way optimal.

Um, but constructive criticism is a different story.

I think how we can in general introduce frictions and

probably kind of introducing kind of trade would kind of

have more beneficial effects would be my argument for now,

because then probably the opening up to try to take

care of some of the frictions in a way.

Um, if you open for export and you have kind

of frictions in terms of your local labour demand or

whatever, then now you have another source of demand.

So also be like the flow of, uh, and how

you move between compliance might change because now you just

have a bigger set of potential buyers of your class,

and vice versa.

And but it's not entirely obvious, is it?

So if you if you can't optimise your factor supply,

um, then what the effect of inequality is depends on.

Okay.

Do you run like one and try this and use

to you randomly, or somehow happen to have the correct

factors that would benefit from trade, that would benefit from

the especially from the import channel.

And we solved with the with the informal sector.

Right.

So if you happen to supply your um, if you

happen to supply in the informal sector, and then and

then suddenly there's trade interviews and you say the informal

sector can't participate, then you would miss out on this.

But I don't.

So it would depend on on the factors, you know,

whether an individual benefits from it or not.

And then in this case it was the location was

like that.

Okay, good.

But is there a definite difference that you have?

Oh, no, I didn't know that.

That was very much an open question.

I don't have an answer.

I think you.

Did a good job.

Uh.

Well done.

Good job.

Thank you, sir.

All right.

Has anyone noticed?

Welcome.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Let's here.

Let's just talk.

Charger.

Let's say chargers.

Are these like the.

Car.

Oh, sorry.

Let's do it.

Thank you.

We can directly.

From the PC.

PC if you want.

Really?

No, no, it's not here for personal.

Oh, I can.

Yeah.

You know what?

I know I'm logging on this computer because I'm teaching

in this class.

No, but the, um, code.

But it's already.

I'm already logged in, so I'll just put it on

my.

Maybe I did something wrong.

Oh, okay.

No problem.

This is just a charger.

I don't think it's the computer.

Like it must be here.

Yeah, but if I compile and send it.

And there's.

A USB in the computer.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

I think it might be.

This.

Refresh.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah.

Cool.

I.

Yeah.

That's weird.

Well, how can I control.

Okay.

Thank you.

So we're going to present this, um, interesting but sort

of confusing paper, and, uh, I'm John and, uh, Dimitri

Giovanni, and so.

So this paper asks questions about how globalisation will affect

development better.

And globalisation is obviously opening up to trade.

But what is development.

Leather.

So it's like a popular metaphor where like countries say

that different rungs of a ladder and they are each,

each of them are associated with a different set of

economic Army activities.

So as you ascend the letter, you become more capable

and start producing and exporting complex goods.

And what's nice about this metaphor is that it naturally

leads us to consider the two way relationship between capability

and complexity.

So, um, so it can go either way.

And there are two kind of broad views.

First is that, uh, as countries develop, you become more

capable and start producing like, complex goods and exporting them.

So this kind of kind of aligns more with the

Ricardian perspective.

And in this perspective, it's like globalisation is already like

pretty efficient.

And that's a fair policy is optimal.

And there is no inherently good or bad sectors.

So as these countries specialise in their comparative advantage, all

countries will be able to ascend the ladder.

That's this one view.

And there's another view that complexity, which means what you

specialise in, determines your capability.

So this aligns more with the industry policy scholars.

So like in this perspective, there could be some room

for government interventions to fix distortions.

And there exists good and bad sectors.

So in this view what you export and to what

extent you specialise to to to what extent you specialise

in complex sectors determines whether you can ascend or descend

the latter.

So um, so in a nutshell, globalisation, the effects of

globalisation, globalisation sort of depends on which view is more

like plausible.

So this, this paper with this in mind studies this

question that how globalisation will affect development.

And first it does tries to formalise the leather metaphor

through a dynamic Ricardian model, and is a model with

N countries with different capability and K sectors with different

complexity and capability.

Growth is a function of a pattern of specialisation, and

secondly, it theoretically characterises the conditions under which globalisation can

push push countries up, up or down the ladder.

And there are two key assumptions.

One is that complex sectors are good sectors, meaning that

it promotes capability growth.

And the other assumption is that, um, so the goods

sectors face the complex sectors face software competition, so that

these are the two assumptions and both of them are

satisfied.

Uh, the paper frames it the, the environment as either

economy and which is um, so in this economy is

kind of beautiful, like you don't have to do anything

as you open up the trade, just everyone's going to

gain And but otherwise, um, uh, if either of them

do not set, does not satisfy, are not satisfied, is

inverted other economy and the opposite things happen.

And lastly, the empirically examined um um whether the reality

which to which uh economy, the reality is more closer

to and to do that they sort of, uh, modify

their assumptions a bit because they're saying that their model

was a bit too stylised in general to be directly

taken to the data.

So after doing that, they measure capability and complexity, um,

and then check each whether each assumption holds in reality.

And it turns out that actually one of the assumptions

does not hold, which means that essentially the the complex

sectors face tougher competition.

So the reality which suggests that the reality is actually

more closer to the inverted latter ladder economy.

And then lastly, the two perform two counterfactual exercises.

One is that, um, uh, what would happen if the

countries, uh, transition from trade to autarky, which is, I

think, more academic kind of interest, but they also do

another, um, sort of more realistic, uh, counterfactual exercise, which

means that, uh, all countries are already training that what

would happen to the trade equilibrium with China during the

global world trade.

So, uh, yeah, there's some.

So basically what they have done is sort of like

I think they're kind of old novel and contributions, but

like obviously how they did it, uh, sort of builds

on the existing literature.

So there are two main, uh, connections to the literature.

The first one is that, uh, model wise, the static

part of the model depends on the Krugman paper, which

uh defines the uh defines the comparative advantage in the

extensive margin setting, and it sort of extends it by,

uh, to a multi-country setting and also imposes some imperfect

substitute stability, which leads to the case that countries, when

they open up the trade they face, uh, they have

incentive to specialise in their more complex sectors.

So that is for the static part and the dynamic

part.

It builds on this a lot of literature, and it's

a shared similarity with them in the sense that there

are good sectors and bad sectors, but they focus more

on the extensive margin consideration in a multi-country setting rather

than a intensive margin consideration in a two country setting.

And for empirical wise, um, first one is measurements.

They say that they're sort of bridging between the original

descriptive work of them and also structural work between uh,

these a lot of guys and, uh, the first work

is more like, uh, they, they are similar in the

sense that, um, the comparative advantage is that the, uh,

uh, they, they define comparative advantage at the extensive margin

and identify complexity and capability.

And then what was similar to this, uh, strand of

literature is that, um, so, uh, they sort of use

a difference in different strategy with, uh, import or export

the fixed effects and the, uh, foreign demand, fixed effects.

And the last one is about, uh, estimation of dynamic

spill-overs.

And they is similar to Houseman paper in the sense

that it uses an instrumental variable, uh, with import and

export to fixed effect, I guess.

Yeah.

This, uh, the overview now the image is.

So yeah, how the kind of fundamental starting point is

that you can kind of run countries online and you

can rank sectors online.

So you're imposing the kind of heterogeneity across countries and

sectors.

It's both one dimensional.

How much does that bother you as an assumption?

Well, uh, I think we can have something to say

about that as complexity and capabilities are sort of very

correlated.

And then like, yeah.

Do you guys have the same.

How are we the the model, the additionality.

Yeah.

So I mean.

If you think about what the in this model, countries

differ on a single dimension, you can rank them at

a country that is higher up.

The round will always be better and.

More the more.

All the more complex good.

I can think about another world where there were two

dimensions.

There's like, am I more productive?

And do I have better organisational bureaucratic processes?

And then what matters is where I am, somewhere in

that two dimensional space.

And then obviously you can generalise that to as many

dimensions as you want.

So the kind of question is, does collapsing the world

to this one dimension of heterogeneity across countries, is that

a reasonable starting point for trying to understand what's going

on, or are we missing something important about the world

by doing that?

Again, this is not a question that has an answer,

but it's something to think.

Yeah.

Yeah, absolutely.

Not really.

But also I really like the way the simple way

in which they can.

I mean, it's very simple.

It's powerful in some sense.

Because it is.

A strong condition which can help and train and upend

the trajectory of the country.

So no.

Yes it.

Is.

There is a clear order for countries and there is

a clear oversupply.

So I think it might be possible that some sectors

are better for this country.

Than.

Others are better for that.

So the.

Regional schools are not.

Suited for different countries.

And there will be some problems.

For as long as possible.

We are.

Okay.

Good.

Okay.

So, um, I'll present a bit of the theoretical part,

and then Jovan is going to take the empirical part.

So the main goal is to here is to formalise

like in the, in this notion of a lottery economy.

And this will allow us to study this causal relationship

between trade and development in a more quantitative way.

So, uh, I'll just briefly, uh, go through the main

points.

So there is a continuous time.

Then we have all these countries 1 to 2 to

end, and they differ in their, uh, capabilities, which we're

going to index by capital N and then A goods,

um, there's a continuum of them where index we're indexing

them with uh by K.

And these uh differ in their complexity.

Lower uh k a lower n uh, like this.

And um, and then the only factor of production in

this model, uh, is going to be, uh, labour.

So in, um, well, in our production function will look

like that based on that.

But, uh, on the, on the demand side, uh, we

assume we have this, uh, representative, uh, agent, uh, structure,

um, with, uh, that they have this, um, uh, love

variety.

And then they choose between uh, uh, goods from, uh,

different sectors.

But within each sector, uh, different countries offer the goods

so they can also substitute between countries offering the goods.

So it's uh, uh, you can subset it between, um,

uh, like within a sector, between the different countries and

then the sectors themselves.

And then the assumption here is that the substitute ability,

um, uh, between countries within a sector, uh, is higher

than between sectors themselves.

Um, so, uh, like, uh, the bananas.

Apples.

Right.

So the, uh, if I prefer to buy the bananas,

uh, from a different country as opposed to switching to

apples, um, then the production function looks like this.

This with standard things, uh, the productivity.

Uh, maybe here, uh, I is the, uh, exporting country.

Uh, J is importing is the one that is, uh,

is exporting to.

And that's a time t uh, feel free to feel

free to interrupt if anything is unclear.

Yeah.

I can go back to the some of.

The.

Here this is usability.

Is this something that's extended or defended in a way

or which.

Is to this.

Uh, well, later on the site, uh, couple of works,

I think, where they say like the, the estimates are

empirically correct, like, I don't know, but.

Uh.

Across sectors based on their as ITC for the J,

uh, uh, definition from other users.

And they found that actually, uh, uh, the substitution between

sectors is higher than the baseline.

And it will play a role in a bit.

Um, so yeah.

Uh, good catch.

It's a fairly standard assumption.

And the An idea would be.

Something like the.

Substitute ability between different varieties of car coming from different

countries is higher than the same cars, or the food.

Would.

Be the kind of standard rational people would give.

Um, so for the so this is where we introduce

the assumptions to capture, uh, one part of the, the

larger, uh, metaphor.

And I'll analyse that in a bit.

But, uh, here, uh, this is uh, the, the productivity.

So I kind of works like an indicator function.

So if it's, uh, it's a good like, uh, if

a good exceeds a good complexity, exceeds the country's capability,

then it won't produce it.

If it if it's, uh, bounded by that, it will

produce it.

So, you see, as this goes on, um, it becomes

harder to produce.

And then this goes up to makes it easier.

Uh, and, um, and then there's uh, the introduce a

dynamic aspect, like how this, uh um uh uh, this,

uh, um, capability, uh, magnitude evolves.

Uh, so it's going to depend on the previous, uh,

level of capability and then, uh, this, uh, uh, this

distribution, uh, with respect to employment.

So here, you see, it's like the, the distribution of

employment across all sectors.

Right.

And, uh, the and here we restrict this up until

some productivity.

And so it kind of gives us how the, the

workers are distributed from, um, less complex to more complex

sectors.

That's what it kind of captures here.

Um, so with, with this uh, like I think John

gave the motivation.

So the, the idea like what we want to capture

here is that, um, a lot of economies, uh, more

capable countries produce, uh, more complex goods.

And we get that from this.

And then as time goes by, um, and employment shifts

towards more complex goods, uh, then we, uh, see that,

uh, capability grows.

So not only like, we're like, the evolution's governed by

this, but now we assume that it's an increasing function,

like this function is increasing in, uh, this distribution and.

Uh, and then the market structure is pretty standard.

I just, uh, called the results is to, uh, uh,

for completeness, but, you know, like, start a case, uh,

consumers, firms, and then your market is clear, and then

the dynamic part is captured by this evolution equations.

And then so once you, uh, let the, the full

system, uh, evolve, you have, uh, the, the competitive equilibrium

basically is this path, uh, of all this magnitude, labour

prices, consumption, uh, and then and then the levels of

employment and the distribution and, uh, um, they satisfy the

conditions from the static and, uh, and dynamic equilibrium.

So to, uh, so we thought we got the formal

definition of the latter economy.

And then to be able to talk about the causal

impact of trade in, in development.

They, they introduced this, uh, uh, counterfactual.

Yeah.

I don't know what it is.

When you get to more complex, uh, production, then you're

gonna have a little more market power.

Do they talk about that in some sense?

More market power.

Um.

Well, I think it's implicit.

Uh, well.

Maybe I think based on what I'll say now.

Yeah.

So?

so so let me let me just say the following

and see if it if it helps a bit.

But the, the point being that um, as you go

to more complex, uh, sectors, then, um, some countries will

be unable to keep up, so there will be fewer

countries towards the complex side that will be producing.

So for them it means, uh, they will be they

will be having the higher price index and then higher

sales.

So that's how they benefit.

Uh, like that's the idea, I think.

I don't know if that helps.

It will really.

Focus on market power.

Yeah.

Talk about competition.

And it's.

Places that you can.

Exploit.

Because there are countries uh in the complex sector.

So if you have higher market.

So they say if you think just about autarky, uh,

there are no, um, why is it so messy Anyway.

So this is there is no competitors in any of

the sectors.

Uh, as opposed to the latter case, you see, uh,

the competitor, the number of competitors drops as you go

to more complex and more complex.

Uh, this is the nice case, the nice, uh, uh,

world and scenario and, uh, the employment, uh, if you

are just, uh, is uniform across all sectors, but, uh,

if you, if you are in this nice ladder, uh,

economy that just gets higher towards the more complex, uh,

sectors.

Right.

So this is the contrast here.

And, um, based on the, the, the argument, I just

I just gave us as a, as more complex, most

countries with less capability are find it harder to keep

up.

Uh, basically what happens is that, uh, it boosts those

that on top, uh, that, that can produce.

And then what happens with the trade is that once

you open up the trade, um, it tends to, um,

raise your, your capability because as does the distribution as,

as we have this distribution of employment, like it's going

to shift towards a more complex for more capable countries

and then less capable.

And you have this outcome where, uh, it benefits, uh,

everyone.

So both, um, they raise the capability and the aggregate

consumption as time goes by.

Is that clear?

Uh, and but if you invert.

So if you pick one of the assumptions and, and

invert it.

So let's say, uh, we found this bizarre.

Okay.

This is just, uh, an exercise like if, if specialisation

for some, for some reason, like in complex sectors makes

you less capable, uh, and you keep that, uh, the

competition assumption as it is.

Then you get an inverted ladder.

Um, but I think the more intuitive, the best way

to see it is keep that.

Okay.

If you specialise in more complex, uh, you, uh, enhance

your capability.

But, um, let's say that instead of competition, uh, dropping

as you go to more complex, actually, it's increasing because

more, more people want to compete in these, uh, so

in this case, in this scenario, you have the, the

inverted ladder economy.

And what happens is because of the increased competition, uh,

in the more complex, um, you end up if you

open up the trade, uh, you end up, uh, lowering,

uh, your capability.

Uh, and, uh, instead of getting, um, having these dynamical

gains like, uh, shifting the distribution towards more complex sectors,

uh, you have a perverse kind of, uh, uh, gains

in the reversal losses.

And then the question becomes which of the two is

right?

So do we have the London where we push towards

the more complex enhancing the capabilities will open up the

trade or the or the inverted, uh, scenario.

And, um, to make contact with the data.

Um, we, we like they, they introduce some um, they

relax this more likely terminals that they make it into

a probabilistic, uh, uh, uh, form so that the, the,

the probability that this is non-zero.

So they produce depends on these factors.

So now some countries that are not necessarily as high

in capability might produce a more complex good.

It's probably unlikely but it's probable.

And um and then they impose a parametric restriction.

But I think I'll leave it to Giovanni because I've

spoken to Matt now, and he's going to use these

two for the empiric anyway.

So I constrained this to a more specific parametric equation.

Um.

So um.

I will talk about the way they, they try to

estimate this model.

And so basically they move from the equation that Dimitri

presented to this linear probability model.

So this pi I j tk.

So this fourth dimensional importance j is the importer I

is the exporter.

So I exports to j at time t to good

k.

And this is a dummy variable for whether this is

or not.

So whether there is this trade flow exists or not.

And then we have two fixed effects.

This is a fixed effect.

that the importer exporter time level.

So this captures all the variation in bilateral highspeed costs

can be transport cost can be tariffs.

And this capture uh demand shocks because the importer time

product level.

So whether there's been a variation in demand in country

J for good K and time here and then we

have interaction between capability and complexity.

So apart from this, this particular effect, the um whether

or not that country J imports from country I depends

on the good K whether it is complex or not.

And the country I whether it's capable or not.

And what matters is the interaction between the two.

So countries with higher capability will tend to export more

complex products and vice versa.

Um, one issue with this equation is that we cannot

estimate separately these these coefficients.

Um, we we could only estimate that like jointly that

products.

But we actually want to, to, to be able to

estimate both because capability and complexity are to key variables

in the model and we don't observe them.

So what they do is they, they say let's try

to make some reasonable and not restrictive assumption about one

of the two.

So we fix it as data and then we estimate

the other.

And then once we estimate the other again we used

to make the first one and so on and so

on and so on in trading.

So what they do is they assume that the G10

countries have higher capability to begin with.

And given this, let's say weak restriction on the on

the data, they estimate the distribution of complexity across goods.

And then with this estimate, they plug it again in

this equation and the estimated distribution of capabilities across countries

until, uh, the estimates converge.

Now there is some fixed, uh, fixed point theory behind

it.

Obsolete.

I'm not sure under which condition this is guaranteed to

be in.

Actually, uh, let's say sane exercise.

Um, I didn't really delve, uh, a lot into that.

It's it's I feel like it's one of the point

that may leave you a bit.

Uh.

Uh, well, it's anyway, data sources, uh, they use un

com treats a very rich dataset that the country product

level.

We observed the bilateral trade flows between countries.

Um, they cleaned the dataset as faster 2005.

They, they make some, uh, modification to, to some trade

flows, uh, which are apparently incorrect.

And then they only keep manufacturing sector, they only keep

countries with a lot of data points.

Uh, they end up with 704 digit industries and 140

countries.

So the, the they captured the, the majority of, uh,

of the world.

So they estimate capability and complexity in, in, uh, as,

as I stated earlier.

And then they perform a sanity check.

So we want to see whether the capability measure makes

sense.

And so they plot the probability measure for some countries,

uh, in the last 50 years.

And they actually show that it's correlated with GDP.

So the measure is normalised to one for United States.

And here we are measuring capability relative to United States

capability for all countries, uh, for these countries over this

time period.

And so we have countries like Italy and Spain that's

in the 60s where industrialising and catching up.

And same thing for South Korea.

And in some points they do merge.

Or fortunately like Italy, they tend to go backward.

And but this is fairly representative of GDP.

Right.

So if we plot GDP of these countries will be

something very similar.

Uh, I not sure about the others.

They say that it's, uh, it's actually representative.

So this is I mean, it's it's kind of reassuring.

So it's at least capability seems to be correlated with

GDP.

This makes sense.

If it was not the case would be a strong

case against the the results.

Um okay.

Simplifying a bigger theoretical model.

Um, specifically assuming that, uh, um, the relation between, uh,

improvements in capability and complexity.

Uh, this relation is linear and captured by coefficient beta.

They did have this equation to estimate.

So they are seeing the capability at time T plus

delta.

Uh depends on capability a time t times a persistency

coefficient.

So how much capability persist over time.

And then it's global coefficient times the average complexity of

the country expert mix.

So S represents um how much how complex is my

expert mix towards other countries.

Um and then they have country and time fixed effects.

And yeah they basically want to, to, to estimate this

equation.

Um, there is a huge endogeneity issue, meaning that obviously

the capability of the country and t and the, its,

uh, export mix are heavily correlated.

If I'm very capable by the same assumption of the

model, I will.

I will be a very complex product mix.

Um, we can imagine shocks that resistance and everyday expenditure

shock that it's bought of, uh, bus and bus and

make them move in the same direction.

Uh, so we need, uh, an identification strategy for, for

this, um, for these parameters.

And what they do is they, they use an ID

approach.

So they try to instruct, they try to find an

exogenous variation in the country, uh, expert mix in they

find this variation, um, in, uh, in foreign country, uh,

access to WTO.

Why is that?

Um, basically when a country, when a foreign country enters

WTO, it brings with itself, A peculiar export mix, and

all countries in the WTO will be exposed to trade

with this country.

And so industries in which these countries specialise, it will

face higher competition.

This will force countries to divert from those industries.

But crucially, those industries will not have the same importance

across countries.

So it's a lot.

O.

More.

Okay.

Yeah.

Okay.

I'll, I will be super, super fast in this meeting.

China is specialising in manufacturing.

China enters WTO and Bangladesh specialise in agriculture and manufacturing.

And South Korea is manufacturing and services.

So manufacturing is a high complexity for the production mix

of Bangladesh, low complexity for South Korea.

So when China enters WTO brings a lot of manufacturing

exports, pushes Bangladesh.

On agriculture and on services.

So it's an impact on us, which is a true

genius across countries and hopefully is, um, is exogenous.

Okay.

So I will talk about the gains from trade.

And I will be quickly for this part because it's

just some, uh, traditional views.

We have static gains from trade and dynamic gains from

trade.

And for this paper, this paper focuses on some potential

dynamic dynamic inside which is thought by the theory part.

And it actually gives empirical evidence for, uh, progressive dynamic

losses.

Uh, so, uh, a quick revisit of the story of

the paper.

There are some good sectors and best sectors in the

economy and specialising in more complex which is a good

sector, is is good for economy growth.

So partially uh, possible because there are more technology accumulation

or some technological spill-overs in some kind of, uh, sectors.

This paper does not talk a lot about the logic.

It just gives the empirical evidence for the result.

So the next step is when we open up to

treat, uh, the foreign competition will relocate, relocate a country's

resources and retrieves the economy structure.

So the result will be if there, there will be

dynamic gains from trade, if more complex sectors, the sectors

are systematically face softer international competition, the leader economy, and

there will be dynamic losses from trade if more complex

sectors systematically face tougher international competition.

So it's actually the latter one is more close to

our reality.

And uh, uh, to show the results quantitatively and to

separate the dynamic and static, uh, effect of the gains,

it uh, uh, collaborates the model with, uh, the parameters,

uh, comes from the empirical part, which is, uh, is

this.

Uh, is is this.

Is this part?

Working to uh, uh, to eight, uh, to collaborate model

and the construct to have federal authorities.

But, uh, the counterfactual is, uh, when they're, uh, they

remove both dynamic and static gains from trade.

And the counterfactual anarchy two is that they cite the,

uh, culpability level of the counterfactual equals to the uh,

trade benchmark for all data.

So they only remove the, uh, 30 part of the

gains and the dynamic part.

So the difference between the uh, uh, trade equilibrium and

the equilibrium of the second autarky is the static gains

and the difference between two equilibrium, other dynamic models.

Uh, so, uh, these two graphs shows their quantitative results

for the dynamic, for the static and dynamic case.

And we see that, uh, the static is positive for

all countries.

And this is just the standard Ricardian stories.

However, for the dynamic, for the dynamic case.

It is.

Actually makes you for more the.

Metaphysical concrete.

So we have prices and clauses.

So why uh, we actually have this this result is

because actually there are more computation for more complex sectors

which can be shown in this graph.

So after we put the fixed effects, we see that

the complexity of of the good are positively correlated with

the number of countries producing that good.

So there will be more countries, uh, producing more complex

schools.

So there will be a more contagious or more complex

rules.

And in addition to that, uh, condition would be an

export.

It will be exported to more destinations for a more

complex, competitive, less complex.

So the result is, uh, actually the good sectors are

facing more foreign competition under under under the trade.

Afraid so.

So actually we have losses.

Progressive losses from the trade.

So this is a part for, uh, for the gains

from trade.

And I also want to talk about some possible weakness

we concern.

So the first one is we think the measurement of

complexity is very sensitive to the functional form.

So uh, actually the provides this, uh, logic model with

uh, probability of a country exiting a rule is decreasing

within the, uh, complexity in the remaining time.

And the.

Guys.

Exactly.

Uh, inverted results.

So, uh, after after the, uh, probability of exporting A

is decreasing the complexity of a good, uh, there are

negative dynamics.

Spill-overs, uh, which show side is negative.

Now, however, uh, based on.

This functional form.

We have more complex goals, tend to be produced by

fewer countries.

So it's actually the more complex.

Both.

Uh, more complex sectors are now facing, uh, lower competition.

So this little guy is, uh, uh, like, uh, provides

economic losses.

So the result for losses does not change.

However, the measurement of the complexity, uh, exactly inverted.

And, uh, for this part, this part is the assumption

under the data economy.

So, uh, we have the capability is greater than the

complexity.

The probability of a country exporting good will become positive.

So from this assumption, it is straightforward for me that

we should think the probability of exporting good should be

increasing the, uh, the capability and decreased in complexity.

So it is straightforward for me to think this function

of what should be the functions associated with their leader

economy of assumption.

However, in their specification this is right.

Their probability of exporting is increased in both complexity and

capability.

So also is to some extent strange.

So I think maybe it's worth questioning that.

Does the successfully identifies which sector is the sector.

Or they just fund a order of sectors that happens

to generate positives to be verified.

So this is one concern and the next one is

some some possible threats to the IP.

So the exclusion restriction requires of the required size.

The WTO entry means the shifter to be at least

correlated with the capability shocks.

So the universe might itself as good as random after

controlling for the fixed effects, and uncorrelated based on the

current observable variables.

Sci fi capability growth.

However, the left hand left hand side variable uh capability

is five years ago.

So here, uh, in this regression, we have this class

data and have the use of failures.

So although apparently the ivy itself may be uncorrelated with

some of the questions I asked, but, uh, other countries

may have some policy response, uh, within this year after

the system.

Countries in.

The.

WTO.

So, uh, for example, other countries might raise tariffs is

some more complex sectors or increase R&D research.

Uh, and events are in the US in such areas

after a new country joins the WTO and it will

be uh, uh, more so.

So such, uh, policies would correlated with the timing of

the WTO entry, which is a we want it to

be robust and it will impact for the future capabilities.

So this will introduce the endogeneity problem and make their,

uh, share a problem.

And one last point is about the, uh, CPU statistics.

So we have the CP statistics statistics to be less

than a third for the specification.

And it is even lower for the, uh, rebounding part.

And the CP statistics is, uh, far different from the

survival.

So we think, uh, there are problems of uh, hetero

stochastic.

So, uh, this is focussed on that.

And SAS is associated with this problem.

So subsets of our part.

Sorry.

So I mean any questions comments concerns.

Um any questions.

So I have.

Mentioned this is a confusing paper which I think is

fair, right?

It is not an easy paper to read, but what

in particular about it was confusing.

So I think the most part is about.

This functional.

Form.

So they try to use this function to identify.

The.

Complexity of the code, which is interesting.

So if the identification is just they just just say

that there are some.

Rules that are based.

On the others.

And they can also.

Be replaced by.

An E.

And I noticed.

I'm thinking about is actually that if that identifies XYZ

the group is facing life or more foreign competition.

So actually Analysable does foreign computation, does everything from computation

for use by my country or affect my future roles.

So, so.

It's also a topic to be discussed, but is less

interesting.

Okay.

Good.

And I think another.

Confusing.

Point would be like.

In terms of.

Like.

It says like.

So like in this.

Model or this is more the reality.

Is like closer to.

The table.

And so this is like no good.

And and especially when some countries.

The World Trade Organisation especially respect is bad for the

poor countries.

And uh, in this case.

It also.

Says like industry.

Policy like sort of, uh.

Good for your country, but, um.

Bad for the rest of the country.

So it's sort of.

Confusing to what.

Extent we should.

Uh, believe.

There should be.

In a certain policy.

So, like.

That was one confusion that I have in mind.

That's good, though, because it does have this someone unexpected

finding that because there is more competition and the more

complex could push you down the ladder.

So you get these dynamic losses from trading, which I

think is sort of slightly surprising, and thinking through all

the policy implications that this is challenging, that's really been

done.

Yeah.

Okay, good.

We should.

Move on.

Um.

I think a three minute right set up and we

will carry on.

We're going to.

Do whatever you can do.

Thank.

You.

So we still.

Have a minute.

But I think.

This.

Is for the.

Whole time.

Yeah, yeah yeah yeah.

Yes.

Actually.

When I, um.

I fell down the stairs.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I love the.

Oval office.

This.

Is.

It's ten minutes for each one, actually.

Yeah, I.

Think I got a couple more, so I think.

It's good for me.

I don't I don't want to talk about it.

I mean.

Yeah, I that's the last part.

I was.

Just wondering how.

You found.

This topic.

Oh.

Yeah, yeah.

One dimension.

Yeah.

I mean.

Yeah, I mean, I think you granted.

What?

You don't have the connecting thing.

0000.

I don't know which one.

Quicker I can, I have one I can do that.

Okay, I'll just connect.

This.

I remember this doesn't work for the max.

Oh.

So you can log in.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Some kind of.

Yeah, yeah yeah yeah, yeah.

I feel like this isn't.

I don't know who's just.

Yeah.

I'm just gonna do this.

This is someone else's account.

I don't want to say.

I signed out of you, so that's fine.

So Sorry, I just forgot.

I forgot the list.

Okay.

He said.

He was.

Surprised.

He also said he gave me all.

The previous card is too.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah, yeah, actually, he called it back.

Yes, it was some.

Mhm.

Mhm.

Mhm.

So some sectors of basic have no spill-overs and others

have higher orders.

So the competitive advantages shift after the three which may

be harmful.

I also don't remember what about the.

Stuff that came out.

Of it.

So it's like.

Business.

I think.

But if you look.

From the.

Picture so it looks.

Like the.

We're right.

In this part.

Of humanity.

But for the.

Most part.

I suppose, because if we go there, we go.

Okay.

I.

Mean, there are.

Some countries on our average.

Okay.

Let's take a running.

Okay.

This is let's say we start from 45.

Okay.

All right.

So hi, everybody.

Um, the four of us are going to present knowledge

diffusion, trade and innovation across countries and sectors by these

three authors.

Um, so the roadmap generally will be, uh, we'll cover

the motivation and contribution, discuss a bit of comparison with

the paper that we did discuss in detail in class.

Um, and then, uh, other people will cover a model

calibration counterfactual.

And then lastly, we'll have a discussion about what we

think the potential weakness there are with this paper now.

So what will be the research.

What is the research question.

It's the punchline of the paper, which is the first

sentence in the abstract goes we provide a unified framework

for quantifying the cross country cross sector interactions among trade,

innovation and knowledge diffusion.

So I wanted to unpack that.

So the first thing the unifying framework is I think

they deem to be the, uh, contribution.

The cross country bear is an average rate paper that

their error is the cross sector is actually very nicely

covered in the paper right before ours.

Um, essentially, it's a very common setup if you want

to talk about comparative advantage in the trade literature, however,

because um, so how that stands in this paper is

that instead of examining just the quantity of a country

level knowledge stock, we are now thinking about the quantity

and the composition of a country level knowledge stock.

Um, and then the last bit of the trade innovation

and knowledge.

So the, the interaction amongst the three is actually one

of their major contribution that they mentioned.

Um, however, even though this is a familiar concept, um,

it requires a bit more distinct modelling choice for each

component, which I will go over in a little bit.

So I figured it's like because we had covered, um,

and the overfilled in depth in our class.

So it's easy to do a few comparison with this

paper and sort of see what this new, this, um,

Thai paper is doing differently.

So first question is who do you learn from when

you have knowledge diffusion?

So in the bright and overfilled paper that we had

covered, um, your your new your deduce ideas drawn from

the distribution of g of T, and they allow for

different options of this distribution.

So you can learn from the frontier of producers.

You can learn from all the sellers which are importers

into your country and also your domestic sellers.

You could also learn from domestic producers.

So these are the options that export in the overview

paper.

And in this one you learn from everybody, you learn

from domestic electronics and learn from your own sector as

well as the other sectors.

Any innovation from a given country sector will eventually diffuse

to all other country sectors at different speed, of course,

and this will always the diffused idea will always contribute

to local knowledge stock, but only the best idea will

be adopted in production.

So that is who do you learn from?

Now, um, I mentioned this model and choice of innovation

and knowledge diffusion.

So in the paper that we have covered in class,

they do not explicitly separate the two.

Um, because you have your original current product, Q you

get this new ideas productivity of Z, Q prime to

the beta.

It can uh, it's coming from two components.

One is your own innovation, which is just exhaustion as

productivity rolling in the quarter model.

And then the other one is this Q prime, which

as we mentioned, is drawn from the distribution of G

of T.

And these captures the diffuse ideas.

So an example that came up in our discussion was

to think of it as, um, you know, you have

when you write your own paper, this is your own

sort of productivity, and then you read other people's papers

and you get ideas from it.

Um, and of course, the choice of g of T

is sort of what paper do you read?

Um, and then if we consider this paper, they do

make a distinction between innovation, which is new idea generation

and the diffusion of ideas.

So in this paper, what would happen?

I don't know if you can read.

If you can.

I'm very sorry, is that there is an endogenous decision

of R&D investment.

So this will capture the new idea generation block.

And then of course all of the new ideas that's

generated will diffuse to all other country sectors at heterogeneous

rates.

At the same time, other innovators, uh, you know, their

new ideas will arrive at you after heterogeneous lags, which

is, you know, who did this write?

What will this ideas do?

Well, it is it will confuse ideas better.

You will adopt it.

You will adopt it exactly as is, which is in

contrast to this here where you kind of do your

own modification to the diffused idea here in, in this

paper, you are not exactly at this, but regardless of

your adoption, it will always improve your own country sectors

knowledge base, which then improves your innovation efficiency.

That eventually feeds back to your indulgence decision of R&D

investment.

So that is the sort of modelling distinction between innovation

and innovation and diffusion here.

And then lastly I want to discuss uh, sort of

what channel drives diffusion.

So in the paper that we covered in class, um,

diffusion is very tightly linked to trade because the knowledge

stock evolution is explicitly linked to trade shares.

I hear I just I didn't want to use the

entire equation.

So this is the, uh, change in knowledge stock.

So when you learn from sellers, it is proportional to

your share with all the people that you buy from.

Um, and if you learn from producers then it's important

to your, um, trade share.

So the idea there would be, you know, if you're

learning from sellers, then you're learning from the most productive

producers in each of those countries, and they are learning

from your producers.

It has the mallets flavour of, you know, trade would

make the least productive firms in your own country leave.

So then you know, your overall productivity within the domestic

producers are improving.

Now this paper, they mentioned the literature review and the

author is sitting right here.

I really hope he has not a few questions because

I'm reading in depth.

Um, but my understanding is that what's driving the sort

of change in product quality growth is this advent advantage

of backwardness, because, um, you know, if you're further away

from the frontier, then you have your product growth is

faster.

And then the, um, each sector has their own sort

of rate of growth that's being controlled by that.

Um, so anyways, this paper, um, the knowledge diffusion is

exogenous, um, of course, at heterogeneous speed and it's independent

from trade.

So, um, what happens there is that knowledge diffusion independent

from trade will always diffuse to all other country sectors.

Um, and is parametrised by a diffusion speed epsilon.

And this is the epsilon for every country in sector

J to country sector K.

So this is something that they will use data to

discipline.

And then they had mentioned that this as one of

their advantage.

Because they say this allows us to be agnostic about

the channel.

That's that's driving diffusion.

However it could also be viewed as a weakness, which

we'll go over a bit later, um, in that it

makes it difficult to think about when you're doing counterfactuals,

the exact channels.

So, you know, um, to a side of a coin.

So, yeah.

Now so after discussion of the three questions, the main

contribution of this paper, as they mentioned, is the unified

framework that incorporates a lot of inter linkages and heterogeneity.

So, um, what they mentioned is first there's a three

way interaction between trade innovation and diffusion and previous literature.

Some of them look at the relationship between trade and

innovation, trade and diffusion, innovation and diffusion, but rarely add

a three way interaction.

So that's what they consider to be one of their

contributions.

And the second point is a multi-sector environmental sector as

being interconnected by both production and knowledge linkages.

So obviously in the open field paper there isn't different

sectors.

It's just a continuum of homogeneous good.

So the multi-sector environment is also something that they've added

on.

Um, and lastly they say they allow diffusion and trade

to operate separately.

And um, it's just I think a modelling choice there.

And um, so compared to so what would be the

sort of a preview of results, if you will.

Um, compared to models without the key channels that are

considered in this paper, which I'll preview in the next

page, is that they get quantitatively larger and more dispersed

gains from trade.

And what will be these, uh, key channels.

Um, this is my last slide.

Um, so the the first thing is an endogenous productivity

and, um, comparative advantage evolution.

So, you know, without it, obviously you return to the

calendar in a parallel world, if you don't have any

innovation or diffusion, it's just that a gain from trade

driven by the increased specialisation.

Um, but with the endogenous productivity and comparative advantage evolution,

you add dynamic gains from trade, um, and you allow

productivity to evolve over time.

Um, second thing that they consider is heterogeneous input output

linkages.

So now this is something that if you shut down

then the specialisation effect will essentially disappear.

So it is very important to drive to important in

driving the trade induced R&D reallocation to the sectors where

the country has comparative advantage.

And the last the last thing is heterogeneous cross country

sector knowledge.

Spill-overs.

So it is important for arriving at eventually will be

discussing balanced growth path.

So it's important for arriving at heterogeneous productivity level across

country sectors on the balanced growth path.

Um, and the direction of this effect, which I think

in the model part we'll cover a bit more.

Uh, it's actually um, it could either, um, strengthen or

dampen the specialisation effect, but I'll leave that to the

modelling part.

So that's me.

All right.

Uh, I will be just giving you a quick overview

of the model, So this is going to be a

general equilibrium model of indigenous growth that has inter trade

and intermediate goods.

And uh, it will have obviously, as discussed, innovation and

knowledge spill-overs which determine comparative advantage and also the stock

of knowledge.

So they divide the model into two parts what they

call the trade and the gross block.

So first let me talk about the trade block which

is just determining the static equilibrium that's given given distribution

of technology and trade barriers.

So they're just focusing on trade and production here and

not talking about knowledge spill-overs or any kind of innovation.

And so there are multiple countries, sectors, uh, countries in

sectors J and K.

And there is a this obviously the main focus is

going to be intermediate goods.

Those are going to be the focus of the trade

and also the innovation.

And there's going to be a continuum of omega intermediate

goods between on the interval 0 to 1.

One.

And, uh, there's a lot of the trade and production

process very similar to what we saw during the lectures

with like, iceberg trade costs and restaurant competition and all

of those things that, uh, you've seen before.

And, uh, foreign productivity is heterogeneous across countries, sectors and

across firms represented by that.

And productivity is drawn from a fresh distribution that is

characterised by T and theta, which we've also seen before.

And yeah, so from what I've said so far, it's

very similar to this item quantum model with like the

multi-sector aspect added onto it.

And what they do is on top of that, they

embed it into this innovation and knowledge diffusion model, which

I'll be talking about next.

So there is a growth block.

It determines uh, it's basically the endogenous technology.

And they make it very over time.

So there is an endogenous evolution of technology through innovation.

No spill-over innovation is done by separate firms that just

focus on innovation.

There's a continuum of entrepreneurs in each sector and country,

and they invest, ah, to come up with a new

idea.

And ideas are drawn at this Poisson rate that's given

by this expression.

And this lambda is just the exogenous part of this

idea.

Uh, there's t which also is representing the stock of

knowledge is the endogenous part of the idea.

And it changes over time, location sector specific.

And there is s, which is kind of like how

much the amount of investment they're putting into the idea.

And beta is kind of making it a diminishing returns

to the amount of investment that's being put into the

idea.

So that's the knowledge, uh, innovation part.

Then we can talk about diffusion.

So ideas diffuse uh, across sectors and countries as mentioned

before.

And diffusion occurs when a country and a sector learns

about the idea.

And this process takes time.

So it goes from one place to another.

It takes up t plus tau amount of time.

Tau is this diffusion lag.

And it follows an exponential distribution with this epsilon that

we care about which is the speed of the diffusion.

And so now we have this two ways of that

a place gets an idea.

One is by domestic innovation.

So they invest on to get a new idea.

The other way is this diffusion from all of the

other sectors and countries.

And so they can kind of put it all together

into this expression, which shows the evolution of the knowledge

stock and the country.

So we have this idea, this lambda t s is

like the investment in new ideas.

And then we're adding it across all of the cost

periods.

So it doesn't matter if the idea was invented today

or a few years ago or whatever.

It's all adding across all periods, across all sectors, across

all countries.

So they have access to all of these ideas, but

they're diffusing at different rates.

So that's the diffusion part.

Then next part is adoption.

So ideas will be adopted if they're at least as

productive as the ideas that are already being used in

that country.

And that idea applies to a specific intermediate good.

And another aspect of this is that like they're going

to adopt only the best idea.

So this is like a definitely an assumption that other

papers use as well.

But there are also others that consider maybe like they

may not adopt the best idea because of this different

capabilities of adoption.

Maybe not everyone can adopt the best idea, but here

it's assumed that everyone can adopt the best idea.

And so that's just about adoption.

There is.

How does this investment decision work for, uh, the investment

R&D investment?

Uh, these entrepreneurs, uh, innovative firms, they finance R&D activities

by issuing equity to households, and then they choose R&D

investment to maximise this expression, which actually is, uh, where

it's very important.

So we have this new idea and then V is

the value of this new idea.

And then uh, PR is the costs that they spend

on it.

So V is uh, the value of the innovation created

at time t and diffused and adopted in that sector

and, uh, country because, uh, so they only have intellectual

property, right?

Protection only within the country, within the sector.

So it's only within one particular sector.

And then so they only profit from ideas that are

adopted in their own country sector.

Every other diffusion is just spill-over.

They're not getting any benefit from it.

So this V has a very ugly expression that I

didn't put here.

But there is something important included in it that I

wanted to mention, which is that the value of the

innovation, it depends on one on the knowledge talk in

the country, in the in the country sector that diffuses

to.

So the more, uh, the higher the knowledge stock, the

less valuable this new innovation is going to be in

that place.

And the other part is this is actually where trade

comes in so far in talking about knowledge diffusion innovation,

we haven't talked about trade.

So this is where trade comes in.

The value of this innovation depends on how whether the

intermediate good that is used uh, to that is produced

using this innovation.

Whether it becomes the low cost uh supplier of that

like it becomes a low cost supplier.

So if it really depends on the countries, uh, the

sectors expenditure chairs in these other places.

So that's where R&D investment is in part driven by

these trade factors.

So uh, yeah.

Lastly, maybe we can talk about how knowledge spill-overs affect

the gains from trade.

So first they do talk about how trade affects, uh,

comparative advantage, innovation and growth and then knowledge Spill-overs can

sort of, uh, interact with these effects.

So speaking of uh, first starting to talk about this

part, uh, as mentioned earlier, uh, there is always like

with that one, you don't add all of these, uh,

endogenous comparative advantage.

We still have this specialisation gains from trade where, uh,

production is going to the most, uh, the, the places

where there is higher comparative advantage.

So we lower trade costs that that part is not

new.

And then what happens is, uh, once the lower trade

cost moves, uh, production to those places with the greater

comparative advantage there is going to be.

The R&D allocation is also going to follow that because,

as I mentioned earlier, the R&D investment decision was also

influenced by weather.

Uh, by trade.

So R&D investment will be allocated to those sectors that

have the highest, uh, comparative advantage.

And then actually since R&D affects uh, the stock of

knowledge, it also affects comparative advantage.

So there is this kind of uh feedback loop where

comparative advantage affects your R&D allocation, which in turn goes

back and affects your comparative advantage.

So this is kind of like a larger gains from

trade than just comparative advantage effect.

And then they also mentioned that uh it affects growth.

Uh I'm not going through it.

Interest of time.

Uh, let me just talk about the second part, which

is how the knowledge spill-overs kind of affect this effect

of trade.

So, uh, there is a heterogeneous diffusion of ideas across

different places.

And so this leads to a heterogeneous knowledge spill-overs.

And this could either dampen or amplify the effects of

trade liberalisation.

So it depends on whether less innovative or more innovative

countries are better at absorbing knowledge.

So if there is a country is more, uh, better

at absorbing knowledge, uh, like lower, uh, less innovative places

are better at absorbing knowledge, then there's going to be

less dispersion and more convergence.

So this productivity is going to be similar across places.

But if these, uh, more innovative countries are the ones

that are also better at adopting ideas from other good

innovators, then there's going to be, uh, more dispersion in

the productivity, and we're going to see more specialisation.

So this kind of, uh, knowledge spill-over effects, this, uh,

comparative advantage, effects of trade.

And next we'll talk about the how they calibrate the

model.

I will present the present part.

And at first I want to give an overview of

the calibration process.

And for the paper, they calibrated the model with the

9090 sectors.

And there are three sets of parameters they need to

calibrate.

And the first part is gas knowledge knowledge diffusion.

And the second part is production and trade.

And the third part is innovation parameters.

And then interestingly you can find that the third part

just corresponds to the paper title or knowledge.

This knowledge diffusion trade and innovation.

And I think the diffusion calibration is the key part

of the paper.

So I will talk talk this in detail following.

And I want to say here they use the patent

and the patent citation data from US Patent and Trademark

Office for the period 2001 to 2010, and for production

parameters they just following the standard calibration process.

You can call them and nonpareil and for trade cost

the following the classical paper of 22 and for the

input of the share the just using the input output

tables data in parallel data of the Nasdaq and the

J is the final final goods called Douglas share and

the data is intermediate sectors called Douglas production function share

and the data is the trade elasticity row is the

consumer utilities consumer utilities discount rates and therefore in the

innovation path the just calibrate this based on data for

R&D intensity and based on the estimated parameters above.

And then I will dive deep dive deeper into the

knowledge diffusion.

And the method is an expansion of Caballero.

And in 1993, and they want to estimate the speed

of knowledge diffusion.

So I am a JK and uh, and the and

the country JK is the sector.

And uh, for data we can read from US patent

and citation data.

We have two variables.

The first is number of patent citations.

Let's say I k and the t and s represents

the time.

And the engine is uh country sector.

Right here is another country sector.

And uh, another variable we need is the number of

patent applications.

And the idea is that the one country that the

parent and it has the time.

So, so what have these two variables two class uh

GMM method.

And uh, we have first we need to specify a

citation function.

And it's a very long equation.

So uh, so I just want to simply explain this

equation for us.

That's the way you know, these two parts.

I'd say this first part.

There are three key parameters delta five, delta psi and

that they can be just understood understood as a country

sector specific fixed cost.

And number five is just the process to decide.

For example, if I am in this sector and I

have a new idea, maybe I need five patents to

describe this patent.

And it's a country sector feature.

So I just want you to control for this.

And this goes to control for that and for Delta.

It's just the ability to generate spill-overs.

For example, I have a new idea and many people

want to test my patents.

So I also need to control this and decide it

as a patent.

I have the data.

For example, I need five patents to describe my data

in the sector I need.

This will help me to control.

This.

And I thought, this part is very tough.

And, um, and, uh, well, density is just relative location,

the application number and the final.

Is that what we want.

To have is.

The noise.

Uh.

And then finally we just use the sigma method to

estimate A and JK and we can see the estimation

results here.

Uh, and uh, one thing I want to, uh, emphasise

is that this is known as generous and time invariant

because during the estimation, uh, process, we don't use any

parameters from our data from trade or innovation.

It's just an independent and a separate module, and it's

just off the screen.

And we can see this graph that, uh, for highest

diffusions build this graph first, uh, they order by sector

and my country.

And you can see that for computers.

Sectors that have computers.

And because they are rated as very fast, but also

that's.

A.

Bit counter intuitive to agriculture.

But maybe it's because of calculations it's easier to refuse.

Maybe that's the reason.

And then the lowest is good or and the model

of warehouse.

So we can see that they are estimation result is

is intuitive and it makes sense.

And the next stuff is first order first by country

and then by sector.

And you can see the diffusion faster.

And the US, Germany and Japan and the lowest region

stayed at the protocol Norway and Spain.

And another interesting finding is that when we can say

this is more precise and you can say it has

more variations, so we can say that sector has more

variation for different speed.

Uh, and then.

Finally we can use this estimation.

Estimated parameters to decompose the contribution of domestic and foreign

R&D activity.

And this equation from the balanced growth path and the

G.

The common growth rate under TNG is the knowledge of

country uh, specific country sector.

And we can decompose it to every country sectors.

And I have because every country, every sector has knowledge

diffusion to to data specific sectors.

So I can just add up the domestic sector and

we can say how to domestic R&D intensity to reflect

its own productive production.

And we can see that Germany has the largest, uh,

domestic share is about 40% of all, followed by Canada

and Japan's about 20%.

And the counterintuitive is the U.S. has 40%, 14%, um,

because the US is the most innovative.

Uh, they also benefit a lot from other countries.

So that's the reason why the data is and this

is my part.

Yeah.

What do you think explains why some countries have faster

diffusion speeds than others, either as the origin country or

the destination country?

Yeah.

I think maybe it's because some countries comparative advantage, for

example, us may uh, more that computers and this technology

is easier to diffuse.

And, uh, I think that's one of the reasons.

Or maybe they have more, uh, uh, international firms.

I think it's also one strategy to diffuse it.

And the, the problem that is our diffusion rate is

time invariant.

So it's a very long period means.

So I think that's okay.

But we also.

Know what you mean by the countries in Germany and

Japan.

So.

But is it a problem then for the paper that

I mean that's the most important one.

To some extent, they also seem like the personal variables

that are emerging over time.

Whereas in the model the files are.

Yeah, it's kind.

Of a matrix.

You can see what it does to the face, but

does it matter.

I think that that.

Yeah, that's a.

Lot of paper.

Speaking of that.

Let me say thank you and your questions about the

assets.

The.

Knowledge.

And the intensity.

So yeah, I was thinking more about that sort of

kind of I thought it was just about thinking about

how Yeah, they all get silent status in the backyard.

And you ask the question, does that make sense or

anywhere, you know?

Um, yeah.

Um, so.

Yeah, I will consider, uh, three counterfactual exercises.

Um, firstly, just a technical note, uh, that, uh, uh,

for this counterfactual exercise, they consider the decrease in, uh,

the uniform decrease in all countries and sectors of the

iceberg costs minus one by 25% for all time.

Uh, and just how they, uh, so for this counterfactual,

they use the calibrated values and then make a new

static equilibrium.

Then also they obtain, uh, new research and development and

density.

And using the Frobenius theorem, they find you a growth

rate of, um, of stock of knowledge as well as

the level.

And then they repeat this just by iterating until they

have the convergence for the growth rate.

Um, yeah.

Um, so just the, the mechanism, uh, they um, focus

on is that research and development allocation.

Uh, so as a result of the trade liberalisation, there

is a reallocation of research and development across sectors which

are more competitive in production.

And.

Also when the trade is more liberalised, the uh, effects

of uh, of this um advanced uh advantage in production

is larger for um, uh, is larger on, uh, restriction

density.

Yeah.

Um, also, uh, competitive advantage in the knowledge of stock

becomes more dispersed.

across sectors.

And because we have, uh, because of the the amplification

resulted in the diffusion mechanism, we also have that the

growth rate of stock of knowledge has, uh, is non-linear.

Yeah.

Um, and welfare gains are also largely large and dispersed,

ranging from 8% to 36.

Um, yeah.

Um, so in the counterfactual.

So this is, this was the like the difference in

the, in the economy, the, the policy change and in

the so they exploit how this counterfactual, uh, analysis difference

differs when we switch the key uh, uh properties of

the model.

So firstly they switch the author switch uh, in the

genius productivity.

So they have the stock of knowledge, which is, uh,

constant over time.

And, um.

Yeah.

And, uh, and, uh, sectors.

Yeah.

It should be.

No, just.

Yeah.

Over time because it becomes endogenous.

Yeah.

And uh, secondly, they switch also multiple sectors.

And the result is, uh, just that the welfare gains

are, are, uh, the distribution of welfare gains from trade

switch to the left and becomes more concentrated.

Um, so it just shows that the importance of the

transmission, um, uh, of the trade liberalisation effect because of

this, uh, two key, um, uh, ingredients of the model.

And thirdly, they, uh, consider, uh, they shut down the

mechanism for, uh, diffusion.

Knowledge diffusion.

They consider this in in two ways.

The, uh, less.

Less extreme is where they assume just that the diffusion

speed epsilon is.

Homogeneous across all sectors and countries.

And the second case is when it's, um, I mean,

when it is almost, uh, it's quite negligible for, uh,

inter sector and for across sectors and countries.

So epsilon equals to almost zero for j not equal

to k and n not equal to I.

Um and they find that elasticity of research intensity with

respect to uh competitive advantage in production drops.

Uh, and the drop is uh, higher for.

For the more extreme.

Case when uh, there is no inter across sector, uh,

diffusion also, um, we find weaker reallocation effect of research

and development with respect to a competitive advantage in production

as well.

And the growth rate growth rate of diffusion is very,

very small compared to the baseline model, which was around

14 percentage points.

Here it's less than one.

And also uh, this uh counterfactual delivers uh, lower and

less dispersion of gains from trade as well as for

previous ones.

And here is just the illustration that, uh, the growth

rate of research on the stock of knowledge, uh, the

fact that it was non it grew non-linear, it was

trade liberalisation was uh, uh, was it was easy to

assume the.

Heterogeneous.

Um, either a genius, uh, diffusion of parameter epsilon.

Yeah.

And as a bonus, they also, uh, conduct the Brexit

counterfactual where they assume a decrease, uh, sorry, increase in

trade costs by 25%, um, for UK, uh, from from

UK to European countries.

And the tit for tat response, um, they find that

the world growth rate doesn't change much.

But at the same time the UK suffers mostly, um,

its welfare.

They experience experience a welfare loss of 10%.

Ireland also among the like lose uh more than others

us not much but Norway because it does not.

Uh, the assumption that Norway gains from it is because

it's not the member of the European Union, but still

integrated in the, uh, European economics.

So the production like reallocated to Norway, um, also UK

in Ireland experience largest, uh decrease in research development while

European countries country experienced an increase.

And interestingly so for the analysis of particular sector, particular

sectors, the research and development relocates from chemicals and vehicles,

electronics and equipment, optical equipment towards transportation, food and refined

petroleum products.

Okay.

Yes.

Um, so we also have four minutes and we also

discuss the weaknesses.

Right.

Um, so the first thing is that, as we mentioned

before, calculating the value of investing in innovation, generating new

ideas that the variable, it's, um, it's generated, it's assuming

that the intellectual property rights only reinforce within the country

sector and, um, any.

And if another country's adopted your idea and then they

make gains from they make profit that that doesn't go

to you at all.

Um, I mean, the paper also considers that other it

could be altered, although the extreme case where this impact

on property rights is perfectly reinforced for all country sectors.

Um, but I think in reality, perhaps somewhere in the

middle is more of, uh, normally the intellectual property rights

enforcement trend is normally at the country level.

Um, so this kind of like condo protection might be

more realistic, uh, whereas country specific is too narrow or

the other side is too.

So that's one of the common ground.

Um, and then our kind of mentioned, um, whereas the

model choice and softness and diffusion, um, you know, it

really could.

Be.

Considered as one of the strengths of this group.

Clearly they have a reason and they discuss it in

the paper.

Um, but also there are other papers doing that which

is claiming a some specific channel for diffusion.

So 3.8 um, preference of the authors.

Um.

I can talk about this one.

It's more I mentioned in a while talking about the

model, which is how you're just always adopting the best

idea instead of considering that, like, maybe they may not

be able to do that.

So that's that's my topic for this questions.

You mentioned, I mean, are you going to link this

to the where they talked about the comparisons.

So suppose you kind of had this stage of this

where you.

The knowledge diffusion rates depended on trade.

As if I were overfitting model.

I don't want that.

Can you think through how that might change the results?

Is there a way that we could.

Um.

Um.

Trade across the Lord and a trade.

One that will be faster than this one.

Yeah, I can do that.

If it's if trade speeds up the rate of knowledge

diffusion, can you show you those kind of factors?

If you slow down the rate of knowledge diffusion again

and then so.

I think it's.

Going to.

Be a very.

Hi, guys.

Um, on top of that, and the bit that I

think is more difficult for me to write, they stress

that the the genetic knowledge level across countries and sectors

matters in kind of quite complex way and how that

we interact with trade.

And I think.

You know, what appears.

To me at least.

Okay.

All right.

Good job.

Thank you.

Okay.

Let's move on to last presentation at the time.

I think just, uh.

Never mind.

Oh, where is it?

Hi.

Do you have a the.

Yeah.

Any connector or something?

Make an adaptor.

Bennett.

Can I borrow your adaptor?

Um.

Sorry.

Take it off.

Are there any interesting trade candidates on the market this

year?

Uh.

I don't know yet.

We'll be looking at the files.

Oh, no.

No, everybody can see my stuff.

This is crazy.

Um, we never.

Um, pretend to be hiring at any table.

Come on.

No, no.

Sorry.

Once I have it for sure.

Yeah.

They can.

So we'll be happy next.

Okay.

So exciting.

Okay, I think I'm done.

Yes.

Um.

I guess not.

Yes.

Please don't see me.

Okay, I'll take this stuff.

Okay.

Oh, good.

Okay.

Let's go.

All right.

Okay.

Hi, everybody.

Um.

So today we're going to talk about Shapiro 2020 QG

paper, The Environmental Bias of Trade Policy.

Um.

This paper presents a previously underexplored fact.

That most of the countries in the world during industries

face lower tariffs, tariffs and non-tariff barriers than clean the

streets.

But dirty, it means higher carbon dioxide emissions for a

particular unit of output, and clean means the country.

The author refers to this pattern as trade policies, environmental

bias or global implicit subsidy.

According to the estimation of this paper, the global implicit

subsidy is about $85 to $120 per ton of CO2

emissions.

Um, while the social cost is $40 per ton.

So the optimal taxation implies that we should impose a

uniform tax of $40 per ton.

But in reality, this taxation is clearly not imposed.

And on the country we have subsidies towards CO2 emission.

And totally people might sing dirty industries face, uh, lower

level or higher level of trade protection due to media

coverage.

Uh, but this is not the case, according to the

paper, because Dirty Industries has lower tariffs and non-tariff barriers.

So why do countries subsidise dirty industries?

Uh, the author thinks that countries do not explicitly consider

CO2 emission or intend to subsidise it when choosing the

trade policy.

To find out the driving force behind the association between

CO2 intensity and trade policy, this paper considers explanations based

on 20 variables, and it finds out that the location

of an industry, or the upstream of an industry in

the global chain, can account for a large share of

this association.

The following two graphs show the main idea illustrated in

the paper.

The downward dashed blue line is the regression of CO2

intensity on upstream, and it says that the most upstream

industry has the highest level of CO2 intensity, and the

upward sloping red solid line in the regression of tariffs

plus NB rate on upstream.

And it says the most upstream industry has the lowest

level of tariff and and TB rates.

Uh, the patents are similar for the US and the

global data.

A back of the envelope calculation suggests that the global

implicit subsidy is 550 to $800 billion a year, and

it also uses a quantitative model to conduct the counterfactual

analysis.

The main contributions of this paper include.

First, this paper is the very first to document the

association between, uh, CO2 intensity and trade policy.

And it's also the first to quantify the environmental consequences

of harmonising trade policy between 30 and clean the streets.

Second, this paper introduces tariffs and non-tariff barriers as a

new setting to study political economy and environment.

Shapiro argues that the association mentioned in the paper can

largely be accounted for by the upstream needs of industry

in the global chain, where upstream carbon intensive industries face

lower level of trade protection due to the downward stream

industry lobbying pressure on these inputs.

And third, this paper has important policy implications.

In our first, best setting, where every country imposes the

same carbon price on CO2 emission.

Uh.

Trade policy plays no role in devising the efficient climate

change policy in a second, best setting where, due to

political economy constraints, the optimal climate change policy might be

infeasible.

Considering environmental consequences when devising trade policy could significantly improve

people's welfare.

Under either case, subsidies towards CO2 emission may be inefficient.

You're not meant to see that.

Sorry.

Uh.

Ignore that.

I don't know what's happening.

Um.

Thank you.

All right.

Okay.

So.

So limiting the greater protection of clean relative dirty goods

could increase welfare.

And, uh.

We will start with, uh, reducing result of this paper,

which establishes this, uh, new fact that there is an

implicit carbon subsidy and also does so using data on

three.

Aspects of the.

Situation.

First, uh, he collects, uh, tariffs at the six digit

level.

And also the non-tariff barriers to trade, including price regulation

and product standards, etc..

And he collects that from another paper.

Then he Extracts CO2 emissions at the country by industry

level from zero base.

The data itself comes with direct usage of emission at

each product level, and he uses the input output linkages

to invert the processes involved in producing each product.

And that gives him a new, uh, lifecycle measure of

total emission.

And then he combines the data with a set of,

uh, political economy variables.

He does so with, uh, the demand side variables, which

he thinks correlates with, uh, benefits of, uh, reducing of

increase in production in a particular industry.

And also the supply side, which includes factors that the

shapes the lobbying costs.

And, for example, the geographic dispersion of an industry and

also a direct measure of political influence.

Contribution.

Although he does not find a result here and says

it is not a perfect measure.

So May's regression specification is, uh, as regression with uh

tariff and NB as uh, outcome, and he regresses the,

uh, outcome, um, basically a measure of emission at the

industry country level.

And, uh, the country would be the destination importing country.

He arrives at this level by looking at the import

of country J in industry s across the supplier countries,

and whether that by the trade flows.

And then in subsequent analysis he adds.

This.

F jasper revolt user regression, which includes the political economy

variables.

He also includes a country fixed effect when there is

no political economy variable in the regression.

The alpha parameter here has a nice interpretation of uh

uh, basically it is the carbon tax or carbon subsidy.

And uh, to address the, uh, potential measurement error in

this emission variable because it is derived from an input

output table.

He uses the direct emission as an instrument of total

emission.

So the first main result is this, uh, relationship between,

uh, carbon intensity and the tariffs and NDB are again

for both the global data and the US data, we

find that the more carbon intensive and industry is, the

less tariff at the MDB it faces.

And this is a new fact that he documents.

Uh, in regression terms, you can see after an instrument

in total emission with direct emission, we have that, uh,

that industry has, uh, more, uh, carbon.

One.

More time.

It's, uh, tariff goes up.

Goes down by three.

And the need goes on in a major regression, in

a major regression, the second volume would be coming in

and adding those two those up.

That uh, is the answer.

So the estimate of 85 to $100 per ton of

CO2 subsidy, that is implicit in the trade policy chosen

by the countries.

This is a new and interesting fact and also attempts

to, uh, explain it.

Uh, he.

He says it's a political economy explanation for this, and

he produces this exercise.

The logic exercise is, uh, to identify a factor, uh,

that is associated with carbon intensity and shapes tariff.

Uh, what he does is he includes these, uh, factors

one by one into the regression.

And if, uh, factors, um, satisfies the two conditions we

mentioned associated with CO2 and shapes, uh, tariff.

It would attenuate the estimate that we obtained from this

regression.

So when he does this, one by one, he finds

that the only factors, the only factor that, uh, attenuates

the estimate of subsidy is upstream this.

And this result is robust to also using, uh, lasso

of regression for variable selection.

And, uh, this is what he calls a political economy.

I think one weakness of the paper is that, uh,

he does not link directly how this relates to lobbying

and etc., but I think it just does not detract.

His does not detract from his main, uh, contribution of

documenting the concerns.

Okay.

Um, so I'm going to talk about the model and,

um, the way I see it, the paper really sells

this new fact, and it tries to do something that

tries to tell us something about, like, suppose I change

policy based on this new fact that I derived what

would be the impacts on global welfare?

But, um, based on my reading of the model, I

don't think it's a very fully fledged and super complicated

model.

And it's also not a super transparent model in the

sense that you didn't really tell us about how he

calibrated some of the parameters.

But, uh, so so he starts with he's the key

empirical fact, or he's big headline number, which is based

on these regression estimates.

If you recall, this is the relationship between carbon emissions

intensity and tariffs or non-tariff barriers.

Then he basically multiplies that by the emissions per, uh,

per unit of output produced in sector J, sorry in

country J and sector S and then multiply that by

tracer.

So the idea is that he wanted to get a

global total value of subsidy based on how much is

traded.

Between countries and how much emissions.

Traded output generates multiplied by the per unit subsidy.

And um, getting these regression estimates, which was about, um,

you know, uh, something like 40, 32 to 40.

Um, he finds that the global trade policy provided an

aggregate implicit subsidy of about 500 to $800 billion value

in 2016, and as a way to benchmark the magnitude,

he basically said that, you know, we know that directly,

fossil fuels have the fossil fuel industry and fossil fuel

consumption in general experiences, uh, experiences subsidies of about 500

billion USD in 2007.

So what he's saying is that countries are unwittingly subsidising

the consumption of fossil fuel.

And through this, our subsidising emissions of CO2 without really

knowing that.

So it's more about they implement policies for political economy

or reasons completely unrelated to explicitly subsidising, uh, uh, fossil

fuel consumption.

And in the end, this results in the magnitude of

the subsidy from trade being even greater than the direct

subsidy.

So let me just walk you through the basic elements

of the model.

He's going to start.

With.

Uh, two country, two sector, uh, symmetric example, and then

he's going to extend it to a multi country multi

industry model.

When he does counterfactuals uh we're going to focus on

the two country two sector case.

And then in the counterfactuals we're going to talk about

the counterfactual based on multi-sector region multi-sector region model.

It's a static model.

So when he does counterfactual he's really comparing a static

equilibrium.

Because assuming there is no adjustment cost, like, you know,

I magically change tariffs and boom, the numbers come up,

there is no adjustment.

There's no unemployment sector reallocation or anything like that.

That's actually going to be an important limitation.

So the model is going to be a very basic

representative consumer model who has preferences.

That's based on CSS consumption aggregate.

The utility of the representative consumer country is going to

be basically summing up how much they consume in each

sector.

And it's going to be.

A.

Functional form.

So they're going to consume a fixed share from sector

S.

And utility is going to be multiplicative in this pollution

damages.

So in the multicenter multi country version of the model

he's going to explicitly parameterise the functional form of pollution

damages as basically is going to decrease.

Utility by how much.

Was meant to relative to a baseline.

Bush model.

And based on pollution level.

And this is the global pollution and Delta is key

sort of marginal damage of one more unit of pollutant,

which he's found.

The central estimates from the pollution sorry climate damage.

children's literature to be about for the US dollars per

ton.

Um, and this is going to derive he's going to

be able to derive a sector country specific price index,

which is going to be dependent on the trade elasticity

which governs substitution between goods.

Uh, importantly, when we think about a counterfactual, is the

main thing that a counterfactual can change is going to

change the tariffs between, uh, sector, between country, uh, countries

I and J and sector J.

Uh sorry, in sector S so the trade cost is

going to be three components.

You're going to have an iceberg trade costs.

You're going to have a tariff component.

Then you're going to have a non-tariff barrier component.

So he's going to mainly be playing with the T

component and not changing these two other components.

The technologies is a very basic well it's straightforward, uh,

relatively straightforward, uh, technology where, you know, in industry you

consume state share of inputs from different sectors.

S and then unit costs of producing in country are

as is going to be dependent on wage multiplied by

the price indexes, which are still by how much they

consume from that.

Input.

Sector.

The other important thing to note here is that wage

doesn't change by sector.

So so so he basically is holding history of.

Excluding the.

Channel where, you know, any change in terms is also

going to change.

Sector.

Wages differently.

Consumer utility maximisation is going to derive this a nice

neat form of the amount of expenditure of country J

a country I from country J in sector S, and

it's going to be made basically the expenditure share multiplied

by the total expenditure in country J in sector S.

Um, yes.

And as we were saying in the two country to

sector model, he is going to simplify the way that

he defines pollution damages.

So this is the total amount of pollution that is

emitted by country.

When you sell to a good location J.

Because of our assumption that you only have two countries

in two sectors, sector one is the dirty sector, which

is why we call it CIJ one.

And implicitly you say this is actually the amount of.

Uh, the amount of.

The amount of output that the country is going to

sell to location J because it's going to be how

much they spend divided by the per unit cost production

or a factory gate price, and then also multiply by

the tariff.

So implicitly by drawing this equivalency, saying that per unit

of output produced that that's being.

Sold or the country.

Is due to location, J is also the amount of

pollution damages.

So in the full model he's going to play around

with not making it to equivalent, but instead having a

different sector country specific emissions intensity.

Um, and in this two country to sector model countries,

total pollution emissions is just going to be summing up

to all the countries, uh, sorry, emissions that they generated

from other countries.

And then the total.

Global emissions on.

Which the representative consumer utility is dependent is just going

to be summing out pollution in two countries.

Um, and because we're dealing with a static equilibrium, the

equilibrium conditions are just consumers maximise utility, the firms maximise

profit.

And both goods and labour markets were clear.

And he imposes this balanced trade condition where the total

expenditure by sector j in sorry my country j in

sector S is going to be equalised with the total

revenue.

So this would be how much you get from paying

from, from the fact from hay to the factors.

And that would be how much you get from tariff

revenues.

And this assumes that tariff revenues are redistributed to the

consumers.

And that's going to be the contributing you get from

selling the goods to intermediate.

Intermediates, uh, as.

Intermediates to other sectors.

And there's also going to be a labour market clearing

condition.

The other, uh, limitation that we were saying is that

he assumes labour is in the last stage.

So the only margin that the only main margin of

response is really through adjusting, uh, adjusting tariff revenues and

adjusting intermediate, uh, revenues when he does the counterfactuals.

So he focuses on a few counterfactuals in the paper.

But we're going to focus on one main counterfactual, which

is also the one that is extensively discussed.

So as you recall from the empirical results, we have

this sort of negative relationship between, uh, the amount of

CO2 intensity and the level of tariffs.

So you say, okay, one very simple thing that you

could do is you sort of remove this implicit subsidy

by increasing tariffs on dirty industries and reducing tariffs on

clean industries.

Um, and he claims that this is a somewhat policy

relevant and feasible counterfactual by seeing that this is actually

similar to WTO style trade negotiations that eliminate tariff escalations,

or from some environmental lobbying from tariff for tariff harmonisation

between clean and dirty industries.

So he's going to in a counterfactual, he's going to

do it for everyone.

Right?

So he's going to say everyone's going to equalise the

tariff in all the industry as this weighted mean baseline

tariff.

So I'm going to weight the tariff by how much

that I trade.

Sorry.

I'm going to weigh the tariff that I get to

the other country.

Uh, based on how much I trade within and the

sector, uh, intensity emissions intensity.

And we use this exact algebra to get the two

main changes in a two relevant outcomes of interest.

The first is changes in both country emissions and global

emissions.

You would just sum up the changes in each country's

emissions to get changes in global emissions and then changes

in countries welfare.

Um, so there's some intuition that goes into the interpretation

of the changes in both of the outcomes.

The changes in emissions is a is a function of

changes in real expenditure of dirty goods.

So the idea is that if you increase tariffs on

dirty goods, you're going to basically reduce expenditures on on

dirty goods.

And that could actually uh.

Yes.

Like that.

Sorry.

Wait.

Um.

Yes.

Sorry.

Do you increase tariffs on dirty goods.

So we're going to change expenditures, real expenditures on dirty

goods.

And then so that's sort of the scale effect.

And then the second component is this like composition effect

which is as you change tariffs on dirty goods you're

also going to change the pollution intensity.

Basically you're going to change on average what's the CO2

emission intensity of the goods that the country spends on.

Um and there is a nominator numerator.

And this whole term the denominator is really the uh

trade share on.

Sorry.

Um.

Yes, the denominator is the inverse of the change in

domestic expenditure share under Regan.

So the idea is that as I increase tariffs, you're

basically going to increase, uh, domestic emissions, domestic emissions from,

from producing more of the polluting goods domestically instead of

trading, importing them.

And the numerator, the numerator is going to be basically

the emissions um from, from exporting.

So both of these terms are going to govern how

much pollution will change as you increase tariffs on dirty

goods.

And both of these terms are actually sensitive to the

magnitude of the trade, uh, elasticity.

Um, and then when we think about how a country's

welfare is going to change, when you increase tariffs on

dirty goods is going to be a function of the

changes in nominal expenditure from tariffs.

So the idea is that suppose if I just increase

tariffs on dirty goods, that's going to allow me to

collect more and more revenues from tariffs.

And that's going to be an income effect.

But at the same time, sorry.

Yes.

But at the same time, because I'm increasing tariffs on

dirty goods, that's going to basically increase prices that I

get both from increasing prices and the final rebates that

I consume, but also from increasing prices of the dirty

from intermediaries that I'm using in my production.

And that's going to reduce welfare.

And then finally, my welfare is going to change because

of the changes in pollution.

So in the counterfactual results, he's going to find that

this normal expenditure effects and the price index effects are

actually going to be a bit more important than the

welfare effects due to changes in pollution.

And the reason he gives is that right now, our

estimates of the damages for improving the pollution might be

underestimated, because we're only using past changes in emissions and

past temperature shocks, for example, to infer the economic cost

of of one degree warming.

But we're not really We don't really know anything out

of support.

Like we don't know what would be the damage is

one more degree of warming when we are five degrees

out of the historical mean levels.

So this is the estimated changes in key outcomes of

interest when you do this baseline made counterfactual of making

harmonising tariffs based on the weighted tariff rate for all

the trading partners.

So in penalty we're just going to have a change.

Change in global CO2 emissions, changes in global income and

changes in emissions intensity.

So this is the composition sorry.

This is sort of the.

Technique.

Effect which is that what is the changing the average

CO2 intensity of production in the global economy.

And then that would be the changes in welfare due

to changes in pollution.

And that would be the.

Total aggregate.

Changes in social, uh, social welfare.

And he's going to find that harmonising tariffs will.

Reduce.

Global CO2.

Emissions, but the magnitude.

Of the benefits.

Is only $40.

Marginal damages is actually really small, and that's also going

to lead to an overall increase in social welfare, not

just a fall in emissions.

And that's primarily driven by changes in real income, which

is a modest positive magnitude.

And you're going to see that there is some heterogeneity

in, for example, changes in emissions and changes in CO2

intensity across different regions.

So in these counterfactuals, he's going to assume that there

are 32 sectors and there are only ten regions of

the economy of the world is going to split euro.

And then you're going to have the classic Latin America,

North America and other other places.

Um, so when you just harmonise tariffs, the intuitive reason

why you see such a large increase in CO2 emissions

in, for example, Western Europe and to another extent to

southern Europe is because these are the countries which impose

the highest, uh, tariff.

Sorry, the lowest tariff rates on dirty industries.

And as you increase tariff, you're basically going to lead

to this reallocation of production in a dirty industry back

to countries in Western Europe and southern Europe that's going

to increase their domestic emissions.

Um, and then the other thing that he does is

he decomposes the total effect of CO2 emissions into changes

in emissions due to changes in output, changes in emissions

due to changes in the composition of industries that produce,

and finally, changes in emissions due to changes in the

emissions intensity of a given industry.

And you're going to see that because the increase in,

uh, total income or, Albert, you're going to have a

positive effect from scale.

But both composition and technique effects reflect this idea that

by harmonising tariffs, you're really decreasing the share of, uh,

CO2 intensity from, from, from dirty sectors.

And you're also going to decrease the CO2 intensity of

a given of, of a given sector.

And then the one limitation of the model is obviously

he's not able to, sir, he's not able to, uh,

go into the specific details other than decomposing by, uh,

emissions, income and, uh, the technique effects.

But he's not going to be able to tell us,

for example, how much of the changes in, uh, emissions

from changes in trade policies due to changes in transportation

or changes in other specific input purchases?

And he seeks to.

Oh.

Oh, sorry.

Sorry.

Um, yeah.

He seeks to give an indirect answer to this question

by saying, okay, so I'm going to decompose the changes

in emissions when I do the counterfactual by changes by

fossil fuel types.

And the idea is that we know coal is primarily

consumed by heavy raw material processing industries.

And we know that oil is primarily consumed by transportation,

and we know that natural gas is natural, gas is

primarily consumed by other sectors and maybe more consumer facing

services.

So by looking at the relative magnitude of changes in

fossil fuel consumption across fuel types, I can say something

about to what extent is the observed changes in CO2

emissions driven by changes in transportation?

And we do find that most of the the largest

reduction really comes from reduction in consumption of oil.

So I mean, intuitively, the most intuitive answer is that

because I am sort of reducing the subsidy that I

give through trade to dirty industries and some some of

the reasons why some industries are dirty is because they

consume a lot of oil and they transport far away.

So bye bye sort of stops.

By not subsidising these, I'm going to reduce emissions from

transportation.

And that effect seems to be a bit stronger from

reducing the effect of reducing consumption of coal from, let's

say, a steel production or reducing the consumption of natural

gas.

Yeah.

Okay, great.

Uh, I try to keep this short.

12 minutes.

So now we've.

Heard about that, um, new interesting fact that, uh, Shapiro

found.

And then basically the the model that Eddie, uh, described.

And so now it's a bit more kind of, uh,

some of his thoughts on, on policy implications for climate

change and mixed with our thoughts on this and also

some of the weaknesses we found.

Um, so if you think of an ideal world, what

would be the ideal climate change policy?

Well, it would be in and the first best would

just be, uh, one uniform carbon price across the whole

world.

But, well, what he also notes is obviously that is,

uh, somewhat unrealistic.

We are in a second best world with political economy

constraints.

Um, so we can't implement a carbon price across the

world.

And, uh, so here it comes in what he finds,

and he's saying that, um, so this is kind of

the main punchline of the paper trade policy is imposing

this lower these lower tax rates on dirtier goods implicitly.

And he says that countries don't do this on purpose.

And this is just happens, um, through kind of some

mechanism that probably until he discovered that fact, nobody was

aware of.

And he says that the mechanism he describes is that,

um, in upstream industries, so those industries that are furthest

away from kind of like being sold to consumers, the

final product, um, have the least protection, protection and highest

emissions.

And that's because firms lobby for low input prices.

And on the other hand, you have downstream industries that

have the greatest protection.

But at the same time, it turns out the lowest

emissions, for example, they have a lot of labour inputs

which, which don't, uh, produce emissions.

And here it kind of his argument is, well, uh,

consumers don't really.

Many consumers out there who don't really have any lobbying

power, in contrast to the firms, um, in, uh, facing

the upstream industries.

And.

Well, now you can think what, what would this imply

for policy implications?

And now we're mixing kind of like maybe a bit

of his thoughts and then also our thoughts.

So, um, he says that, uh, kind of the good

thing would be on the second best to consider CO2

emissions in, um, trade agreements.

So if countries negotiate with trade agreements that you, you

consider this fact, you know, which countries are more polluting

and which are less, um, and adjust tariffs based on

that.

Um, and so his argument is that actually if you

do that so for example, you raise tariffs on dirtier

industries.

Um, he says this could actually work because, uh, somewhat,

um, uh, surprisingly, you basically, uh, this benefits two groups

that usually don't agree, which are industry lobbyists and environmentalists.

So for the industry lobbyists, um, you must maintain protection

on dirty goods, um, and these or upstream domestic industries,

which lobbyists might find good and then at the same

time decrease global CO2 emissions, um, by importing maybe less

of these dirty goods.

Although you can obviously then argue, well, if it's, uh,

produced locally, then, um, emissions would go, go up as

well.

And I think it is somewhat the question to what

extent, um, kind of given that basically, I mean, our

opinion or my opinion basically, um, what I lined out

in the previous.

Lecture 8:

To leave.

100.

And one.

Point.

Two.

Four.

Oh.

Oh.

Oh.

Oh oh.

Oh three.

Oh.

Oh.

Oh.

Oh.

Oh.

So you marry there?

Oh.

Yeah.

You know.

What I mean.

You.

Know?

And you.

Know, I think I had a three hour election here

this morning.

And this beautiful island here is blowing cold, and.

I brought my winter jacket this time.

Thank you, thank you, thank you.

I think I used to teach.

Remember how anyone you teach, you don't realise so much

because you're.

Sitting, I think.

You know.

You know what?

I mean?

I didn't take any of them.

Amen.

You know what?

Let's hide your profile for a bit.

Sorry for the pictures.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

I think.

It is because she doesn't like the two of you.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Are you up to me now?

Sorry.

That was nice.

And all of us focus on the single usually share

which.

Means you need to return.

To your.

Businesses as you say.

I mean, get the like.

You know like but like.

She was a skilled worker, tied to the company and

moved back for now.

I think she's still moving and like, you know.

This.

Morning.

I.

I.

Think it was my decision to quit.

I think she's wanted to quit for a while.

Either way.

A team of three people.

Like one of the managers.

Because, like, we go back.

I like it.

Yeah, exactly.

This is going to be hard.

She is not around anymore.

Nobody's telling.

I don't know.

I think it's great.

I don't know if.

feel much.

Like getting.

Married this weekend.

Because, I mean.

I'm just saying that, you know, it's.

All.

At work.

Right?

I mean, these people.

It's been 20 days since.

Right.

About.

Yeah.

So we're one minute, right?

And then there's.

Another environment?

I don't know.

Oh, yeah.

I have email.

I haven't.

Are you enrolled?

I'm not.

Not really.

Really?

Yeah I am.

Lost motivation.

Yeah, I didn't I didn't see anything.

You're right in the.

It.

Is taking so long and I can't make it out.

I was about to.

I was about to.

Worry.

About.

That.

Yeah, well, I'm a bit worried.

It's the uploading stuff, isn't it?

Yeah.

I'm.

Like.

Okay.

It's okay.

Hold right now.

You're not good enough.

Yeah.

You just don't know who you are.

But you're aware.

How are you doing?

This room.

Oh.

Great.

I wish it was you.

I I I'm the.

I can handle the calls.

Oh my God.

Don't you.

Know.

People would.

Have to.

Be working in your current.

You don't have to.

I mean, I think I do, I really think.

It's like I'm.

Miserable.

I know there's nothing to stop it.

You know, I.

Don't know.

Trading used cars and stuff.

Oh, he was actually.

Yeah, maybe.

Maybe you should get out here, I guess.

Really?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Who's winning?

Yeah.

I can get what you want.

You go.

You go.

Come on.

Should I knock?

I.

Think there are like.

It was so weird.

Yeah, I know.

I'm not looking.

For a little trouble, but it's important.

Oh.

Oh.

It's hot.

Okay.

Yeah, I have one at home.

It's a big one.

Yeah, I have classes.

So.

Now you have your own.

So.

What do you.

Think is going to tell us about another.

Yeah.

That's something that actually I have thought about this.

What are they saying?

I don't know.

I think we should go.

And there's another one that's chargeable with the power button.

Very nice.

What am I getting in here?

Oh, yeah.

The great thing about it is you drink tea again

and again.

How do you like it?

I would think I want 45 minutes.

What?

Do you think?

What?

Could be better.

Yeah.

Very much.

And I would like that.

that's.

The part.

So I.

Can think of something else.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I mean, just.

Do what I want.

Oh.

Do you ever do that?

I guess you're happy.

With.

That.

I mean, it is.

So.

I don't think we're having this.

We're just having a mini hanging out.

I'm just saying, this is.

You know.

What?

I'm sorry.

Are you being late?

Uh.

What?

It was a misunderstanding.

I thought I'm going to do next week.

So next.

The next three weeks.

I'm sorry if I put it wrongly in my calendar.

Um.

Um, there was sort of various rearrangements, and I thought.

I thought I correctly copied it from the thing.

So in any case, unfortunately, I need to prepare.

It's not that I could do it.

Uh, just the preparation.

So unfortunately, we got to start next week, so next

week and then the next three weeks.

Yeah.

So last the last three weeks of term.

So today is sort of off.

One maybe quick thing to say is I have quite

a lot of material.

I'm going to try and post all the material before

next week.

Um, and then I'm, I'm still trying to figure out

which of those parts that are going to do.

So I create that.

I had to teach a summer school earlier this year,

the summer.

And so I've created a lot more material that I

had last year.

So I have to sort of think about which ones.

You just get the slides and you can ask questions

about which ones are actually going to cover it in

class, but I'll let you know in advance.

So sorry about this understanding.

Sorry, it's really bad.

I was sure I covered incorrectly from the from the

head of online calendar what the final agreement was, because

we shifted it around several times.

So?

So today's meeting.

I'm sorry.

Yeah.

I'm.

Sorry.

I'm.

31.

The balance.

Was.

So great.

I don't know what you guys really.

Like it so much?

Yes.

We know.

That many people are coming.

Oh, did.

You.

Understand?

We got 507.

Oh, sorry.

Not they do that.

You know, why can't we do that?

For example, this week's line is the line.

I saw that in a sermon.

The firm would.

Have gotten one.

Hundred points for moving.

On to 307.

Oh, I send the emails in three.

No.

I said, because of this clash, I'm not going.

But, uh, but I didn't.

I do not want that, you said.

So we're not going to have this one this week.

Then we're going to have to resolve this for all

of you.

You know I don't want to.

Stay Same to me and it was trade class.

But there is nothing more.

It was the pastor John Stamos, going to teach from

next week on.

So he said, okay, okay, I sorry, I didn't realise

it.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah.

They just yeah.

It's next week on.

Oh I see.

Yeah.

And will end on of the summer uh online is

it or.

No no no I did it.

Just moved all the three classes.

Yeah.

One week later in November facing the summer and all

of, uh.

I just was not notified.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I wasn't, I was just reading

the paper now, so I am up until, like.

But, uh, I thought I was late, but, uh, I

see you're talking from UCLA.

Okay.

Are you here?

Yeah.

life and hope we share you.

And you said on the call.

Oh, great.

How is this organised and like.

Do you have, like grades on your second year or.

Um, we have brains, but it's really easy, actually, to

get.

You want to get coffee?

Well, if I can't, because I'm not.

Oh, I would think I was pulling me to that

level sometimes.

But, yeah, I mean, we have coffee.

A little bit of my worst time to drink.

I don't I.

Don't know how to appreciate it.

Yeah.

You Russian.

Yeah.

Uh, yeah.

I mean, it's, uh.

It's me.

It's how.

I mean, I guess between.

Yeah.

You know, like.

Eastern Europe in.

There.

Yeah, but you see it from.

Oh on.

Uh, Bathroom, which is very good.

But it's 1000km, so.

That's the only advice.

Should I?

Buy them?

Yeah.

And you always have to evade somebody.

I think that's what they always have.

And then.

What about the.

Oh.

Yes.

And then.

Yes.

Yes.

Did you know that?

But in this.

Nature.

As you can.

See?

Lecture 9:

You can invite her.

To visit?

Me as usual.

They don't look well.

Which could enable the temperature of the room.

How?

Do you.

Know I'm.

In.

The history.

Of Scottish.

Football.

And the.

European Union.

Now we need to talk about.

How we.

Actually can be sure to talk about that.

Maybe you.

Should.

The bottom line.

There you go.

He.

Tries to.

Put.

In place and make.

Sure.

It's.

Easier.

I know.

It's freezing.

behind it is not.

Going to be very warm here.

Yeah.

I mean.

Not people.

Dying at.

The last.

Minute.

Come here.

And.

All the usual.

Thank you.

Peter.

Yeah.

I like how.

You just convinced me because I had.

My camera had.

You had it.

I mean, that was.

I told you that.

All right.

I feel.

That I decided to go to you.

Yeah.

Okay.

A bit more.

Yeah.

After that.

After that happens, I think you are on your own

here.

Yeah, I did like a lot of.

The freaking back home.

Uh, yes.

Yes.

And this is such a great place.

It.

Is.

Worth.

The wait.

Very long.

Yeah.

This is nice.

Yeah.

Yeah.

After taking the pills.

Everything.

Was.

Like.

Oh, I'm not traditional.

We.

Are playing everything into a.

Whole new, comfortable niche.

I did not.

Get to ask for.

You think you guys?

Went to Israel?

On a romantic level.

I know it was a big group reaction.

Do you have any action?

No.

But you didn't even bring an EpiPen.

No no no no.

You can rely on the ambulance.

Coming.

I.

Hadn't.

All.

Right.

Let's.

Try 40, uh, changing codes, um, needs to be assigned.

Um, so apologies about not showing up last week.

I had the wrong idea.

This week, next week and the week after.

And I kind of put a reading list, which I

should, um.

I talked about it.

It's a list of you can look at.

Uh, it has a lot of papers on it, but

a few of the solid papers, which are the papers.

I'm going to spend most of my time on the

lectures and which are key to terms of understanding the

issue in terms of Have outlined what they can do.

I have too many slides for the three weeks.

So I'm not going to be able to cover everything.

So I'm going to cover things that I think are

particularly important and where sort of if I ask you,

you say, well, I haven't seen this before, then we'll

cover it.

If you see what I've seen this three times, then

we I'll go for it.

Yeah.

And so the, the kind of broad outlines, there's a

very short introductory chapter which gives you a bit of

background about this area.

Went to the funeral home and what's, what's sort of

the more broadly going on right now.

And then I'm going to talk about the coverage.

So economic geography is going to be choices across cities

where people decide which city to to live in.

But you have to work and live in the same

cities.

You can't commute in these models from from Manchester to

London.

And then we can look at urban models where the

kind of key decision or one of the key decisions

is the commuting decisions that you live in.

We work.

So we're to um, Yeah.

So within city locations, obviously these incredibly quiet.

And there are papers that combine them.

They're the best.

They're fairly separate kind of literature and two quite separate

models.

So we're going to look first at economic geography and

then urban economics.

You'll see obviously the ideas that come there are lots

of similar ideas across these areas within these two blocks.

Geography and economics I drove out the slides into a

community hall and then a period of, uh, sales revenue.

Um, there is a kind of a theory.

Even a city in Paris is where a lot of

the funders and a lot of the sort of the

kind of the action is a lot of, you know,

a lot of the kind of papers that are being

written right now on the theory.

Nevertheless, to understand the theory is key to kind of

be able to interpret what the kind of empirical literature,

um, reading us in this area.

I've also have two exercises.

So to basically Surprising resistance activity.

So he's asking a lot of questions, and you will

have to ask me questions as well as if there's

anything unclear.

Just stop me in the discussion.

There's a lot of stuff that we need to get

through, and we need to kind of act on the

material, but I sort of have two exercises, one which,

you know, over the next week and one which we

are going to do the final week.

The first exercise is it's it's on a paper by

Aqua.

It's also sort of a paper by, um, several co-authors,

including and also and then all of the, all the

courses that, um, is that we will look at for

the exercises next week.

So please read that paper.

You'll see that paper.

It's about cities.

It's mostly about, you know, cross city differences.

Um, so it's going to look at some critical evidence

is completely non-structural.

There's no theory.

So if a bit of a contrast to the stuff

that's going to do here.

Um, but um, it's a very it's a very influential,

very interesting paper.

And so they ask me questions on the paper on

the exercise and visualisation to discuss these two questions.

That's a given the sort of take a moment and

probably we just finished the majority to do the exercise

and that jump in terms.

Okay.

As you'll see from the questions, the questions you just

sort of what the kind of point of the exercises

is to get you to read the paper, because it's

an interesting paper, but to read it critically.

So to think about why certain things, why are they

saying certain things, why that may be not saying other

things.

So most of the discussion that you're going to have

is going to be about what you make of certain

parts of the paper, and how community are the kind

of points that they're making, and why are they making

particular points in a particular way?

The papers are written in very strategic ways.

Um, often you can sort of almost hear the referees

talking in the background that you sort of sort of

like listen to a telephone conversation where you can only

listen to one side.

You don't know what the referees exactly said, but you

see the answer if you want to call it that.

That's a sort of try and see what sort of

what's going on.

Is that behind the behind it?

I know the co-author of that paper and iPhones and

everything that happened on the paper at all.

But nevertheless, that's going to be the main focus on

the questions that we're going to look at.

Okay.

So that's if there are no questions on this or

any questions in terms of logistics, I need to get

back to some of the reports.

I'm sorry I haven't done that yet.

Reporter.

Um, in terms of the if you want to write

a report on on this this graphic here.

Okay, so the, um, we're going to look at the

accumulation dispersion forces that shape the spatial distribution of economic

activity.

That's sort of the broader definition of what it is

is not specified.

Where are we going to locate?

And the literature looks at location choices across cities, cities

and regions.

So some sort of a bias to thinking about cities,

but also rural areas, whatever the region is that you're

looking at.

And it occurs within cities which are contributing to us.

Yeah.

So as I explained in the second, these questions have

a very long tradition with us.

Um, however, recently some of the material on this chapter,

such as the kind of increase in interest in these,

in these kinds of exhibition.

For many people today, you see a lot of interest.

Uh, so first, we talked before we talked about this

kind of work in this area has many different names,

maybe the particularly many names, more names that you can

always like.

And so there's this period that's going to very different

names.

So traditionally a lot of this sort of thing called

mutual sighs that are mostly geographies but regional economics.

Today if you see regional economies people just go to

sleep.

It's so boring.

So then the first it was the first wave of

sort of more mainstream work in this area, which had

recruitments kind of on paper in the 90s, everybody talked

about the new economic geography, because our work on today

was that if you go into something at the time

of the 90s and EEG was sort of new, economic

geography was the last word.

You'll see it in literature.

People talk about the kind of economic geography model of

the energy, literature and stuff.

Then there's a lot of people talk about urban economics

and urban development.

It's been around, you know, sort of created later than

that.

So it came into being in the 80s and around

all the time that you see a lot of the

reference today to a lot of people.

Now we refer to urban as the Discovery station.

So then some people talk about economics, which is, I

think, the more popular name for a lot of people

dislike it and says it sounds strange.

It sounds much different than spatial.

And now we see a lot of this really because

of our contribution models of the same.

Name.

But talk about that later on.

But this is a recently came up in the in

the literature.

It's on if you invented that embedding a method is

a service but it will be quite quite the members.

So at least if you hadn't have a smooth work

with Irvin.

Um, and so I don't know what people are going

to call it, but people, people stock market papers, which

I've done a lot over the last days.

They say all sorts of things which are essentially urban

and regional economics and all sorts of things.

So it's all kind of the same.

So whatever, whatever they may be, um, that's what it's

about.

Okay.

They said that, um, they're sort of the kind of

people that you sort of.

I talk about urban politics.

I mean, because of the city choices.

I say economic geography.

I'm thinking about choices across cities.

So that's the kind of sense in which I'm going

to use the two of you and, and, ah, the

economic conditions.

A lot of people would have subscribed to the absurdity

of kind of the original negative economic country, which You

looked at choices across all the choices across.

Within cities.

Across England.

Okay.

So, um.

So there are papers that are two pages that combine

both of these things together.

I'm going to mention them in briefly, but they're not

going to spend a lot of time on that.

It is obviously interesting if you could think of an

interesting empirical setting.

So I think we have now, again, at the point

where you write down the model, you can write down

the models.

But the question is do I have some data that

I can actually combine?

So just writing down the model where that happens is

kind of not the kind of cutting edge, you know,

it hasn't been accounting for for some time.

What was the time when there's times where you can

make theoretic contributions?

Even then, a lot of the literature is about trying

to combine theory Mr. perks in the 1990s.

You just wrote papers.

I did my PhD in 1996.

That was sort of the end of that period.

You could just write models.

Just why the modelling stuff happens with my model and

people are very happy.

If you just write, all this stuff happens, everybody goes

away.

So you think that.

Yeah.

So everything is sort of driven by the data.

If you see something that hasn't been done theoretically.

The main reason is what we know that it's theoretically

possible, but that nobody's come up with an idea.

How long into the G7 before.

Okay.

So let me briefly talk about sort of the history

of these things and where they are within the space

of the companies where this comes from has a very

long tradition of slightly ironically, incredibly long tradition.

And it goes back to.

So there's a lot of reference here in the literature

for that reason.

So there's a German And then how that economic position,

but how that was about to be wealthy.

A bit like Charles Darwin.

And basically worked on regional economics model, for example, which

is also sort of around.

It's also worked by about a Crystal Palace just before

the Second World War, who at the time pretty influential

people thinking about the key spatial questions.

That's not the end of this.

Also, after the war, economics was perceived to be the

kind of, you know, the people making decisions.

And also it was a for profit publisher that this

was one area where they're going to put them down.

And so the issue of the Journal of Ergonomics, along

with the Journal international, is the Journal of Public Land

Exports to other countries.

It was sort of one of the few journals they

just created and started writing And for you to join

us.

It's also from the so-called handbook series.

Probably.

Does anybody know what the handbook series is still extant

in so many years, published as you have coming out

next year?

The chapters have just popped up.

So what are some of the surveys that I've put

onto the reading list and are the kind of the

new chapter on economic geography and new chapter economics in

for the next ten book series.

So again, the Handbook for the disciples and set up

very well.

So despite this sort of long tradition, it has been

very little work in this area.

And the first change was Paul.

So.

For his 2008.

So this is a new distinction just to know the

price.

So I get it all myself Is.

So he got his prize in politics with the Soviet

Union, but also for his 1981 economic geography paper, which

extended in many ways, sort of some of the ideas

in this area, in this area.

So the paper, which I think very widely is won

the Nobel Prize, was one of the things, one of

the reasons why we won the Nobel Prize and created

the initial sort of interest when suddenly mainstream economists started

working on these kind of questions, although there was no

mainstream economist in whatever mainstream economist made it exactly who

qualifies as a mainstream economist.

But there was some mainstream economist working with Henderson, for

example, as one of the very few people who was

around them before, or if he was about to film

at that at that point.

So.

So that produces the first shock wave at first wave

of papers, which is for the summer school to prove

invaluable.

99 year old, um, which sort of sounds that this

early phase of economic geography.

The 1990s were mostly theoretical and so there's little data.

At that.

So from the early 2000, people stopped worrying about it

compared to our much more closely.

And I'll talk about that in a moment.

Why, that took a long time.

But and so recently, there has been another big explosion

in interest in this field, which is much, much bigger

than the initial and is much, much bigger than the

initial shock wave.

For example, the Urban Economics Association, the first meeting in

2006, followed by, among others, Henderson and a few other

people who were around at that time, and to us,

hundreds and hundreds of submissions.

So ten years ago, that would have been a good

year.

Um, you know, good papers and whatnot.

Um, now, this is a lot.

Of papers per conference in the European conference.

Um, which you will be aware of the next year.

This is going to be related, um, in March next

year.

So the European public is able to get them for

this.

So there's tons and tons of papers going around and

lots of stuff to do in the job market.

Lots of people actually have this part of their fields.

Sometimes it's the first field, but often, you know, in

all sorts of combinations from open to trade and urban

macro, urban public economics and urban like anything, anything.

Uh, and so there's a graph here which comes from

a presentation for countries in traditional country, person or change.

A person who is not entirely happy about the rise

of people working on crashes other than trade.

So he has used this graph in this in a

keynote lecture.

The graph comes from Neil's web page.

So Jonathan Dingle, someone who works with the trade and

in economic geography, has since the 2000 mark counted the

number of candidates that he thinks have some interest in

urban and some interest in trade.

It's some old apps that are serverless.

You can also be on the trade list and vice

versa, but typically the overlap is on TV.

And there are also some concerns.

It's not clear that you know how easy it is

that I spent as much time in the early days.

I'm trying to find Everyone who's on the market.

But this is sort of the ratio of future candidates.

Even if this is an outlier.

It's a trend that the number of people who say

that age has been urban and this has dramatically increased

their looks.

And also, I think one of the people that people

are interested in at this point.

So that sort of reflects this.

So why is it so why why is it so?

Why is it it becomes a sort of you know,

I'm biased.

So I think it's very interesting.

So but why do people sort of start to disagree.

And so why did it take 200 years for, you

know, for, for more people to start working on their

productivity related reasons that explain that?

The first one is that there is a lot more

data now than there used to be in the past.

So a lot of the data, you know, 50 years

ago has been very difficult to find.

The second closely related thing is computing power.

Yeah, so you're probably way too young to remember the

days when that computing was really, really difficult.

Many years old.

But when I did my undergrad lunches and I bought

I bought a laptop and a laptop, had a hard

drive of 80MB, megabytes of gigabytes, megabytes.

My best friend really liked that.

It was a very expensive laptop.

You'll never do that.

What are you going to do?

You never know.

And he goes right to the years to fill up.

So that was a different time.

So obviously, at that point in that kind of computer,

most of the data sets that we have today, it's

impossible to have, you know, to, to do.

So the price of computing has fallen dramatically.

And a lot of the things that you do today

would have not been possible in 10 or 15 minutes.

And obviously, that's why it has to be the number

of medical breakthroughs.

You know, a recruitment came along, but there's a lot

of stuff that happened after crude in terms of how

we think about a model in space.

That has helped.

So I think all of these things together just kind

of make it sort of suddenly let's look at space.

It's kind of a bit of an unexplored dimension in

a lot of companies.

There's a lot of stuff.

So even though this has been on for a while,

there is a lot of things that have happened.

It's not like sort of monetary funding.

So.

So where people have been active for 40 or 50

years.

And so all the kind of obvious questions, if you

don't, there's always stuff here where you might say, well,

this is all about how to do it.

So it's just an area where there's still a lot

of opportunities.

It will go down at some point.

I get to stay safe and it'll probably it will

go down.

At the moment, there's still a still a bit of

the feeling of the gold rush trying to do things.

Okay, so that's sort of my general introduction to the

background where this came from, what's happening at the moment,

at the time of the moment.

So we're going to switch very quickly at the moment

to sort of the kind of recent or the kind

of comprehension of the theory.

But I'm going to spend a little bit of time

talking about three pieces of the background.

And so the remainder of this chapter, in the case

of three pieces of background, of models that have been

around for a long time, and that a lot of

people simply talk to people in the field and particularly

been around for more than five minutes.

And it will refer to these things and to know

about it and why people, you know, most important of

all, the theoretical background.

So there's the decision on the Rosenwald model and more

broadly, Marshall's agglomeration Okay, so this city model was the

workhorse model to think about the city choices.

And so pretty easy.

So the model was developed in the 60s by a

series of impressive books by Alonzo Nelson, who first of

all three credited with working out using the model is

incredibly simple.

So you think, how could three people.

So this.

I thought you'd be surprised to look at someone's handbook

of chapters.

There are 80 page surveys and the comparative static results

of the modern city city model.

So I'm going to make this ridiculously simple.

Even something so ridiculously simple is surprisingly complicated.

And so, so first, the assumption of the people that

was going to make the city is one dimensional.

It's a light.

And can't you say sorry, one point planet is going

to be located in the central business district, so the

problems are not going to be allowed to make any

choices.

They have to work.

They have to, you know, have to locate in the

centre and the centre of attention points on the master.

That's contextual.

And if you look at employment security, there's new employment.

Yes, there's a lot of employment in the city, but

there's also a lot of employment.

And the only kind of endogenous decision that happens in

the city model is that the workers can decide how

they want it.

And if you do further away from the centre, then

you're going to incur a higher commuting costs, which are

costing them utility.

And in an equilibrium that's going to be compensated by

low housing.

So if you're willing to commute a long way, you're

going to get a cheaper house.

But unfortunately, in equilibrium, everything, all these opportunities that are

going to be all the way through the ages and

nobody has different commuting costs, um, different, you know, extended

holiday.

Um, then everybody's going to be different than, you know,

people to just, you know, they pay pretty close to

get cheaper housing in those further in yet more expensive

housing, not less.

So if you think about this all but it's it's

cute.

Yeah.

It's a bit like I like to compare it to

be a vote on it.

So if you put the Equality Media version of all

this time on a piece of, you know, a theory

which everyone knows, kind of both a little bit right,

but also totally wrong produces but so is sort of

right, but also completely useless.

Um, so in the real world, cities are not alone.

Therefore doing so compared to work that tightly connects your

data to a model is difficult.

Yeah.

So how do you wish to align.

It can be done, but that's going to do quite

a lot.

It is extremely unsatisfying to assume that all forms are

in the centre or in the centre, and you see

that that's not the case.

And the firm is obviously, fundamentally are going to be

free to choose where they operate.

It could be important planning constraints and so on.

But first of all, it's just it's totally counterfactual to

the to assume that all jobs are.

And so the dimension of this point of the centre

and this relates to this, commuting flows are also a

lot more complex as opposed to from as most central

is to go to the centre, you work, you go

home.

If you come out of the tube station in the

morning, you see people going in.

So how many of you actually out or out?

Also, commuting is a lot more complex than and as

simple as that.

There's also no everything is a lot of work.

There's nothing about consumption or consumption.

Um, for example, such as having nice, nice restaurants.

So the city model, or many people you'll see, is,

uh, in this example you can use the authentic city

model.

They typically use it in setting where you want to

have very little data, and you sort of the data

sparse environment, and you're trying to do things very simply.

It's where yeah, I think I think there are going

to be more people probably, but it's pretty near.

So unless you have a very sort of specific data

setting where I can do very little, or there's sort

of a combination of within the city choices and across

city choices and for impurity computational reasons you might see

the most interesting model.

But but nevertheless, if you walk around all these conferences

and you meet someone who's older than 25 and you

say, wow, almost every single model is really stupid because

they might be people who have written papers on it

or feel still invested in it.

Yeah.

So the.

Um, the rules are framework.

So the kind of companions for that kind of a

is the framework.

Again, that's sort of a little bit more popular today,

even though I think it should also be available today.

Uh, but um, yeah, they have even more than they

do.

Quite a lot of it depends on the model.

So the, uh, framework was developed by, uh, and Jennifer

Robach.

Um, I think she did actually most of the work.

Um, but it wasn't really like.

Short thesis in 1982.

So.

Nevertheless, we're going to look at sort of a slightly

simplified version of the model here for our purposes.

So you kind of need to know what the original

model is.

Um, you know what how it differs from the kind

of stuff that people are doing.

So they're going to give you an arbitrary number of

cities.

That's the model of cities.

Um, so there's a number of which is where it

is made.

So let us make this from deciding which city to

live and work and community.

I live in London or Manchester in somewhere where you

can't commute.

There are no migration.

Workers will move to the city that is in the

highest tier cities.

People are in a sort of a globally, global, globally,

uh, workforce who will just go to whatever city doesn't

have to go to the city, the country People just

go and arbitrage away all differences across cities or utility

across.

The production side is incredibly simple.

Work isn't going to produce the sort of homogeneous good

that is constantly traded across cities.

So that's going to be one of the kind of

key utilisations of the of all the different systems you

call jockeying or the moment we know that trade is

not the cost of it.

Yeah, space matters for everything compared to streaming.

Yeah.

Um, so here we're going to sort of have a

moment of space where space does matter.

So you can cost as you trade everything across cities

in your country, which is the kind of available data.

Exactly.

But nevertheless, let's sort of display sort of the flat

earth assumption for now for the space which is used

for residential purposes.

So it's going to be some competition of the space

between permanent residents of the city.

And we can have upward sloping supply functions for space.

But it's as far as there's either land centres or

something else, which is just a fixed supply.

That's again unsatisfactory.

But it's maybe not the end of the world and

we could be getting some some approximations.

Okay.

So let's look at this kind of model in more

detail.

So we're going to have a consumer floor space and

define and enjoy a residential and energy.

And which is going to be fixed to the city.

So city cities are different residential units.

They are sort of Los Angeles and Rochester.

And so they're kind of very beautiful places and not

quite as beautiful, beautiful places for opportunity and reasons.

So this is the utility function.

What you care about is the price of housing, the

price of manufacturing is going to be one is going

to be the.

Wages in the city where you work.

And so these are the things you care about.

So the price of good is going to be more

in spatial equilibrium.

You can even compare all your options all the cities

that are on offer.

And so the utility of this homogeneous agent has to

be the same people you are giving us.

And also there's a city that offers high status as

a could offer high utility because it's very pretty.

So it has very high amenities that people are very

happy for their wages or it's very cheap to live

in any of those three things that are going to

be intact in the community.

And what the model is going to do, the model

is going to try and show you what the pattern

of house prices, wages and amenities are going to be

across Look at this.

So let's look at production first.

So what does production look like?

Um first and foremost reason is that if you use

the final word um, and there can be consequences here,

it should be about the consequences scale.

And it's all going to be important factors.

So cities that have different projected cities could be more

productive or less productive in the production of this final

build.

And then it's going to be denoted as a typical,

um, TFP term.

So the general unit cost function purpose is to produce

the unit of output.

And it's going to depend on the two factor prices

or wages and floorspace that you're going to use as

inputs into production in this quantity term.

So you can think of this as sort of a

this option combines wages and space and has some trap

that's sticking to the typical Home of 1980s locations that

have indirect cost options as well.

So this is how economical in the old days.

So I'm thinking this is not quite the location in

the cinema today.

Okay.

But if you need construction work as shown on the

next slide.

So that kind of that's the classic kind of roads

and the kind of comparative static in the roads and

rollback mode is what happens if the amenities in the

city increased.

So look at the world.

Two identical cities are going to make the city higher.

What's that going to do to wages and house prices

which are the two variables.

Okay.

So that's the kind of roads role equilibrium models and

how the house price and the wages and the taxes.

These are the only two.

And Interesting endogenous variables.

So we have a little that's going to come on

the next slide.

Because everything is constant returns here.

The city size doesn't matter.

So then come back to the all that matters is

you know, if if you're indifferent between all the cities

in multiple different cities.

So the city size is going to be determined by

this sort of exogenous housing supply function.

So like bigger cities are going to get bigger in

that in that city.

But this is kind of a few of the kind

of the two, uh, space wages and house prices.

And there's going to be a profit line and a

indifference curve.

So the profit line is going to trace observations of

house prices and wages, where the firm is your profits.

This line is going to be conditional on a particular

level of productivity.

So for a given the level of productivity if I

make your wages cheaper than I have to make other

effective production house floorspace more expensive.

So does that make sense?

So it's just a condition of the farm.

This is the independence of of residence.

And the district of residence is also conditional on a

particular level of amenities.

So for a given managing effect of the city on

the sunshine, if I increase the wage.

Yeah.

Then I also have to increase house prices to keep

people in different locations.

So if that's some reason to increase the wages and

they have to pay their house prices to keep people

on the difference sort of difference.

Yeah.

So that's a that's the idea.

The curvature of these curves doesn't matter.

And functional form is like whatever you can get.

I think the connection is correct, but it should not

go on for the distance, for the data for this

I suppose, and should also be never around.

But that's the most important.

So how does this this graph change?

If you increase the amenities in the city as opposed

to sort of the city's population?

And then we're going to do a comparative study and

say, what will we expect if the if the amenities,

amenities in the in the city increase?

What do you think?

We just go down.

We just saw the characteristics of the kind of.

Isolated culture.

Things which occur if I change the infrastructure.

So you different process.

You don't raise your hand.

That's a shift.

Of course.

Yeah.

Why?

Because for the same for lower wages and higher.

Prices, you're going to.

Yes.

So that's why if you start with a price and

you get this house price you were previously, you want

to stay and you bought a sophisticated decoder you can

get elsewhere.

You wanted to have that bridge.

Now the analogy is sort of a substitute for wages.

You say, well, I'm still I'm going to be willing

to work with you for lower wages because I get

paid in sunshine and that's.

Okay.

Your sunshine.

Which is also going to happen in sort of economy.

In other words, we can be competitive in different ways.

So we can we can make locations attractive.

So if the time goes to the left and the

new equilibrium is going to be here, where wages are

lower, house prices are higher.

That's the kind of famous Rosen Roebuck prediction, um, that,

you know, Los Angeles should be a place where wages

are low.

And this is very pretty in my opinion.

It is very tricky.

London is also very tricky, in my opinion, that we

might disagree about.

So let's stick to Los Angeles.

So this is very pretty.

So um, relative to other cities in the U.S. that

should pay more wages and prices, house Authorises this to

be reflected is attractive.

So people want to be there, but it is at

low wages because implicitly people are going to get paid

with sunshine rather than contrast.

Okay, I'll come back to the prediction and whether that

would work, uh, as well.

But that's sort of the most I think, so the

kind of key things to take away.

Yeah.

Um, first let me try to go to the, the

key thing to takeaway something we're going to come back

to a number of times is this idea that utility

is going to equalise across locations.

It's a kind of what's called an institutional spatial condition.

So like in the financial markets, the setting where people

are going to arbitrage across different asset classes, all of

the spatial work, and it's going to be much more

complicated later on in order to see There's always in

the background station.

The idea that what sets are the majority of international

trade is in an international trade setting.

Even if wages in America are higher than they do

all right now, whether it's all that migration is completely

free into every location across borders, whereas humanistic settings where

we live in a country where there are no restrictions

to migration.

Obviously there are countries that have restrictions to migration within

countries.

So China not being the absolute only example.

So they've tried that in the past.

So you're going to see it is perfect.

Here is perfect conditions.

People will arbitrage away any utility difference across cities.

And so that's a key kind of backbone assumptions both

in this model.

And really it will pop up in many different guises

in everything you know, everything that especially comics literature asks,

you might say, why does it hold?

Apparently.

Is it really the case that people are the difference

in the way we talk about empirical evidence later on?

It's very difficult to directly to say whether utility has

equalised.

But you mentioned that another way that, you know, it's

always you have to do that.

Utility wouldn't necessarily equalise you.

Also, it's not the case that you would have to

sort of say, well, I am exactly different between every

city in the UK.

You're probably not.

But there will be some marginal problems and more complicated

models.

There will be a marginal person who will be implicitly

in different kinds of locations now and then.

You know all about each bilateral, each decision.

There won't be a person, a marginal person who just

uses a different here.

Given the sort of stark homogeneity of agents or agents

that can be independent.

Possibly.

So that's one of the key things that comes with

the rise and rollback world.

Also in the Motor City, people have very different locations

within the city.

And due to this it is arbitrage.

So the spatial equilibrium position is one of the legacies.

I don't know exactly.

I do think that that.

Probably goes back to probably the Amish area.

I don't know, unfortunately the history of it is here.

It's um, it's probably all the idea that uncertainty is

the mainstream since.

Since this time.

Okay.

So what are the limitations of the original model?

So as the final goodness, free trade won't matter.

So it's sort of a model about space or space

for that matter.

So sometimes it's also called the system of cities literature.

And this is sort of a code for saying, well,

focus on matter.

We just have this idea that cities and people can

migrate across them, but it costs, uh, zero.

So whether you're a city in Northern Norway or in

the middle of Belgium, just they know the differences in

trade across economic geography.

So we've got to change this and market access.

So relative location is going to matter greatly.

Empirically it's going to make any difference to duplication whether

you are in all the more than the middle of

Belgium.

Um, but this is not the case.

So also the size matters that everything responds to returns.

If you split up two cities into two halves, they

will be perfect.

And there's no, uh, the returns.

The size is such that the second time in cases

of repair, you just assume that productivity in the city

or potentially all the Also, amenities are functional sizes if

you just have a useful relationship between size and sizes,

but the basic all sizes.

So London and Norwich just to decide your sizes in

terms of becoming say exactly again that early on as

well.

That's great.

Imposing as it is not going to be.

So.

So we're going to have sort of size dependent probability

measure.

How limiting the first problem is depends on the setting

in which the model is.

Yeah.

So you can you will see the papers that you

see are still.

In terms of the chance of bumping into some other

the concrete to use an estimate which is slightly higher

than the model.

But I say times over that this is just crazy.

It's a sort of crazy.

It's like saying, you know, we're going to have we're

going to build a car.

So, you know, you're never going to be just going

to look at them.

And if it doesn't matter, whether the communists are very

good at that.

They're.

Just crazy.

Like, just don't worry about it.

But nevertheless, you just know that it exists.

Um, I wouldn't, um, if I were, you know, if

you write it in the paper, it's not something you

want to do.

Unless you have a very specific reason why you think

abstractly for something that you know to be a first

order feature of the world, it's not going to matter.

Economists.

Okay.

Um, models.

Economies.

So the models, another kind of typical sport in this

show, in many parts of economics is I've been having

meetings in small for 2020, 1920.

Sorry, not 2020.

I didn't didn't already know everything.

He knew a lot about it.

Not everything.

So he has an inkling of a lot of things

that would become important.

But he didn't.

But nevertheless, he's behind.

And the so-called three martial martial forces, which have been

incredible in the literature.

Why is this like, why do we see people classes

together?

So even Marshall's.

It's very strange.

We're all sitting on top of each other in places.

I don't spread it out in space.

You know what I mean?

I can think of three reasons why that might happen.

So the more they can breathe, better access to inputs

and production, and there could be productivity loss.

So of these so what the slide says there's still

still no remarkably little about what the exact forces are

even sort of more than 100 years later and probably

more far from perfect to work out why people are

so strong.

You'll see that a lot of models, they will sort

of.

So a lot of the models have been talking about

this is they want in the house.

Very black sheep was very special.

Too important to think of them as something from other

people.

Rather economic.

Village has a lot of economic nature.

It's not the kind of services that we're going to

look at.

Anthropology of mostly today are very basic, but they are

virtually where inputs and data access.

To your data is not going to be very quiet

in terms of getting access to it.

So there's going to be sort of a market access

mechanism, which you go to, which we're going to look

at distinguishing how important this is.

Security from this is tricky is a tricky question.

And finally, the advantages of legal market pooling are a

bit sort of questionable.

That exactly is one deprecation of labour market theory is

that you have the answer.

London is a great place for for banks and bankers

because, you know, if you want to, if you need

a new job, you can just go to the next

part of Norwich is more of a bank is open

to um, so you can't kind of easy migrate to

us for us.

So there are various versions of what why labour markets

in cities may be better.

Another version might be that you just get better matches

so that you can do this little thing.

Whereas in Norwich you have sort of the jack of

all trades.

Um, kind of a very specialised kind of a very

specialised job.

Um, so there's more specialisation in big cities.

So this is a bit more vague or that exactly

this.

But this is a really try to understand what the

differences in the various papers that try to tackle this

question.

But you see, the literature is mostly, uh, look at

the history mechanisms and much less this mechanism.

Um.

But there are exceptions.

And so the grand model says how to hold on

to those we don't really know at all.

Okay.

That's it.

In terms of the introduction questions.

So that's sort of the big background before we're going

to jump into the geography.

Do you think.

What do you think about the questions.

Okay.

So let's first look at the question.

Model like it is focussed on a, uh, comparative status

on a marriage rather than did you both.

Look at what is a marriage.

I just can't think of an example.

Good question.

So in the most simplest way, say something about an

energy structure that sort of compares.

What's the difference between Los Angeles and Rochester?

These have never been true, but it's not known to

be particularly pretty.

And you say, well, if I used to kind of

look at these two places through the lens of my

model, the fact that, you know, if I'm correct in

Los Angeles is a very high energy base.

And if the productivity and energy productivity levels are the

same, Rochester.

And LA expect wages to be low.

So the That's an abuse.

It's not.

Sort of.

Don't think about it.

So the temporal changes by the terms of the conceptual

variation.

Um, and so the literature that is trying to back

out of the way, the spatial equilibrium condition is typically

used by the use of is to say, you see

that use in the moment is that energy levels have

to be to satisfy spatial equilibrium.

So if I see that house prices in really high

wages are really low.

But if the wages are really high in house prices.

You know, they're like they're going to be something that

well, why does everyone move to Rochester.

Such a great place clearly, or at high wages.

And houses are cheap.

There must be some energy difference.

As to how you can use that.

So if you see the cross-sectional distribution and back out

from that kind indifference condition more than intensity.

Seated at a moment.

More complicated how that can be done.

Okay.

So in.

So we're going to start with the geography.

And we sort of the kind of background has already

said this is Koopmans and Nobel Prize winning 1991 paper.

And so that's looking at cities.

So so there's going to be no cost city commuting

here in the kind of benchmark model which is live

and work in the city.

There's not going to be any within city geography.

So you just live in London and work in London,

and we're not going to talk about how we get

to work.

What you do when you're there.

We're going to start with the 1998 version, and particularly

it's a paper by Steve and myself.

Um, first shown here in 2008, um, which extends to

help the model.

So I wanted to even go a group and kind

of created this whole literature that won the Nobel Prize.

His paper is kind of useless, but also the Nobel

Prize winning papers, and the helping model is going to

have the same evaluation flaws in the model, but a

different dispersion force.

But it serves as the next slide is going to

explain.

This is a whole chapter in a kind of a

video.

It's not something that usually writes, but it was written,

apparently a collection of stories.

And he developed this sort of slightly simplified version of

a slightly different version of the model, which turned out

to be much more useful as tools to work.

So you'll see very few people working on the original

with the model.

But maybe as a means of looking back at this

paper, maybe we can do something with it.

I can talk about this and talk about this in

a second in this line after this sort of.

So this is a paper right here.

And.

Noting your applications.

Thank you.

So we're going to look at our applications that happen

all the time.

In particular the block data and also some older paper

ready to be 16 ready 2016.

If you want to finish up looking at the writing

as is particularly appendix is going to be easiest exposition.

Certainly what I'm going to do here comes from the

appendix of reading.

Start writing 2016.

This is sort of an exploded version of that expanded

headings which are published in the Journal of International Economics.

So it sets out all the potential bells and whistles,

sort of a bit of a menu of things that

you do.

Arguably, the handle for the hand in the front have

just happened Since.

Since then.

Now you can have.

You can do a lot of things, but you need

data.

So if you have a lot of data, obviously you

can use some of those tools to start thinking.

Okay.

Um, yeah.

So what you said is that this could be useful

to have the right tools in the original paper is

the same the dispersion for recruitment and mobile hiring cultural

workers as in the original factory workers, agricultural workers, agricultural

workers had to say whether they had to stay on

their farm.

So many actually work as a tool in lower rates

in the city.

They would still have to supply the guys left behind

of their own fields to demand also packaged goods, and

that created the models very unstable that goes, you know,

goes, sort of has all the solutions.

Until you start, everybody starts agglomerated or nobody starts agglomerated.

So for empirical work it's not particularly particularly useful.

So where you have the model is simply going to

be an explosion of housing stock, which you'll also be

which we're going to talk about in terms of it

is easier to do that.

So a lot of papers have been implicitly built on

the help of the aid version of this, of this

model.

Okay.

So let me go through this.

The model is simple.

It's a simple, uh, kind of model that I think

is too simple.

But the sort of the argument around you can stop

something quite complicated.

And that's the point that has made it easier.

But here we're going to start with the very bad

loans model.

In that way you can apply it on all sorts

of further downstream business on top.

Yeah.

So once we've covered the model you can look at

the extensions.

Which of these extensions are sensible.

Depends very much on the verge of.

Okay, we're going to go for a ride about 20

minutes.

So halfway up there was a different kind of a

break, but let's sort of get into the kind of

bare bones of this moment.

So there's going to be indication this is which are

the cities or regions.

The next question I that I dealt with the immobile

resource housing a lot.

So the number of patients is going to be given.

Obviously there's a question of, you know, there's a much

deeper question that if you look at the geography of

the UK and see, you see, well, the, you know,

the cities are where whatever it might be, that's any

settlement, more than 5000 people.

So you get at these locations probably there are many

other locations where these cities could have been.

Yeah.

And so here we can say, well, we can't really

explain that.

We just think that as the people are, these are

the kind of potential locations in a more, deeper way.

There will be a lot more information, but for now

it is assumed there is a set of locations and

somehow suitable for.

The subscripts I see it as for consumption by central

production people production.

And it's important then to see means that we're talking

about consumption.

And I in this talk about production.

The eastern part is going to make the kind of

assumption that each location is going to be fixed.

That's pretty unrealistic.

Uh, but it is, um, it's good enough.

But before we can talk about it in the setting,

you can I would slope it in.

So easy to make it so big.

This space is a lot more constructed.

A more fundamental question is why is the housing supply

curve upward sloping at all?

You know, there's lots of space around.

My company just builds.

Yeah.

And creating more space publicity.

That's obviously desire.

But even if there are no planning constraints in the

UK, which can buy an interesting counterfactual, if you build

up further out, these places have much longer commuting times

to the centre, so they're not equally attractive, or adding

further floors with skyscrapers in the centre is also not

cheap.

So implicitly there is sort of a within sort of

why is it even at best and how it works?

Because there is in the background some things to each

other.

You have to really understand why space is constrained and

cities, why can't we just sort of quadruple the size

of the cosmos?

Yeah, and it's because there's a within city geography, which

we are not modelling in these models, we're just keeping

this.

And the next level to the back.

The same as this is.

Where these locations are is plausibly highly arbitrary as of

why London is here, and all the few places that

are up to the Thames of the valley, or somewhere

closer to Oxford or some other place is going to

be completely arbitrary.

And we get a sort of lock this out and

say, well, they're just locations.

If you just know London is here, I can ask

any questions.

But on the most fundamental level, in terms of arbitrariness

of geography, um, there must be a lot of architecture

where exactly cities are.

Any questions of this?

So we're going to talk about River in a moment.

Yeah.

But you'll see this, this model is possible.

Um, a practical restriction is going to have a unique

equilibrium.

But the unique to this kind of slightly, you know,

abstract from the way that it is definitely at this

very fundamental level, huge opportunities where Varsity's complicated.

Okay.

Time to focus.

So the invocations are connected.

Bye bye.

Good strategy, subject to iceberg training costs.

So this is the key difference to the rows and

rollback model.

The Earth is no longer flat.

You will have to incur a costs to ship staff

around the country.

Let me first explain how how they work is going

to be the standardised form that you see in the

picture.

This is the craziest form.

That's really crazy, but it's the simplest way of doing

it.

Sure, that someone's somewhere right away how you know, how

usually known iceberg trade courses and all sorts of really

interesting applications.

I haven't seen that yet in the geology, which is

which is usually the trade offs where you have to

ship something bigger than one for one unit to arrive.

You're going to assume that their costs are symmetric in

this direction.

They don't have to be.

In principle.

You had to be here to get to see and

see.

I try to look at that particularly for sailing, sailing

upwind a lot farther than anybody.

So the good old days when people are still sitting

around and there would be plausible differences.

I think I hear you just forget about it.

Um, there also are going to be no internal credit

cards, income or trade costs.

Also a really interesting question.

Kind of what are the trade costs and what happens

with assumptions about it and which you may have seen

some of the trade literature in terms of people worrying

about what other kind of currency they're worried about within

city trade costs, in the trade with the country, trade

costs other than US trade offs, probably big, but yes,

let's ignore that.

So we're going to parameterise trade cost as a function

of distance.

Which is the kind of typical assumption is that the

Distance Straightline distance between cities.

So it's like from Trafalgar Square to the centre of

Birmingham straight line.

That's distance.

That's going to be the time of trade cost between

locations.

You could also say, well, that's crazy, it's crazy.

But let's say, well how about travel time for the

travel time instead?

You could have some freight charges or so freight picked

on this.

Yeah.

So again maybe someone took the claim.

For example, this time this is more travel time.

Um, it doesn't matter that much quantitatively.

Yeah, that's a measurement error.

Assuming that the costs are important to say that distance

may not be that big.

Okay.

So the people haven't really bothered much in Hermitage and

things in our travel time distance.

How long does it take you to know how far

is it.

But maybe for longer distances.

This is such a highly correlated time.

With the time it takes.

Therefore, it doesn't matter.

Okay.

I have to do something.

Sorry.

Consume something.

So consumption and so consuming.

This is closing and consumption of the trade world of

tradable rights.

So there's going to be manufacturing like any sort of

material.

This is very expensive.

Which principle?

We can look at data to see what kind of

the average expenditure on housing is the value of all

cities.

That is just six.

And these manufactured varieties are usual consumption.

Have you seen see this sort of the kind of

typical Christmas horizontally differentiated varieties which are produced by by

firms.

And they all have to say this is a substitution

class.

And the price of X for these things is going

to take this form where the price implication sees the

direction C is going to depend on some across all

producing locations.

I introduce myself, but let's think about others so I

can buy from lots of other places I where the

price of the local price is pi t I c

is the transport costs.

So I see.

So these together is the kind of deliverable delivered price,

the price that I'm paying for.

And this is a factory gate price and this is

the price in my city and I multiply this is

the number of firms that education is, the sizes of

matters.

Or being close to a place that has the low

prices in more tense because they also have a lot

of firms.

And that adds a lot to my variety in terms

of writing off of it.

And then the usual kind of attorneys in India is

going to it's going to be the price index for

my application.

So on the next slide, and I'm going to basically

call this thing here consumer market access.

This thing is low.

So if you have good access to cheap products it

will have low transport cost to locations with low prices

in these locations.

I also think that's going to be good in terms

of access to the markets as a consumer.

So what's the difference?

You know, one of the differences between Northern Norway, London

is that Norway, you know, getting all the varieties can

be quite expensive.

So the price index in terms of buying tradable goods

is higher.

Whereas in London it's a lot because it has a

lot of food production and, you know, it's more centrally

located.

So imports to London are going to occur.

Lower costs than shipping staff to London.

Does that sort of make sense?

Yeah.

What is cost?

Exactly.

So how much you talk.

Did you talk about you talk about trade costs or

the course in terms of what is what.

Also, if you look at the empirical data, there must

be massive freight costs in terms of cross countries.

Do you talk about like where they come from.

What are the sort of what what do you think

are these costs?

Why is it so expensive to ship something from London

to Europe?

Did you talk about that?

No, no.

Okay.

So briefly about tariffs, non-tariff barriers.

Right.

That's right.

Okay.

So there could be tariffs.

Trump is just going to add those jobs with academic

problems such as logical growth.

Provides exogenous variation.

The first problem is how many papers are written about

the first grade.

The second grade will be generated.

So what's the line so that errors.

There is something called non-tariff barriers which is kind of

filling in forms.

And what.

Time does it take to get stuff there.

I feel.

The same.

Could be just time, but it could also cost money.

So if you pull up sort of, you know, someone

said, well, I want to ship a container for $5,000.

And that's what I've done.

So, you know, I don't know the price per container.

So.

What do you think if you add up all these

things like non-tariff barriers, potential terrorists, which before Trump the

very low the most mean trading partners trading nations losses

of physical transport costs.

Do you think that high enough to kind of explain

these kind of things?

Do you really think about this?

Have you given you estimate that have you talked about

the gravity equations.

So if you estimate the gravity equation you're going to

get implicitly some sort of estimate how you could say

I'm seeing how quickly trade off.

I also have to make an assumption about the typical

trade model by substitution and make assumption that this is

institutional, which is going to be a shaky one.

If you made one, you can back out so you

can back out this thing.

How quickly times of cost mass And you're going to

get massive coefficients here.

Yeah.

So crossing every additional quantity is going to be quite

a drag.

And you say, well let me sort of see whether

I can unpack this.

And I can sort of add up the cost of

shipping a container of potential costs of filling forms.

And obviously they have to be proportional to distance to

time.

Can I somehow explain this relationship?

The answer is no.

So there's a whole there's a there's an older paper

by.

Anderson in ten years, which goes to sort of trying

to explain how well can you potentially hold the kind

of massive trade costs that gravity regressions produce and which

we need to explain why you trade guys off so

quickly with distance.

And the answer is the cost of shipping kind of

container is not going to cut the ice because it

is more expensive to ship to contain the Australia than

to say that the method is quite good, you know,

or you know, shipping container across Europe is a little

cheaper than shipping around the world.

Nevertheless, there is no way that this relationship that comes

across the relationship can explain the capacity of this distance.

So presumably there are other things in the background here

that that, you know, one reason why it's hard to

do traders is like whenever we are going to go

ahead and whenever they call us, we can't pick up

the phone so that there are other distance related costs

that it must be responsible for.

And the same is going to be true.

So if you want we're not going to do this

here.

But if you run the gravity regression there's very little

trade data.

The countries that have a little bit of within country

trade data.

So trade flows and so on.

If you want to talk about the regression, you will

find even bigger effects of distance than the cross correlation.

A few people have run on the Hazard Data Model

flow survey.

The US is one of the kind of datasets which

tries to track trade flows within the United States.

If you run a graph to your regression point, even

bigger effects of distance and trade flows than the cross

country region.

So there's sort of this sort of thing like why

you've never been rich and you know everything on Amazon.

It's just the same as living in London.

So clearly trade is causal as I was on anything.

We have a kind of a prime customer.

The earth is flat.

It's not.

If you look at the data trade flows, for instance,

even within countries, incredibly quickly, and we don't really know

why, we know that happens.

And it hasn't really changed much over time.

But trying to understand why what are exactly the frictions.

So an interesting question.

So if you write a very interesting paper on the.

be a big contribution, but it's not in these models.

It's not.

It's hard.

So why why is it why does this matter so

much?

There are obviously other reasons that you can point to

is that if you think about manufacturing goods and services,

then it's clear that this is a matter as if

you if you need a lawyer, be kind of cool

if you could meet that person and not just hold

on to those days, maybe zoom is pretty good, then

you might be happy to have a lawyer sitting in

Australia to help you do something.

Yeah, really?

You call the individual investor in Australia now?

There's no way you can maybe deliver a couple of

things to you on sort of hypersonic rockets.

There's no way you can even take it away.

It's not quite the same as going to restaurants in

lots of settings.

But even the setting where you just look at manufactured

goods, there are big frictions.

Okay.

So therefore these things here could be carrying quite a

bit of those locations.

And also the kind of access to goods could vary

quite a bit in the world where, you know, if

you think that things are all one personal matter, then

obviously we are pretty close to the Rosenwald world.

If you want gradual reductions on with the accounting data

and two other things that we're going to look at

later on in the chapter, you'll see our costs.

The Earth is really not that good question.

Sorry.

Um, is there also work that maybe looks at whether

people just prefer the things that are most close to

them?

So if they have a local substitute and they choose

that over the one that has been brought to them.

Exactly.

Yes.

Yes, it's work is, um, the academic team.

Some of us earlier work is looking I think this

regional paper was looking across regions in India to show

the people that have two just very different tastes.

That's one of the reasons that it has so reproduced,

because.

It's combination that produces all the time because they also

into the tomatoes.

And so we don't see them exporting little tomatoes and

other things that say, of course, a lot of apples.

And they also like apples a lot.

So they find the differences in consumption preferences, which would

be sort of some regional differences in preferences, could explain

why you don't see a lot of exports of apples

from the apples.

And we love them because it tastes the same, which

is the assumption we usually make.

This is something that is also there are it's not

much.

He's probably the most prominent person.

There's a recent paper by someone who's.

Come back to me, but there's a recent here that

looks at taste differences in France, shows how they have

changed in Los Angeles and the origins of the ordinance

differences, so that it claims that all these differences have

declined all the time, so that maybe at the time,

they should have become less important that we all become

kind of American or do the same thing.

But in the past, there would be big differences for

many people by trade.

You wonder why you didn't see that.

Yeah.

So it's an interesting question, but also other regulatory barriers

and stuff that could make it difficult to, to to

ship stuff.

Yeah.

Okay.

So I've already talked about this.

Define consumer market.

Define describe as a.

Consumer market access.

Good consumer market access means you have access to variety.

Okay.

Then there's a couple of more things.

Um, uh, expenditure uh total expenditure.

So this model we can just define what the total

expenditure is in the city.

So the expenditure is the wage.

So the people who are 18 times the wage.

That's one way as you can see.

So what is that.

So in the model people are going to spend the

share one way in this view of the income which

is income manager.

And on housing.

So this is sort of the income of landlords.

And the assumption that you're going to make it in

the whole world is going to be distributed, distributed to

the local residents.

So you can you can have sort of an active

landlord, which is also a popular assumption such as a

disappears someone somewhere like here.

They can be in schools all the time.

So if you say all of the income gets pulled

into a thought into account and everyone gets an equal

share of the system.

So whenever you pay for energy, essentially you get back.

But it's a lump sum transfer in the background, so

it's not going to change your incentives.

So if you change your mind, if you change your

choice of housing units, then you know what?

Our savings are going to be savings.

Because you know, the change in your transfer is going

to be much, much smaller if you have a reasonable

policy.

So this is just promoting getting people to spend money

on real estate here.

There are no interesting landlords or anything like that.

Obviously landlords are pretty interesting themselves.

Yeah.

In terms of inequality, questions of inequality.

So if we do something that increases income of rents,

going to challenge with housing, and it's going to have

to do with policy implications, because this assumption currently is

pretty crazy Everybody shares the same share of housing in

London.

If that was the case, I'd be fantastic.

But it's not.

As you probably know, it's not.

So in terms of thinking about inequality or the effects

of kind of spatial changes, inequality, I think that's probably

interesting, which is because.

Okay.

So I mean we can use this, we can solve

this here.

We can figure out that the kind of price of

housing is equal to the expenditure on housing, which is

expenditure times the expenditure divided by the fixed stock of

housing.

And if we do that out of the kind of

the price of housing here.

So last thing before we can go for production and

yeah, we have done these two slides and then we

have to do subtraction is going to have the same

form as the kind of initial throughput in 79 paper.

Before we have done this paper we haven't done the

same as Thomas very briefly talked about that that exists

or and went straight into minutes with strangers.

So this is kind of all for 50 differences across

firms.

So it's a labour requirement if you produce one output.

Um you need X units of module labour units of

fixed labour.

And that's the total labour requirement.

So this is a legal requirement a way of saying

these are the marginal costs.

And if we set this equal to one and the

marginal cost the wage, each additional unit of labour produces

one unit of quantity.

And then the wage is the cost.

Yeah.

So this is a very simple easy returns production function

etc..

Excuse not the new times.

The number of fixed units of labour fixed costs marginal.

Pricing is going to be the usual market pricing rule.

The optimal policy here wages.

And it's going to be the price of the demand

here is going to come to the city of substitution,

which is obviously the city is going to determine whether

kind of mark-up over marginal costs are.

And then the final thing is properly calibrated.

So everybody's going to say what the market is at

1.5.

So you're going to do 50% of marginal cost of

your price.

So you know the current unit of half of what

you're going to do to make a profit is so

in equilibrium with free entry.

So it's going to be empty until each firm makes

zero profits.

The model just marginal makes your profits.

Here everybody makes your profits because firms are homogeneous.

You can put matrix here if you like if you

want to see that people have done that.

But that's not the case.

So every firm is going to have size zero which

is determined by these parameters, which is the output level

at which you just cover these costs and makes your

profits overall.

Yes, it is the equilibrium process and the small size

keeps cost and sigma one in terms of mark-ups.

Okay.

So that's that's what we're going to talk about kind

of the implications of this model.

And then extensions in a moment.

Okay.

Let's go for a ten minute break.

And.

So one of the advantages of the.

Hybrid.

Oh.

And.

If you think.

That.

He is the principal.

That is the title of this is true.

And you just have to give me one.

Okay.

Okay.

All right.

But I mean, to be fair, I think it always

happens.

People come back.

Yeah.

I see you guys.

Yeah.

I don't know how.

To see where we're going.

We have two types of groups within this.

Yeah.

I mean.

I don't know what to do.

I think I have come across.

This way.

The girl and the students.

The feedback was terrible.

I think.

I actually, I don't want I have to.

Yeah.

Mine is always good.

Yeah.

That's great.

Yeah.

So this is a picture.

This is.

This is what.

I want for the next.

time.

What is your first to be like?

Like you can start the season.

That would be cool.

That way we can get to the first.

Of a and the Google age.

Of course, it's very easy.

I mean what is what is wrong?

That's what we did.

There are no other reasons.

He has a name.

For the first time, I would like to know that

I would like to learn more.

So they look kind of prestigious and they fight.

Thank you for.

Supporting up to ten reasons that this should be helpful

for the rest.

Of the data, or at least for fixed effects.

Do you think it would be cool?

I think it would be helpful for you to.

Watch the.

Same.

Things like this.

What?

Do you.

Think.

Why are.

You still.

Here?

You've got.

An.

Open.

You.

Know?

Yeah, I think so.

I.

You do not.

Worry.

Oh.

Yes I do.

Okay.

Do you?

Want.

Someone to.

Tell him.

Uh, yeah.

Yeah.

I said Yeah.

You know.

What?

You know what?

You know.

What happened?

To the video.

Shoot on the naval station.

Okay, okay.

He.

Told.

Me.

He regarded.

The.

Presidential shoes.

Somehow.

Well.

What?

Are.

The.

Rules.

To this.

But again, the methodology.

Is very.

We also.

See?

That more.

People.

Will be.

Seeing.

Hello?

Yeah.

That's the clinic.

The clinic is not new.

But.

It.

Was for.

Local astrology.

Because it Linguistic enough for those who.

Don't just want to use their full size.

The.

European.

And more.

I mean, this is.

How?

I think this got too good of a.

Major.

Drain.

On.

Your contribution.

And you Yeah, he's taken off his post.

Don't mind him.

I think it's reliably every now.

Obviously.

This.

Is the best, I suppose.

Yeah.

Right.

Um.

You don't.

Have to worry about the downside.

And.

What?

His name.

Never changed anything on this laptop.

Every night at every turn off after dark.

I'm not going to be there.

I have.

To come and.

Do my driving.

The big.

Pickup the.

One the first time driving is this.

One.

Oh, the blind spot.

So basically, we never had to switch.

I put my indicator.

Okay.

If anyone is still there after 10s.

Because he can't really see me, but also very slowly

so that people could come.

So he was telling me he should go a bit

more quickly, like, because then we had to extend because

he'd first started by asking them to do extend and

then.

Description level comes out and.

I was okay.

I know I am so smart.

Okay.

Let's start again.

So.

So what are you going to look at now?

Unifications of the model.

Sort of how to solve this sort of very simple,

um, setup and looking at um, and then looking at

a number of exceptions.

So there's something this is sort of two different ways

of solving the model.

So it's.

Just the timing.

Um, so the different ways of solving the model, you'll

see different papers doing very different things.

The kind of traditional thing is in the help of

all of us to solve for something.

So this is a function, um.

Or table variety.

That's a table like, uh, I, um, how much of

that is going to be consumed.

And so it's going to depend on the price not

just rising.

It's going to depend on time.

So of course this is going to be so highly

isolating for a time.

And so this is going to be a negative coefficient

down here as well.

So higher prices or higher transport costs are going to

be tested.

And you see we see this sort of income.

And the agency's review is the kind of share of

income spent on the tables.

So more is more demand.

And then we see this with the highest rate of

inflation see.

And provision is higher price index, more demand, higher pricing.

It captures the competitiveness of the market.

And so what are the prices charged that other people

in that market right now.

So thinking about and demands in price, how much are

you going to send it to market.

See depends on what the president says.

You will price less while you install more competitive.

Charge or you hold the price comfortably.

You will sell more.

Does that sort of make sense?

Yeah.

So that's sort of this is just to see the

sales kind of.

Combination.

Yeah.

So then if you if you take this sort of

demand function, you take into account the front end location,

the patient is going to produce this natural spa in

a zero profit equilibrium.

You use the pricing equation to use the approach 5

or 5 is essentially equation.

And eight was the pricing equation.

And you substitute this into this.

You can get this.

So the way this operation says Just something both intuitive

and intuitive.

So it's a bit strange because it has wages on

the left and wages on the right.

So the idea that there are no wages on the

right, but yet wage depends on some concepts.

And this is from here on the right hand side,

which is a sum across different destinations to which you

could be selling your output.

So what it's going to depend on is the size

of this destination.

So that you can see is the kind of how

big a potential destination these people live there and what

their wages are.

It depends on the price index, their location and depends

on transport costs.

If you.

So this is right inside track here.

It's going to be called.

We're going to call this firm market access.

So you say well wages and location are going to

be high in the zero profit equilibrium.

Yeah.

You try to make your neighbours bigger than I make

this bigger.

If I increase the price to make them less competitive

in terms of other suppliers, they might have.

And here this is one minus C minus delta by

higher transport costs even at lower transport costs.

So if you if I make you closer to big

markets that means more than that.

This is simply a description of your dimensions.

Yeah.

So I can imagine if your demand shifts to the

right because firm size is fixed in Europe, zero profits.

You're going to have to pay higher wages.

Yeah.

That's a sort of a very simple idea is right.

A shift in demand means that you know everything sell

more, um, in the community, it can sell more than

it's your home.

And they'll be perfectly.

As a result, the new wages will have to.

Wages will have to go to the prices so that

people are in higher wages in that location.

Okay.

So this is sort of people call this sort of

call this channel.

This is to transact from market access.

So it says from the perspective of the kind of

exact opposite of consumer market access.

What's the difference between here for London and the firm

in the normal way.

No.

And no way that the firm is going to be

very far from consumers and potentially customers.

So it has higher transport costs to other markets in

London.

You know, so get a Brexit.

You know you're very close to European markets and you

know Modifications.

So therefore you have better access to consumers so that

you have.

You know like redshift at the macro.

So so we're looking in terms of the set of

consumers.

It's sort of how easy it is to get things

to that location from the sort of how easy is

it to get us out to, to decisions.

So if transport costs are symmetric all mathematically the same,

so they are indistinguishable.

So if you want to write a paper that says,

you know how much of the advantage of London is

due to fair market access versus consumer access.

You have to have a system where these things are

all the same.

So when trade costs from the two, sometimes it's typically

difficult to think of that as a case in which

are also interesting.

So I'm not sure that that's a very interesting question

about this sort of formula that these two components of

that access, both in terms of consumption and in terms

of reaching customers.

Okay.

So the status of the condition.

So.

Okay.

So I need to see the manuscript.

Okay.

Before we come to to to this so session equilibrium.

So basically the condition in the model is going to

be very similar to the rows.

And rollback utility needs to be analysed.

So people can freely migrate.

And so any differences here utility boils down to real

wages.

In the second.

So now all that matters is the nominal wage location

C divided by a price index, which depends on the

price of manufacturing goods index and the Department of Housing.

So they tell me that the wages.

So it's wages divided by a rather of the price

index, which consists of the goods you consume.

Right?

So the ratio has to be the same everywhere.

At the moment, all the examples you're going to look

at, you're going to say, well suppose there are amenity

tips at the moment.

They are automated across cities.

And it's not the case that most of the productivity

differences across cities.

We're going to introduce in a moment like other than

roads and railways and the density differences.

But the absence of such a major difference is all

that matters is these two things and then picks up

on that.

So.

That we can work out a number of purposes from

the information that's not been involved.

Okay.

So that's basically very similar to the moment we're going

to make.

Even more similar to the ones in.

Yeah.

Okay.

So there's a little note that morning I was Constraints.

In reality, both firms and people come in units and

as you can't have a quarter of the money if

you had.

Yeah.

So we're going to ignore this issue almost exclusively because

integer constraint.

Yeah.

Which is obviously very convenient.

Yeah.

So I meant to solve whether there is a million,

million more people in London to just have a million

0.3757.

So, so that's fine.

This is more formally than ready.

And so, um, this is a bit of a joke,

explicit and explicitly assumes that as a continuum of okay,

so people people start talking about mass of workers.

They try to call you to say the very, you

know, in a more sophisticated way, I'm going to enjoy

it.

And that's all they're doing.

Yeah.

So, um, whether ignoring integer constraints is the kind of,

um, this is interesting question.

So the kind most prominent of the departure of these

two constraints is the so-called granularity paper.

But you will not be able to do that if

you come across the country.

No.

Okay.

Oh, okay.

And we'll talk about that in the comments.

Which of the other things that develops the model where

people are integers.

So you have integer constraints.

Everything becomes a lot more complicated uh, in that setting.

Um, but um, you know, they, um, what they can

do as well.

So there are settings where you think that these other

settings I can think of, the integer constraints are not

harmless to people, then it's not harmless.

That's sort of how many I don't know, you know,

how do we have a continuum of, let's say, for

example, of aeroplane Cafe manufactures.

It's probably not maybe a case that there's a continuum

of restaurants.

Uh, he said.

But it's probably okay to say that as a continuum

of restaurants.

Seven and a half.

But in order to stay in the world, I think

there are probably going to be some interesting areas to

be written on this at some point.

But you will see the signature 99.9% is going to

ignore that and just assume that everything can be sliced

up into into pieces, which is analytically extremely convenient, but

potentially not really.

So this is sort of the side of the equations

here in terms of saying this is the kind of

this model is going to be referenced to, there going

to be seven endogenous variables.

And these are all equations that we've seen before.

The equation on this equation.

This is the normal terms.

So this just collects together the seven equations defined in

this in this models.

This is from the kind of appendix of writing and

some 2008.

If you look at some of the 16 papers or

other versions, people will rearrange these equations in many different

ways and substitute them into each other and simplify.

And so after a little bit of algebra, I can

show you that three equations are enough to characterise the

equilibrium.

And maybe the other endogenous variables are recursive in the

sense that if you solve for the three endogenous variables,

you can solve for the other ones.

Yeah.

As a as a follow up afterwards.

So that, you know, for those of you who have

a lot of theoretical metabolism, there's a lot of things

can look very different.

But in principle this model has 7 million variables.

And here, you know, this is an older paper where

you can sort of seven equations and seven.

That's just so clear.

Even though it's only seven pretty simple equations in the

morning is sufficiently nonlinear that it cannot be solved.

And the outcome of this maybe you don't care anymore.

And so this year sort of generations, obviously we put

stuff on the computer is that it used to be

a time when this was a completely normal.

So I think one of the kind of things that

sort of crewmen used to say, I can't solve this

can solve some things.

So in some way he could solve a few things.

But a lot of the new construction and the experimental

analytical results, we do everything by simulation.

Um, and it has become sort of okay that you

can do that.

You don't have to be able to solve anything.

Everything.

Can we just simulate things and see what will happen?

So that's what's going to happen here.

Um, as well before computers, um, some sort of um,

there's there's a.

One more light.

We can come back to that at a later stage.

But ready to host.

This is going to show using techniques from the 14

that it is helpful for extension.

Whether this version has some unique distribution holes.

So if you look at the 2008, even Steve Sprague

couldn't work out that that was the case.

If you see the paper that the session was, um,

it turns out that this formula also holds the original

Hartmann paper.

So for the true location setting.

But it's not clear that the condition that holds the

two locations on supported end locations.

Turns out it does.

So it's the ability here.

Uniqueness of the unique equilibrium is guaranteed if either the

house is.

And this year this is high, which means that the

dispersion force is strong.

So if you spend a lot of money on housing,

then living in an expensive city is going to be

quite painful.

Well, Sigma is very big.

When sigma as big, this means the lack of variety

is weak.

So big sigma means because it's just a substitution, you're

pretty indifferent between different things.

Everything is a pretty good substitute.

So if you say everything is the same, you could

kind of get the same utility from.

Whereas a smaller than the kind of lack of idea

of having access to a variety is particularly important.

So that's the kind of strength of the small.

The domination force is very strong.

So this condition says if we are going to get

the uniqueness here, we need the dispersion force to be

sufficiently strong.

And the innovation was not too strong.

And then things don't work.

Okay.

So But let me warn you again that this pilot

here, speaking about apparently the economy in this business involves

and however and so we are sort of playing the

game with like the background comments to say, well, let's

make assumptions of the model as unique glitter.

It is very clear that in the majority there must

be interesting rules about Libra.

And that model may not be the right way to

think about that.

And probably sort of the way to think about it

is here we have kind of baked in the locations

where things are, and obviously there's lots of other resources

and so on.

The fact that it's true to arbitrary, where these locations

could potentially be sort of ignored here because we've just

made that into the structure of the language, but that

sort of makes sense.

Yeah.

So thinking about uniqueness is not is, uh, you know,

this model is not going to be very interesting if

you have the right to uniqueness.

Um, but in general, it's not a great problem to

think about, because there must be a multiplicity and sort

of indeterminacy of very likely in the kind of location

of cities that sort of London is where it is,

rather than in Southampton or Norwich.

It seems like it should.

It's just a historical accident.

Okay.

So you have to do a number of extensions, but

sort of a first look at the qualitative predictions of

the model.

So this model without any difference in activity space is

going to say the city is such a central city

that the whole city markets are going to pay higher

level wages, a lower price index which actually rises.

Exactly.

Essentially, to come back to that in a moment.

These two things need to be offset by something.

Otherwise everybody would move to London.

So the thing that stops you from moving to bases

or access to the health crisis is you just have

to be offset.

So if I go back to the spatial equilibrium condition

here, big cities have a higher wages they're going to

have.

So if this is if this prediction model is true,

that market access is better in terms of access to

consumption goods.

You talked about that in front of you.

Then ask me something offsetting offsets.

So if you ever complain about the London is so

expensive he's very expensive.

But he's sort of the kind of comeback of the

stage companies.

It's expensive for a reason.

It's very attractive to high wages.

And this is also going to be some time of

year.

But you get high wages here and you have a

good one to add to this.

So there's got to be something to make unattractive.

Otherwise everybody would come here.

So I think it's going to be this.

So without any productivity differences or any of these.

This model predicts that there could be some central differences

in normal wages.

And you know the wages are going to be offset.

Yeah.

The big question here is if you look at the

data, the big action is variation in nominal wages between

London and other cities in the UK is massive right.

This is also massive that even more massive than this.

This is.

What the exact model is, how you want to.

How much variation you're going to get into the consumption.

Side of this.

So the discussion in the break.

Civilisation is manufacturing, rising and tradeable in Non-tradable and it

is in restaurants.

And then for the long tables you will get an

even stronger kind of price index, effectively say, what's the

difference between other than this whole city is London has

all these local non-tradable consumption varieties that you can consume,

whereas in a small place, somewhere, somewhere else you have

the 3000, you know, and that's all you can pick

from.

And so you have to choose tradable Non-tradable standard long

tradable price index.

Arguably, the terms of price index, which defines both the

prices and variety, would have even more variation than maybe

those tradable tradable, which probably have differences in prices.

Okay.

So that's that's sort of the kind of basic why

does all of this in this city okay Inequality decreases.

So let's look at the number of extensions we are

looking for.

Some of that is going to be um um, but

we're going to start looking at some of the, some,

some data.

Uh, but then in the next chapter we're going to

look at start looking more seriously at data.

So imperfect mobility of workers productivity.

The many differences is the morphisms uh dynamics important the

actual structure.

And then finally okay.

So most of this is just one slide pointing you

in a number of different directions how this could be

made more, um, realistic.

So it's going to introduce a simple way to make

workers more productive.

Mobile is to use a lot of other settings.

So instead worker Peter here gets some taste job which

is going to be going to the distribution, which is

going to feature prominently in all other social work.

for distribution and you see the solutions you see here.

Because again, if you've done it, it's important.

So you see the distribution.

You know what it looks like you're going to have

some keystrokes.

So the simple way for many people not all different

across locations to say we're going to have some sort

of notation from the version of it and then use

the presentation that you're going to get through each city.

And this is going to determine, you know, so you

you're not going to be different between locations in the

UK because conditional shock may be on live in Norwich

and some other, some other places where some other person

shelter has other ideal location choice.

But the what is what is nevertheless there are going

to be people who are testing different, and it's going

to be a marginal consumer who's just the difference.

And the key kind of the difference is that this

is literally the supply chain.

So if you increase the attractiveness of London in the

presence of these these shots, as soon as I offer

1% more utility in London, I'm not going to get

an infinite inflow of people, which you would get otherwise

until the price is adjusted.

We are back to spatial distribution and you sort of

slowly drawing people.

So as you, as you increase the attractiveness of the

location, you know, there's always a little bit of supply

of people who are going to come to us.

Obviously trying to excavate what is the city of the

labour supply, which is going to be driven by the

labour supply.

This is you increase wages on them by 1%.

Or utility by 1%, and let's say just wages.

How many more people will come to London?

It's, you know, a price question that they've been coming

to try to estimate.

Um, it's not clear what the right number is.

So if you want to do more of that kind

of complications, you need to come up with a number

here.

So it's 10 or 2 or 3 or 5 or

something.

Yeah.

Okay.

So that's one of the extension and which is the

empirically it's likely that there is an upward sloping labour

supply.

This is needed to be perfectly indifferent across locations.

And that's one way of doing it.

Okay.

So those are the one we're going to look at

the largest labour and managing productivity differences across applications.

And that's very easy to do.

So yeah we just stick in some amenities.

So this is a receipt for us.

This is a common amenity that everybody agrees on.

What is the kind of a woman versus the peak

of the peak of Birmingham?

And what are the kind of energy levels, different locations.

Obviously you can have these differences.

And we think that I'm going to do here can

be powerful together.

As you can see, disregarding utility and common utility structures

in the same time.

So that will be here.

And then for activity you can go to sort of

the minutes.

It's not quite ready.

So what's the difference between this and minutes.

So here is now is alternator quality.

But this is the productivity of the location.

I will be in a minute world.

Productivity.

So here everyone in the city has the same opportunities.

When you travel to London the more productive firms elsewhere.

But there's no heterogeneity within the city.

So there's differences in productivity across locations but not with

the within the factions.

You can obviously go all the way to balance and

say, well, we want to have a distribution in London

and a particular distribution in the city.

Then things become more complicated.

So this is not I'm not doing this.

There's another side of the world.

We can do this.

We can do mandates across these locations.

It just becomes if you don't have the data to

do this, if you don't have sort of these people

who have done this, this is probably the most common

paper that does make these people very simple.

But the I think that kind of differences in productivity

of firms in cities and how firms search across countries

and plants.

Okay.

Good.

Yeah.

This is a similar world where they just promoted different

procedures in the in in your country.

If you do this, nothing much happens.

So the modern version.

I just go back because we're going to need it

for model versions.

If I go back to the original edition too.

If you just stick in with productivity, manage the differences

and the special.

Edition.

Will change in one way.

You will have the DC charm here, so the differences

in productivity across locations will change wages.

If you make a negotiation over that, it will pay

higher wages.

So if you look at wages and body and political

differences, it will be another charge.

Times you see will be the kind of will be

the energy will play a role in the conversation.

And so it's not just going to be wages.

So that is exactly the rules and logic.

So if this happens you can sort of pay people

either wages or an assumption.

Both of those make an application more or.

Can I am I.

13 attempts to make labour supply elastic in the model

instead of each worker implies.

That you could work more in other than elsewhere so

that the data supplies metrics are first met.

Or think about counterfactuals where they climate shocks effects or

labour supply.

And that effects I haven't.

Maybe because I'm not aware of people doesn't mean it

come to mind.

Okay yesterday.

But if you.

Have.

Questions.

Questions of measuring labour supply.

And so think of it I always think about sort

of could have some data.

Can I get to the right data about differences in

labour supply between London and some other days.

I can then go for it and then we have

to have some endogenous labour supply.

If it's a simple, endogenous labour supply, just how many

hours you work in, probably more than once.

You put a whole hour labour search and matching model

into settings.

More complicated.

The one of the drawback of this last year was

India or we went to use.

She has sort of a search and matching order across

cities.

And um, she's a macro on this whole setup.

Uh, but then that it's possible that it gets more

expensive, but in general, people have to look at.

The extended margin.

Whether you work or not.

So again, the kind of the classic is just everybody

works independence off to the point of nuisance in the

background that we just couldn't have.

Quite easy to get that right.

Yeah.

How many people live in the UK?

There's a lot of farms and their homes and their

friends.

Exactly.

So there's a paper.

There was.

There was a joint statement by the council over the

first thing.

A survey who had looked at retirement at the time.

So this is in the two period one way, your

first work in the fire and you retired in Florida.

Why?

Because you don't have to.

You could.

And so she said there's a reason there's a sort

of a follow up paper by that paper in front

of me.

And I think it's actually the people here at the

commission also looks at kind of all the time choices.

And so people are starting to worry about the non-working

population.

They'd be retirees.

But if you really look at other things, I have.

An urban model, which I'm hoping to have a working

paper very soon present in other times very soon, which

has also non-working people.

The classic assumptions everybody works unemployment.

I think this year we want to do something with

unemployment and very interesting.

This mistake has a lot more dependencies.

The one thing.

But so the real unemployment since I've seen, I'm not

aware of anyone who saw something interesting, but there may

be something that I'm not aware of.

Okay.

So that's um, that's that's for the humans isomorphism.

So comes from something more complicated.

Okay.

So yeah.

Sorry.

Isomorphism is going to come up.

So first you're going to talk about model inversion.

So popular strategies to invert spatial models and to use

equilibrium values to determine the values of entities and activity.

You've seen model inversion before.

Let me know.

Is that you.

Yeah for sure.

But anyway, you have not done any.

Have you heard the word model inversion?

Okay.

Yes.

City model inversion is something that again, I don't sure

admitted.

That idea probably comes from an average, but it's appeared

in the kind of spatial data they had known, and

they had a little bit in payment at the end

of 2018.

And after all seasons that anybody does model inversion.

So the moment version is an incredibly kind of crazy

but also simple idea, which is the following picture.

In any kind of if you think microeconomics people are

going to say, specify the relevance of your model of

the economy and then you will solve it.

So the model is going to do exactly the opposite

because they tell me about the equilibrium.

And I'll tell you what the fundamentals are.

So it's like say as in the normal economic model,

you're going to say let's sort of specify the foundations

of a house.

What are the fundamentals.

What is the productivity levels in different locations.

That was the transport cost.

How many goods they are, the level of transport costs

whatever.

And then we're going to solve for equilibrium.

So you've got to sort of build a house on

these kind of foundations are going to say, yeah, now

everything is fine.

I've solved for equilibrium.

This is what you do in a microeconomic So what

are we going to do here is you can do

the exact opposite.

So I suppose I can see the house.

I can work out what the foundations must be.

So I'm going to sort of work not from here

to there, but from there to there, as I'm going

to say.

I'm going to observe the house which is here, the

equilibrium.

And from the equilibrium I'm going to infer where the

foundations have to be.

And if you think about this in this very stylised

example, you think that could work for us.

I know a lot about the house.

If I can see very clearly where it is.

I have a lot of knowledge about the static.

I need to know a lot about the kind of

structural engineering.

I can sort of guess where the foundations are.

I can just work out what the foundations must be,

because otherwise this house wouldn't stand at all into itself.

And that's sort of the idea.

So it's a very unusual way or unusual in terms

of sort of simple and kind of normal Moment where

nobody thinking is going to work from the equilibrium backwards

to figure out what the fundamentals.

So this is the first slide that states it becomes

a full statement of modern version in this particular model.

But you do.

People will also be kind of predictable.

Thank you.

Very very nice.

Um, so first of all the statement that intuition in

the next slide.

So the statement is and this comes from the kind

of statement the council had already made.

The other 2008 paper does not talk about model identity,

although I appreciate.

That no I won't talk about that later.

But so then this is what the person is able

to work this out.

It's a summarised yes.

They come from various other papers including the If you

have this research process, you need to know that the

3000 model is really expensive and actually gets women's health

care quite as good as the substitution for the varieties

of the man.

That is this new vision.

And how strong was the brightest, and why was the

kind of necessity capital cost is present to discuss that.

If this is the zero that the earth is not,

and the.

Medical costs are not related to to tourists at all.

So you need to know these these social factors.

How could you possibly know that that's sustainable.

We just happen and we need data.

So this is sort of the kind of structure, you

know, how how is this work as you need to

know a lot about kind of the kind of physics

ability basis of the CCD.

And then you need to observe enough of the equipment.

And particularly if you have data on population wages, housing

supplies, your housing supply, house prices and also time and

distance between locations, then you can work out what amenities

and productivity happen to be in each city, up to

a multiplicative constant.

So this is going to be very important.

Everything is always up to scale.

So we can change the equilibrium if you know what

wages are.

If you multiply the wages with the fact that everything

is still in equilibrium.

Similarly, here we have two sets of amenities that solves

this problem.

If you multiply all of the communities of the factor

k, welfare of the country as a whole will go

up by location choices or not, that people will not

change location.

Similarly, you know, the wages we're supposed to cover without

multiplying prices will be richer.

But nobody would change locations and change all that stuff.

You've had to feed some of that, too.

So this.

This.

So that we have the surgical crisis tossed in not

only equilibrium, then we can solve for BC and the

amenities and practices.

So how is that going to work?

Let's go through the intuition how we can do this.

And I'm going to try to do this for um.

For productivity and then into the 20s as well.

So the reason that we're giving wage is to be

able to lower prices.

So why?

Because of my capacity.

So if you know wages and sigma is the market

over the place, you also know prices.

So usually they tell wages to handle prices on these

things together with this device and give you the trade

offs.

The distances between cities are and you know this this

can be translated into trade.

And you know the trade cost matrix.

You know what the shipping costs are.

If you know wages, prices that you will impact out

population and freight costs just backed up, then you know

exactly what the demand is and also what costs are.

So if you know wages.

So wages are going to be equal for costs, the

wages of the marginal cost.

And so we need the wages to figure out the

marginal cost in terms of and um, you know, the

prices in other locations.

I mean, the population also needs their wages and training

courses to determine what the demand is.

So this is all the stuff that's on the right

hand side of the equation.

I need to know what the price of the communication

is.

And if I have this then there's only one level

at which profits.

I know you demand curve and I know your model.

So the poster is going to be one for activity

level where that firm is going to make exactly zero

profits.

And that's the profit that I'm going to infer in

the reverse approach.

Does it make sense that you go back?

I go back to the equations.

If you think about the equation here.

The this is the weight version of the weight equation

that if you look at.

The wage that I can pay in a location depends

on how other my destinations are.

Well the price index at these locations is and the

transport costs are due to the data that I have

or this is I can work out but this is

I have to wait on wages.

I have data on population.

I can work out what the price index is because

this year is this, is this.

That's if I know what the number at the number

of times.

So if I know what prices are happening across the

world.

So with all this data I can figure out what

the kind of demand level is.

I know what the marginal cost is.

I know the wages are and what the actual function

therefore is.

And then there's only one productivity level where the firm

makes a.

Slight explanation, but does that make sense in in this

thing.

So um, and.

The same thing is going to working easier for for

amenities.

So amenities.

Yeah.

If you if I go back to the condition.

And just go all the way to the station.

So if I, if I know wages, if I know

house prices, I didn't know house prices are you know

how the supplies I can solve for the given price

from demand by the house and the prices I can

get at these prices and wages.

Wages can get translated into prices from lack of pricing

formula with transport costs.

I know exactly what this price index looks like.

So if I have this number, that number and that

number and this early one, you know that many people

have different variations of this city A and CTB city

A, this is, say, one in Sydney, this is point

eight and I know that amenities must be higher because

otherwise people would go off.

So using the spatial equilibrium condition to back out what

the differences must be so that house doesn't fall in.

Yeah.

And spatial deliverables.

Okay.

So that's kind of model inversion.

As you see people talk about model inversion.

They just everybody does model inversion.

Because why do we do it.

Because we don't really know particularly many differences.

We don't have any data on it.

That's if I said like why do we go the

other way and wait.

For productivity you can say, well, why don't we talk

to our friends in Ohio and estimate productivity differences across

cities?

Let's do that.

We could do that.

Great, great.

In the absence of talking to our friends in Ohio,

it's kind of hard to tell what the problem is

that they are across cities and that the energy difference

is even harder.

So if you think about this as sort of little

B and A and B.

What are the many differences between London and other places?

You know, people have very different views.

We're just going to say, well, let's just pick it

back from social equilibrium.

So that's what we're going to do.

Yeah.

Obviously this question you might say, well is this what

we do before we get out of this process.

Is it totally crazy?

I don't think so.

Yeah.

In the sense that what you can do, honestly, you

could say, well, sort of suppose I backed out, right?

50 differences across cities and many different cities.

I can correlate this with things that I think are

correlated with me.

For example, you regress more amenities on our society.

You could get a positive correlation.

The R squared is only one, but it's the other

things that you might think.

Could you see so many cities for the sake of

the kind of model confers amenities?

Similarly, productivity is something you know, and there's less work

that is definitely anticipated to be written, to sort of

look more closely at all the activity differences across cities

and compare them to my precedents.

Um, sure.

Pretty soon, um, it won't be me, but it will

be some of, um, doing that.

I'm pretty sure that you will find my quotations as

well.

Okay, so that's probably the most important conceptual thing for

today that we need to take away this morning, that

we're going to work, uh, work backwards from equilibrium values

to, um, focus.

Okay.

So I think we've got a future in terms of

theory is to look at more.

It's going to look at how our life is.

And it's like this is going to have a slightly

different version.

Matter of the geography.

And you want to see some things that are Sometimes

more than a person.

So the Augusta National and the morphisms is, you know,

cost us this week last week expressions at the office.

And it's just a fantastic word.

And I know a lot of the minister.

And so he's going to show how simple of all

this is on the line here.

I sort of move it to various other models in

the literature.

So there's sort of this matter model.

You think those other models are going to be special

cases, including the Hultman and how the table is going

to be a special case at this moment in, in

a very special way.

So this model is very simple.

It's only one unit that produces I units that I

activity across the nation.

And.

Um, the workers are going to have utility.

So I'm going to use a civics that.

You talked about on the right.

He has told us your priorities, right.

He knows what Huntington varieties are.

Anybody?

Know you have to talk to it.

I mean.

I think we've seen the model.

So, I mean, there's an idea from 1969.

What about you?

So this is before this is needless to say, you

see the existing machinery.

So the kind of you just see the CSS classes

where each farm produces a variety and the others are

equally translated, which you like to call the seeds that.

Completely implausible, but it's extremely convenient function.

Here coming which is there is different products produced by

firms or by cities.

So there's a London product, there's a mortgage product driving

a product, and you going to consume the consumers that

are consuming these different varieties.

And they're going to be horizontally differentiate that is the

Birmingham route, whatever that might be.

And the London could have the same utility function, the

same way that in a simple case the kind of

outputs of all these different firms.

You might say, well, that's crazy, it is crazy.

But at the moment the isomorphism is going to turn

out that the model with this crazy assumption in certain

well-defined ways is going to make exactly the same quantitative

prediction and a much more realistic.

Still unrealistic.

A much more realistic model is where a lot of

the parts will have horizontal differentiated CSS, right?

So I mean here that it's certainly well past time,

but it's kept alive by the fact that this sort

of simple orrington model, where you have a distributed function

that is differentiated by origin, has quantitatively in a lot

of, in a lot of ways, the same predictions and

the model, the way I see it.

Okay.

Um, so productivity is one of the functions of productivity.

Overall productivity is going to differ across the locations and

the productivity is going to be enormous.

So creativity can change is not just a fixed number,

but it depends on some fundamental productivity location and the

number of people who live in and who live and

work in that location to the power of some factor.

Contractor Alpha.

Has more people to Alpha is positive.

That means that more people work with location.

There some analysis and you'll get more practical.

How big Alpha is, is that too?

If you think that won't be, Labour economists have at

some point estimate a waitress wages on staff in the

state of Georgia.

You want to become a real spatial economist, have to

do something on your wages on the site and you

will get an estimate for alpha.

And these estimates have huge identification problems, which is the

same as in the wage which the regression is.

But the estimates are suddenly positive.

So the kind of there's no consensus in terms of

how big this is.

There is a better study.

There's a survey of a lot of people signed by

Rosen, by the French.

Somewhere between maybe two and 2.1, 6.0, 2.1, which would

be 2% to 10% would be sort of a consensus

range.

So the 10% would mean that increased population would 10%.

Yeah.

This is why this population of 10%, this is going

to go by 1%.

Which is still.

Oh that's okay.

Yeah.

0.202 and 2%.

So then 100% more population means 2% more productive.

Okay.

So that's yeah.

So a lot of people will say, well this is

one of the positive parameters.

It's expensive.

Size matters.

It looks like size matters.

You don't really know why it matters.

But some of the in the data, whatever sort of

thing we do, we get the conditions.

The second assumption, which is extremely similar, says there is

some overall Supposedly my previous notation is called B is

now for you.

I'm following the application, so there's going to be some

overall activity in the location, which is going to be

some fundamental component which could be, you know, a very

beautiful coastline or little sunshine, and then endogenous component, which

is going to be a function of a number of

people in the rotation to power something beta.

And they're going to say, well, beta is going to

be negative is it's going to be quite a few

people will somehow reduce the utility of space and other

than it just gets annoying, is the cheapest it will

become.

And that uses this.

Okay.

When we estimate the productivity spill-overs doesn't matter much whether

we use population data, which is very important.

So if you look at.

The differences in population and employment pretty much the same

if the labour force participation.

So the normal working there's no variation of working dependence.

So if there's sort of labour economic speak, if there

are big differences in labour force participation across cities, that

accommodation and employment is not the same.

And then probably you want to put population level employment

here.

Here we can assume a better way.

We're going to say that these two things are the

one working with dependence or the number of non working

dependents is exactly the same.

So it's just a multiple of each other.

Thank you.

Okay I'll come back to that in a second.

This is very plausible.

This is going to turn out in a moment to

be quite implausible.

But this is a systemic belief and say.

yes.

Um, and.

Okay, so I said.

So if you have any is an alpha beta is

alpha, beta is alpha is the activity is gonna be

the moment this model turns out to be isomorphic to

the model for other values with models with imperfect probability,

or how do you use it in action?

I think we have kind of skipped over it.

Why did the robot, um, firms use space to produce

in the kind of cosmic geography they don't?

Um, that is implausible.

Need space in the cities?

Um, so I think the main reason why that is

why the traditional abstract from that it's no problem to

have from space.

Also in the setting is that and it's not going

to make it all the difference.

And the results qualitatively will make a difference when you

back up productivity.

The 90s people didn't worry about it.

They didn't worry about empirical work.

But here's the work.

It makes sense to have a geography model where you

have how it is used as input into production.

It's used by firms.

But the model I showed you doesn't do that.

Yeah.

Quantity will matter.

But so you can.

So the whole business point is you can extend the

model and this sort of very simple model for different

values of alpha and beta.

So you know theoretically and turns out to be exactly

the same.

Note this is the important note, the isolation that applies

to transfers wages, population and welfare, but not necessarily markets.

So it shows that if you use this sort of

model, then you can sort of gauge the country's particular

wages, population and other authorities.

So let's see what can I do so that you

can use data for US counties to the year 2000?

Um, but how many people live in each location?

The wages in each of each county and house prices

in the county, and they need.

So, um, so they have all the situations and they

need the values of the structural parameters to have a

meeting.

So how are they going to get them?

They'll just assume them.

And so a lot of that kind of structural work

these days is going to be about estimating parameters such

as often people ask if you want to do a

market paper and you say, I'm going to do this

economic model, for better or worse, people will want you

to ask.

These times, they'll say, Show me some microfilm.

Identifies estimate of the structural problems rather than just assume.

So what sets us apart from the macro economists is

because I don't want to find the macro economists.

But so the macro economist says I know that alpha

is going on.

I don't want to discuss about it any further as

to that value over the life.

The structural urban literature says no, I'd like to see

an estimate from the estimate.

So you could.

So how could you estimate this one?

What do you think?

What could you.

Do?

What could you sort of do to try?

What sort of data could you try and collect as

an estimate of how big is?

The shelf to your right neighbour for disaster.

Okay.

Yeah, yeah, you're being very good at this.

Let's do something slightly less.

So you don't want to be that religious.

So we want to just say.

Suppose you can't think of a very good natural experiment

that would distract some data.

You could use some alpha.

So if you don't think of a social experiment, most

of the data you want to do regression, you want

to pin down that value of alpha.

And like a panel data, we have observations for the

same counties and different years.

Yeah you could do that.

Yeah you can.

Then you could next to me the x part, which

is the if you go back to the equation.

Suppose you can't find out, for example, a data set

that shows the wages in the UK across cities and

seaside.

So these places are what could I do.

I just regress wages losses.

Yeah.

So I've run a regression where I say let's regress

wages.

And let's assume a number of things first that wages

are proportional to productivity, which they're not, but sort of

second, that I couldn't think of any exogenous variation.

But surely city size must be random.

So I can't figure out what do you think of

any sort of disease?

That would be fantastic.

He was very happy to try to use soil conditions

as instruments of city size, as if you're walking soil,

if you build, if you're difficult to build, and that

it may be instrumental to city size.

But even if you can't think of an instrument, we

can just regress the wages on size to find a

relationship which is going to be positive.

Point one means end to end as a very high

value.

So in my opinion, this is a very high value.

But you know it's going to be some positive metric.

So I could in principle there wouldn't be a very

nice investment if you had a very nice identification idea

how to estimate that.

And people do this, and I would like all those

that kind of take care more.

The makeover of the table.

This is their model.

So maybe they understand one thing, which is how would

you disentangle the I specific to each city from the

alpha in this case.

From the other.

Point.

That's that's a very good point.

And it's been a little bit a little macro Collins

implicitly identifying assumption you're going to make.

So if you're going to so that you're going to

there's a replacing this thing with wages.

Yes that's some detail is so there's regress wages on

this.

Taking the law to log wages and alpha times log

size.

And I'm implicitly assuming that this thing doesn't vary across

locations okay.

Right.

Hello sunshine.

It would be great to have instruments, but I can't

think of one.

Implicitly understood that this thing doesn't work.

Yeah.

That's why I was thinking of that too.

So.

Yeah.

So that's why you want to go over the time

so that you can do it all the time.

So there's plenty of ways of getting good at the

material, you know, improving on something.

But it's going to be hard to identify application problems

like estimating the returns and thinking of a plausible good

instrument for this is is really hard.

But at least we can sort of do stuff even

if it's not perfect.

How do we estimate this?

So this is the relationship between manatees and the number

of people.

So the how bad is crowding.

I'll tell you what they go to do.

Um.

Can you think of ways to estimate that?

Theta?

I can't see that.

It's hard to see how that could be done.

Wage as a function of.

Housing prices in this way.

Yes.

You're right.

It's a good idea.

So if you're going to do and it's going to

be sort of goes in the direction.

They're going to say, well, we're going to show that

for a particular value of beta.

This model is isomorphic to the housing model.

And help.

Them all.

And in particular, they're going to say, well, if the

housing expenditure share and help, the model is, I think,

one of three or they say 30%, then they can

work backwards using the isomorphism and say, well, then therefore

it has to be a particular value.

And this is to to be to be minus point

three.

You can make specific assumptions of this sort of about

a housing expenditure and the helping model, and then use

the prism to calculate the apartment model into this model.

So you can think of this as an indirectly derived

parameter where I'm going to say, well, my model is,

is this could it be either way is isomorphic to

this.

And in a helper model, an assumption of 30% housing

expenditure?

It's possible.

I think it's not exactly 3,033% of them.

And it is it is a way of And change

that into what therefore Peter has to do.

And so the very macro kind of indirect estimation approach

of doing that.

Let's see what that produces.

So therefore very beautiful mass.

So let us look at that.

So what these.

Do.

Let's start with productivity.

So the first thing is the disposal now is going

to account for the overall productivity and location.

So we're going to use implicitly this sort of model

is going to have very similar condition as the helping

model as you move it.

Um so you can put it back on what the

productivity is so that firms at all locations are going

to make zero profit.

That's the overall productivity.

This is a great it's more productive.

So what would this look like.

This is a bay area that would be very productive

and a pretty good job in the East Coast.

Those very nice moments in the middle.

Yeah.

So you're, like, kind of disposable.

That looks like.

Well, maybe.

So some of you got some data and the estimated

activity of firms in New York versus someplace in the

Midwest.

Yeah.

And maybe we will find that actually, that is sort

of what we find in the kind of micro data

as well.

It sort of confirms prejudices in terms of deep differences.

This is the amenity difference.

So this is the overall amenity without distinction between the

kind of fundamental amenity and the spill-over component, just the

overall land.

Right, is better, higher amenities.

And who is worse?

What does that look like?

Does that look plausible?

And maybe we will vote for your vote.

Yeah.

This is one of the beauties.

Whenever you want a job in New York.

It's a bummer.

It's terrible.

Okay.

Deep blue.

This is my Arizona.

This is why the beauty is not good.

So I guess how much more these guys are completely

confused or your profit is just wrong.

The fact that you are in.

Charge everything you've ever been to in class.

The real beauty is elsewhere.

Okay.

Let's go.

Why?

Why is the model to find that completely implausible?

The Result.

Because they were.

Intrigued by my culture.

You say that because they assume.

These are things.

That is conjecture.

Yeah.

Okay, so what sort of implicitly you can before you

talk a little bit about it, I try to avoid

taking away the ultimate.

There could be congestion.

So what's kind of wrong with this assumption.

What is missing.

Why why why why isn't the whole thing.

That's impossible.

It's not implausible.

Why does it have the distinction that the Bay area

and New York and Chicago, all the terrible.

What's going on there?

What's missing?

I'm sorry.

Population density.

No, it is population.

You know, so the total population, population density empirically of

high crime.

Correct.

So we get to look at the combination with each

county.

But the size of counties is almost exactly the same

as the size of the country is exactly the same.

The population is not exactly the population population.

It's a high inequality.

So when you put the population in, that's not going

to help you make the population density.

You still get something completely impossible.

Within the city.

Normally, yeah, that's going to be big.

You know, one of the other things is that the

individual is pretending that all of the Bay area or

all of London have the same population density, which obviously

we're going to see a few hundred and 80 also

within cities.

But that's again, so now.

So everything in London is the same, some house price

and some.

So thank you.

So what's missing?

Working through the problems you want you to achieve.

The CSR will only survive this financial occasion and the

multiplicative amenity.

What's missing?

Something missing from the bulletin.

People consume goods and enjoyment.

What else do people do?

Sorry.

Who said that?

How is it getting back to you on the bridge?

Most of you have a flat.

So these people don't consume any housing.

So they've made the simplifying assumption that people do not

consume space, which is clearly counterfactual.

And so as a result, what this TV attaches is

this negative feature.

Most of this is the fact that the reason that

there is this crowding is that typically this is simply

house prices.

Yeah.

So we need a negative coefficient.

But there's more people that come to a place house

prices.

What is the result that the dispersion.

So really what.

Are two things that may be some true effects of

population size on the switch.

When we come to the kind of urban model.

See that.

And a lot of estimates suggest that it should be

positive one to control for housing prices.

But really, the beta here is some weird combination of

the effect of the people, house prices a lot, and

maybe ability to change.

So it's a composite amenity that includes house prices.

So it's kind of I'm sorry, the last 2:00 is

kind of useless because you really know what you're measuring.

So in terms of estimating beta, It's the combination of

these two things.

It's very hard to tell how.

It's how you complete the estimates.

So obviously, you know, the two people are extremely intelligent.

So are you going to say, okay, let me show

you fundamental amenities and then let me just sort of

to do this, you can do this first.

So we're going to see this.

Let me go back to the formula.

So here.

The map you should look at is the overland I

know that.

I made an assumption but.

Then I calculate what this thing is.

I know what this thing is for the modern version.

So I can figure out what that is.

So I know what the fundamental is.

Location.

So how exciting it is.

And that is a composition where I say the model

inversion gives me the oval Local amenity, which is if

I know population and I can enter the neighbourhood, that

component of your home.

And I know what the residual component.

So this is what the residual component looks like.

This is the alternative to implicitly taking out this house

price effect.

This looks much more global.

Yeah.

It's not that much.

But that is pretty good.

Well that's pretty good.

Florida is pretty sunny.

This looks pretty good.

And so it's not perfect.

I've never been I've not been to many of these

places.

But I would agree with somewhere that that's a lot

more plausible in terms of fundamental energy.

Some of it is here in New York.

I'm not that great.

Uh, but that's sort of talking about the fundamentals in

terms of sunshine.

So the fundamental amenities is probably not that great in

general.

It's not bad, but it's not terribly.

It's not quite enough.

Okay, so the same can be the same with exogenous

particles.

So the activity is exactly the same logic.

You just go back to the equation and say one

inversion gives us the overall activity.

I take my population workers to the power of my

current alpha.

I get this term so I can work out what

these solutions are.

What do you make of that term?

So this is the kind of distribution of accelerations or

activity in the US.

How close is that.

Not very different from the overall productivity.

Yes you're right.

It's it is quantitatively it's going to be smaller.

Yeah.

So the kind of variation in fundamentals are going to

be less.

But you say that it looks suspiciously similar to the

overall activity here.

Yeah.

There is.

Something in the Bay area that makes it very fundamentally

correct.

Whereas here is quite.

Well is it it is this it all?

In some sense is definitely not just what the model

says, but it is.

The problem is, is it sort of plausible.

With messages that isn't it is not arbitrary where you

have cities.

In exactly one interpretation, this shows the Bay area is

some fundamental practice.

If we move Silicon Valley up here, it would be

a disaster.

This is the fundamental differences between the things that mean

that some things are best in others humanity and the

most important.

Won't be the other.

It's like where people move to.

It's endogenous.

So there's too many people.

It's we cannot really separate this from the inherent productivity

of the place.

It's not that it's function as the productivity.

It's not that exogenous.

But like we try to make it.

In one direction here.

And so if you look at the productivity we have

right.

If this is this is the endogenous part of productivity

that more people talk to each other.

They learn from each other yesterday.

So you've got the creativity, the indulgence that's We came

to the exotic experience.

Something must have gone wrong.

If we think that it's implausible that the the model

tells us that the fundamental point giving me the data

to justify it says, well, maybe something is broken.

So maybe either the estimate is wrong or I haven't

really stripped away the entire in all this bit of

practice.

Yeah, it's hard to tell.

You're already sort of you're already putting in an alpha,

which is very high.

That's a point that you made that the correlation with

fundamentals and overall productivity looks quite high.

If you put a smaller alpha here that the two

become even more similar.

Yeah.

So they've already been pushed in the implausibly high number

of alphas to try and make the fundamental productivity as

flat and as flat as possible.

So we can obviously go.

Let's go from .1.2 or that point whatever.

So bigger than then this will go down.

If you see the empty house this is very empty.

This is a lot of people.

So if I put a bigger alpha I can make

that smaller.

But I'm just stretching imagination.

Something is not quite right here in the sense that

this feels implausible.

Such a big variation of a mental theory to take

actually putting you into the shoes.

We can take the cardboard version.

So no, it's mental.

It is just very productive.

And that's why cities are in these locations where we

say, well, I think the model is just this specified

in some form, attributing things to fundamentals.

I just told you not to do this.

Yeah.

I'm more a second camper.

Open to our interpretation of the world.

Yeah, that's sort of an idea.

I think it's more likely that we are here making

some mistake.

It's not entirely clear what the most plausible mistake is

and what the kind of most plausible in this specification

of models.

Maybe the cost function is supposed to be high or

low.

This is the part I haven't got all the baggage

you want.

How will I change the model to try and solve

this problem?

Okay, I think we had a sort of this time.

So what I'm going to do now is there are

a few more extensions that make this, which is very

quick.

This is an extension.

We can talk about this, the recent climate file and

the dynamic of this whole thing, all the static and

briefly talk about it at the beginning of next week.

And then there are.

Various other extensions that you will have very briefly talk

about if you want.

So my proposal will be at the beginning of next

week.

I'm going to talk to these guys, whatever you want

me to talk about.

Any questions that you have identified.

And then maybe you can look at the experts around

this and then do the exercise, maybe do the exercise.

So just after the break, I look at the kind

of light on the papers.

So please read the paper and read it very critically,

in the same way that I've been very critical across

this paper in terms of why are they doing this?

What's going on here?

What are the kind of strengths and weaknesses of the

paper?

It's a good paper.

It's going to be a start every now and then.

The admissions mistakes.

It also is in good places.

They're kind of pretty crazy, but even greater than we

have ever seen before.

Okay, I'll see you.

See you next week.

And then we'll continue to post.

We need to stop at the urban level in the

second half of this.

Year.

I think.

Lecture 10:

Give you.

A shot.

So that's what we.

No, of.

Course not.

And I.

Have.

Something.

To tell you that you can't.

I.

Know.

All you.

Want to do.

On.

I think this is good.

Yeah.

It's material.

It's super confusing.

Really?

Yeah.

That question you ask are all the same questions.

Yeah, it is the same.

I will be changing numbers on this for four times.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Okay.

Um, so you've called.

Us a question Because I think this is discrimination based

and should be somebody face discrimination as there is actually

something here.

Yeah.

You should consider it as discrimination even if there is

no discrimination.

Yeah.

No.

So I don't know.

This is bad.

I can memorise.

I don't fully understand.

Yeah.

I, I believe I would believe it or I think

it is based on a belief.

That this and this is wrong.

Really?

Yeah.

Yeah.

I think this is religious, actually, the reason for doing

this.

And I found the same number, actually, that I was

asked that I have done this.

This is really great.

This is great.

Thank.

You.

Should we do this?

This is kind of.

Exciting.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Because I got here, and I was thinking.

How should I put.

Anything on this?

I don't want to.

Have you been following up on the.

Following?

No, I mean that you entered into our story.

So you already.

Know there like this is adding new scripts to this.

Like whoever wants to write shows.

So.

Yeah.

Yeah, I guess, uh.

Uh, yeah, yeah.

Minister of National defence.

Yeah.

The chiefs of the Green Party.

Yeah.

And the president?

Yeah, they're all from the same reason.

So yeah, so they kind of, I think, agreed to

stage a coup for actually aim to accomplish.

I don't like.

I need the charger.

Somebody now makes it.

You must have had it inspired by your own.

But, uh, I mean.

And he realised that I could actually do it.

Yeah, I do.

Could.

Anyone see some sandwiches?

Is there someone in the seven hours that.

Delivered the tire?

Yes.

Oh, God.

Can we go?

First.

Wow.

That's cool.

Sure.

So.

Yes.

Okay.

So.

I'll give you.

Credit for.

The treatment.

Cool.

Thank you so much.

More and more.

For everyone.

Was.

Angry during the.

Day?

Yes.

This is perfect.

I was hoping it would come in during the lecture

now.

You know, it's always a trade off.

Yeah.

What did you think about the paper?

Camera running.

It's an interesting, elusive paper, but, uh.

The earlier paper is always the capital of the school

year.

And find that climate change is a major problem because

of our migration.

That's the.

It's.

Unreasonable to assume.

Well, yes.

So it's obviously partly a technical question.

Following this kind of model is.

Really hard.

So we need.

To bring in also the dimensions that we.

Are very comfortable.

So that's the problem.

So it's not that.

We.

Couldn't put the model.

There talking about the fact that the migration is still.

A little bit.

It's a little.

Different.

But you can talk about it sort of in this

setting here in a moment, every way we think about

it.

So the plan is.

Not the introduction.

Chapter has done the.

Last, last time.

And we need to move on to the knowledge base

that at the end of the day.

So there isn't much less that I didn't talk about.

I was just going to be reading flat that we

used to talk about a normal version of the seminar.

Um, probably.

So that is this, um, typical model in the literature

that used to be static.

Now, this is a push to help dynamic bodies.

Um, and there are various models around that.

One of them, sort of most most of the geography

is the power of and a framework which is regionally

a trade kind of model which has which is sort

of the most problematic model.

And I'm in the 2013 paper.

is sort of currently probably the state of the art.

But you see here, you know, sort of, um, there's

a constant movement on this front.

So the model, the cities of geography and the city

state in terms of the amenities and activities.

So this is in the geography slides, because this model

was written in a matter of state kind of U.S.

application.

Um, there are extensions now being in progress at least,

uh, looking at sort of doing that in cities as

well and looking at dynamics within cities.

There's a couple of areas of progress in the model

building going to be this is going to be trace

and migration restrictions and the capital stopping economy is housing

stock.

And the thing that you've just seen in the several

years is, um, sorry to the treasurer and said I

want to do um, so very similar kind of So

they kind of in terms of keeping it small.

The key problem with the dynamic model is distractibility.

It's not.

It's just how can we solve something like this?

And if you do anything, um, they're triggered to activity

in the climate framework, which also the car sort of

the paper that sort of, um, uses this, that workers

consume migrate between cities but do not invest, uh, any

income invested in the work as a sort of model?

Yes.

Yes.

And then.

There's got to be investment into the capital somewhere and

and, you know, and the details of the investment decisions.

It must be some trade off when it comes to

individual investors that are going to be some investment for

friction.

And so the this makes everything this separation into two

classes of agents is one of the ways to make

the world acceptable.

Another kind of arguably much less attractive person to use

earlier is to basically make a dynamic model where the

state space is extremely simple.

For example, assuming that all capital depreciates fully at the

end of each period, and then if it all evaporated,

the buildings all blow up at the end of the

day.

And there's nothing to to keep track of, and it

makes the dynamics a lot easier, as well as arguably

a less attractive assumption.

So it's not perfect.

It's a sort of this, um, it helps the ability

to have some immobile people as mobile people are, you

know, people do the investing more people just do sort

of the same model in some sense.

Yeah.

They just, um, optimally, um, locate in every period they

can be forward looking in anything.

So how come the model where everyone can move doesn't

create a sufficient incentive?

To move?

Like, why is it that this model solves the problem

of tractability in a model with dynamic farms, and where

everyone can move and appreciate not fully depreciating capital?

Okay, so technically the kind of these guys don't care

about evolution of the capital, they don't have investments, so

I don't have to.

So my investment in all the locations that are going

to influence my behaviour, that I don't have any investments.

So that problem is a lot easier.

These guys often it's complicated in terms of the investment,

but they're not making location choices so they never move.

So that's a beautiful white House.

But with the details here.

Complicated.

So I don't have time to do that.

I'm also going to be much further teaching that part

of the course, so they can exact the exact maths

way it helps, but intuitively that's where it really helps.

So they just make investment decisions and they make my

decisions and they don't have to worry about capital stocks

in different parts of the economy.

Okay.

So let me maybe further extensions of this of this

model.

You know the.

Sort of flag.

You can have even semester structure models that you can

do you want to do is if you don't want

to increase the recurrence and the importance of getting something

quite similar by having heterogeneous technology across across locations.

And so the very nature of the marketplace is that

structure.

Um.

They go back to their original paper, looked at the

sorting pattern, genius farms across across locations, and there's more

work to do that and that as well.

Uh, the DS and legal papers here, because it's one

of the features of heterogeneous workers rather than these workers,

and how it flows across cities to different sizes versus

sort of a this model is sort of a trade

off between living in sort of zone five in London

or living in zone one in Birmingham, where it could

be much more central and, you know, relatively more attractive

location.

And so this work 280 and how this interacts with

the agent choices across, um, across okay.

Lots of other stuff that we can talk about.

But let me sort of move on to talk a

bit about the the impacts around economic geography.

So this is the next, next chart.

Um, I'm not sort of there's a lot of slides

here.

I'm not planning to go through all of them.

I'm going to sort of do sort of highlight a

bit of the key pieces of evidence that are out

there, and maybe also where the kind of dig holes

are into, um, we can and then we return to

the exercise at some point, have a discussion in terms

of the kind of, um, to the urban side.

Okay.

But so obviously some of the empirical evidence here, um,

they're not going to be in the RCT, as I'm

sure that some people.

There are some acts that are.

So they're kind of able to kind of have some

dust on the seats in terms of, you know, giving

individual people different incentives, for example, in the urban on

Saturday morning, Brian is a word on subsidising migration, for

example.

So the exercise is really awful.

But nevertheless, there's a lot of things you're not going

to be able to study with RCT this year.

So we're mostly going to be relying on natural experiments

rather than fully identified and solve their own little problems

rather than our cities.

But maybe some of you are going to come up

with really brilliant ideas, how we do RCTs in this,

in this kind of setting.

And that would be highly, highly interesting.

Okay, so there are kind of four different issues in

something that revolves around evidence around the economic geography model.

This one doesn't really exist, but I'm going to show

you some data.

There's no sort of it's sort of a bit of

a lecture other than the data I'm going to show

you that discusses parity testing, the assumption of state liberal.

Then there's a lot of literature that looks at kind

of the implementation of the market access methods.

So the kind of key cannot remember the equation from

the original that says if you're close to if you

have low transport costs to pick markets, that's good for

you.

So that's a pretty striking implication of all of that,

a little bit of trying to estimate.

But that is indeed the case of the data.

Then there's the literature on multiple equilibria.

There's been a lot of interest in this in the.

90s when people first spoke about income geography.

Then the literature sort of moved towards more of a

macro equilibrium, where we're going to make assumptions to make

sure there are multiple clever.

Annoying initiatives of making difficult but empirical work, but be

really interesting.

So a lot of it must be mostly the setting.

And so there's sort of ongoing literature in terms of

looking around.

And there's a huge literature looking at the relationship between

density and productivity, which predates even some of the kind

of poverty in this area.

The idea of the note is that there is a

relationship between density and productivity, while various measures of productivity

just wages and size for the population.

So let's have a quick look at these different literatures

and see what what is there.

What does it say to my work at this level.

Work at this point?

So, um.

So the key feature of the model, uh, and pretty

much everything in this lecture is that this is a

good group.

doesn't, as you see it more clearly at the moment.

As you'd see already in a kind of geography model

where you have to use a classic case for locations.

Um, it's not that everybody has to be different across

all locations.

You don't have to sort of feel different about every

location in the UK.

Um, but there will be some model, if you will,

in a basic group.

Back over to these agents.

Everybody is in different across locations, for example, and the

same will be true in a model we have used

in the classic case for locations.

So um, testing the assumption that is difficult and the

assumption is typically used to estimate the distribution.

So rather than trying to directly test it.

If you remember, the kind of spatial condition in the

geography model is wages, times of amenities divided by house

prices and fixed prices.

That's the spatial condition.

So rather than trying to estimate whether that term is

really the standard universities, you just use it to estimate

what the amenities have to be so that the term

becomes the same across cities.

And do you?

Does that make sense?

So you can sort of people typically use it incorrectly.

So I don't have a solution to that.

So there's you know to to be tested you have

to have independent measure of amenities.

And then you can see whether the kind of product

or amenities and wages divided by house prices and fixed

prices isn't the same across all locations.

Yeah.

So here is something very quick and dirty, which is

not really empirical evidence, but just looking at data.

So there's a table from the data for US counties.

And it's not a formal test.

But this is what I pointed to the bottom line.

And it's also sort of all data for this.

So the metropolitan product Median income is kind of the

same kind of almost the same share population.

It's not very interesting, but it's not that important here.

Median house price.

So let's look at the first one.

The last one.

So then this is the top five.

And then what's inside is okay.

So in terms of profitability and product you look at

the kind of data from the 2000 is all the

houses.

So this is 20 years old data.

This is quite a cross product per capita up here

is substantial.

It's going to be a lot higher today.

And then you look at the bottom, it's pretty shockingly.

So there's a lot of variation in income and growth

across states.

But you know it's hard to do this very precisely.

But you know, maybe 3 to 4 times.

If you take the average of this, and the average

above and 3 to 4 times is what the income

variation is between the bottom five at the top, it

is very precise.

So if you look at.

The top of the answer, the significance that the tops

of these are the most expensive as far as.

The cheapest.

Um, it's even better.

If you ask.

So this is a, you know, again, you know, the

simple at the very top here.

Uh, there's a temporal difference in house prices for these

places.

So that is the kind of pattern that is, at

least in principle, you know, consistent with spatial delivery, where

we have big differences in nominal wages.

But these differences in nominal wages are offset by an

even bigger variance in house prices.

So if you ignore that.

he's going to say his wages and the house prices

of goods prices, goods prices are not going to vary

in space, but not by not by many multiples.

Yeah.

So 50%.

So yeah.

So there could be it's going to be some variation

in parity in terms of what my books prices are.

But the few things that move the most is nominal

wages and house prices that moves by those house prices.

And that's exactly the kind of pattern that you need

to, you know, have something like spatial equilibrium.

Um, in the US, it's not a formal test, but

it's sort of something to keep in the back of

your mind as you travel across space on the wages

with very kind of a water level.

House prices will, you know, vary by even more eyewatering

amounts.

So that would be consistent with kind of spatial spatial

data.

House prices are sort of yeah, such an.

Economic success in locations.

So if you're an older man, that's very different in

himself in some very poor location.

Okay.

So that's basically there is some work.

That's some some work that is trying to test this

a bit more formally.

But you know, the key problem is we need to

do some independent living doing this.

Um, to do this properly or in some sense a

sort of a shock.

For example, do we return to spatially.

And so that will certainly be interesting to, you know,

formally given how central that assumption is in this literature.

Okay.

So key implication of the model is the access to

the specifications.

Um, and this is also the implication of this model

that sets it apart from the local.

So Robert Trace Costa's location.

Doesn't matter whether you're 100 kilometre from New York or

500km or 5000km from New York City, just doesn't matter.

In an economic world where trade costs, you know of

reality, it will matter.

So there has been a lot of interest in the

economy going back 25 years, 50 years or so.

Looking back to kind of, you know, long before Groopman

started writing, um, looked at the role of market access

for the development of allocations.

So in the older literature, people will not talk about

market access, but talk about market potential, which is a

term that was coined geographers whose name eludes me right

now.

But and so the geography of the people talking about

architecture, which had various definitions which are quite similar to

what sort of a model would suggest, what the market

access term should be, and people would be buying regressions

on this for some time.

So the two examples are more economic data.

And here is the paper by supply running in animals.

And the you see here um in the in the

early 2000.

So most people are looking at the striking correlation between

measures of market access and GDP per capita.

And this is GDP.

You could also look at maybe more interesting if you

look at total GDP.

Um, but they look at the um you would find

it.

So this is um, this is the paper I think

appeared in the journal.

Of some sort of neutral and, um, it's proxies and

market access distance to Luxembourg, which I quite like.

And, um, so this is a very rough measure of

market access.

But if you look at a map of Europe, work

is kind of in the middle.

This is to Brussels, what other people have done.

So it's a poignant graph in the middle of the

economic crisis in Europe.

So the further you go out, the more peripheral you

do, the more all kind of measure of market access

consistently, the more we find some resistance to the less.

And then these are the incomes of the various, uh,

you know, various regions in, uh, here.

And so, you see, um, you know, there are going

to be country fixed effects, obviously, in the background, but

nevertheless, they're sort of some peripheral parts of Portugal are

pretty, uh, pretty poor.

Also here is going to be southern Spain, and they're

going to be various areas up here which are much,

much richer in terms of character.

So there is a correlation that is a suggested regression

line, but you can be very worried whether this is

causal or whether there's been a sort of the difference

between the direction of Europe in terms of Portugal or

more than Norway or Italy and some good televisions.

It here it must be that if you go to

the control, the Italian regions are going to be down

here.

Is this causal or is this just a correlation where

there's other stuff going on in the background?

Yeah.

So maybe, you know, the area is very different from

the conditions and it could be important for productivity or

it could be different institutions maybe.

You know Italy has a very different kind of the

other regions in Europe.

And that's holding it back.

So it's very difficult to disentangle where there really is

access to markets or the lack of access to markets

that's holding these guys back within this on the differences.

So the writing paper does the sort of same thing

in a cross-country setting.

So it's a it's really a paper rather than a

geography paper.

And you know, it's published in German comics.

Um, it's an incredibly heavily cited paper, has several thousand

citations.

And it was one of the early structural estimates of

geology.

And so what we're going to do is to also

have GDP per capita on the left hand side on

the y axis here.

And then they have um, some measure of market access,

which is directly from the geography model that you see.

And there is going to be the market access here

is a cross-country setting.

And so consists of two terms is market access and

foreign market access.

So this is a world where we have many countries.

So for market access is access to other countries around

you, to other locations around you.

So how far are you from one of the other

locations around you, and how big are these destinations in

terms of GDP?

So the domestic market access is how much, how big

is the domestic economy?

How much domestic market access.

So what's the difference between the, say, the US and

Luxembourg is the tax book is going to have very

little on the domestic market.

And whereas the US has a lot more, um, in

this area.

So this is a three.

The paper goes through different ways of trying to estimate

what the kind of amount of internal trading is.

One of the, you know, the one of the features

of this is we know why.

We know a lot, a lot about trade across countries.

You know, people about trade within countries.

So if you want to know what the exports from

London to Birmingham and vice versa, that's a tough one

to you to get from.

There are various countries that have a little bit of

data, but not many.

And so the is the kind of estimation of the

foreign market access here is going to use trade data.

If you don't have that data, various ways of sort

of approximating of the domestic market actors in these kind

of models.

But setting this inside, this is the first specification.

It produces an almost hilarious positive correlation between market access

and income capture, and the showing that not controlling anything

two thirds of the variation in cohabitating can be explained

by a difference in market access explained.

Obviously, it's not causal.

So let's say, wasn't it a guy who recently more

Nobel Prizes were arguing that differences in institutions in Sweden

as well?

Yes, he had much better identifying people.

So clearly some of that variation is It's going to

be you.

So they for example, then they you just control in

these regressions for institutional dependencies, the correlation between market access

and income goes down, but it doesn't go away.

And you also have some idea estimates which are fairly

implausible, at least, um, as they were.

Uh, and, you know, the results are still going to

be going to be there nevertheless, in terms of, you

know, finding, finding convincing evidence.

Um, if this is this, this is sort of not,

um, it's not very it's very hard to point to

some explosion and say, okay, so the what I'm going

to do is spend a bit of time talking about

is the writing a strong paper experience that I can

bring together, which tries to provide hard evidence for the

kind of causal role of market access.

So it uses a so what we do here is

to, as is to, to use to exploit a large

resource, exogenous variation.

So the particulars can be clearly.

Here is going to use the geopolitical kind of events,

which is the division of the unification of East Germany

after the Second World War.

And you say, well, this is like a it's a

triple ization.

And today, you know, the division is a reaction of

trade access, but it's driven not by economic factors but

by, you know, the outcome of a war.

So and this is a very big variation to go

from complete integration to complete disintegration.

So we have all the variation and the variations are

going to be completely exogenous.

So if you try to use a studied kind of

entry into the European Union as a change in market

access, which is certainly is, you be very worried that,

you know, the entry is driven by, you know, economic

factors.

There are countries that are doing well, you know, maybe

more likely to be accepted into the European club talk

some words.

Yeah.

This is this.

This was an event.

Was driven by nothing to do with economics.

Crazy people and crazy consequences.

So the kind of idea behind the paper is sort

of.

This is easier to explain in this in the design.

This is a map of Germany in 1937 and its

so-called 1937 lines begin just before the beginning of the

start of the Second World War.

And it shows how Germany is divided after the secondary

consequence of the civil war that is West Germany.

Here is what begins with the ceremony that in their

parts that became part of Poland, this part in that

part.

And then as a part of that, you can start

to wonder why there is already this sort of little

I think this is what disappeared after the First World

War, because the Germans didn't behave themselves.

And so go Polish, but not quite as massively they

did After the Second World War.

So the kind of main variation that the paper is

going to exploit is within West German variation.

Uh, the calibration is going to use data for all

of Germany, all of pre-war Germany.

But the kind of main, sort of reduced form evidence

is going to be using just West and the West

Germany.

It accounts for just over 50% of the area for

Germany and more than 50% of the population.

And so the argument is why the natural experiment is

interesting.

Is they?

Well, this division line, the Iron Curtain that divided East

and West Germany, was driven by completely political reasons that

people in the 30s could have anticipated that war, that

this was born with the, you know, kind of future

economic variables in the community.

So the crazy planners or military planners decision and how

they came up with this line of division.

So take a look.

Within West Germany, there are some cities here that are

squares in all of their circles.

So the squares, the cities are within 75km of the

border.

And for some sort of absurd reasons, a seemingly absurd

reason to be able to divide versus the treatment group.

And that is true rather than the colour.

And that's if you swallow that.

Let me explain why.

You might might want to look at the kind of

simple difference in difference regression to the paper is going

to run.

It's going to say we're going to define that as

the control group is the treatment group.

That is the period before division as a period after

division.

Do the same for education.

I'm not going to talk much about the unification, but

if you think about the kind of 40 period, 40

year period of division during that period, that's the treatment

period.

So if you look at the population growth in the

treatment control period, During, between, before and after the treatment.

So in particular, that's the loss of the market access.

Yeah.

Uh, particularly the cities here in the two world.

So this is a this.

Why does the treatment group sort of make sense or

not make sense in the sense that when the Iron

Curtain gets filled, you lose access to all parts?

Everybody uses access to trading partners.

And so to make a decision.

However, in the presence of transport across the city, out

here in the West would have traded much less with

cities out here before division.

Uh, so trading partners further away are less important than

trading partners that are close by.

So if you're here and you lose us here, you

lose access to sort of this this is a much

bigger shock in the spatial economy then and losing you

know, trading partners that are further away.

So here the thing is that if you were to

disappear into the oceans tomorrow, you'd notice a lot less

than if the Netherlands disappeared from the perspective of the

UK because of simple, simple trade offs.

So that's why.

So even though both the treatment and control group are

plausibly treated because of the loss of market access and

there is going to be differential treatment, and furthermore, there's

it could be.

Another problem is the moment we're going to look at

population relocation, the people who will leave the treatment cities

will have to go somewhere and the model of the

population is going to be case.

So there'll be also another kind of contamination of the

control group here through migration from the treatment to the

control cities.

So suppose if you've just been who's been in the

seminar.

So that was exactly the same setting.

Yes.

And a lot of spatial difference in difference.

You have this problem that it's not a simple labour

economics difference in difference whether the control group is entirely

untreated, and so the control group forcibly is treated because

of the loss of market access and the kind of

legal migration from the treatment group.

So in that sense, we can do a significant difference,

but plausibly when the treatment happens, you will lose, you

know, cities and cities and the gap that we estimated

here disperse the movement in the control group, the movement

and the way around that is going to be for

now, just say, well, the contamination is probably going to

be relatively small.

Um, but to really, you know, get around this problem

and to interpret the difference in difference through the lens

of law.

And that's exactly what Adrian and in his papers estimate.

This is different as we have the control group is

also affected.

But then he runs exactly the same regression inside the

model and compares the estimates inside the model with those

in stone.

That's exactly what's going to happen as well.

As I explained at the moment.

But for now there's a lot of spatial environmental.

So there's a lot of difference, a lot of interesting

difference in difference whether the control group is contaminated.

One way to deal with that is to either argue

that the contamination is small or to say, well, basically

the same thing through the lens of the model.

Okay.

Does that make sense?

That's an okay.

So this is the model data is sort of the

data is incredibly sparse over this period.

It's just population data.

That's really the only thing you observe is the size

of cities in terms of population is a couple of

more things we know about the distance between cities is

that why do you think we didn't compute, didn't collect

sort of GDP data.

So wage data at the level of cities over time

or due to GDP in the city at a time,

and the data that's going to get used this year,

1992.

It's just not a thing.

It's not bad.

Yeah.

This does not exist.

Germany starts assimilating after the Second World War.

Even the U.S. official estimates, the official estimates only estimates

the GDP before the war and World war are becoming

stories.

So the experts estimate the estimated GDP is something as

largely recent in 1800 or 1900.

But we're doing better.

Because there's no way that you could ever get it

would be great.

But maybe somebody's coming in at some point and we

estimate population that.

We need to do this.

But it's not it's not that obviously population for the

GDP will be highly correlated.

Okay.

So there's some more data in the, um.

Okay.

So.

Okay, so let me just, uh, let me just go.

Go.

So calibration.

So the first thing we're going to do is to

collaborate model on the data.

So the model is calibrated is the basic geography we've

gone through.

So without any bells and whistles.

So it means that this is housing.

So people are going to be stationed in Libya.

Uh, most importantly there are no differences in productivity across

locations and there are no differences in semantics of qualifications.

Why do you think we did that?

So we don't have any.

There's not going to be any differences in productivity because

every location is the same.

Or if you set it to work, attack whatever you

want.

And also Expect the Germans.

The Germans in the room.

Everything is equally beautiful.

It's not the case that unity is better than any

place else.

Is it the same problem?

You need wage data.

But you have information.

Let's examine.

So let's review what we need.

So to to calibrate.

To to invert amenities and to invert quantities we need

wage data.

And.

That's right.

So the question is what exactly do you need.

Help price data to invert the productivity and amenities.

You need to know the house prices and wages which

is not available.

So until terms of consistent with the data.

Um, so they have kind of various websites, they have

price indices, but certainly over time more so.

And similarly at the city level over time is going

to be um, it's going to be impossible in difficult

to.

Yeah.

So some sense in the system, if you can't figure

out something better, don't put it into your model as

you put it in and sell it all to one.

But yeah, you know, sort of well, this was also

early days in terms of literature.

Today, if you've heard that paper, um, maybe will push

you to do something and get some wages and sort

of some baseline and amenities.

This is not I would be surprised if it mattered.

Um, a great a great year for the results that

you find when you maybe someone is going to revisit

this question at some point with a more elaborate model.

So this is one of the absolute baseline kind of

model.

So this is a visual.

This is going to be this this is a.

Variety is the elastic and then elasticity of transport across

respect to distance.

And so housing just housing.

And this is the kind of five parameters.

How does distance translate into transport cost.

So it's like t t which is the transport cost.

It is distance to the power supply.

So the calibration is going to use the following values.

So sigma squared is going to be two thirds.

So we can go to 30% with one third housing

sensor sharing and 47.

Okay.

So how do we model.

So these values are just picked off the kind of

shelf here.

Um.

today, if you did this while in the morning the

estimated.

Yeah.

That a lot of structural work.

You know, a lot of this writing is about estimating

these parameters.

So you want to kind of somehow get an estimate.

Getting an estimate of sigma substitution is particularly complicated.

So a lot of people probably even today said that

the principle is easy if you have some principal investigator,

but there are lots of people who have housing expenditure

on consumption days and reward housing expenditure.

Yes, we know much less about that.

That's in terms of how sensitive trade costs are to

to distance.

So the values were picked because it is values rather

than it's, you know, whether the whole issue is a

third or 25%.

I'm sure I haven't tried it, but I'm sure it's

not going to make a huge difference to the results

for this would have been the kind of range that

people find plausible.

If you combine that assumption of sigma and this assumption

trade offs, what you find is that the kind of

relationship between trade flows and distance is this sort of

log flows, and log distance is minus the elasticity of

the minus one.

And so that means as in all the transactions you

solve, the global trade flows, how close you know, the

end of the response to the change in distance dependence

on sigma, these two things together.

And you have to produce estimates.

The.

Second is one times five.

So this is one minus one way times one third

it becomes minus one.

It becomes one.

And there's a minus sign in front of it.

So it's minus one.

So which is sort of an estimate that the trade

part treatment estimated some opportunities.

That's already forgotten already.

But you've done it with gravity or you looked at

gravity.

If you ask me, gravity on international trade data or

law flows on distance.

On long distance, you typically find something around minus one.

So that's sort of how these problems are kind of

justified.

Okay.

So the final step is so basically 3D structural parameters.

You pick off the shelf with some, you know your

economist your kind of at that point you could just

say well I've had this.

You should.

So the fundamental thing to do is to calibrate the

model to fit the data.

So the only other parameter you're going to calibrate is

the housing opportunity, so that the model can match the

1939 distribution of population across it.

So here this is sort of it's a process of

math.

And it's sort of pretty classic kind of thing.

What people are going to do in this situation, you're

going to see it like that and say, well, I

want to.

I see that there is a 39 distribution of population

in the census.

I know how many years I'm going to assume that

the German economy is in steady state at that point.

That's an important assumption.

So I'm going to assume that we are in a

steady state.

If that is the case, then I somehow want my

model to replicate the kind of pre-war distribution of the

39 census distribution as an equilibrium of a model.

The way to do that is to calibrate the housing

stock and basically say, well, if I see that the

city is very big, why could the city be very

big?

You can either have high productivity.

I've ruled that out of the wall.

That can't be the reason.

It can be because it has good market access.

So if you're in the centre of Germany, you would

have much more attractive option than something is somewhere in

the corners.

But that's not enough to generate the kind of size

variation to match exactly what you see in different settings.

So what I'm going to do is this housing stock.

So I'm just going to see a city in the

data is very big and I need to make it

bigger.

I just give it more housing and more people will

live there.

And so the greater the distribution of housing stock such

that the more replicates the population.

Does that make sense?

This idea that you just look at a concern is

very concerned.

Because how do they address the issue that a lot

of houses just got destroyed during the thing?

What are you going.

To do that we're going to do?

Yes.

Very good question.

For now, we have a rating of 39 point bombs

dropped and nothing to destroy.

So we're just saying we want to replicate 39 institutions.

And yeah, that's all the more we can go to.

We go to destroy that?

In this.

Video, I'm going to talk about destruction.

That just so that you don't see the war in

39, you just say, well, I want to I want

a model of the German economy.

And what I'm going to do is I'm going to

take the housing stocks.

That's it's a big black box.

So there's a lot to that, a lot of things

that are being hidden here.

You say, well, this is what I need to basically

this sort of ignorance of the model assumptions.

The model doesn't, you know, comes in that this is

not this mechanism really explained the citizens decision.

So we're just going to create all the disasters.

And second, the model is going to be black.

And this is something that some people get quite upset

about and say, you know, econometrics is always an error

term for everything.

Exactly.

So to make that that obvious is people what is

not in this paper, this is too early, but in

exactly the same thing happens.

You'd call the housing stock structural residual and say this

is a structural residual that we need to match.

The data just isn't a regression.

And the model explains something in the rest of the

structural residual.

And then we mentioned data as in a regression that

the regression kind of the line matches in the data.

And so whatever you want to do here, you can

think of it as a structural residual or just a

way of making the models fit the data.

Exactly.

What?

Is it?

Um, okay.

So from my time, a lot of people, I mean,

Jews living in Germany where the parties and got their

houses taken away and they were given to the Germans

and pre-war, particularly people of Jewish nationality, had kind of

more wealth and were more productive.

So people would have migrated Specifically to the regions that

were excellent.

Already doing better.

Let me come to.

Let me come to that in a moment.

So.

So again, the model has so much genius agents as

we do the Jews and non-Jews and model.

Um, and in a moment of population.

So we do a model counterfactual in principle, change the

level of population when we cannot then because one of

these questions is a little bit.

But for now, what we're going to do is before

a sort of all this kind of complications.

And what are we going to do is now we're

going to do a model model for the model counterfactual

in the paper.

It doesn't talk about model counterfactuals, but today we call

the model model officials say that simulate the impact of

the decision and assume that none of these are the

except.

To say, well.

But modelling in principle.

So you don't observe the stock of housing, right.

So that's why you choose it as a residual.

Because no one can tell you you're wrong, or to

play devil's advocate.

To get some sort of housing.

So today, the satellite team, if you did this to

a very good German aerospace agency, for example, housing stocks

around the world, and so you could get a measure

of that.

If you did that, you could put that in the

model and you'd still not be able to match the

data exactly.

So if you wanted to measure exactly without that, another

structural residual would be some other thing which, you know,

whatever makes you calibrate activities to make sure I mentioned

the data so you could do that.

But here, you know, we don't observe housing.

We just think of it as a black box, and

it captures everything that's not explained by the structure of

the structure of the model.

And the structure of the model is all about transport

costs.

And so the only thing that changes here is market

access.

And but that's what the model is sort of built

for.

And that's the kind of main shock or the shock

that obviously we've had here, which is all the kind

of kind of complications.

So if you use this model to say, I'm going

to, I'm going to divide Germany the way you're going

to divide Germany, the model is I can go back

a couple of things.

So you're going to calibrate the model on all of

pre-war Germany.

There is no international trade.

You have to the Germans to talk to the French

or any of the neighbours.

There's no trade across the value without some sort of

Germany's integrated into the European economy before the war, before

the European Union had to cancel and model.

You just trade across cities.

And so the pre-war economy is the same, and then

you're going to build the Iron Curtain and you're going

to see that the distance matrix, the distance between any

point across the boundary becomes.

So you just trade across the country.

You can't talk to these people anymore.

That's the model counterfactual.

So it's a change in transport costs.

It's a bit like building a transport of destroying kinds

of things without being very explicit about what the kinds

of things I just say.

Any bilateral combination across it becomes infinitely costly.

If you do this all the time, so there's no

disruption.

I think that the housing stock that you can operate

at 39 is the only counterfactual.

It's going to be held constant.

So in this in a setting, the simplest extension of

the model would be to say, well, we're going to

have an upward sloping housing supply function.

That's what we said.

Assuming some housing supply elasticity and even where we can

match the 39 equilibrium population moves into cities, our cities

housing stock is going to respond and we will do

that.

I can't remember whether we have discussed that.

But, you know, estimating a housing supply a necessity.

You need some price data.

So you know the price data.

It's pretty tough.

So again, if you can't do it just don't look

at it.

But maybe, you know, it's really pushed us.

We truly would have done it.

And I would say it's just become someone else's estimate

of the sensitivity of the data.

And we could we could certainly do that.

Similarly, if we come to endogenous productivity, let's talk about

that later.

You could feed that into these models.

But even without any of these whistles, this is what

the model predicts for the distribution of population changes across

cities and different distances from the border.

So this is West German cities within 25km of the

border, 25, 50, 50 divided by 100 and so on.

And then 150, 201 and 200.

So there's not the same number of cities in each

of these bins.

So these are just the average percentage changes across cities

and the different bins and even the housing counterfactual in

the bottom half of the population of West Germany is

constant.

You could easily change this.

You could, for example, say we're going to account for

most of the people that are being killed.

The people who've left Germany and all the way and

natural population growth over time.

And so there's a little population growth after the war

over this period.

The model I haven't got it.

So the model is probably going to be immediately in

population, probably not 100% because of its non-linearity.

But it's unlikely to account for a proof for for

the interesting thing, if you had a lot of time

that you could play around and see what happens, if

you just increase population at the same time, and the

decision would make a difference about a bunch of people,

but I really haven't.

Okay, so this happened.

Here is the pattern that looks kind of plausible is

maybe not too surprising because that's what you build.

You guys are actually going to have a bigger population

between 70 and 80% negative growth so quickly, and then

100km.

Then it's sort of very small and then it becomes

positive.

So it moves away to cities that are less negatively

affected in the control group.

So if you look at this motivation, you know, the

kind of reduced form regressions you said like the treatment

areas up to 75.

And whereas the.

Whereas the control group over here is up to 100.

Yeah.

That's it's not it's not entirely perfect.

But I'll show you some examples to explain why.

This is a much more interesting result of this.

This counterfactual is is the same data.

So it's the same underlying counterfactual where Aware that we

as a city is in each city and therefore our

finances change.

The baseline is to say, and this is the treatment

effect on small cities.

This treatment effect is massive.

This is comparing small cities which are below the medium.

In 1994, looking at the sample of small cities within

75km of the two small cities further away, and this

is large cities within 75km of the border versus cities.

Further away.

So the treatment effect on large cities, it is the

treatment effect on the smaller cities.

Why do you think that happens and why is it

sort of interesting?

Why is the treatment effect of the kind of improvements?

If you go back to the map and say, this

is a small city, this is the lost city, why

should the small city suffer or in terms of lost

population in response to this state shock and then a

large city.

Maybe because they're more likely to get their goods from

other places.

They rely more on trade.

They have less domestic.

But in the small cities.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Yeah.

So it's the same kind of logic that we see

in international trade.

You know, did you do a little bit of gain

some trade also.

So trade is a bit of a complicated topic in

trade.

But the gains and trade of big country much more

in the case of a small country.

And it's the same logic here.

A small city is more reliant on external trade, has

a smaller internal market.

It has more of an internal market.

So the external trade is comparatively important.

So this is sort of a classic kind of trade

prediction that the same loss of external market access could

be More painful for small cities.

Okay, so this is what the model elicitation predicts and

what the kind of the next two steps that we're

going to do.

This is first to say, well, let's just run some

of these form regressions to see whether this kind of

happens.

And then second is we're going to go back to

the world and say, you know, can we somehow, um,

can we somehow, um, these estimates can be sort of

these other can use the use one to essentially structurally

estimate these disparities.

So first the sustain this and then run some um,

regressions.

So the baseline and so the reducible reaction as well

as regresses population growth in CDC at time t which

is compute this for division.

So t is going to be various people are post

war periods.

The census is of different points of time.

Sometimes they have a broad range between senses converted into

annual population growth rates.

So, you know, you have a few observations, even if

the senses are 7 or 10 years apart or 13

years apart, and everything is converted to annual population growth

rates.

This variable, which was one of the part of the

treatment group which is 1575, this is actually between the

border and division, which is the treatment dummy.

And then there's this whole set of time dummies here

for the year.

Okay.

Let me show you this.

Before we estimated this regression, um, there is a simple,

um, the sort of two, two graphs, which is to

say.

So this is a graph that just puts the sort

of a graphical difference in difference analysis.

I think the problem is the line is the treatment

group, those of lines over the phone line is simply

the total population of the terminal cities.

You just added up populations between cities.

This dotted line is the total population of the control

cities, and you're going to divide both of them by

the 1990 values of the index as well as the

base year.

So the next hour, she goes from 1 to 1.3

or so.

Populations increased by 30% in both groups.

So total population one year.

So if you look at this it looks very pretty.

So.

So it's kind of almost like it's almost quite parallel.

And I think there's a lot of stuff happening here.

On the changes in population.

Yeah.

So it's like a full world war.

Now nothing much happens in the regressions.

We're going to drop that difference including it surprisingly makes

very difference.

But if we just drop.

It's going to be rebuilding over this period.

And what you see, um, you see a big divergence

between these two universities.

So this is sort of just the difference between these

two, uh, two graphs.

And you see this?

Uh, here, that here.

This, um, really is statistically significant.

Um, but this is very long, drawn out the decline,

relative decline of the German cities relative to the control

sources.

Okay.

Let me show you the regressions in your question, but

they sort of go in the wrong direction.

So the here is sort of estimating this load as

a through the data.

This is the graph.

And then the arrows or anything here is sort of

estimating the baseline regression and a few extensions.

So this is the first based on the kind of

the theme of those in the two pages.

So this is the fact that these achievements estimate here

on the vision.

Just 1.7 5.746% success relative to the control group.

The.

After the division, the treatment group grows about 0.75% per

year.

Slower 0.75% per year.

Doesn't sound like a lot, but if you do that

over here, you fall substantially behind.

So the kind of treatment estimates are not dissimilar to

what the graphs show in the moment.

We also split up the treatment estimates by by decade.

You can do what today will be called dynamic advanced

study.

Um, and while I was in a bit of an

effect in the 50s and 60s and 70s in the

80s.

And what you see is the effect is very big

and then it declines.

But the decline is not quite exactly the same as

this slide in this slide.

The kind of decline is pretty similar for a long

time and then flattens out in the 80s.

Here in the regression you see really big.

It's much smaller.

Space also gets smaller, but it's still highly significant at

that point.

So it's just that even in the 80s we have

quite made it to the new data set.

Yeah, this is really embarrassing.

I haven't fixed this.

So this.

So next, next regression shows let's break up the treatment

group into not just 0 to 75.

But first 25 does make sense.

The next one is and it is another one is

missing which is 75 to 100km.

So what you see is pretty similar, though not very

different than the one that's missing here is already positive.

So there's no treatment between 75 and 100.

And the reduced form is basically zero and the size

or sorry this is missing here.

Um, and you can see.

it got a linear effect.

But for some reason I cut off the action that

can happen with that sort of thing.

So the last thing is, if you split this out

of cities, you see exactly the pattern that the model

counterfactual predicts this treatment effect on these cities.

Okay, so much for the treatment effects on small cities

than on glasses.

Okay.

What?

Two questions.

What's the difference?

So the basic question and you kind of made a

joke about the kind of dynamic events that the literature

is all asking to be biased in this settings.

So the genius treatment effects and studies done on this,

the econometrics is, is it wouldn't be a problem here.

Again.

So I didn't know that there wasn't a chapter, because

that is a sort of an issue.

This is all assessed and it should be viewed sort

of some algorithms or, you know, bullshit on this kind

of thing.

Why not?

So management time.

Exactly.

So the whole village of saga implementation saga.

I think it's most likely everybody gets treated at the

same time.

So this is not unfortunately not related to that.

I'm sure someone would already be familiar with a lot

of these estimates and see how how robust to that.

And that's really all the question is.

Um, so if you go to.

The results for this graphical difference in difference.

So let's look at this.

Yeah.

It's not exactly the same as the regressions.

Why not.

And what should be we trust?

Regression or regression?

So what is different and what is better?

Because you can trust for instance.

The regression is better.

Not expect.

So it's there's another point is here that this is

a this is sort of a bog standard difference in

difference something that I do.

My point is you could have replaced all the time,

dummy and just put in a division dummy.

So this is sort of the simplest difference in differences

treatment Month after and the interaction.

So here you can read that and you can just

say, well, I'm just going to be rather than having

to spend a lot of time on this, I'm just

going to have the division done.

You find the gamma the point estimate of gamma is

identical.

So that's a difference in difference where with no controlled

variables, whether you put in, for example, for a time

dummies, consider that you could replace the board of values

here.

Why don't we wouldn't see any fixed effects.

Yeah I remember doing that when we wrote the paper.

We put it to the fixed effects and we were

like, wow, it's super fast.

It's super, super fast.

It's like.

But he held the same number, you know, like there

was something going to be wrong.

And we didn't know at the time.

It turns out it doesn't make any difference.

So the difference is the difference is that they control

the variables.

Whether you have a full set of fixed effects, that

means it's not because it's going to matter for the

standard process, because there's a lot of very different degrees

of freedom.

And there are different terms in terms of the point

estimates.

This is a relatively straightforward issue, the kind of variation

that you're controlling with time, and the kind of city

fixed effect is orthogonal to the variation in differential performance

over time.

So the thing that is unfortunately.

Obviously one of the advantage of the regression is it

has standard errors.

So you can see whether it's consistent.

But that's you know that's nice.

But that's not the argument.

And the regression you're using growth right.

I don't think.

This this is also gross.

This is you know.

This is.

Growth rates.

And then there's a relative difference in growth rates between

the two.

So we're saying how much of these guys go to

the next slide here is minus control versus the difference

in the world.

Rates 2.3.

The The difference in growth rates between these two states.

So this kind of is this sort of it's sort

of the same.

So I think.

The graph is essentially a weighted regression.

So the graph.

If you think of it, if you think about the

regression all the way to regression and you see the

same way, every observation is equal.

So whether a small city declines by 5% or a

big city divided by 5% is the same for the

regression in this thing here is not the same, because

the sum of population in the treatment control group is

going to be much more dominated by big cities that

are smaller cities.

So it's actually quite surprising that this graph looks quite

similar to the regression, um, because it's essentially a weighted

regression where you give a lot more weight to big

trees, which we know have smaller treatment effects on the

regression.

So it's a bit of a block.

It's like that.

It works the paper because it just looks extremely striking.

But in terms of learning something you learn a lot

more from the.

Regressions and all I think is just sort of no

reason to weight the sample to as large as we

want to learn about the effects of more observations, which

is no reason to believe that some of them are

less important than than others.

So yeah, so that people should be sort of it

is in the paper because what we know is not

just raw data.

It shows that employee productivity very similar to the regression

model.

Okay.

So what's the kind of last thing that I want

to do with you?

Here is the schedule.

So what we have now is we have a model

that says something should happen.

We have some reduced form regressions that kind of show

that it kind of happens in the data.

But can we, Um, yeah, it can be, uh, can

be bad.

So first of all, this is the front side, you

see.

There's lots of there's lots of reasons to be sceptical.

And I know you're on the side and there's no

destruction.

Well, this is a distraction.

So lots of reasons, other things that could be responsible

for the decline of these other than, you know, losing

nearby trading profits.

There could be differences in the structure that could be

more heavily invested in coal or steel or some other

industry that works better after the war.

It could be differences in war destruction, and maybe the

policy is really that there would never be built in

this way to empty the housing stock.

You know, had some terrible shocks to it.

And there was also integration of the European Union besides

the Germans coming in the war with others on the

West.

So maybe, you know, Imposes lots of axes on these

gang of axes on the web, and you could be

maybe very topical, say so.

You could be very afraid of the Russians.

And that was further on conflict.

And as a result, people moved away from cities close

to the Ivory Coast because they didn't want to be

in the frontline of that sort of acute and future

war.

Okay.

So I wouldn't have time to just go through all

of those in terms of who lives in multiple places

to try and rule out and all of that and

all of this.

And that's I can talk about it quickly.

So the first step that you're going to do is

to say, well, can a explanation that is purely based

on, on market access not only account for the reduced

form of the data, but also quantitatively?

So compare the model to.

Today in search of various values of these sort of

examples, to see whether you can match the reducible elements

and more, more closely.

So what is so?

So this is done here, this sort of this estimation

here at the time there was certainly a feature that

was a very useful structure estimation.

At that point.

It's now become much more prevalent and lots of people

are doing it.

And here they are doing this in a very data

sparse environment.

So in particular you think, well, I actually I want

to estimate three parameters.

And then I have three models.

We don't really have two moments.

So you're not going to be able to estimate all

three parameters but only relationships between these parameters.

I don't think given the little data there is, that

is a plausible for the moment that you could use

identifiable parameters.

Um, but, you know, that's, uh, mostly because of this

sort of data scarcity is the same.

So particularly it turns out that there are two things

that are estimated by these, um, um, and so, so

I just.

Um.

So this is something sort of the two moments that

one is going to think is going back and the

two moments that the model is going to be these

two estimates.

So what are we going to do?

So coming back to the question who is going to

say what you basically do is the simulating the model.

You're simulating the division for the different parameter values.

And you're going to run these two regressions in this

type of model.

Are you going to say model generated data?

I'm going to estimate what the treatment effect of small

differences in the treatment effect is in my model.

And I'm going to compare this to the students and

that sense that this is exactly what he is saying

as well.

He runs the same regression.

If you run the reduced form, he runs inside the

model to me, and therefore the model, the same combination

of the control group is going to be the case.

So we're going to interpret the model says well yes

as we divide the control.

So if I go back to.

Calibrate if the model says yes there is an optimisation

and some increase in population in the control group due

to the sort of spill-over population or the people moving

away from these, from these areas here.

So we're going to interpret the difference in difference through

the lasso model, where the model in principle can tell

us exactly how much the control group has gone up

and how much the group is on value.

So the gap that opens up in the program is

what we want, the models that we're going to estimate

that gap in the model and compare the model estimates

to the estimate in the data, because that sort of

makes sense.

Yeah.

So what we got at the two moments of data,

the two targets are going to be these fashion coefficients.

And all you're going to do in this setting here

is to try out different values or try different values

or different values for this.

And the prediction for the change in population city run

the regression on all the data.

See these two treatment estimates, compare them to those in

the in the reduced form and keep going.

So this there's no gradients over here.

So it's just a search across from the values.

So because they're only two targets and three parameters and

you can't identify all the three variables, but the things

that are going to be identified is the strength of

the dispersion forces which are captured by this relationship and

the coefficient of distance.

So the coefficient of distance is what I described earlier

on.

This is one minus sigma.

This is four one minus four is minus three times

it is the third that is minus one.

So that's the kind of effect of distance on trade

flows inside the inside the model.

And so that turns out to be identified.

And the product of sigma and one minus mu, which

is the kind of stability condition in the model.

And the sequence of information flows into one minus three

means more expenditure on housing, which is going to be

the third force.

So the closer this comes to one.

The stronger sort of the acceleration, the balance of strength

of accommodation forces.

So the dysgraphia is a bit similar to the two

graphs that Adrian showed earlier.

It says, well, for what parameter values can you can

model match either the treatment effect on large cities, on

small cities.

And this is sort of an effect of cities sort

of parameter values of these two strains of immigration force.

And this is efficient.

And the line here sort of the crosses is um,

combinations of parameters where you get close to the moment

for small cities.

This turns out to be either the best parameter combination

in that model.

So the estimate is this distribution of more than two

smaller than -0.5.

So if you think that international logistics at minus one

is an effective distance within the country, according to this

estimate matters more.

There are some other recent estimates that also suggest that

it is possible that, maybe counter-intuitively, you know, across oceans,

distance matters not quite as much as within countries.

One simple reason could be that a lot of shipping

within countries as by truck rather than by boat by

boat.

Once you put it on the boat, it's not that

expensive to ship it at long distance.

So that the Spanish regulation wars is is pretty close

to the unbelievable bargains.

It's just about one.

So it's a very strong, very strong agglomeration force to

get the kind of massive decline that you see in

the data.

Um, to get the model to that.

Expansion.

Obviously the model is super simple in terms of so

coming coming back to the idea of holding the housing

stock in a constant, what would happen if you leave

the housing?

So what would you have done?

What do you think would happen to these estimates if

you made the housing stock supply or in hyper activity,

amenities and or activity and amenities, particularly for activity, responded

to city size as a way, the moment you're going

to stir, there's a lot of evidence that bigger cities

are more productive.

So if you lose population, you become less productive, population

become more productive.

So we switched on these two mechanisms endogenous productivity.

And how do you think this these estimates would plausibly

change.

It's pure speculation just running the data or evidence about

what what are we using and how it should how

it should change.

For smaller cities needed to be more negative because they

lose population, their productivity goes down.

Yeah.

Yeah, but but a lot of cities.

Do it.

So let me just go back into that.

If you look at the kind of upfront simulation here,

this big pile of 70% and it has a major

small market, and the declines we see in the data

that the declines in the data, 25 to 30%, have

massive negative treatment effects and pretty positive effects.

And so the model sort of the baseline calibration and

the predictive treatment effect.

So you need to crank up to basically cranking up

the forces here to get, you know, people to really

sensitive to this.

In the middle of the Iron Curtain is the loss

of market access that passes.

So that you get people out of these areas.

You need to restart.

You need to care about market access like health.

Otherwise you can't get them to be.

As you make them have to make them really sensitive.

So I mean the housing market is.

What I get away with intuitively.

Would I get away with smaller.

You know, smaller forces, less sensitivity to market access?

The answer is probably yes.

Why?

This is a dispersion process.

What do you mean by this?

But what do you mean by dispersion?

Of course.

Is the.

Attractiveness of space.

Okay, so there's a paper by Glaser and Glaser in

early 2005 where he shows basically the durability of the

housing stock acts as a buffer for citizens.

If you decline populations because housing stays there, it slowly

depreciates.

But suppose depreciation is zero, it just stays there.

It means that housing becomes really cheap as a result.

People become ever more reluctant to leave because, you know,

Detroit, you can have a house for free.

Just go up you to were a part of Japan,

you could also have a house for free if you

want.

Um, so the durability of housing here basically makes it

difficult to get people to move away.

So if you have an opportunity housing supply, then as

people the housing disappears as if housing.

So that because of this upward sloping supply function is

not completely fixed but follows population in some sense, you

it should be able to produce really cheap and estimates

even with weaker accommodations.

So quantitatively we estimate that this model at some point

say, well it's true.

You know, there's not much doubt about the future of

these things.

But if you have if you just assume that this

will be obviously a function, I would expect, um, that

you would find weak forces because you'd be able to

enter smaller cities with less power.

And similarly, if you made productivity improvements and said, well,

we believe the city becomes as productive again, it becomes

easier to continue this.

Okay, so this is old and, you know, more important.

So there's a lot of stuff which I won't have

time to go through to try and rule out that.

Is that all of the concerns that you have here,

um, are not going to drive this.

So you can control for city staff changes and matching

and different differences.

Turns out that that's not going to do anything.

Uh, you can control correlate disruption.

You see the various.

We'll talk about those in a second.

Um, a lot of the modelling finds that warming is

no longer where the impacts, particularly at sort of aggregate

satisfaction, but particularly aggregate level.

So that doesn't be good.

You can control for the rest integration.

It doesn't change it.

Integration shows up in the data, but it doesn't.

You know this.

fear of the conflict.

This is the hardest to sort of rule out.

So if you're totally hellbent on this.

Talk to you all about it.

I think NATO recently classified documents that quite amazingly, show

that NATO had prepared to go back to the Mafia,

that it needs to be drawn up.

The ones that are around $120 or more, which was

the tax line in the Third World War.

So there was a whole lot of tank barriers that

were built secretly about here.

So if there hadn't been another world war, you know,

everybody in the world would have been affected equally.

So it's not really plausible that they're moving away from

the border would have sort of been a very and

very effective strategy to get you to, you know, extricate

yourself from further conflict.

And also this sort of opinion survey that people were

in worried that there were other things that were more

pressing at that point than worrying about another one at

that point.

And all the guys were, okay, so that's this.

And so the summary of writing a story was kind

of why this paper expresses a little bit, in fact,

is because it produces, with all of its problems in

between the speed with and predicted for the second axis.

So that's that's why all the papers.

Have looked at other kind of divisions in the paper.

We've written at some point on Korea.

But this year with that, yeah, it's very little data

unfortunately, because the first division in Korea is sort of

a bit short.

There are not many cities close to the country.

So before the break in, just a few more minutes,

talking briefly about these other things that go along with

literature.

There's a lot of interest in this sort of emerging,

re-emerging interest in multiple countries.

So the regional economic, obviously this is just mostly theoretical.

Everything was on the table.

You had beautiful models that had all sorts of people

that characterised all the different weather, and so they didn't

have to do empirical.

Um, so in empirical work, my theory of, you know,

amuses.

So the more recent literature moves to the to the

macro strategy of trying to find parameter values where not

half months, as I've already said empirically, there must be

a lot of scope for multiple equilibria.

Um, there's a strong market in this year, right?

From, um, Harvard.

She has a very interesting paper sort of looking at

how to estimate about a, you know, sort of a

pretty theoretical set and then looks at, Um.

To what extent industrial zoning can, can help coordinate the

economy of particular equilibrium.

So there's sort of a re-emergence of interest, but there

has been an ongoing literature, uh, not very much in

nature.

This literature that will be solved by the 80s and

90s and 2000 acres of white paper in 2003, um,

is, um, I don't have the kind of key I

don't know the slide on that.

You know that paper?

Never seen a paper.

You should definitely read it.

It's a fantastic paper.

This is by David Weinstein.

I'm sure that some writings.

Well, but David is a very good writer.

It's written in an incredibly powerful way.

Maybe he makes the following pitch.

It says there are two groups of the world.

Um, there's a view of photography.

That location has multiple equilibria.

So there's some arbitrariness as to where the cities are

located.

And Japan setting is going to be Japan.

I guess London could be here or could be oranges,

or in Birmingham, a little barbiturates.

Or an alternative classical world where fundamentals determine the City

of London is big because of the location of its

more productive and more small business and productive.

So we need some evidence to do that.

So we're going to do is we're going to look

at the kind of wartime destruction in Japan.

And Japan was how we destroyed not just through the

two atomic bombs, but also to sort of imagine the

bombing campaign.

So they use a all the destruction, but then they

also just use the two atomic bombs that that were

dropped, and particularly after the two atomic bombs is you

see population growth.

And the key is so that before the war on

the upwards scale and the bomb drops with lots of

deaths, But about 20% of the population.

The motion is a mess.

And you see a return about 20 to 30 years

to the free world.

If you just completely recall completely the very, very simple

way that you say it looks like this.

Work.

You just looking at the free world.

And then we see the drop.

You see a convergence of like that and and the

regressions with this and say well this so.

So they're kind of sitting on the paper as well.

Even an atomic bomb and not shifting the economy between

the policymaker.

Just forget about it.

You don't have any choice.

But really as powerful as the atomic bomb to shift

yourself into equilibrium and a good equilibrium.

So just forget about it.

It's a way it's extremely aggressively spun and basically shows

that it is a lot of persistence.

Yeah.

So the paper I remember reading this is a great

read, but I was also a bit upset before that.

That's true.

You must be wrong.

I cannot believe that the economy is sort of stuck

to the fundamentals.

And there were others within the paper writing sort of

paper, and then that tries to provide evidence, basically say,

well, you know, so let's look at all of the

experiments where maybe you can see some of the.

Holes.

Let me just go through you.

Look at this.

This is the kind of this is our ability to

interpret the rejected.

So that must be the better paper.

So it's a pretty cool paper and it's summarised by

these maps.

So what they point out is, um, say this line

you're looking here, this is sort of these areas of

the U.S. and we're sort of, sort of this, um,

this line here is a tectonic bridge in the kind

of U.S. continent.

And at this point.

So this is a continent.

As a result, rivers that run across this point.

So these are all rivers here.

Um, they typically have either waterfall or rapids, which make

it very difficult or impossible to cross, um, across.

So if you think of a river which is taking

a ship upriver, you basically have to stop you from

going further.

So in the days of water shipping, these became portage

side to Portage.

So this is what that means.

Um, is that basically at this point, when it was

before the railways and before cars, Cause you to take

ships up to here.

Then we will unload them.

You know, transport or transport the stuff by donkey.

That is all the ships are here.

And then we should have very, very expensive way of

doing stuff.

But it was the only way I know the choice.

That was the cheapest, best choice.

Although behind your back all the way.

Um, obviously Portage became quickly irrelevant with the advent of

railways, which is what this is, and even more than

other than the, uh, you know, plenty of aeroplanes and

cars.

So whatever advantage these spaces have, you know, that's a

that's the basis of where many of us crosses the

line, naturally had sort of aberrations of activity because that

was, uh, it was a kind of shipment place where

you shipped the stuff.

But whatever reason that had to exist obviously disappeared at

least 150 years ago.

After that, the location advantage was clearly there at some

points.

There was a reason why they existed, but that reason

disappeared.

Nevertheless, as they showed in the papers summarised by the

serious suspicious laws that are along the line, it always

crosses the line so that all cities that originally started

out, because they were the portal site and they're still

around today, even though the fundamental that is created to

disappear very clearly a long time ago.

So there's a lot of persistence.

It looks like that is an arbitrary initial advantage that

is long evaporated.

And all of that is the advantage today.

You can still sustain these places.

They don't disappear.

Obviously there are other places that do disappear.

So if you look at gold mining cars, there are

a lot of gold mining towns that have been abandoned.

So people set up these old towns that had been

gold was all gone.

This is it.

Here you find a set of old mining towns over

a while.

They're pretty substantial pieces.

Then the kind of reason why you set them up

disappears and they still continue to exist.

So that's pretty strong.

You know, any other evidence that there must be some

big arbitrariness in terms of where they are?

The paper is pretty inconclusive as to what creates the

kind of dependence or the persistence, whether it's sort of

investments or some other kind of things.

It's not clear what it is.

Okay.

So that's another issue, which has a lot of recent

contributions as this stuff happened here, trying to estimate how

boards and goals and papers on trying to estimate the

parameter combinations models have multiple and whether we depended on

those empirically.

It's a lot of interesting work going on.

Finally, the density for activities of this huge literature was

amazing.

The relationship between productivity and density Um, that was pretty

much started by there must be area.

This is the first thing that should be done.

Something sort of a little bit right like that before.

So it's an easy fix that first that measures from

wages to more formal productivity.

Activities are strongly related to city size or density, both

of which are highly correlated.

Yeah.

So you find these things we had obvious concerns with

sort of if you regress productivity or wages on size,

maybe the places that are very productive, a lot of

people, it could be a huge reverse position rather than

more people increasing productivity going to be the hyperactivity just

attracting people.

Yeah.

So, um, trying to solve that problem is uh, is

tough.

The literature is various, is a bit like the individual

and the transfer mutation.

Yeah.

The various instruments, none of which are particularly plausible that

you could come up with an instrument or some other

identification strategy to estimate what that is.

Um, that would be very interesting.

Okay.

So let's stop here and let's go for a break.

And then we're going to do going to have a

discussion about the paper.

And then we'll go to the start of the article.

Okay.

So thank you for.

Having.

Me.

I don't want to owe you anything about.

This.

Uh.

It's a.

say you're coming.

For this.

I said.

I am.

I don't.

Know.

If that's how it works.

I mean, it's not here.

It's.

Not even curious.

There's.

A lot of.

Things on.

My mind.

I mean, I like.

I mean.

There's one.

Hundred and 50.

I want this one.

You know I'm not going.

To thank you.

So.

Yeah, that's going to happen.

So I was a.

Military service as.

Well, urban.

My military presence.

Yeah.

What about it?

No, no.

Not really.

Often the protest was really annoying.

Like protesters would never go home.

And for that reason, we would have to say they're

like killing everyone kind of goes home.

So I sometimes had to kind of sleep underneath it.

But.

I really need that time.

I don't know, asparagus is you have to actually kind

of.

Or at least if there's no congestion, it's just like

measuring.

And then you say nothing and it has you actually

have the station service is working.

Is working then.

Correct?

This was during the military.

That's right.

You know what I mean?

Yeah.

But it was comparing within the weather station.

Yeah, exactly.

I'm 22 is I'm.

Not really sure.

What.

You mean to me, like, I never got any practical

training.

And you have to do something.

You know how they.

Are.

That's.

How they have the high school in terms of controlling

the weapons.

We have better.

But I don't think our army soldiers will be less

competitive as us.

I mean, they can go trick or treating the police.

Service for like ten years.

Yeah, yeah.

As long as you do this, you know.

I saw people making videos.

Talking about it because there is a.

Barcode.

You can try to carry up for that.

So there were actually people like filming videos like, I

don't know how they got videos.

Do you really?

Yeah.

Yeah, yeah.

Um, and there are also exchange students.

Yeah.

Yeah.

From Russia or China.

Yeah.

And it was like a, like the university would be

paid for them to have the M every month or

something, or every week, they would have two hours of

free time where they congregate in a room.

And then they had enhancers on it and they could

access the internet as well.

Um, there's nothing like that.

Then they We covered it or I'm still going on.

I'm not sure.

North Korea not China doesn't have a place.

It's not a lot.

I would not have anything like nothing.

Like a epidemic?

No.

Ignoring the cases nowadays.

Now.

But there is this, like, viral video of this.

Like a little kid.

It is North Korea.

And you know what's so funny?

I mean, I don't know why.

It's just really funny.

Yeah.

So how is it?

It's.

So.

Beautiful.

Thank.

You so.

Much.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Oh.

Okay.

I mean.

Maybe.

Maybe.

I.

Should just be that stupid.

Yeah.

I don't know.

Leaving it?

No, sir.

I'm not charging.

I don't.

Mind.

Hiring an urban this year.

With hiring and all.

I heard.

So.

Yes.

Several people made it onto the interview list, which hasn't

been published yet.

Really?

Okay.

Yes.

Whether any of the writers.

Was surprising you.

You mentioned earlier who's on the job market.

This.

From dark?

Um.

Because Yeah.

You want to be.

On the list of people interviewing me.

I hope I haven't seen, I haven't, I haven't seen

the fabulous.

Mr..

Yeah.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Corruption.

Within the city.

Could.

He actually prevent it?

I mean, when you left.

I'm not going to do anything.

Over the one year.

I don't know if it is.

In the summer, I think it's because of the war.

So we just have to, I think, make all the

assignments we told you guys about this time.

So kind of.

That's.

The main thing.

Is related to the way that you can think of.

You know what happens if you introduce this.

Okay.

So we can have a discussion about the kind of

our, uh, paper, um, which is sort of, uh, as

a stream of papers is coming up.

Um, by, um, you know, if you look closely, including.

All the courses on the table.

And see.

Ted Durant and sorry God assist you.

And sorry about and present.

Some of the.

Bigger picture and story.

So if you look at the paper, it's pretty open

and it uses Google Maps data and kind of sets

out my open secret behind this is.

Have you ever used the Google Maps API?

Is there anything?

Yeah.

But a little bit a little bit of.

A problem with using the.

So it's ridiculously expensive.

Um, so that kind of data sets, there's going to

be millions and millions of data sets.

They just scrape Google Maps.

Um, they don't use the API.

They scrape the.

Maps is what I'm trying to figure out because you're

going to get all kinds of texts, and so they're

going to crack down incredibly quickly.

So the way to do this is essentially operating as

a bottleneck using Amazon Web Services, where you just have

hundreds or thousands of machines that query the maps.

They all get locked up for 20 attempts, but then

you just move on.

Uh.

So it's a bit like a denial of service attack

on Google, and.

I'm.

Sure they're going to be great at that.

I hear that very limiting remarks you do about it,

because if they if they set the parameters even more

and said, like, we're going to talk after three attempts.

First, people stop using Google Maps because, you know, even

if you if you have to give your phone very

quickly to read several things on Google Maps, if you

do this in 3 or 4, you can always start

with some unusual activity on your phone.

Everything okay?

Yeah, everything is okay here, but not on your hand.

So?

So this kind of data is only possible.

Unfortunately, Google is incredibly uncooperative when it comes to the

search.

So in this case.

So it's basically a paper that uses truckloads of Google

Maps data from India.

There's lots more evidence around the world.

I think it is required to be submitted today or

some other top out, and there going to be more

papers in this kind of.

Paper that's Papers come in that direction.

So in three short sections, what are the four main

findings of the paper and its data?

Public.

So no.

So.

In a I don't know.

If you look at the kind of.

Maybe they publish the data for that paper.

I think I.

I don't know.

Because that would be a huge criticism.

Right.

So you have a.

Published paper where they spend a lot of time on

scraping.

And if there are two options, either you do it

yourself and then you have their methodology, which is okay.

But like it's a bit such as.

This other day.

This is not confidential.

Data these days were published today.

So and so the same source if you work in

some potential yeah some data then you're not going to

be able to publish it either.

So you say well, I can just write to you.

I don't know how much detail to describe how to

do it, but it's in principle.

It's just it's just a lot of machines querying maps

all the time.

Yeah.

So that's that's the methodology of doing that in practice

is not trivial to kind of probably a computer science

pretty dog to help you write that code or be

very good at computer science yourself.

You can run distributed jobs across some of the machines

that collect data, but in principle, that's it.

So that's what you do.

Yeah.

It's possible that I haven't looked at the replication devices

with maybe the data that is behind me, this paper

that I knew that you know, I know from talking

to Jill particularly that they're collecting data on an ongoing

basis for, for lots of different projects that they might,

might want to do at some point.

Um, okay.

So what are the main findings of the paper?

Can you just tweak some to be able to summarise

one point?

If you look at what.

Is this collection of books and what are the kind

of main findings is.

Um, the variation across cities in India is driven by

70% rather than by variation congestion.

That's probably the most kind of important, surprising conclusion in

the paper is there's a lot of obsession with congestion,

and there is a bit of a pushback.

This is not true for many years.

For example, testing pricing was a holy grail of urban

policy that how can you sort of get the city

to use?

Those.

You can argue that maybe the The gains from catastrophizing

are nobody's ideas.

You might think, unfortunately, um, for various reasons that that

he sort of tries to estimate, um, there's sort of

a push back against congestion.

This is sort of another paper that supplies really powerful

factors.

It's not the case that some cities as well, because

the congestion and others are really fast.

But there's some word that says there's a lot of

variation in speed, even in the middle of the afternoon.

It's from the paper.

It's not entirely clear.

I can't remember exactly whether they're very open about whether

the, um, congested speeds are the kind of accidents or

whether it's the speeds in the middle of the night.

Uh, they're going to be very similar.

You know, I know the street, um, the variation on

the street.

So that's the that's finding number one.

What is the analogy?

Well, what is it?

Well, I think it actually is them.

I can just read them off.

Yes, please.

So first, finding large differences in speed across Indian cities.

Yes.

The second one was the one that Eddie mentioned.

Third one is travelling India slower?

Much slower than in the US and in less populated,

flatter cities with fewer waterbodies, more roads and most streetlights

and a more crowded network are going to be faster.

But as the relationship between cities per capita income and

speed.

So the first three of those are sort of just

a is a little variation of variations accounted for by

uncontested as each.

And it's slower than the US which may not be

that surprising.

Like how it's even optimised for traffic.

And it's maybe not that it's maybe not the most

surprising.

So the first two is the final finding Fighting is

essentially, you think of it as sort of a finding.

It says.

Let us correlate these differences in speed and whether there's

anything observable across cities that extend.

This is basically a credibility exercise where you say, I'm

going to estimate these differences in speed across cities, somehow

pointing to things that people will find plausible that are

correlated to these differences.

And so the kind of water quality is sort of

hills and stuff that people, most people think, yes, I'm

going to be balanced, seem to be correlated with these

differences in the sense that I find the findings more

as a sort of sensitivity check on the kind of

baseline results.

Okay.

Obviously it is a good finding.

I find it quite impressive.

I think, you know, it got into the I you

can say in our paper that that's not necessarily true.

You know, like the kind of tastes of the I

think Obviously something interesting, but getting the data.

There's no model here.

This is having a regression, just data.

It's pretty cool data.

Pretty cool stuff.

In fact, I think it's an interesting paper, but you

can obviously disagree with it.

It's a bit.

It's a bit basic.

What's going on here?

What aspect of the construction of the average data do

you think is most critical?

So there's a number of conditions across.

Basically, the kind of main output of the paper is

to estimate the average speeds of cities or to see.

An index of speed, maybe a bit like a price

index.

Um, and there's a number of things that get discussed

in the paper in terms of what could be complicated

or could be problematic in this process.

Hey, you know what?

What concerns are there?

What do you think could be the most critical concern?

Oh, it's a good question because I didn't really understand

some of the chips that they measure.

So I understand the magnitude trips and the circumferential trips.

I didn't understand what a gravity chip is.

And then I was also wondering how valid it is

that you're just assuming that every city is mono centric.

That might have an influence on your measurement.

Yeah.

That's a good point.

Too.

So it's circumstantial amenity trips, gravity and commuting or I

see a lot of.

Radial.

Radial a radial I think is just the two is

the centre and back again.

So it's sort of classic, uh, kind of commuting to

the centre and back again.

I don't remember exactly how something about size is something

about here.

Maybe the trip to the nearest kind of the location

to the city or so or something.

But in terms of population size, to say, I'm going

to take a random point and then I'm going to

figure out what is the one of the trips that

that sort of in terms of gravity would be the

most important trips from that location, but take into account

something like distance and the size of the destination, maybe

something like that.

Okay.

Well, besides you as a reason why they do it

for me, I just had.

With someone else.

That's not.

It's very funny.

I forgot about that.

Sorry I haven't read rebreather before.

This was a few months ago.

Very carefully.

Um.

Well, the only reason that I would do that is

a bit of a joke.

In a sense, that's.

The author of the paper has estimates of arbitrary regression

for computing, but on the hilariously small dataset.

So there are also other people who have estimated gravity

time, particularly by today.

Um, so there would be lots of more plausible things.

But maybe the main point is to say, well, we

know that gravity works pretty well to pretty close.

So we're going to kind of mimic something like this

and say, you know, let me think.

I think it's sort of a graph model to think

are important molecules in substance.

Okay.

But So that's okay.

One issue is that we have these four classes and

things.

And what other issues are there in terms of what

what what do you think.

It's sort of.

So one thing that gets discussed at a great length

is the question is who will have a reliable source

of speed data.

And there's a lot of space in the paper that's

devoted to creating your own app speeds as a competition

tool is.

How how well spent.

Is that money?

It was very well spent in the sense that it

helped to get the paper published.

But the doses of the social module product.

What do you do that?

Usually takes the average daily, uh, time to each street.

Right.

So they have like smartphone data.

So how long?

Like the.

Now if you're in the car or not.

And.

So we had no idea what to do.

So I have this Google in my car and walking

down the street.

It must have some machine learning where they kind of

detect.

So they decide whether that's one or the other.

And but so they kind of, you know, extremely slow

to the last process.

This should be accurate.

Yeah.

So whenever they do that that's sort of you need

to do your own separate measure of speed.

It was just shooting with an enormous cannon.

The non-existent fly button.

Um, I didn't read the paper.

Yeah, I did not.

But I did like a lot of law cases currently

going on in India, particularly about It's road images that

are not reflected on Google and hence people having accidents.

Oh yeah.

I'm sure.

There's some US lawyers went to India where we can

help you guys.

Sure.

You know, every now and then, you know, Google doesn't

know that a particular word is what is the first

place they stand in front of it.

And it's unlikely that this is a systematic problem.

So you'd have to believe that some cities have a

lot of roadworks all the time this whole cycle period.

And Google is just incapable of doing that.

And that is very possible.

I think if you do like I've had this discussion

with a lot of Indian friends.

Yeah, out of curiosity.

And almost all of them reported that they would not

use Google Maps for navigation in India.

Okay.

Okay.

Because okay, that's a very.

Well, they're using.

What.

Is not represented.

What should we be scraping then?

No, I mean, Google is the first best talent to

take the I mean, it's saying best, the past best.

Like, I think a lot of people use as a

navigation kind of word mouth.

So they navigate by conversation, obviously not something that we

can observe, but nonetheless, I think there's a considerable measurement

error in the Google route mapping also.

So so let me take back my audio kind of

sort of say, you know, if you told me that

Google doesn't know what it is, I was just laughed

out of the room in India, say, well, maybe you're

right, it's not as good.

Or there are lots of smartphones that the technology is

using is very similar to that.

Maybe having less knowledge about the road.

They know who with so much money.

They have spent so much time mapping the world in

a way that I won't be surprised about that.

but maybe there's an argument.

This was the $200,000 well spent to turn it off

to Google to see how reliable it is.

Even if we only came to the conclusion that the

stakes in this, in this setting.

Yeah.

Because we're not so sure whether it's good to in

the developed world.

Overall, my assessment you can disagree is that this is

a complete sanction.

So I'm pretty surprised that this made any difference to

you as a result of trying to get better estimates

and whatever you talk to people like, it also speaks

to detection drivers across the developing world and see what

they think, the kind of time it will take them

to get to to some place in the city.

I don't.

Know.

But who knows.

It's one of the weaknesses, but I would think that

it gets a lot of space in the paper, but

I think that it probably is not Davenport, Indiana.

What other issues are there that could be potentially problematic?

Using drivers.

How about public transport?

They stated they argue that within city rail.

These mass transit are.

More rare in Indiana.

I think that they claim that their findings with the

estimates of travellers be willing to convert to public buses

as well.

So they kind of say this is the defenders versus

say, we can't like the data.

There's no data.

It.

Doesn't have to be a lot of times in these

in the setting.

Second, it's very low in transport that travels at speeds

and different designs.

So the mobile buses have their own congested road.

They don't travel with the same sort of Slow speed

and as the road travels and that's it.

Okay.

But there is sort of a.

And I think there's some other side of the paper

that only 55% of trips, according to some travel survey,

are using motorised transport, including buses.

So that's there's a lot of trips and mobility that

happens where people just walk on and just think it's.

So busy walking, this is all that some cities are

going to be places where you can have a walk

or if you don't see differences in walking.

Nonetheless, if a lot of things happen by walking.

To what extent this is a problem, is it a

problem so that the fact that that sort of there

seem to be a lot of transportation, and I suppose

it's just walking.

that you believe that there are no trains that are

running some sort of mass transit systems, where you have

dedicated lanes, where you're going to travel at very different

speeds than what Google Maps is going to estimate for

the roads.

I guess you.

Can say that to the extent that people walk in

the streets, even on congested, even if you have.

Walking disruptions, the walking is affected by congestion or or.

People just.

Jaywalking and there's no traffic.

And that would affect both.

That would slow down the traffic.

So for.

Sure.

But that would be sort of to the extent that

there's the same amount of jaywalking in different cities, it

would love to be part of the reason why my

traffic is so.

There's a lot of jaywalking here or there, than there

could be.

One of the reasons for that is something that you

said, well, that was just sort of jaywalking.

You do that and use it in the regressions going

to be less observable in some cities where people are

very agitated.

That seems really very slow.

But maybe as people get richer, moved to like richer

cities, have fewer people walking.

And then that's why you have this more recently.

And I don't know.

How would affect.

Uh, usually protests afterwards.

So, um, the route that car can take wouldn't be

two.

Different streets.

And then, uh, nobody cares about what you like.

The streets like these people change.

Into, you know, congestion.

So you can.

this is true?

But in this kind of massively described case, you have

to sample a particular trip many times and, and you

may take different routes in different tasks.

So this is going to take all of this.

And so you may be taking different routes at different

points during the day because of congestion.

But then the bus wouldn't be able to take this

different.

No that wouldn't you wouldn't be able to do that.

So you write that to the extent that some people

who are probably encountered.

So the fact that 45% of those travelling seem to

be using the, you know, it seemed to use not

so that they kind of I think the statement is

non-motorized travel.

So they can't even be on a bus.

Yeah, but maybe you're measuring traffic to send that along

with the buses and the buses.

You know, don't avoid congestion.

Yeah.

And so they just keep going on their route.

And so the speeds could be measured.

That's it.

So all of this sort of issues.

But there's one there's one really big issue which gets

discussed in the paper which sort of summarises together what

is kind of the what do you think is the

main problem and the main assumption that you need to

follow?

And it's sort of related to Bennet's first point about

what are these trips and why are we using these

trips?

You know what?

Why?

Why have you used these trips?

And why is the selection of trips may be absolutely

critical?

Is it everything?

Was it fun?

No.

Obviously none.

So it could be that reality is non non normal.

Let's think about a very simple.

Experiment.

We do sort of what we want.

We want to represent a sample.

Now, if you want to do something, you want to

have a representative sample of the underlying population of interest.

So do you think they have selected a representative sample

of choice for the underlying population?

And if so, how?

So if you don't have a representative sample then.

Yeah.

So if I, if I, if I measuring in some

sense are trying to avoid unrepresentative groups.

This is like saying the price of whatever green, whatever

plastic, you know, has gone up and you go like

that's a lot of inflation but not.

So if you take that logic and apply it to

these settings, what could it be?

Is this a representative sample of chips?

How do we know?

If there's an actual component.

It should be a treat that matters.

Exactly as we say.

You say?

Well, they sort of say, well, suppose we knew computing

flows and then we would want a sample and we

might have the computing.

Flow or how would you.

Do it?

Suppose you knew exactly what the computing flows are.

Why would you do that?

I may try to avoid it.

Exactly.

You just say, I'm going to select this so that

they are representative for all It goes in the standard,

but there's a lot of people that I'm going to

sample more of it in the vernacular that I don't

if there's only one person.

So I'm going to have weights that are proportional.

I'm going to sample in proportion to the actual community

face.

Do you relate to that?

No.

Why not?

Because I have no idea.

That's why Google Maps.

The principle is you probably have to do them.

We probably know what the flow is.

So you try that in LA because they know how

many people query or they see how many phones travels.

They'd have a pretty good idea of commuting around the

world.

Unless you, you know, kidnap the CEO and you know.

Well.

Maybe you better get the data, but you know that,

you know, so you don't you have no idea what

kind of photos are.

So there is sort of a few lines in the

paper where they're pretty open about that problem.

And what do they say?

What what do they compare this to?

Sort of the fact that they do not know what

conditions are.

The.

Most aggressive.

Way of the trip.

But they said that they use the shared drug from

the US national.

So I was early.

For the manufacturers.

Yeah.

So they were saying, you know, I'm going to estimate

a sort of a price index for Germany.

But unfortunately I don't know what it's going to take

the expenditure basketball Korea and use that to infer what

Germans need.

I have a project like that.

That's not glory.

Yeah, it's even crazier because obviously in terms of understanding

how many people are going to, travel, in particular trips

within the city.

I can't really infer that.

I can sort of say the kind of similar gravity

or whatever you have.

How popular are the U.S. that I can do?

And that's basically the situation where I'm concatenating quite like

an average of speed, which is the average prices, without

knowing what the expenditure rates are.

So I'm going to say average prices that are actually

taking the goods, and each of them is about the

same weight.

I have no idea how important these weights are in

the expenditure basket.

So to me that's the point of this paper.

It's a crazy kind of what you think about it

is the price index without weights, which if you were

in the business of construction, you continue to get thrown

out of the room if you proposed that.

Yeah.

The whole debate about consumer prices is about how we

can optimise the basket and that was the way to

the basket.

Here we have no basket because that way it's a

one priority.

We have various arguments about these that that we think

that the kind of goods that we have picked are

pretty representative.

It's like saying, I belong to the park and I

have seen people do stuff, but I bought a basket

of things which I think is kind of representative of

what people are doing.

Right.

Okay.

Yeah.

And but in this.

Okay.

You want to have an index.

I understand that, but why wouldn't you separate those for

kind of kind of trips and reported results separately?

Because for instance, when you think about deltas for different

kinds of goods, right, which are supposedly reflecting different kinds

of mobility and a new bunch together, which is taking

a stance on what the policymaker cares about.

Right?

Right.

It's using the weights, but it's just do you care

more about the average trip?

Do you care more about commuting to work, or do

you care more about.

I know access to schools.

But I think in terms of whatever the policymakers might

care about as a researcher, we want to care about,

you think of this as a policy problem.

You want a representative you want if you want to

tell me that.

So I'd like to know whether the people, along with

the people who are actually travelling in London, along with

the random trips of London, but the people, the services

that people actually take and that can be the main

issue.

And you have to sort of argue that your selection

to ensure that they claim that the kind of selection

of trips doesn't matter so much.

And I'm pretty sure that there's an appendix section where

they're going to show you the results for each of

the four trips, and that the ranking probably is relatively

stable.

So there's lots of reasons to think maybe the weights

don't matter that much.

But nevertheless, this is the biggest activities here of the

paper that you kind of went by committee, Which may

be a particularly sensitive issue.

As a section of the paper, we talked about the

last 20 minutes or so.

Um, that shows that equal weight in my clothes could

be very important in terms of understanding what training, uh,

behaviour, behaviours.

Okay.

I don't I just want to the main point thing

is I like it a lot.

Yeah.

So I think it's an amazing kind of, uh, paper,

you know, even amazing paper problems.

So there are issues if you read the paper, if

you read the paper that you see, I don't know

whether a lot of the passages of the of sort

of discussing the reliability of Google Maps were requested about

these fields, that it was in my company, and a

lot of them became both of the authors, and then

even more was requested from the referees.

Um, but, you know.

Yeah.

So that's sort of what gets a lot of attention

that is sort of very, kind of very cynical definition

would be you're going to spend a lot of time

talking about the reliability of Google Maps to avoid having

to talk about noise.

The paper is there's not much text is very explicit

about the fact that this is like estimating a price

in this world with which if you you know that

this is a battle that's really cool.

That's unusual in a getaway.

I do, you know, if they ever tried using historical

data because I try.

To.

Find like ways of doing.

This scraping training for ten years now, ten years before

they start serving the data.

So I go to historical data.

I couldn't be.

Yeah.

Not only maps like the principal Google maps might have

it.

They've even Google probably deleted it because they don't care

about the storage and stuff.

Okay.

Yeah.

If you just break into their vaults, they probably haven't

any hand done anything, so you need.

To have this sort.

Of speed, which there isn't very much in the actual

speeds.

That's obviously in all the kind of historical papers that

we've done, including the brilliant paper that we're going to

turn to, to now, you know, spend a lot of

time trying to estimate travel times without congestion in the

past.

So you build your own network and you say, for

example, I take the railway network in London today, and

then I'm going to eliminate all the stuff that's been

built in the last 50 years, and then I'm going

to recompute speeds without.

That is the research that can be done.

Yes, of course, but it is just predicted speeds without

any congestion points.

So actual travel speeds are the kind of quality of

the maps and whether there's anything historical.

Okay.

And the paper that he presented and uh.

Trade centre, are.

They doing something different for the Philippines?

Yes.

Remember that it's all business.

This is another.

Change in the way.

So it's the same price.

And then it's.

You know I trying to remember what the.

So I think that the data that they use for

that is a lot more data than they used per

city here in this, in this paper.

Um, but in principle, they also I do think that

it's, I think that often I think that often the

seminar is there, there's no commuting data.

So he doesn't know what those are.

He just samples things and finds, uh, finds those speeds.

Okay.

Let me spend a bit more time on the kind

of on the introduction to the kind of paper here

on the, the, the model, which is going to be

the most rigorous about it, but in the paper.

So the 2015 I feel very show is very funny

variation of most people.

consider this the lid paper.

Um, is um, and is to be counted at the

state of the art of trying to look at this

part of the question.

So what are the questions?

Questions that we're going to look at within city location

choices.

So the choice where, um, you know, geography is across

the desert.

So that is the kind of way of classifying the

literature here.

And urban model is the city is a is a

model where you're going to decide about this, um, workplace

and the residents in the city, which have all the

resources and you know, where to go and all sorts

of other things that we're going to do in the

city.

But I think the kind of most basic while you

just pick your workplace and the residents, so the the

paper, you can view it as an extension or replacement

of the model centric city model, the kind of simple,

you know, modelling model that we looked at at the

beginning of last week.

And, uh.

Here we go.

So let me just talk a little bit more about

the background here.

And then in the next chapter based on this on

this.

So that is a slide that I could take from

the other field here.

It seems like it's a lot of stuff.

So I would want to read it.

And there's a lot of citations on the price.

And it is very popular.

It's this is some of the talk about papers.

There's a lot of used versions of this on to

in various laws to produce the correct model, the basic

sort of possible model that you're going to continue with

that next, next week.

So the model builds on I had spoken about Lucas.

Lucas was in macroeconomics, but he was interested in cities.

And then um, so they have this they have the

paper which also be commissioned in 2002, which I think

it's the most cited paper.

Um, uh, kind of, uh.

Maybe not.

Correct.

And which improves all the, the kind of.

Affirms those in the space of you no longer can

assume that the firms have been the same.

So firms can make location decisions, know what work is

making decisions.

The city is going to be two dimensional, um, and

it's a continuous space, which is very brilliant and also

brilliant in terms of using the models when we do

work.

And so we have the principle of two dimensional city.

But the bust is here.

The city is restricted to be a symmetrical circular city.

So that means the city is sort of like a

pancake.

And distance to the centre, uh, the middle of the

cake is a sufficient statistic for, um, For everything that

happens in the city.

Also, the city is, um.

It's good to be a city.

This is the middle.

And, you know, the distance from the middle point is

a sufficient statistic for every endogenous variable.

So you can have sort of waves of development.

You could have some unemployment here in the centre and

a ring of residences and a ring of employment again

and sort of, um, stuff, but obviously making it all

symmetric.

It's essentially like saying it's kind of like it's kind

of like a linear city where I'm taking into account

that the line that's taken at the end.

So it's not it's still a very complicated paper to

show that you can solve this model.

Um, but because it's looking that way, it's sort of

hard Talking to see if I can take that data.

That's not in any way to do the data.

Yeah.

Um, so the paper hasn't generated it's sort of an

empirical literature behind it.

So the idea is sort of related to that paper,

but it's going to be empirically, in some sense an

empirical version of this paper.

So instead of continuous space, they're going to be discrete

locations which you can define what you want the locations

to be in a file.

So the spatial resolution will be um, there's going to

be arbitrary productivity and residential differences across locations.

And there will be also transfer connections.

And I can sort of determine travel time, which can

be arbitrary or whatever, whatever substructure you want them to.

So there's a lot of attention that you can put

into the wall.

Uh, we're going to talk about more edgenuity in a

second.

Normally I would be highly popular after the kind of

problems and issues that you know.

My principal would be nice to do lots of things.

Making them all tractable is sort of the key problem.

So we're living at the same distance, and the two

firms would work with lots and lots of them.

And this is my favourite example, is given equal distance

between LSC and UCL.

And you know UCL makes me offer and they say

okay, one more outcome and then NSC retaliates for to

come back.

And so obviously that's not gonna happen.

Yeah that is very implausible that that will really happen.

But with homogeneous workers, you know, to people who are

different at the same distance from, from some point that

it would be these huge discontinuities that if you see

all the races where suddenly all of the faculty would

migrate over and vice versa, which in reality doesn't happen.

So that is what is going to prevent that from

happening and remain tractable because that to Jamaica, the incomes

of workers commuting decisions which uses the sort of imported

machinery.

So the situation where you look at all of the

kind of shocks for heterogeneity across cities in the model,

the same is going to happen here.

You're going to get taste shocks for, you know, basically

combinations of residents and workers.

Um, so people will have tastes that you're not going

to be quoted.

It's just a taste for the patients.

You know, some people might be really into living in

a home and other people will say, well, it kind

of the world is such that others will say, like,

baseball is the absolute peak of experience.

So there's going to be evaluations for different locations that

will prevent this sort of bang bang nature that as

you change prices, you know, into the numbers of people

would change their choices.

So this will help.

So basically what this creates is an upward sloping labour

supply function to change for itself, for activity and wages.

And the location of these locations within the city will

attract additional workers, but they will not attract infinite number

of them.

What this shows is also going to do it.

It will create the gravity style gravity computed gravity equation

for computing, which is escalators.

So that's why the initial point estimated.

You see that it fits the data actually well.

So you can think of the paper as providing a

micro foundation for gravity regression on computing, similar to the

kind of micro relations of gravity regressions in the international

trade.

And we see a similar to this.

If anything, for Newton, gravity fits even better than that.

It's insane.

Well, um, you know, uh.

Okay, so let's go through the kind of model setup.

I know that some of you seen all, but not

everyone able to see the model.

You all seen it, but I doubt it.

Yeah.

So it was, um.

What was what the model does.

So the the kind of the base model.

Now there's a lot of variations that are going to

point to various regulations that people have tried by now,

but there's a lot of variation and value is the

key is embedded into why the economy is why the

economy offers some exogenous utility, you know.

So this is like an international trade, the classic small

open economy model.

And you're a small open economy.

Here is why the thing that's why the thing provides

an opportunity.

Obviously it's unrealistic.

Yeah.

And they said that, you know, as any small economy

sort of reducing abilities, if you think about one that

we have a productivity shot of the mother, which is

probably 10% of the UK economy.

Then probably that shock is going to ripple across the

UK.

So I have sort of spatial allocations across the board

in principle can all be modelled.

Part of the problem here is all computational power and

ability to be sort of, um, just being able to

just sort of handle the data.

So the principle that the interesting questions that say you

have a productivity shock in London, how does this sort

of ripple across the whole of the UK economy?

And in principle, that can be done for analysis, assume

that the rest of the economy is so big that

it's unaffected by shocks in the UK, which the city

is going to consist of a set of discrete locations.

And I know the capabilities of that.

So there are several options which have a certain size.

You get to pick what the geography of the city

is in terms of the data.

And also you can have extremely granular data, very small

spatial units, or maybe gridded data for a two by

200 metre and credit points.

We might have much bigger data than you might say

in London or whatever.

How many borrowers and the data what data point is

it for?

What you want to do depends on data availability and

the kind of a question that is more to ask.

So then you need to go for very granular data.

And this is sufficient will depend on the sensitivity of

the question that you're going to ask.

Okay.

So construction firms and also just for today's paper this

involves two building houses.

So if you just use capital it's going to be

freely tradable here in the economy it's going to have

some price one times you know perfectly elastic supply.

Um and then today you're going to produce something which

is called five, which is the density of development.

It's simply the rules for that in moving land.

Once you've built buildings similar to the assumption the moment

is, force base is going to be obviously allocated between

residential and commercial use.

And talk about that in more detail in a moment.

They can in principle restrictions.

And this is the most interesting work to be done

in a sort of super cargo version of model.

Everything is determined by crisis.

So the building of what it used to be in

office, then it will turn to resemble.

Why?

Because they were willing to pay more money.

It's not that the planet decided that it should be

a residential building.

We can put classes into this model as well.

The problem with the simplest base assumption is that the

market decides that whereas highest willingness to pay is going

to get a certain plot of real estate, whether it

be an office or be some residential space.

Or There's a female.

Pilot which is costless and traded as cheap.

So this.

Is an assumption that is inherited from the model, which

is obviously unsatisfactory.

So there's only one.

There's no variety.

That's another.

That's just one of the good is something that gets

produced here.

Um, in reality there will be variety.

Yeah.

And furthermore, this is costly to the trade.

There are no trade frictions within the city.

In a more realistic model.

You'd say, well, you know, if you want to go

to restaurants as a trade because you have to get

the restaurant you can't like, you can order on Uber

or on Deliveroo, but even that costs some money.

So there are definitely trade frictions in the city.

If you want to go to a shop to maybe

try some closed or buy some flowers or whatever you

want to do.

Uh, there are going to be trade options, So it's

pretty easy to send them all the questions.

Of getting good data on that.

So if you wanted to know what sort of trips

to people make in cities to buy flowers and so

on.

You know, be cool to have some data or mobile

data or credit card data is kind of the main

sources or very rich sort of community service will be

the kind of this little stuff.

So we did it that way, but we didn't have

anything like that.

So just as the cold cycle model is sort of

shut down, the key feature of the model is going

to be the commuting friction, as you'll see.

So it's not a trade friction.

So you can do all your trade in goods here.

So yeah it should be people backwards and forwards within

the city.

But the kind of in the base model, the sort

of the frictions created by trading restrictions, all markets are

going to be perfectly competitive.

And so in terms of the sort of overview of

the choices and issues of occasional employment with some of

the finest to maximise utility.

So as an alternative city model that is a more

refined way here, you got to decide it.

You have to decide where you work, where you live,

and you're going to do this maximising utility and jumping

forward.

Firms are also going to choose the inputs of the

labour force based on maximising the profits and the equilibrium.

They're going to make zero profit, free entry to the

firm's location, which is going to be to the other

firms to maximise profits which were necessary to maximise utility.

So we're not going to prescribe that all workers have

to be working in some particular location of the city.

If you look at the equation that the workplace, and

the president's choices are going to be driven and.

Driven by the simple factors and biases used to make

sure.

And also there's going to be two versions of the

model is an open city and a closed city version.

The closed city version is just a fixed number of

people living in the city, and it looks like a

burden all around.

You can't get out, and you have to continue the

assumptions that people are going to be indifferent between the

utility they can get in the wider economy, and the

expected utility of living in the city.

This is the moment where there's an expected utility.

What the implications of that are.

So if there is mobility between the city, then it's

going to be driven by this assumption.

You're going to compare the expected utility of moving to

the city to living in the economy.

Okay.

Then finally there's two points.

The three points and maybe the most important.

But so the first meeting cost of the goods can

travel freely.

And it's not the case that commuting is costly, as

if you look at the data, it's very clear the

commuting mass unpleasant, uh, people commuting clothes drop off pretty

quickly the distance.

So, um, I yeah, it's just very clear that that

people, whatever these costs may actually be, whether it's financial

costs or simply the utility costs of time, unpleasantness of

sitting on transit, um, there are big costs of producing.

So the last two things is that we'll see in

more detail in a moment that there are going to

be differences in productivity across locations and differences in amenities.

And these differences are directly due to both fundamentals and

syllabus.

And also there's going to be endogenous Productivity and indulgence

vanity.

And so particularly as more people work in a location,

we're going to allow that location to become more productive.

And also is more people who live in the location

say, well, change your amenities in principle, both positively and

negatively, negatively because of this crowding or positivity, because having

all the people around you, it's just fun or means

that there are going to be more restaurants and shops

and other kind of urban amenities which are given by

population.

Right?

So the question of how big this bill is, a

big part of the kind of big part of the

estimation of the model is actually to estimate the strength

of these spill-overs and estimates, kind of how this committee

functions, so that we use that kind of model estimation

next week, and the Lord will be about these finer

points.

Okay.

So let me maybe do that as sort of the

last thing or the second to last thing.

So let's look at the kind of the utility.

And that's sort of a key kind of equation behind

the model was, you know, what consumers are doing is

in the city.

So this is the utility function of some worker over

to this location.

It works the location change.

So what does that person's utility depend on.

So first it depends on things that are sort of

going to get the top depends on wages in the

location.

So that person works at a this information destination.

So it's not that you know the focus is if

you have heterogeneous firms at every destination.

But here in this model each destination is going to

pay a different wage.

And that's the wage that.

So we just map The eye is the residential amenity

of location where you live.

More amenities.

If you go back for a second.

Let's go down here to Vijay.

The commuting costs between imj.

So this is like in the model t I c

or t I j.

So this is the cost of commuting.

So this is big.

Maybe because it's unpleasant in other ways.

Um, then, um, that's that's bad.

P is the price of the final.

So the price of the final year is one.

So it's going to be the same.

But the principle of the individual model, where the price

is varied across locations of communication, where the prices are

low would be nice.

And finally, Q unfortunately is not quantity, but it's the

price of residential floor spaces per square foot.

The price of floor space.

So if the residencies in location are very expensive, that's

fine.

Yeah, you can think of it if you just think

of these two terms at this time.

These are just real wages.

There's no minimum wages divided by the price of goods

and the price of the real estate.

So just like an RFU model.

So now we also have this transport cost here for

commuting costs.

We have these entities which we can also put into

the geography model.

And then the final thing is this idiosyncratic shop.

So this idiosyncratically shop is a draw.

So the next slide is a probability distribution.

So it's a it's a draw that tells you how

much you like just for each combination of workdays.

And each Omega is trying to get his or her

own choice and therefore any bilateral in the city.

And you say, you know, living in a working state,

you know, living in hazard and, you know, working in

Ely.

Each of these accommodations is going to you're going to

get a draw.

And you know how the ordinance says the variance of

these shops is small, and the people are going to

be very sensitive to the economic factors that you're going

to work with.

We just hired you to go.

So if each component is bigger than a lot of

variation.

People are very used to there.

In that case, then I'll see you soon.

The staff is going to determine if you see a

lot of random commutes.

People will do stuff.

No matter what they earn and how long it takes

because they just have to do it.

So obviously, currently it's an important question to see how

important are the kind of economic factors for people to

pay for choices within cities.

They kind of identify with economic factors or how important

is going to be.

I'm going to invert through the models and we're going

to kind of invited as well.

Like this is actually just encourage folks that are comfortable

Impossible.

So we're going to measure the importance with indirect strategies

in the qualification.

Okay.

So um that sort of makes sense.

So it's a pretty simple principle.

Things that there's a functional background here.

This is.

My this question says the combined consumption of all space

and goods with expenditure should be one minus three.

And it's going to be 73 multiplying.

So.

The distribution here of idiosyncratic shocks is a draw from

uh for heat distribution, which just creates a kind of

a distribution.

Um, so that we can call this and so use

this sort of that same distribution.

So the first distribution is a value distribution that has

a bit of a long tail to get very.

It's, uh, negative, uh.

Very convenient.

Um, so you're never going to get negative, negative strokes,

but you could get a very small showcase and positive

showcase for different combinations.

The general form of this distribution takes this form where

P, I and j are going to be so-called or

the kind of this thing is going to be called

a scale parameter, whereas epsilon is called the shape parameter.

You've seen that Fisher distribution with Thomas.

Yeah.

So you've done this.

Yeah.

So this is the same kind of idea in the

behaviour.

You'll see in a moment.

If you just set the EJ to one.

Yeah.

That makes the model a lot easier.

And empirically uh t is going to be something that's

equivalent to the ISO for the moment.

And J is something that we cannot identify given the

data, even with a much better name is very difficult

to identify.

So while this variation means that you're going to get,

on average, very high draws for a particular residence location,

this is isomorphic to saying that that location inspired by.

And so later papers are designed for this shift in

the distribution.

The two things are exactly the same.

They don't just mathematically say this year is a destination

of energy.

So it says if the shocks that people draw for

a particular destination are very high as well, you know,

maybe people commute to hold or not because unless you

pay so well, but because it's such a cool location

where we have the parking lots of restaurants around, it's

just a cool place where it's one of those business

park and go for it, you know, in the summer,

and therefore the value would be lower.

So in principle, this could be an important determinant of

people's work choices.

Um, but it's very hard to identify.

So for simplicity, we could just set it to to

one and forget about it.

The paper is not going to make any progress on

trying to estimate it.

In principle.

Interesting meaning to estimate how important that is.

Whether people you know, how much people value the attractiveness

of their work location, and how to decide whether they

want to work somewhere else.

If you have a choice between that job and so

on at your job.

You also say, you know how much of a wage

differential you make to go to work at all.

Excuse me.

That's nicer.

Uh, rather than imposing.

So we really do.

But you need a little restated here to do that.

Okay, so for now, if you just say just ignore

this.

So there really key parameter is going to be epsilon

which is going to determine how big the variance of

these user credit choices.

And it's unfortunately inverse.

So epsilon is big.

The variance is small is absolutely small.

The variances big, that is, the variances that people, you

know, all of their decisions would be driven by shocks.

So they're kind of estimating the size epsilon is going

to be a key object of the structure estimation next.

Next time okay I think that is the last thing.

So one thing that rolls out, which is one of

the more complicated but otherwise straightforward, is, is that if

this indirect utility function generates bilateral computing probabilities for each

bilateral, the probability that someone is involved in the case

I versus J is going to be driven by this

form, which is sort of coming from the kind of

extreme value distributions.

If you have any shocks or other extreme shocks, you

get these choice probabilities, which are difficult to derive but

have been around for a long time, long time before

this model.

So the general idea of these choice probabilities is sort

of a transport for us.

Where?

Where are you going to choose?

This is going to depend on things that are specific

to this.

And down here is a term which is pulled in

the tradition of multilateral resistance.

Do they want to talk about resistance in the traditional

sense?

This is probably the tradition is to call the multilateral

resistance test.

Whether you're going to do a particular idea depends on

how attractive it is and how it affected all the

other things that I could have done.

So I may be, you know, doing a particular commute,

even though it's not that attractive, because all the alternatives

that you see here, for example, it's all relative.

So that's what this is about.

So let me sort of start here again and look

at the production side.

And then quickly next week into kind of the structure

Of the promises of lots of things you can do

with it.

Okay, I'll have a look at slides in the paper

in a second, but there's a lot of stuff going

on.

Okay, I'll see you then.

And then there's also the exercise.

The next exercise is about the rentals.

So this is one of the.

Papers that used to accommodate all of this time.

And so.

I think it is very instructive in terms of you

see in what states sort of a job market should

be.

Um, he did a bit of time doing a poster,

except, um, I, quite like you, has a pretty good

chance of getting into a good rhythm for the publishing.

That's so interesting to read.

And what kind of a job market paper, uh, looks

like.

And we'll have a discussion very similar to the.

Lecture 11:

Oh.

Oh, oh.

Yeah.

No one can know who I was.

Literally no one here.

Yeah.

That's crazy.

I have to define.

It's.

Very.

Sad.

Yeah.

I can still get.

Guns in the cabinet.

But.

Not today.

No, no, I mean, a lot of people already went

home.

Probably.

Actually.

I'm the only one staying here.

Who else?

Hi.

This is a very provocative question.

I'm just here.

Because she's going home.

Yeah, I'm saying I'm going to Franklin for New Year's.

Countryside.

Yes.

Nuts!

Yeah.

When are you going home?

Uh.

Describe it.

Oh my God.

No.

That's true.

I'm so gentle.

I want to go blind the day after tomorrow.

We have to talk crazy shit.

I gotta take their longer, and I.

I know, but I'm so impatient.

I just want to go to Germany and drink mulled

wine and eat all the wine.

Yeah.

Lots of fun.

Is there any one of you going to the festive

Christmas, soldier?

What time is it today?

Maybe yesterday.

But today it overlaps with the.

But we don't have to.

Yeah.

We can.

I don't want to see the next kitchen.

That's the problem.

But those were like, okay, it was okay.

Did.

You read the paper?

Okay.

I thought I'd do it up.

If you're going up, I'm coming up with you.

No, no, I'm talking about later.

Okay.

I thought you wanted to get your coat.

In which case I'm trying to get you.

For today.

Was there a paper?

There is a paper about building wind farms in Germany.

I'm just curious to hear what Germans think about it.

Doing.

All that Yesterday.

I think public on Monday.

Must have been wait one day public.

Wait.

Are you taking public money?

It was not a day.

And then not go.

I have.

Already gone home?

Yeah.

Better than environmental.

Where?

Garrett showed up five minutes and he was too few

people here.

I'm just going to go.

Let's reschedule.

Really glad.

No.

It is so rude.

No.

I mean, to be frank, the reason why we have

a lot of this Tuesday is because, uh, he missed

the last lecture, but.

Yeah, but, uh.

I mean, he's being paid.

Here as well.

So professional.

Nonetheless.

Things in development economics courses like this in development.

Oh, surprise.

Exactly like.

Do the findings have external validity?

Mhm.

Probably in this school they do.

Right.

It works well in uh.

In cameras.

Is that one of the interventions they do in black?

You know, we went to, uh, to the course.

You need to take a picture with the class to

show that they're here.

That's funny.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

Like.

Ready for some rest?

Yeah.

At the same time, also, you No way.

There's a lot of other.

Yeah.

That's all.

Yeah.

So, uh, just like.

Now that we have that.

Yeah.

Just like.

It's like you're applying for something and then you realise.

Oh, actually, I don't want to do it.

It's fine.

Okay.

That's it.

I don't want to do it anymore.

No.

But.

It's all.

Oh.

All the time.

Yeah.

No I did.

I will surrender.

What was it before?

Nothing.

Like what?

I was like.

Oh.

My gosh.

Oh my gosh.

Yeah.

So like but that happens right?

Yeah.

Exactly.

Happens all the time.

Um, so yeah.

I was just.

Having to think.

Okay.

Okay.

What was the seminar?

Yes.

I mean.

I only want to work in progress this morning.

Not to the main seminar just now.

Yes.

Some people did go.

To the event.

That.

Was interesting, but it's a little.

Surprising that that doesn't find any effective reciprocity in Paris

in the 1840s all the time.

It's a bit surprising that.

How is it?

So people say research comes in waves.

Yeah.

How is it that the oven wave kind of came

a couple of years ago?

Yes.

But is it like now, already?

Like the world going down?

I mean, it's hard to say, but I know what's

happening is, you know, I started my PhD in 1996.

That was five years after the.

Civil war.

It's going down.

It's always.

Been to all the important stuff.

Like, oh, maybe not.

So yes, that is going to be diminishing returns eventually.

Um, but, um, Yeah, I think there's still a lot

to be done.

And so I think that the.

Extension that the UEA has disclosed that the system has

515 submissions, which is an it's a new record for

a European conference.

It was more than the US conference this year.

So that's great.

It's a little ways.

That we decide to use it.

How many people.

Are you a co-organizer of that conference.

And might be a little bit more.

Open to.

Getting some money back.

But how picky are people with like what's been you

have a lot of like big urban people submitting their.

There it is.

Accounting accepted.

Yeah.

No, I think that people are relatively, uh, maybe imperialistic.

Imperialistic in the interpretation of what urban is.

So.

Uh, no, this is sort of a completely sort of

usability of paper, you see that you consider yourself.

As you might be, as actually doing nothing to do

things like paper, uh, whatever, you know, commodities or, you

know, any religious faith.

But that doesn't happen.

The quality of.

The paper, I think, is going to get accepted.

Okay.

I was going to say the life of today is,

um, is it more sort of theory to kind of

the whole world is quite a bit more, uh, but

I don't want to say it shouldn't take that much

time.

They are the sensitive and basic ideas of the of

the early novel.

And then we're going to spend some time talking about

impure thoughts and model inversion and how to to work

with these kinds of models.

And then, you know, at some point I would like

to switch to a discussion of the paper rather than

to have a discussion about what, more broadly about what

this means, to look at the questions that are on

the on the exercises, on the exercise, and a couple

of the literature.

To be asked.

It's a sort of a very typical paper in this.

Yeah.

So I would like to up to now all the

bells and whistles that I want to talk about at

this point.

Okay, so last time I kind of mostly spent time

kind of looking at the utility function of this, of

giving a location I'm working in Jay.

He's going to care about the wages of this nation.

We care about the energy at the origin of the

kind of residential origin.

I'm going to cut out the time of day.

The title is cosmology.

It's.

Like a little iceberg cost.

And.

So it's neutral and costly.

And then if you care about the price of goods

at the location, prices here is going to be the

price is going to be the same everywhere.

So this thing for practical purposes of science is in

the case of a heritage level, although that is going

to be t QE, which is the price that has

naturally of the state.

And then the key ingredient.

As I've said, this is the secret sauce.

Which is that it is a shock for bilateral collateral.

So you can have a preference of any combination of

the rest of the workplace.

And that is the idiosyncratic kind of component overall of

the kind of economic variables, which is what these things

are.

So, so this is something that makes it really nice.

That is economics as well.

So these are the types of things.

Okay.

So then we've kind of talked about that is the

draw from the distribution these draws which is an extreme

value distribution of these two things that will come back

in a moment to kind of shift parameters.

Um, So you can just post one.

And as I become maybe clearer in the morning.

So this is one of the kind of both unnecessary

and unnecessary complications of the kind of, um, the scale

parameter is going to be critical in terms of how

big the variance of these issue traffic sources.

So constitutively big epsilon means low variance, low actual means

bigger variance, etcetera.

So if you have a city where you take the

people that are very low epsilon to epsilon small, that

means it's a lot easier kind of moving behaviour going

on.

So I think I saw I don't know, did I

stop this one or the next one.

Let me just review this.

So the this this type of indirect utility function because

of the flashy machinery to rise to this kind of

bilateral moving.

Probability is that the probability of distribution.

So the probability of choosing any combination of the unconditional

probability of the dependence on the stuff that you know,

J, for example, J, will make it more probable that

people choose that option because it makes them more attractive.

However independent the term of the bottom will be called

the natural resistance from its kind of the outside option.

Like all the other things, all the other executives are

in the exercise and all the other options that I

could have taken.

And obviously how attractive in particular it is depends on

how attractive also options are.

So this is the strategy at the moment.

It could be the expected of you picking.

You know a bilateral in the in the city and

its apparent how attractive the authorities by this choice probability

that the probability of choosing something depends on how it

is.

The choices and how attractive without options is something that

comes up in any of this as a discrete choice

or anything where you have a distribution is going to

come up in society, as with other.

Versions of the sort of choice for the highly trivial

life.

But it's a result that's been around for a long

time now, so it's a very well established result it's

not new to.

And it's also related by this paper.

So you can also look at the conditional probability.

So is that kind of what's the share of the

population is going to be the Combination.

You have to look at the kind of condition.

Where do people treat you who works as a person,

like, uh, Chelsea or some sort of someplace?

Where do people what's the probability?

Do people commute to particular destinations?

And that takes on a much simpler form, where the

only thing that matters is because your condition, I mean,

that matters are sort of either bilateral or destination characteristics.

It's basically a function of wages of destination and transport

costs to the power of this epsilon term.

And e I, j is the kind of scale system

of work as a destination entity.

So this is high.

And this means this is a nice place to work.

You like it.

And so old school takes office and builds a good

wage.

So that's why it's attractive to the initial conditional use

at the moment.

All other methods of estimation for the path to it.

So how expensive it is to get to that place.

Okay, so final preference is in terms of the timing

of all the people that are going to make the

decision, you're going to make a decision whether or not

to move to the city.

And that's going to be covered by this, by this

thing conditional on having decided to come.

You go to learn about your frustrations.

So you get off the bus station or you're going

to get off the bus to play.

So once you land in, you're going to realise what

you have, distribution and all these kind of shocks.

So back in the days.

JS um.

JS for yourself.

And then based on these resolutions, these realisations, you're going

to make an optional choice so that whilst you know

what your thoughts are, it's going to be a unique

activity, a unique rate to the glory times.

Is it going to be you drinking?

You're going to like this most and this is the

worst.

And what is he going to do the best.

So in that sense, once you've realised your strengths is

already spatially clear, you're not in different locations.

There is a unique opportunity for us.

Yeah.

However, what are we going to assume is that it

has a spatial equilibrium condition comes in at the sort

of key stage.

So the way you decide whether or not to come

to one of the, uh, in this sort of simple

world where there's this kind of fixed outside utility, you

need to be different between basically entering this lottery, which

is going to London or City Council.

Does that sort of make sense in terms of an

assumption?

But what is it going to be the kind of

downside of that assumption?

Was that.

So the so the first the first distribution talked about

the last little bit in incident about what's implicit in

this, in this equation is the idea that, you know,

that there is this fixed outside world.

Is the global labour or labour supply to London.

It's not entirely horizontal.

And you are.

Yeah you are.

You can draw as many of the people you like.

It's obviously yeah I was, I was looking for this

case obviously.

So as London becomes a sort of say as this

expression which is, which is the expected value of the

lottery.

And so this here, which is the bottom of the

choice, turns out in this way, because it's sort of

a sudden but nevertheless is the expected value of entering

that lottery.

So you decided to travel to London.

You know that on arrival that you're going to get

this role from this distribution.

This is the expected value of the London so that

the expected value goes up.

If we have an upward sloping labour supply function, then

you're going to get more people, but not an infinite

number.

So here if I want to send more expected utility

into the number of people that come running after London,

obviously the actual house prices have adjusted and then we're

back to equilibrium and then people will stop coming.

But nevertheless, in a more realistic setting, we want.

To supply two things which could be modelled in the

way that you looked at the geography, to show that

there's sort of a shock for cities.

So you get maybe in the first, in the first

stage of living in London or Birmingham or any other

city that you like to consider, and then on that

stroke, you're going to get another taste shot that tells

you how much you like a particular kind of location

within the city made your your taste between London and

the Birmingham a much more useful credit than at the

Taste of London.

So maybe your labour supply between Birmingham and London is

smaller than the Labour slices within the city, where you

say, I see a lot of ideas that I kind

of a little bit different about.

So this is first thing, but in terms of what

sort of variant in this timing, in terms of what

is going to be an unattractive feature of this Office

of Public Consumption in London.

Don't know what your socks are and you own your

shocks and then are you going to be happy?

I don't know them all.

They're going to be happier.

So you're going to be happier in the sense yes.

You go to based on your shocks.

Yeah.

Based on your goals with align, you will pick the

IJ that's best for you.

Is this really good?

Is it sort of.

Good enough.

There's something.

That's a little bit idiosyncratic, because it's not exactly like

a lot of people in the end and in some

cases sort of thing, because they draw a high value

of shock, but it doesn't really.

Sure.

That's a sort of another sort of a sort of

designated viewpoint, things that are another problem.

So one of my favourite jokes is, is that if

you want.

To say so.

Arbitrary all along the way, you just add it to

the menu.

That's right.

So yeah, you say, well.

What is it that makes you like it so much?

Huh?

Could you be a little bit more specific as a

hobby?

Because, you know, maybe.

Has it all been.

It makes this location area or your parents are from

there or whatever.

Some other thing about you really, like play tennis and

there's a great tennis score there.

That's why you like it.

Um, and so yes, that'd be great if we could

be more specific about it.

But for now.

You're going to see in a moment.

We go to the data at the moment.

So this is going to be the basis of all

of your regression.

So you're going to take sort of the log of

these probabilities here.

And the data is going to be the flow.

How many people live and work and taking all of

this.

And then actually on the right hand side for the

period of fit, it's going to be really, really good,

really high.

So in the right way.

So it will be the strongest is like even if

you don't, we don't know what these shocks are.

Adding these shocks also have to produce a new gravity

structure this time, which is empirically how you fix the

data.

So some indirect justification, obviously, if you could identify what

these shocks exactly contain it'd be great.

Yeah.

But we have the same problem.

And this is why we do not why do you

like, you know, what is more the Bahamas.

Just that you use aquatic soccer.

You really like apples.

I mean, like, what of us?

Yeah.

And we don't even want to just use the quantity

component.

Okay, so that's a whole scepticism about this.

Uh, all these shocks are in what sense is going

to be regret here?

It's going to be a level of regret.

So why in what sense is there going to be

regret here?

If we made this sort of two step decision?

First we decided, you know, we look around and say,

well, what's the expected value of moving?

Then there.

Let's go.

Let's go.

It's positive.

It's higher than I thought.

You are right now.

So I want to go and then get higher elevations

and make my optimal choice.

What could possibly go wrong in this kind of setting?

And is that right?

Am I going to be happy in London?

The answer is actually, a lot of people are not

going to be happy.

Why not?

So you were indifferent.

So you were a difference between the expected value of

the lottery and the outside option.

Once you think of the lottery, you could get quite

unlucky.

You had a lot of really bad draws.

So even your best choice in London Is it a

choice that is worse than you are?

Yeah, it's just the expected value.

Yes.

If you're if you're in a different and expected value,

if you get a lucky, you're going to get a

bad role in terms of a bad set of rules

for the easy choice.

And as a result, we will actually want to turn

around and get straight back on the plate.

Well, we are fortunate we are going to allow you

to do so.

That's right.

It's a kind of justification.

Here is a justification of the ways of relaxing.

This would be that some inertia that's going to make

this decision to go to learn more about the city,

you could get unlucky but not allow you to optimise

in the settings.

We allow you to optimise instantaneously.

Then you could um, we would be, which is great.

So you would have been terminated for the distribution to

be much more difficult to you to to deal with

another.

So whenever we come to the mental picture, think about

this thing.

He's not going to have this thing.

He's going to basically get rid of that problem with

another trick which he's working on another day.

So this one is sort of this other matter that

you are doing this two step decision.

Unfortunately, some of the people who are going to arrive

are going to be.

Okay.

Um, production for action is super simple.

Scope is constant returns.

The output is actually to consider what happens with um,

and so places with human capital is the number of

people who are working.

This location is going to be the pool space.

So add a suitable space in the fraction of the

full spaces allocated commercial use so that this can be

can be allocated either for residential or commercial non-residential purposes.

And this is going to be the fraction of the

floor space that is the location.

That's how to production.

You plausibly should have other factors of production in here.

You should probably have some tradable capital.

Yeah.

So unfortunately we know relatively little about what kind of

is potential production function here.

So that it looks like in terms of what the

factors are, that's the macro.

Economists are probably going to say.

So if you take this sort of simple macroeconomics head,

you say that maybe shares should be 60%.

Yeah.

Um, and everything else is capital.

And so it's 40%.

How much of that capital is going to be, you

know, real estate?

I don't know that is the correct data.

I think best data that we have would suggest that

the share of the state should be about 20%.

So that should really be some other factor that says

it's going to be another 20%.

Some other captive audience will be available.

It's going to be down to some papers and literature.

We have three factors that actually make the federal capital

and the state space here, including all the competition.

You're just going to set the labour share to 80%,

which is too high and 5%.

At the moment you get satisfactory.

But maybe more realistic is to sort of follow the

kind of a good microdata as to how much variation

there is, sort of particular between if you had a

model with different sectors of production, it's clear that there

are activities that are much more space hungry than others.

So maybe the first example would be if you operate

a self-storage business, you do a lot of space.

And one of the two employees, if you run whatever,

you know, I don't know, uh, a call centre and

just a tiny desk of a person and.

Yeah.

And you have all the people sitting, sitting in it.

So they're very different roles being between different, uh, different

businesses, different sort of space use.

So this is um, but again, it's sort of a

question of do we have some great data to sort

of inform the model where this place plays a role?

Okay.

So the next thing is, which are going to be

pretty key for the estimation, uh, and maybe also for

using this, this model, but not in every setting, is

that the model is going to allow both productivity and

the energy level.

So how how and so the productivity here.

So if I go back to the production function this

general Total productivity term could obviously be just fixed.

This would be over and has a certain amount of

productivity and, you know, also a different one.

Um, but here we're going to allow that that is

going to be a part of something of service and

some student or some coaches.

So the overall productivity is going to be this, this

and the spill-over term is going to be a function

of um, it's going to be a function of hmm.

Okay.

So hmm.

Is the amount of people working in location s in

some location s divided by the area.

So this is sort of the density of employment in

an area and number of people per square km.

Let's see.

And we are summing here over all other all of

s, including myself as a I'm going to be in

this summer.

So if I'm looking at some location That morning.

The kind of Owen Owen Spill-over here is.

This function here is going to be a function of

density in all other locations, but weighted with this exponential

decay.

So it's e to the power delta t.

This this is going to be the travel time between

our case.

We also do this in straight line distance.

Or we would make much of a difference.

But the pressure due to the mass travel by travel

time or by distance, you know he is going to

be my travel time.

And this is highly correlated.

So Delta is going to regulate how quickly these spill-overs

decay.

So delta is very big.

That means someone a few kilometres or a lot of

minutes in travel time away.

It's going to get very low weight to the power

minus that.

Whereas if Delta is, you know, close to close to

zero, then I get almost uniform spill-overs from everyone.

So I kind of think it's for everyone in the

city.

Okay.

And then finally Lambda is going to be how much

the spill-overs of the spill-over charge contributes to, um, to

productivity.

You know, that's a parameter that a lot of urban

economists and also a lot of micro economists have estimated

that sort of depression in terms of if you believe

to believe that productivity is a function of density of

employment, to be learned from the people around you is

more density around you than even more questions for big

business can be.

So in a moment look at kind of ways of

estimating lambda using natural experiments.

There's a lot of people that run simple regressions that

are some measure of volatility.

Some measure of density may be just in your neighbourhood.

And then we give you an idea of what lambda

is.

It wouldn't necessarily tell you what delta is.

Maybe you could use some sort of robustness where you

say, well, I'm going to compute density within a all

of you and then just regress it and see what

happens.

Does that sort of make sense in terms of the,

um.

I mean, so this is endogenous activity and here and

I do the same thing for managing.

So also entities here can be endogenous.

So there's a softness component.

So maybe positive images are simply you are you have

a farm and someone decided to have a part maybe

in your next level you have a few of the

tens and maybe that could be it.

You have your full and your views on that.

That could be an expression of your identity.

And then there's going to be again an endogenous component.

So this endogenous components that look exactly the same as

for activity spill-overs with one key difference is is for

h m h r h r r stands for residence.

So this is the number of people living around you.

So the density of residents in locations.

So this is you said sort of in terms of

knowledge, in terms of what matters is the number of

people working around you in terms of amenities.

Is the number of people that you think that's possible.

Do you think that sort of places, in some sense

could come more attractive if more people live around you?

I would say it's quite the opposite, isn't it?

It's quite the opposite.

American Economists is like, why is it bad?

I mean, speaking for me personally, I'm very annoyed when

people are too close to me all the time.

And the thought of living in a house by myself

sounds very nice.

Sounds very good.

Yes.

Yes.

So that's a yes.

That's a very kind of American approach on my back.

Surely.

Good to be back.

So in a moment, you're going to ask me how

big data is going to be, which is that's an

issue for some of these observations.

So I'm going to care about people within this.

But you know, some of the major literature to approximate

this is I'm going to care about this issue.

But you do this at the level of more than

100.

So you just say that's basically turning road here into

a step function.

I care about people in my world and nobody else.

So that's sort of an approximation to that kind of

function.

So then the question is, will people in my world

how much the how whether this thing is negative or

positive or negative, it could be negative.

It could be that they're just crowding.

It shouldn't be crowding.

Externalities aside, you know that people sit around me and

noisy people going to have parties or whatever it is.

I live in my, you know, huge mansion somewhere, uh,

in rural Pennsylvania.

Uh, then, you know, it's good.

I don't have any of these exiles.

However, what you saw in my listing might be positive.

Empirically, it's going to be positive.

It's going to be some of the positive.

Stuff.

I mean, if there are a lot of people, then

they're probably going to be a lot of shops later

this massive infrastructure.

So.

This is going to be more of a black box.

So it's just it's going to be just urban amenities

are going to be strongly correlated with the density that

people in that area, you know, kind of have a

lot of, you know, unfortunately, very quiet rural locations have

very few cool cafes.

And the question is that in some sense you are

measuring here the net effect of these two things working

in terms of the literature.

That is something similar to this.

It was Rebecca's work at Diamond's paper in 2016.

Her job market paper.

Is a number of papers.

A lot of papers have estimated kind of endogenous identities

will assume that different papers have very different things.

You on the right hand side.

So this just puts population density on the right hand

side.

And the lead is for example, is going to put

the share of high skilled workers in total populations and

the number of people at a share of high schools.

Um, so that so a lot of high skilled then

then going to the United States to help themselves, whereas

the population is in such mass and we have a

lot of people where we can have other the other

assumptions that's against the whole fields in terms of what

what is the right functional form.

So I think The empirical evidence suggests very strongly that

community support is that.

It's just not that sort of, you know, so always

of exogenous beautiful in some sense.

And that's why everyone wants to maybe do other things.

So.

Chelsea.

Chelsea, that's a very expensive.

It's just an exogenous the beautiful that somehow it must

be.

A lot of it must be.

So the question is what is the best way of

capturing that an opportunity in terms of how attractive.

So.

Okay.

So the remainder the idea is is mostly configurations and

stuff.

So let me just see what I so we're gonna

come to model inversion.

So they're going to be two positions that are critical.

The first thing that have a condition is the market

condition or the labour market condition.

It says that the kind of supply and demand or

the labour market.

So the spatial tends to it out.

This is the number of people that work in education.

Okay, well, the right hand side says that the number

of people working there has to be equal to the

number of people actually completing their work.

So this is something to, you know, across all sort

of suppliers and all other places in the city, in

these other places.

This is the number of people living here with additional

computing probability.

So this is the share of people who actually decide

to do it today.

So we are summing across all the inflows, uh, has

to be equal to the number of people who are

actually supplied who are actually working in this area.

So that's simple demand equal supply in the spatial labour

market there, in the sense where people commute across bilaterals

and the number of people available, location is equal to

you going to use that equation very commonly appear to

work in the moment.

It's going to be incredibly useful to do those.

Pretty simple.

information.

Okay.

So this is the I talked about.

Have you talked about this in a second.

Okay.

So because this is where I was going to talk

about that in a second.

But sort of the key here.

The beauty of this equation.

One of the beauties of this equation is that you

can solve it for wages.

So in a lot of data sets, in terms of

basic data sets, suppose you have information about where everybody

where how many people live at each location, how many

economically active.

And that's always thinking about this as a model without

any dependents.

Yeah.

So if you had kids and other non-working students, vulnerable

people that can be put in this.

Again, mostly a question of data.

But now let's sort of think about sort of boring

people.

They just have a job at work.

So this is the number of Work has given each

location to work as work.

Each location.

Suppose you have this data.

Suppose that you also have made an assumption about epsilons,

and have to have a, you know, for the value

of epsilon out of the out of the hat.

You also have parameterised cij in this way.

Say, well, the travel costs from I to J.

Are a function of travel time with this parameter kappa.

Each of our campuses and potential costs of travel where

the travel times go up, um, cost increase and how

quickly they're going to increase is going to depend on

this car as a Kappa zero.

And you're completely sensitive to time.

This is positive.

The more positive is the more expensive travel terms.

Suppose you give me a value for kappa and you

give me a value for epsilon.

Then I can actually solve this system here for wages,

so I can the only unknown variable is going to

be wages.

I also have to make an assumption about ejs.

So they're.

Supposed to Ejs are all one that just got here

and I can the only unknown if this is the

case W is not one W, but the W is

all locations.

If you have 10,000 locations in this 10,000 under WS

vector of the length 10,000 wages.

But it turns out that this this system has unique

solution for wages.

Intuitively what what's what's happening is there's only going to

be one wage vector is going to make it choose

the right amount of people to commute the destination that

you need to observe the kind of employment, as you

say.

Well, there's a thousand people working in Boulder.

You might think that this isn't even one set of

wages, one set of wages subject to kind of a

multiplicative constant.

So if it wants wage vector, then also multiply as

a positive, but it's only one profile that makes the

right number of people commute to other, and not just

to Auburn, but to any other destination set.

As for the spatial labour market, where let's say 10,000

destinations and 10,000 origins is only going to have one

set of regions, and I don't see why.

It's not.

It's not always the case, but that turns out to

be the case that this system has a unique solution.

Even if the model has magic or any kind of

whatever.

It could be those things could be happening.

This system has a unique solution.

And we're going to use that at the moment.

I'm going to come back to that.

So the second condition is a typical space condition for

space gearing condition, which says that the supply and demand

for floor space has to be equal.

So it's broken down into sort a few steps, he

says.

His invocation I share one way this is going to

be the part that's devoted to residential use.

And this is 50% this floor space, residential space.

The supply of residential space has to be equal to

the demand.

And the demand is this right hand side, which is

going to be dependent on preference shares.

And this is the kind of extensive share of consumers

of housing one minus beta.

And it's going to depend on how many people live

in that location.

I was the price of floor spaces.

And this term here is going to be in terms

of.

The amount that you are selling on floor space is

going to be a number of equal times the income.

So this time it turns out to be the location

which depends on wages at destination is the people I

work with travel to for work.

As if you want to know how much do people

in Chelsea earn on average, you need to see where

they're going and what they are earning at the destinations.

For those numbers, it's a demand supply in residential floorspace

demand equal supply for commercial floor space.

This is the amount of commercial floor space and location.

This is the demand from the kind of firms for

extraction, uh, for that.

So, um, and then, you know, the supply of space,

the rule is going to be due to some competitive

construction sector that combines land, uh, which they call em.

Um, so capital impulse, and that's not precisely the other

ways.

And this is sort of land area.

Okay.

So you combine land and capital to build and to

build floorspace, but the whole separate literature on what the

right functional form by now is, it's a good approximation

to the kind of supply housing there sort of people

who are the people who think it's all okay or

not enough.

So here, this is going to be a public option

that combines rich in this way of system rules.

This is capital to the power designed to the power

minus mutant copies of power.

Okay.

And the final thing is the detail here is in

principle, either the logic of this project or it could

be picked by a task that or both.

Now you can see that the kind of the subject

that you're going to make, but instead of a more

general setting.

And so in a purely competitive world, what fraction of

floorspace in a location is residential or commercial should just

be driven by higher willingness to pay.

So the opposite used to be an office with some

offices, and even now it's a residential block.

That actually means that sort of we used to pay

off, you know.

Residential uses was higher than this would be developing as

a as an office.

Uh, so that means it's it's not it's.

So that would be a world in which simply the

need to hear is, is due to kind of competitive

pressure.

Uh, in this world, they are charged.

The word is, you know, planners have a lot of

power in London.

And they could have just said, no, we don't want

office use anymore.

We don't care what the willingness to pay is.

We just going to regulate.

We're going to restrict it.

We're going to change the zoning to residential because of

what we have.

And as a result, this could be.

What is the kind of better way of looking at

the space uses?

This is, again, a pretty open question, sort of how

strongly do market forces manifest themselves or how much you

planners just do stuff?

It's an interesting question.

How far from a competitive This is the way.

Okay, so here is.

The second really confusing thing in about an acre is

is this assumption.

So the only thing that's going to do this is

this.

So the bottom line is this.

So one way of thinking about kind of the land

use restrictions or the kind of influence that candidates have

is to say that we're going to see, um, fully

commercial uses tables.

One if the price of commercial floorspace is higher than

the price of residential.

Right.

And that's going to be some tax rate here.

So if the tax rate is one that this sort

of drops out is completely frictionless and this sort of

market.

Yeah.

So if the number of residential of commercial uses is

higher than residential uses, that is going to be completely

marshland out here.

It's going to be the other way around.

It's going to be completely residential and residential.

Uses pilings to pay.

And only if these two things are exactly the same

as the price of the village first.

And then there's going to be mixed use where the

theta is going to be in between.

In this, in this world.

Now there can be some story here, some sort of

tax that says, yeah, there's some this is the plan.

That's what this thing is for people to want that

we want.

We have the kind of planning restrictions that say, well,

you know, the planner, for example, if this was true,

then it says, well, I'm only going to make this

a commercial.

Uses we need to pay twice as much as the

residential uses.

And that's.

Okay.

So this was a very easy idea.

The problem is that, you know, the people here is

going to assume that this has to be put to

zero, and this Who's going to be monitoring this very

often?

I'm pretty sure this is a typo, but it's pretty.

It should be larger than one this year.

Is that the kind of bias goes in one direction?

That's a completely implausible assumption.

I'm sorry, but the reason I can't remember the exact

reason why we made it.

The main reason why we made it is that, general,

you want to let this thing to be unrestricted.

It's a bias of the panel that can be used

in favour of commercial or commercial, and the bias could

vary across locations and as I see it.

So maybe this location will be very biased towards commercial

use and other locations.

They're very biased towards residential.

The way to measure that is to have data with

UI, UI and ux UI.

And so if you can see that a full bar

is a residential school, space cost twice as much as

office space.

If you go know, like, looks like there's a little,

little wet hair and then some other occasions the other

around that you would see the tax implicit tax, which

is there in the paper that you don't have.

We don't observe this and that at the same time.

So this is sort of an assumption to deal with

the fact that unfortunately we only observe one price, that

we cannot identify these.

And if you're going to see an entity that creates

a whole lot of complications, that involves going down the

way and, you know, trying to work with a model

where these two prices can differ, even though you can

only observe one.

That's right.

What is the role of zoning restrictions?

If you think of zoning restrictions as as.

Excessive so as government as like, oh, just purely residential,

no commercial property, then you just.

Said This.

This is the kind of text equivalent of a zoning

restriction.

I restrict something that nobody wanted to have an office

in residential.

Of course, this year this thing is going to be

one.

It's like, yeah, yeah, I've zoned your back garden to

a garden.

You were like, yeah, that's right.

I was never going to use it for anything but

a garden.

So there's no restriction here.

But if we had a situation where the kind of.

Yeah, sort of suppose that suppose we were biased against

residential people saying, oh, this is going to be an

office area to offices.

So the kind of willingness to pay a residential developer

has to be sufficiently higher than an office developer for

the planner to say no to the residential.

Now they maybe have to pay one and a half

times as much for that, be willing to pay one

and a half times as much, and if you do

that, then that.

An example of that.

Yeah, that's a binding restriction.

That's what we have been working on the paper right

now.

I think that time is pretty important.

So that is new stuff.

Uh, and they just, you know, they they control quantities.

They do not control prices in most settings.

So if you restrict, you know, the supply of something

then that is going to be reflected in prices.

But you know if you don't care about prices which

a lot of planners all due respect don't.

Then you just you get you get to choose prior

quantities and subsets of this in this setting.

Okay.

So here is a kind of a horrible slide in

terms of what observable and price action.

So I understand correctly that basically businesses need land in

order to produce, but then households like the location where

they live.

No no no no.

Yes or no?

You choose.

Yes.

Let me just go back to the utility of all

the combinations.

Do you get to choose any colouration you can get

to anywhere at this location is 100 100 locations.

You can give it any of these.

Any one of these 100 locations.

So there's no kind of rivalry in the floorspace.

So in the location?

Yes.

It's in some location.

It's going to be demand.

Let me just go to the equilibrium condition.

So in a location I.

Think.

It's going to be the key that's going to determine

what the allocation of floor space between residents and commercial

is.

And it's sort of without any pilots.

It's going to be completely regulated by willingness to pay.

So if, if, if it's going to be mixed use,

if we are at the sort of where the pooling

space is exactly the same, who we are, the corner

solution, whereas either completely residential or commercial.

Okay.

Now my question what would be the implication of things

like a rising gig economy where you don't really need

like a your home as your business location, or you

don't have a business location in a sense.

Sure.

Yes.

There's several papers that will use this framework to look

at working from home and what they can, and working

from home if wanted, especially what's happened in the city

through work from home.

I'm really excited to see that.

Um, that's.

Yes, it's one thing.

They tend to assume that these models are working from

home is mostly reduces commuting costs.

So if you go back in to the utility function.

So this is about the same as if I don't

have to go to the office anymore.

When you're working all of that without work.

I can get the whole wage without having to come

here.

And this thing is just one.

I don't have any.

If you think of it in the past, I had

to come here five days a week, and I wanted

to come one day or two days Database.

And that would be, you'd think most of these things

in a pause that you can say, well, but maybe

there are also other forces that, for example, in the

production function.

Shall we say maybe it's not one minus alpha.

It's called power, but it's still one of alpha has

become bigger.

Alpha has become bigger.

Yes.

So to be using the yes you can sort of

using kind of ways of working.

So the good old days everybody and we firm had

an office.

Now they all just share office.

So so you know open plan offices.

So open offices mean that this thing has gone smaller.

So there will be an interesting thing to study.

Why how do you know now with the, you know,

Covid and sort of working from home again.

Working from home is the question to what extent is

used in after real estate because people are going to

this place, and how is that going to change things?

Does that make sense?

So lots of things that I can potentially use.

Um, so okay, let's just ignore this.

Like, you know, any kind of duty to do this

in any way you can observe it.

You and you, you need prices we don't hear as

it's going to be a complete mess and just ignore

that part, okay?

So what are we going to do now?

And before we come to sort of empirical.

So the real basis is to say, well we got

in a moment we're going to do model inversion.

And in the same way that you've seen at the

geography level.

So it's going to do the same thing here is

we're going to do model that is going to use

a zero profit condition for firms.

So it's going to be even easier here than in

the geography model because there's only one price.

So this equation says this is a complicated way but

this is directly on the paper.

So this is the paper for whatever reason at the

time decided to express it says basically I can solve

for the overall productivity of the location.

I know the prime real estate is, and if I

know what ranges and locations are and I need to

make assumption about the prices.

Okay, how are we going to do this in practice

at the moment?

Um, typically the purchase is going to be people are

going to try and have some data on the price

of floor space.

The problem is the cost for it.

The wages are going to come from solving.

You can take care of the wages so you can

just get a lot of wages.

The typical approach is going to be to say, what

are you going to solve the computer market so we

can solve this condition yet for wages.

Once we've done these few things that I've observed, house

prices, floor space prices, I've sold, wages I can solve

for the market.

Does that make sense?

I don't need to know anything about prices and geography

model.

I like to transport costs and prices because there's a

sort of this final output, which is priced one, and

it becomes very simple.

If you had trade and final goods within cities, which

are costly and more complicated, but still to be able

to do it.

Okay.

Um, the yeah, intuitively here patients that pay high wages

and very expensive in terms of space in order to

be hyperactive and you say, well, everybody's chasing the same

prices.

The same applies to you surviving with high wages, high

prices.

You must be much more productive than me.

If I was going to be somewhere in the periphery

where I pay much lower wages, and so the bulk

of the wages are lower.

And of course.

This overall is going to be at the moment when

I go back again to the projection function here, it's

going to be this object.

And the next step is going to be to say,

well, how much of your property in the location is

due to some fundamental advantage of the location or spill-overs

as that security of the scene?

Interesting.

Is it all exogenous?

Zero?

Yeah.

Is it just over?

And is this productive for some fundamental reason or is

it also.

Okay, so we need a moment to think about the

identification strategy, how to identify how important that is, how

important spill-overs are relative.

Okay.

So that's what this is.

So the key is the information from the from the

from the directly from the paper.

What is a more intuitive way of writing it is

that.

Images in a location are going to depend on a

bunch of parameters.

You are So just a bunch of promises.

It's going to depend on the number of people who

are making this choice.

Our high is the number of people who are living

in locations divided by the total number of people in

the city.

It's going to depend on course base prices and certainly

depend on this.

Do you think this is access I will use to

find out the job market at this time?

So what this year says is the new something is

going to be a high to be a high amenity

location.

If a lot of people decide to pay, there it

is.

You know, it's very expensive.

And it has been kind of the minus sign here

and is.

Down here where you can have it in lock in

the site.

It has labour market access.

So if we see the location that a lot of

people want to live in, it's very expensive to live

there and it has bad access to jobs.

So the term is somewhere in the sticks.

And it must be great.

Otherwise people wouldn't do it.

So that's the kind of comes from the sort of

comes through the choice of probability and says that's if

we see something some people that a lot of people

meaning something which from economics is quite unattractive because it's

very expensive.

It doesn't have really good access to jobs.

Then they must get compensated with basically.

Okay.

So that's the kind of idea.

And this is used in the paper at the moment.

Very commonly this is that you just sort of translate

the differences in prices and wages of access to wages.

You come into an analysis.

Okay.

So this is this is something super interesting.

But so first you prove the existence of the existing

equilibrium Room to meet.

This is an interesting one.

Included.

In this room.

Um, so if you are exogenous by exogenous, then the

model has a unique equilibrium.

Um, you know, maybe it hasn't.

Uh, so.

Um, it's an interesting ongoing sort of a sort of

ongoing kind of debate in terms of what should be

doing.

We had a discussion about that already in the geography

model.

Uh, you know, I think we're going to make sort

of like economists and make assumptions as to the model

as a unique equilibrium.

But that's not very interesting.

What we have a way of dealing with the multiplicity

of equilibrium.

So arguably the much more interesting approach is to deal

with the loss of one of the key features of

cities is that it potentially should be a lot of

arbitrariness in terms of how things look like and to

exploit it.

But That's quite, quite, uh, quite, quite difficult to do

that.

Um.

Well, I guess that makes a lot of progress in

making some progress.

Is there actually a sort of how can we say

something interesting about multiplicity in this kind of setting?

But there's a lot of it's a lot, I don't

know.

This is one.

Okay.

So he is a sort of a mixology in terms

of the equilibrium things that I've already already said, sort

of a key spatial equilibrium condition.

Here is the difference between the expected utility of going

to the city and the outside option.

This is this.

Yeah.

Once you arrive in the city, you're going to get

shocks and then you're no longer indifferent.

So in that sense there is no spatial equilibrium.

Um, this is a service some people would like to

one day get out and do so instead of a

more complicated application of the procedure, which has nothing to

do with any of this?

Is that.

Turns out that the average utility, not the individual or

the average utility, turns out to be the same of

everybody by that rule?

So this is quite mind boggling in terms of the

way that works.

So you say I see some combination that like three

people commute on.

And I encourage you to do these three people.

And I look at another 3000 people, something very popular.

And I find that the average utility of these guys

is exactly the same.

That's very strange.

How could that happen?

So the reason that happens is that there is a

negative selection.

Three people are going to do this very unusual commute,

which probably is a very long distance between two really

hideous places.

The only thing is because I had very positive draws

that they really want to do it, whereas some very

popular to do that short distance between a place that

is cheap to live and pays good wages, and the

destination is something that's going to draw in people with

much less positive shocks for this particular bilateral.

And it just turns out that it's self-selection.

So it's like in the train setting.

And you sort of this connection of firms here, whether

they have a long tail or short tail.

Yeah.

So we're sort of the engine area for the kind

of activity is the same here is that it's sort

of this walking people across locations that churn out with

this machine structure exactly balances the average activity.

This is not necessarily really important in terms of the

equilibrium or anything else.

Yeah.

But it just turns out to be a feature of

this.

So you can see.

Well this is also some spatially across bilaterals move and

take the outcome of the sorting across bilaterals, but it

maybe highlights the sorting of people across the nations is

going to be quick.

These people are going to make choices based on their

idiosyncratic draws, and that's going to be quite important in

terms of how people are thought in the scene.

Okay.

So, um, we do for time.

Okay.

Um, so the, the sort of various there's a lot

of expressions that are already kind of sketched that nobody's

done yet.

Yes.

I was thinking about the variations in the model, the

number of things that people have worked on already, which

one of which is adding multiple archetypes.

One kind of timing of the base model is assuming

that everybody, all ages are the same.

Uh, you know, not at all in terms of the

use of credit shots.

So everybody's have their own choice, but otherwise you're all

the same.

Obviously you're not kind of the same.

Yes.

That people will they will be high school.

You know, maybe all the younger people, uh, all sorts

of differences across people.

And so you can it's not difficult in principle to

add more workers are looking at one side of that.

So we have different types of workers.

Then you can have a sloping supply to the city

which you talk about.

And then there is an elephant in the room that,

you know, in this kind of base model, all you

do is you get out of bed, you go to

work and you go home again.

That's what people do.

Obviously there's also some people that are less serious about

they also do consumption.

They go to the set of all the different things.

Obviously that is really important because the community is going

to probably this is important as interest in terms of

the number of trips that people take.

The main problem with consumption trips at the moment is

you need data to see what people are doing.

Serving where people commute to work is something that we

have much work to structure to, to measure.

And whereas observing consumption trips, it's much harder to do

that in.

Okay, I'll ask the workers.

Um, the I think.

The six years of revisions his refunding made are, um.

He was on the market.

Um, yes.

Two types of workers.

High skilled and low skilled.

Um, there have been a number of other cases that

also have had this.

If you do make additional assumption that you need a

theory, you need to make this work into the production

function.

Um, and the box mentioned this is labour.

And now you need high skilled labour and, you know,

low skilled labour.

Or you need to make some assumptions about what the

kind of production function looks like in particular, uh, maybe

it's going to be a function where, you know, you

care about labour, but labour is a composite of the

needs of some elasticity of substitution between, uh, between the,

uh.

But you can just, you know, take some paper from

David cards and say, well, he has clearly estimated that

it's like 1.4 or some number.

Therefore I'm going to just do that.

So it's very straightforward to to do that.

The main problem is doing that is you need to

observe people.

So suppose you want to have my skills and those

skills and the data set that you would have is

a dataset where you can see the residents choices, the

workplace and the residents choices of these people.

You see in this location as like a high school

as you are living and some other location, you see

a problem where people are working, as is the location

where a high school that is useful.

And in an ideal world, I would also want to

see that I need to see a community close.

So I want to see not only the opinions about

what are the kind of community flows of high skilled

and low skilled secondary.

What do you think is the most qualification of those?

So there's two things I need to know what the

composition of the residential population is.

I need to see the composition of the workforce, and

I need to see the flows in sort of orders

of difficulties, what is needed across.

Different.

Types.

It's going to be probably the hardest, although it is,

it depends.

So in census status with UK, I think for the

very first time, commuting flows by type by types in

2011 and 2011.

Yeah.

Um.

I think um, tags.

Oh, what, uh.

Is this too polite to ask, you know.

Which is.

Usually.

But they I ask you, they do it by socioeconomic

groups.

See the.

Vocational transits by socioeconomic plans type the types of managerial.

So them in geolocation.

So it's going to be highly correlated.

I think you can see it by income.

I have two choices by, uh, by people close.

And that's going to be the hardest, I think the

UK kind of thing.

This is going to be the likeliest.

But you could also see if you had a community

survey and the group in Serbia asks for the other

one, it's not going to be a lot of observations,

unfortunately.

So it's going to be much harder to estimate the

regression.

But that might contain the kind of information, whether you

see the flows of someone very rich or some variation.

So that's certainly going to be hard.

What's the easiest.

Income?

Yeah, not just income but the composition and the residence.

So a lot of censuses are going to tell you

about the kind of income composition and residence is employment

and destination.

A fine spatial scale by skilled type can be very

hard.

So a lot of the complications in this paper is

that he does not Model observed the composition of employment

distribution.

As you can tell within that destination, it's very happy

and the workers are very happy.

You know, life then looks good, but vice versa.

So if he goes through huge shoes to try to

construct that data so that a lot of the kind

of yeah, kind of complications in that data.

I think he does not observe where different skill types

work, and he has to make some assumption about the

production function in different locations.

Looks like.

So you could just say it's the same everywhere.

The department uses 40% high school, 60 low skills everywhere.

Whether it's a bank or, you know, some warehouse.

Doesn't matter.

And we heroic.

So I want to do that spatial variation in kind

of the skill and intensity of interaction.

But it needs to calibrate.

Okay.

So there's multiple types of principal that can be done.

The main problem is having some good data.

So you think he didn't do it.

He tried.

It doesn't.

He does it very well.

And he doesn't think he does it in a country

which is not known for.

If you ask the exact year 2017, just before he

went on the market, and whether someone would be able

to write that paper and said, I can go away

because it's just not enough that we're not going to

be able to do that yet.

And he found it a little better than I thought

was.

The one thing he doesn't know is full employment that

he should, but that if he uses the term data

to infer how high skill intensive production in different locations.

So he has to basically, you know, get some location

data and it makes some sense that they must be

very high skilled, intensive.

It says no Kentucky Fried Burger.

And it was a bit intensive.

And it uses that to infer what kind of composition

of demand for skills and locations.

It's not going to be the most critical part of

the table, but it costs a lot of effort to

try and fix that data problem.

Okay, so I was looking for work.

So this is sort of yeah, you can do that.

Um, there is sort of one thing to talk about.

And one possibility is to have sort of choose two

thresholds, one for cities and then one within the city.

There is a more elegant approach with, uh, heavily threading

and strong, uh, 2020, which I might talk about it

later on and also solves another problem, which is something

that can pull data to you as well and say,

you know, why do I need to have sort of

an offset utility at all?

How could I just turn all of the UK into

some gigantic city?

So you get to choose.

In UK.

Why do I do it?

Just for London?

Principally, yes.

Like, obviously it's sort of empirically there going to be

very few people who choose to live in Edinburgh and

work in London.

It's going to be awesome if you're going to do

that.

But, you know, it would be one of my colleagues.

But it's very academic.

So, you know, famous long distance commuters.

So for various reasons.

But so first they're going to be lots of zeros.

There are very few people.

How do you want to commute more than 45 minutes

or 60 minutes one way.

After the hour and a half, hours of commuting, flows

tend to be pretty close to zero.

So you say love, but, um, so it's kind of

overkill to say, well, you can do it from anywhere.

What are the other issues?

What do you think about why can we you know,

what's attractive about that assumption?

What's unattractive about.

They.

Can tell you attractive attractive about it avoids this regret

column.

Yeah.

You don't have to make a decision.

You sort of have to make a decision.

You live in the UK.

I suppose we'll say about this.

You owned your paper all year, so you get to

make a decision about where to live, and then that's

the optimal decision.

That's it.

So you don't there's no sense in which you, you

know, move to London on the expected value.

And then you get disappointed when you have a bad

rule and you'd like to leave again.

You're just going to throw the whole UK in your

optimal thing.

No regrets.

Okay.

That's the that's one of the potential.

That's the no restrictions the two disadvantages.

So one thing this year, but the other one is

both sets of opinions have to think about what's going

to be the issue in terms of thinking about it,

um, of of making an assumption.

First problem is what's going to be the computational.

Pairs of things to compute.

So to be able to do that I need to

come to a third way.

I need a travel time matrix.

I need to know the travel time between every I

and J.

If my in the moment I do this with 130,000

locations, 130,030 thousand is a very large number of taking

a very long time.

And once you finish the computation, your computer is going

to crash.

It won't be able to save the money.

So the size of the kind of bilateral.

Long One mutation of this thing, and having a matrix

that contains so many ideas together is going to be

a big pain in their own right.

Okay, so that's what you're not going to do yet.

So the trick that comes from this paper and this

is we used in the final game, and we get

it so that it's a bit like a block bootstrapping.

You're going to say, well yes, you can choose any

image.

However there is a constraint and we're going to define

the cities.

And you can't.

Move it across the outer boundary.

So you can either left with your island J in

London or you go somewhere else, but you can't live

anywhere.

We just don't allow that.

We're basically going to cut out and that's what we're

going to keep.

So the diagonals of the block diagonal of the matrix.

But we're going to cut out things that we think

are very low probability.

And that's going to help a lot in terms of

computational and even manageability.

That's what capitalism in the second is going to be

troubled times within London and within any other city.

If we consider this, that's very nice.

Um, otherwise the map miraculously simplifies to something that looks

pretty much identical.

The kind of one of the other drawback is that,

unfortunately, that's persisted and is going to be the same

to London and across locations in Ireland.

So if you turn all the UK into a city,

unless you have some other heterogeneity in the kind of

in the fishhooks.

Yeah.

If I get the same procedure for all of the

draws from the same distribution of all of the UK

Labour.

Within London is the same, which I think it's not

particularly likely that that's a good assumption.

What do you mean by that again.

But what are the sort of.

business, he says.

London becomes 1% of the state.

And global 1%.

How many more people will want to work in London

as a result that we believe?

And the same is the way it is home to

about 1%.

How many more people will be willing to commute to

Hollywood?

And I think that the second number is going to

be bigger numbers.

People are going to be more sensitive to changes in

economic conditions within the city than across city.

Yeah.

If you constrain the numbers to be the same.

Then it just comes from the fact that you treat

the entire thing.

It is more.

Simply because it's just a question about people's preferences in

terms of what is their willingness to react.

I mean, where does it come from?

A new model that is the same.

If the answer is not the same, if you you

know.

So this would be forget about this sort of diagonal

thing.

You just say the whole UK is a city.

It's all the said.

So all the cases, you're going to get rules from

this Fisher distribution, which have a particular epsilon parameter, which

is the same like just as kind of stuff.

This sort of the kind of my substitution between location

within unknown and the location between, you know, in Edinburgh

or the patient is all the same.

That's what it's all all equally.

It's all from the same process.

So there's probably a more realistic model.

It's one where you say, well let's suppose there's a

two step.

So two step, you know, short procedure that first you

have views about cities.

And within cities you're much more flexible.

It's like sort of a nested like a nested structure

where you're you're not that flexible about living in London

versus Birmingham.

You're sort of kind of but then within the city

views anyway.

Okay, let me, let me move south on the reverse.

Okay.

I was like, well, let's move to the east End.

And it's going to be okay if you don't have

strong views about about things that.

Significant advantage of that.

Like you use that approach.

What the disadvantage is also having proved that.

Yeah.

The main disadvantage is a very it's a very cheap

because one is you need two numbers.

So at the moment you'll see that estimating epsilon is

going to be almost hard.

So estimating this epsilon which is the kind of shape

which governs the variance of the decision.

It's going to be hard if you need a second.

If you need to estimate the second row of the

kind of capacity.

So it's just it's sort of people are very parsimonious

literature.

They can avoid estimating something.

They will just won't do it.

So if you have a lot of parameters, you have

a lot of criteria model, like if you have a

lot of tapes, you need to be able to estimate

all the things.

So if you can't do it so independent, sort of

a stupid example in the Berlin paper, why didn't we

do have quite heterogeneous people.

There's no way you have the data to identify commuting

flows by time and all the parts normally of a

100 year period.

So we couldn't, as I said, call better forecasting sort

of a bit of the approach, which is the most

part and obviously very understandable.

There's no point in reading this model and let's hope

for the best.

It's not that model that doesn't that ignores all of

this.

Heterogeneity still has something interesting to say, but that people

will suppress it.

Certainly in the 2020 paper, there was a few among

some quarters said it would be better to not have

a second parameter, which you would have to then pick

out if you know some either estimate or or and

be from the literature.

Okay, bring in a second of the literature that maybe

that point that I think I've talked about all of

this um, and spoke about this, but before I talk

about this is the general kind of empirical strategy in

this literature.

People are going to push you really hard to try

and estimate the structural crisis in your city.

So if you just say, I'm going to take this

from the field like a macro economist, would you say,

like, I know what the parameters are and I'm going

to just take my friends parameters and they're great people

in this literature at this point.

So you have some parameters in your model.

They will want to see evidence from it, ideally from

your setting.

So if you for example, you have housing expenses for

consumers.

If you can find some data so that you're working

in your favourite country and Belgium, if you had some

Belgium data to sort of pin down what the housing

expansion is, it's going to be a lot better than

saying, oh, this is estimated that in the US the

numbers should be fine.

So the pressure is to say additional parameters.

If you just say what I'm going to describe is

from some of the favourite paper people.

Yeah.

I'm thinking, you know, not maybe the seminar itself.

But you sort of partially compensate by saying, like, I

have a grid of different parameter values, and this one

in particular doesn't.

You can.

But it is very difficult if you have 3 or

4 of those parameters and you can do this, all

of them in there.

How are you going to summarise that.

And then people are going to go out with these.

You've done.

I agree.

So yes you can do robustness and sort of trivial

appeal.

Okay.

So lasting incentives are in principle both easy and complicated

and kind of challenges.

We need to measure what people do with consumption so

that the.

Read the paper is used as a data source because

of the good credit data.

Big data gives you.

So if you haven't opted out from there, you know

lots of apps are going to send out your location

all the time.

And the various companies that have this data and make

it available.

And so if you have these things that I can

see every ten minutes where you are, and they can

use this data to save you, I think if you

stay in the location for 15 minutes, which is not

your workplace or your residence, then you've made a visit

and you went to a restaurant or your shop and

that that's they consider that a consumption trip.

And then they have in terms of the model, it

shows the changes.

So you can go to work and we actually can

go for shopping.

And the whole shopping come from a home where you

can maybe also during the lunch break, uh, you know,

pop out and the shopping trip to Covent Garden and

If you allow a little bit more becomes more complicated

in this model.

The paper finds that some of the matter, um, they

matter.

With all due respect, my author as the matter is

a little less than I would have expected them to

do.

So produces basically the kind of cost benefit ratio of

of transport infrastructure becomes bigger.

If you are obsessive, you realise that people are going

to take the tube to accommodate rather than just to

work and obviously be more valuable than that.

But the kind of in terms of it's not a

huge it's not that it sort of increases by 20%.

So when you go to go, maybe you're not measuring

enough or what it is, or maybe you don't.

And I don't know, it's sort of an open question,

but I would think that the consumption is even more

than that.

It's a part of the reason, potentially like just the

congestion effects from consumption trips or about the utility case.

Like, you know, if you drive to buy groceries and

then access the roads and to prevent people who actually

have to commute to work from working, that I'm pretty

sure that.

That paper does not model congestion, so that that sort

of travel times are solid.

So you just have to pick up.

So if you had congestion, yes.

Then you could.

That could be one reason why consumption sort of self-defeating

increase.

It just slows everybody down.

I'm pretty sure that this paper hasn't got any sort

of solving for the congestion.

Equilibrium is really complicated as well.

So most people don't do that.

They're just sort of destroying lives.

Yeah.

From from Google maps.

Some people are just lazy.

So maybe they I mean, it's true.

Maybe they consume and they can form and then they're

too lazy to go anywhere else.

And I'd rather not.

You know, like if you look at the best data,

if you look at travel services of transport for London,

for example, people are going to say, oh, that.

Is.

Not for me.

So their findings are not in line with survey information.

And how frequently.

Is this the survey?

All the survey information says is that if you ask

people to record all their trips in a week, you'll

find they're going to make a lot of pictures and

you go, like, maybe they all don't matter.

The only thing that matters is the commute to work

is the kind of the only thing that is really

long and thought of maybe a lot of these trips,

and I'm going to pop around to the local air

and shop and buy, you know, whatever, toilet paper or

whatever.

Um, maybe this, this, this, these things are walking and

they don't really, you know, they're relatively cheap.

But there are, you know, if you ask people to

record every trip for a week, they will do a

lot of research trips.

And some people who only go to work and go

home and.

But most people don't do that.

They have a lot of other things that they want

to do.

They go to the cinema.

They go to the restaurant and things.

Okay, let's go for a break.

And then after the break, I've got a bit of

time to prepare for the video.

We can talk a lot about the tricks and just

how to take it all into the data, and then

we should sort of spend some time discussing the mental

paper.

So the next application.

Okay.

So.

This.

Is.

All right.

No.

Okay.

I'm not the right person.

I'm just some people.

How can I solve this issue?

For you?

I mean.

You just.

I think you would be.

The last.

Okay.

Well.

I got it.

I think it's good that.

Yeah.

I mean, that's.

I know, I know.

I know.

I mean things to us.

I know, I have.

Everything.

I.

Know, I know.

I know it's.

Not like I get it right.

I'm.

Reading the paper all the way.

Here.

Yeah.

So.

What do you.

Think?

I guess it's a sign or not.

I think I don't know.

This is ridiculous.

Well, I.

Think you said it is.

A new invention.

And I would like.

To know how.

They have their house.

I think why this is very interesting because it is

good.

However.

It.

Is a very how.

If you want.

To build a new.

Way from existing housing state I don't know.

200 and.

Seven such that it's impossible to do something like that.

But then you see.

This is.

Just idea and you Probably.

You want to just move away?

Yeah.

They would probably.

Let me use it, but I.

Didn't want to leave.

You.

I don't know, but it.

Was wonderful.

Describe it to.

Me.

Yeah.

You're not just saying that.

Action of living.

Yeah.

Okay.

We.

Need.

Two months ago.

Sir.

I.

Think.

You know.

This because.

It's possible that.

The reason that we.

Put them in the comments.

So you don't really get to.

See this, right?

It's a weird question.

That's a.

Good principle.

Oh, yeah.

You think that whatever these rules are, they're very different

than the sort of spill-overs that happen because you have

a law firm, and I'm just right next to all

the people there, and.

They're very different.

As we just heard, your question is, they're all papers

from all the research.

Yes.

So what do you do most?

Or in exactly the same way?

Well, actually.

Maybe.

The answer empirically is not so with the estimates that

are confirmed from other papers that follow this.

He It is because of the extreme you.

Know.

The poor more interesting and more like the other is

like the guy who suddenly becomes the first to get

away with it.

Yes.

Most of these moments.

Most.

Of the times that it is a punishment.

That's stressful.

I don't have it.

I don't have any friends who really?

Um.

I run for, like.

And I also had some idea and I thought.

That sounds great, which is how I.

Don't.

Really like actually socialising with the right and right people.

And wanted to socialise with someone who's more important than

them.

And I was the lead.

Yeah, yeah yeah yeah.

So.

Yes.

Exactly, exactly.

So I was a little the.

Only person would be like this would be possible.

Exactly.

So we took about two iterations of.

The model and then.

Uh, said you're going to.

Oh, it's.

A Bristol.

Actually, we are going to be.

Talking about.

Structures built in three different.

Parts where.

Infrastructure is.

The idea.

So consumption is also about learning a new term.

Well I mean.

I mean I'm not sure there is.

The pure healthcare you don't bring.

You know who's.

Here in the area.

That.

Some people live on.

Oh, okay.

It's been the reason.

That the model could explain why there are multiple.

Centres.

Oh, okay.

Okay.

Yeah, I think it's.

for joining us.

Okay.

Um.

So one thing before we start again.

Several people emailed me about this request.

Um, I have a suggestion and two situations.

The first is the two papers that I would recommend

you to do if you want to do an urban

geography.

Paper or normal library.

Um, I know this might be for another paper that

I think is quite interesting to look at.

You see.

What is.

The difference, you might ask.

When you mentioned that I.

Think you mentioned the last time.

So it's a.

Sure.

Well, read my handwriting.

Let me try to prove.

All right.

Why?

Why?

She's going to hurt us.

Somewhere.

It is about the kind of effects of high waves

of racial segregation.

Or the kind of evil attack you can think of

as a bit like Edith Sweat.

It's like a lot of stuff happening.

It's a very American question.

And also.

The racial preferences.

Of the present age.

It's been it's been a very good paper and it's

very nice.

So, Laura, white.

If you want paper in terms of a very cutting

edge, um.

Kind of all.

Um, none of that urban model.

Sorry.

This is, uh, not grow at all.

So the meaning of my group.

For my group.

Chicago booth.

Um, they have a paper which is called and centred

around the School of Optimal Transport for those in Chicago.

Something like this is not an.

Urban transportation policy.

Policy evidence from Chicago.

For optimal urban transportation policy in Chicago.

So it's a tend to look at the very sort

of transport planning perspective and say, suppose you can run

the bus network in Chicago.

What would you what would be the optimal?

And to give you a bit about the constraints or

infinite amount of money.

Um, so, um, that's what you know.

So if you don't want to do any of those

behaviours and just email me a suggestion for a paper,

I'd say yes or no.

So I'd say I think it's a good idea.

But we also have to do this research proposal, right.

Where you can do whatever you like.

You can sort of.

Come chat about it.

Come up.

Yes, you can, you could do you on this.

Um, and you can check it if you want.

Uh, I'm going to be around Friday, and then I'm

assuming I'll be available if you want to talk about

this.

But think of it.

It's like a paper proposal that's sort of a it

is a pitch, uh, for for giving me some money

to write this paper or whatever, give you some data

maybe to, to to write this.

So it's very flexible terms of is what you do.

The great thing about writing research proposals is that I

have a lot of vague ideas about what would be

an interesting problem.

When you start writing it down, you realise what the

complications are and what data you need and what, why

and how interesting it really is.

It always sounds in my head.

It sounds like it's a really great question and I

think she's not that exciting.

I'm sorry.

Yeah.

Then you write it down and you sort of say,

oh, I could put it that way in that sort

of view that way.

And then it sounds much more exciting.

We'll talk about that in the paper in the second

as well, in terms of what makes the paper exciting.

Uh, so.

So, yeah.

So the research proposal is really free if you want

to send me an email.

I happen to sort of chat to you about, you

know, about these sort of ideas.

And in terms of papers, I recommend these two papers.

If you say, I don't want to do this, something

else, would you possibly trade in any case that you

want to do that?

How do we submitted Moodle or.

I think so, yeah.

It's a good point.

I'll make sure there is no submission.

So we will make sure that someone puts up a

submission link on Moodle that should be removed.

Okay.

Um, so we can talk about what occurs.

And there's a lot of slides here which I won't

have time to go through.

So whatever the trigger is, is um, is that here

in terms of stuff from the paper, from the.

World of abundance?

There's a bit of sensitivity.

This is, um, which is now 2024 and published.

Um, and, um, but I want to talk about a

little bit about the kind of stuff, particularly the bits

that the parental is going to follow.

Um, so the idea, the kind of idea of Berlin

is, is sort of this is just look at the

kind of a map.

There's a map of Berlin divided with the building of

wall unified.

In 1909, United War came down.

And.

So there's a natural fragment of the red line.

Is known as the wall.

The wall really goes all the way.

This is where it goes all the way out here.

It's all on the outskirts of the wall.

But a very secure fence was booby traps.

And in a park is actually a concrete wall, which

basically completely cuts the city apart.

It's a very unusual environment.

It's not the only city that unfortunately suffers this fate.

In another example, what I see a divided city, Cyprus

and look at because it's fascinating.

Maybe even the divided cities.

But it is fascinating to see how.

And there are few other cities that are divided as

well, sometimes just because a normal country is not as

prosperous.

So the kind of cool thing about this natural experiment,

in some sense, is, is that the wall comes down

and wraps around this area, which is the main pre-war

CBD, as you'll see in the data in a moment.

So the a lot of the variation is going to

be where we get data from Westwood.

So how does Westwood in react to the loss of

everybody out there, and in particular the kind of main

commercial centre that's going to be the main variation that's

going to be employed, exploited in that.

And then.

So, um, so this is a close up of the

centre here.

And next, the next meeting of the conversation is going

to be, I'm not sure if it's a year or

so.

Um, uh, in, in March next year.

Today, a number of predictions of the model for what

should happen when the ball gets built.

So first we are going to begin to assume that

there are no knowledge across the world and can talk

to the guys at the other side.

There was no no other exchange.

You could comment that either you could have lived in

West Berlin and commute to East Berlin, or vice versa.

Um, so as you confirm in West Berlin, cannot get

commuters for a spin and vice versa, in a way.

And, you know, they don't want to do any, um,

any assumptions about these kind of externalities on the East

side not coming from the other side.

So let me.

Show you some.

Of the data sets in this paper.

This compared to the moment, is you observe the workplace.

How many people work each location for the residents.

How many of these workers visit each location several times

between walks in every year, and land prices and commuting

data?

So that is the study that a baseline data set

that you need for this case.

Even though you didn't work, you need to have an

estimate of travel times, which is going to be your

input into trouble because it's very hard to do without

even that process.

It's a bit difficult because you need some information about

how expensive the communication.

So here we observe the Germans are very upset by

the land prices.

Having house prices would be more straightforward.

We're going to translate them prices and house prices to

the prices and floorspace.

That's what sort of the key the variables that most

people eat or consume.

And then you need something which is very limited in

that setting as well.

So let's look at kind of the evolution of that.

So the kind of data that the paper samples data

into very fine spatial scales, about 15,000 units in this

in this area here, um, for 1930, around 1936 86

and 2000.

So for three sort of pre-war to the end of

division and then 89 and 19, the city gets 45.

Um, and then 26 is sort of after, um, more

than 15 years after reunification.

So this is from some places in Berlin in 1956.

So this.

Is, this is sort of you look like the graph

is sort of a graph that's taken how many hundreds

of hours of worked together.

But this is from the telephone book of someone called

holiday, who published his land values for every street in

Berlin.

So we digitise it and figure out where the streets

are, which blocks are adjacent to these streets, and you

average across the price that you report.

For the streets that are adjacent to a particular block

or special unit or across it.

And so that's what this, this, this data does.

The levels are sort of informative here.

The levels have been normalised.

Meanwhile the main takeaway is a it's already a kind

of a bit of a police centric city here as

sort of the main peak crisis.

And there's a second peak here.

There also are lots of other you know, this is

sort of it's not a totally unorganised centric city, sort

of like, but it's also not it's not perfectly normal

that there's a lot of interest in it.

The second thing to take away is that the difference

in that price is the very centre of the periphery.

This is not specific to Berlin, but in any kind

of way you look at land prices.

The prices is also going to be a lot of

variation between peripheral and central locations.

But in terms of that prices, that variation is going

to be even even bigger.

So we see these huge differences in cost of space.

There must be some reason why people are willing to

pay this.

Otherwise you would be an idiot to do that.

If I tell you that this is going to cost

£10,000 per square metre a lot more, and it's like,

okay, you know what's there to think about if there's

not some huge offsetting thing that drives you to the

centre to never, ever spend that money in a month?

Yeah.

So it's just sort of an indirect way is obviously

endogenous in the objective in terms of motivating people to

just think about cities as if you think about cities.

There must be some very strong accommodation implementation force is

going on here to sustain such a process.

That's really the takeaway.

So kind of the main variation that we've used is

going to say so what happens is when the city

gets.

So this is 1036.

So it's just showing West Berlin.

So that within the West within you see sort of

the this fight here and then prices which the areas

just out outside the centre, outside the kind of main

commercial centre which is going to become part of East

Germany and here.

So this is what this thing looks like in 86.

So this is Berlin during division because we see these

despite here in these areas completely disappeared.

So the areas that are close to discipline variation at

the end of the world, right next to the wall

to this, nobody wants to be there.

And the kind of spike here is the biggest fuck

here in the West.

But this was a bit flat.

Everything is a bit flat.

This is west London in 2006, so this is sort

of the view station shock.

You see the vertical division vegetation, everything goes up.

And in particular these areas here close to Berlin go

up here.

And this is sort of the city in fall in

the 80s, in 2006 of reunification.

So if I go fast back to 36, that doesn't

look exactly like 36 years of.

One direction.

So this is 36.

This is a it's not exactly the same, but it

kind of comes back.

But that does happen.

That could be a little bit where you don't exactly

return to the same equilibrium, but the variation that the

paper is going to use, this variation between the division

and the reunification that these areas And the other way

around.

So this is before the division.

The Security Division disintegrates.

So this this central areas go down and they come

up again.

That's the kind of.

Okay.

So there's a lot of really fun stuff that I

want to talk about because you can look at it

and it's a lot of interesting stuff, but essentially it

shows the variation of the scene in my office is

going to be statistically highly, statistically significant, and it doesn't

really work on different prices or prices as a summary

measure of the locations.

So the model, the paper, and in terms of also

the following, there are two ways to estimate the structural

parameters models that came back to your point.

You know, why do we have more parameters.

Because we'll have to estimate these parameters and to have

come up some idea how to identify them.

So the model year as I go forward to the

next slide.

Here there are three parameters, three sets of parameters that

are going to be set from the literature rather estimated

on the data in Berlin.

And there are going to be six other parameters that

are going to be estimates of the data.

So the stuff that we get away with from the

literature is first the share of residual space consumption.

So it's more as the Davis paper that a lot

of people point to.

A lot of people hate because they think they didn't

write down the wrong thing.

But anyway, they kind of argue that this is a

reasonable assumption for expenditure on housing and that a reasonable

housing expenditure is 25%.

And you can disagree and say, well, that's too low

and too high, or typically what sort of a lot

of that kind of distance as well.

There must be some known history that is not perfect,

and that rich people spend smaller share of their income

on.

Some of the.

example.

So that you have the product that says everybody is

25%, no matter how many you will get for something.

Um, what would be a more realistic example is someone

with a 50 so that the kind of expenditure is

very important.

A little bit, but typically what data shows you, if

you look at how those things in this year by

income type, by income data.

So it's sort of another mix of how important that

is.

It's an open question in certain stats and I'm not

sure it is that important.

But so that's the number that gets here.

The commercial space intensity is going to be 20% from

this one entity hanging off paper, which is a US

paper again uses this data to kind of break down

forms, finishes and construction and land.

So the shift in housing construction is getting 25%.

That said for the purposes of this paper, an important

assumption.

But in general, it's very important assumptions that determines the

talents of our clients.

So the next year in a Douglas production company, we

combine land with capital to build houses.

That actually is going to determine the supply.

Notice the differences in the sizes to potentially could be

extremely important extending differences in urban form.

So why is why is that in New York.

Why is that.

Which is much better.

Why are local developing country cities very crowded?

Whereas the developed countries have very little size right now.

What exactly drives these differences?

And you know, one very simple way to think about

is this difference in the supply system.

Maybe the New York is very easy to build up.

So if you have a lot of demand, people are

going to build up really high.

Whereas in other cities that may be more maybe harder

here for the people.

This is something very important.

This will help us to food for the future.

So the key focus are going to be tickets.

Prices are going to be estimated automated which are going

from the bottom.

There are going to be two parameters that govern the

kind of trade frictions in the city, which is the

kind of the two parameters.

One is written as really as a combination of two

things.

So copper was the thing that translates minutes into travel

time travel cost problem in the US.

And epsilon is the kind of qualifications.

So the thing that in the moment that I showed

so this is these two parameters are going to be

key to measure travel avions.

And in terms of how far people are willing to

commute to what the other parameters are all about the

opportunity of year accident of productivity.

That's the production side.

That was the kind of how to deal with her.

So if you double the apartment density around you, how

much does productivity increase?

That also is kind of how quickly do these spill-overs

die with distance?

Or how much do you care about density at different

distances from yourself?

And this is the same for and so it's a

natural instinct.

We talked about earlier earlier on in terms that that

could be negative or positive for the answer, whether there's

crowding or having more density of people living around you.

And that's going to be the aggregate.

So the first approach to estimating the first approach is

making the model, which is section six, is in its

approach is to be very confident.

It's also going to be used in the criminal setting

is to say, let's actually estimate only these two parameters,

okay?

And let's forget about all this stuff or assume that

particular value for all the literature.

These are the much harder.

These are the hardest parameter to estimate.

This is pretty easy to make a little size for

these parameters.

So let's see how how what the approach is to

take these parameters.

And thinking about how you can estimate these parameters given.

Given that settings, one of the key contributions of the

paper is to estimate the endogeneity of 50 images.

But then other papers will just say, well, we are

going to assume that pretty many exogenous or, you know,

under the previous estimates.

So so how can you estimate these last two things.

The thing you need is first is computing plot.

So the computing probability here It's going to be for

those people choosing to live and work.

It's going to be this thing.

If you do take lots of it and for both

sides, then this is going to be kind of this

very simple community group communication, where a lot of flow

is between I and J is going to be explained

by origin fixed effect.

The destination takes effect and tell times.

This you know coefficient how it is the kind of

travel time between I and J and how I smooth

here, or V is going to be the product and

so on.

So structurally, if you take the kind of local decision

tree that substituted for the idea that it is e

to the power, and you will find that this is

this is actually the structure of that coefficient.

So that is very.

Truth is that you can convince yourself that everything up

here is going to buy these effects.

For example, the destination is the fact is going to

capture the wages at the destination, which is going to

capture, for example, the amenities at origin, one of the

house prices at the origin.

And so it's sort of simple thing works in terms

of capturing all the, all the kind of messiness that's

out there.

So it's pretty simple, pretty easy to run this regression

if you have some flow data and set up data

and then you can get an estimate of this used.

Okay.

So the kind of problems in estimating the regression, there's

a very good talk about it in particularly in sort

of the moment.

Okay.

So let's see what what what he does.

So the, um, and this sort of concerns the suppression

of what are we going to do about that?

We need an estimate of calculate epsilon separately, but we

have to be a sort of combination.

Why does the combination of these two things matter?

So travel close could drop off very quickly with distance

travel time because either kappa is very big, which means

that this is a really painful time.

And it's just like just for us.

The second reason is that absolute absolute is big.

That means that eastern critic shocks are low variance in

the loop.

So the people are very reactive to economic forces so

that they will go over the wages of high and

can get too fast, which is not going to be

very fast, whereas if epsilon is small.

So if there are a lot of induces empathic shocks,

then you will see people making very long commutes simply

because they are very positive shots for them.

And also with a lot of aesthetic shots, you have

a lot of long distance commuting behaviour, so we can't

tell the people whether the cable is due to very

high costs of travel or due to the kind of

variance of use of the exactly the same.

If you run the same thing on the train data,

you should make an assumption about costs and availability of

substitution.

So the same epsilon here.

And to say how much of a decay of those

systems is due to training costs, or to differences in

society of substitution of goods.

That sort of make sense.

So we have this regression.

And so if we do run this regression is what

the kind of paper finds.

So the coefficients about .07 and.

Which says that we're going to decrease in travel time,

reduces flows by about 7%.

This woman estimates and are about that ballpark as a

whole.

Now that estimates sort of gravity equations, there were people

estimating slightly different equations before the Olympic pivot.

But this is sort of a value that a lot

of people find finds that here for a number of

years.

This is estimated on a very small sample of just

144 observations.

It's a very kind of aggregated commuting data in the

city from this much more segregated commuting data.

Um, this is um, this is also he came out

and got my PM out.

So he came out.

Uh, he's going to be what most people are going

to use at this point.

So why would you use Pmml if you talked about

this in the back in the trade report?

Insufficient, insufficient observations?

Yes.

So there's going to be any kind of trade flow

matrix or any computing matrix.

There's going to be a lot of zeros, typically in

a very granular data like 52,000 by 50,000 locations.

But in a lot of these bilaterals will be empty.

Nobody will travel there or any one person.

Um, and so on.

So in a setting where you have lots of zeros,

don't throw that.

Never throw the zeros just out of the window.

The kind of benchmark which keeps the zeros and the

estimates, the gravity radiation taking the zeros into account.

Now there's two or things here.

There are those zeros in this matrix because this sort

of doesn't really make any sense.

The reason why all S&P can tell us that is

zeros.

That's good.

But anyway I don't know if we got away with

that.

So if we just said oh you know everybody does

this in the village.

So Therefore, you have to assume the current benchmark is

equal either to this.

This is what the pencil paper does.

Or what else would you want to do?

What is wrong with this sort of regression?

Apart from the fact that that's the difference between all

humanity is kind of pointless.

Any questions?

What are the legal consequences?

Come after you.

Do this.

Sort of thing.

Where we expect people with better access to market, access

controls, all the different computing flows because they're different.

It's going to be sorting.

But like, you know, and they become is going to

shout at you, this thing is endogenous.

This is not the case of travel time is randomly

allocated.

Planners decide, and maybe there is a lot of reverse

connection, that if there's a lot of people travelling on

this thing and they're going to build a infrastructure piece

and then it's fast.

So really causation runs on the left to the right,

on the right time.

So you do that.

So what do you think of what we're going to

do.

We need some instruments.

So we need an instrument.

The kind of default instrument that literature is to use

straight line distance as an instrument for travel times.

It sounds like a crazy instrument, but it's actually probably

a reasonably good instrument in the sense that if you

think that planners do this, planners are extremely sort of

forward looking and say, well, you know, there's a lot

of flow between you and me.

Therefore, we're going to build a big train line there

so that travel is really fast.

If they were award winners and saying, well, if you're

not going to do that, we're just going to take

kind of the amount of travel time that's predicted by

straight line distance preferences of the plumber.

Reasonably good instrument.

And so the straight line distance instrument, so that the

instrument has a huge aperture, is very strong and only

in the amount of using an instrument is a bit

more complicated.

So there's sort of a control factor control function approach

where people either in OS or console are going to

instrument the straight lines.

Instrumenting typically does not matter at all.

To which you can say, well, maybe it's just that

maybe, uh, my interpretation of this is that unfortunately, the

story of planners is more one, I'm going to build

a line on a very busy road because they need

it, and I'm going to build a road to nowhere

because they need it as well.

Yeah, I want to help them.

So so that if you think that the infrastructure allocation

process is one where we sometimes build things, we're going

to award winners, and sometimes we're going to build stuff

in the middle of nowhere to just help people.

And because we think it somehow helps these people, then

you get to that sort of equilibrium weight instrument doesn't

matter.

The problem here is it's probably not a huge issue.

Okay.

So then notice that the.

Queen Elizabeth line, for instance, that was precisely what they

were saying.

People travelled here a lot and they need to go

there faster.

So.

Even if it's Elizabeth and you think that the political

process has sort of two bits, so they build it

through the very centre of town.

They could have also built a lot of the way

we go, like when it's pointless.

I don't want to go there.

So they built it through all of the really attractive

planning, but then they built it on the outside because

they wanted to help.

So part of the location decision clause is driven by,

yes, you know, that Tottenham Court, which is a pretty

popular destination for people to get into town.

So we're going to connect that.

But we're also going on the outside.

We're not being biased into its poorer areas, but maybe

demand is going to go up.

Sorry, it looks like the endogeneity is not sufficient.

But you need to defend yourself against this.

And so we got away without instrumenting.

Nobody asked.

Nobody wanted to know the answer instrument of this instrument

either, as you will see in a moment.

So far it's gone away that most people's instrument history.

These notes talk about all of this, talk about all

these points summarised here.

And now.

The final bit is to say, well, how can we,

um, how can we separate Kappa Epsilon?

So how can we know whether the key in terms

of travel times, YouTube shocks or due to travel costs?

And so there are a few different strategies in the

literature.

The most popular comes from the Berlin paper, and thus

much so it's going to do the following so we

can solve it.

So recall that the market conditions for this state.

And first we consider that we have no idea about

these amenities.

So let's just define something as for just the wages

which is this um object which combines the wage and

the amenities.

What we don't know.

I don't know whether you come to this league.

There's this great park in front of the door because

they pay you.

Well, that's.

I just don't know.

So I just I'm just going to sort of say

there's some wage that sort of set this thing to

one.

Let's get rid of the definition.

And if we can't deal with it, it's a flush.

Let's just forget about it.

So if you look at this equation here, you can

actually use this equation within the initial moment to estimate

what epsilon estimate.

So what he said is you can solve this equation

which is for given epsilon.

For epsilon I solve this labour market condition for the

actual size.

So what I'm going to do here to identify epsilon

is I'm going to solve this many times for the

different epsilon.

How do you think I'm going to wages.

How are going to be the equilibrium wage is going

to differ with different assumptions about epsilon.

So there's a very simple intuition.

If you make epsilon really small which means very big

idiosyncratic shocks.

Then people will just compute randomly in space.

They just do stuff.

They just go places because they want to.

In the things that you're going to see, the lowest

people are working in the centre of an earthquake.

So you will have to pay people enormously higher wages

in the centre to persuade these wild To get the

computers to go to the centre.

Does that make sense?

Yes, absolutely.

It is really small.

That means a lot of variance.

Then you know the kind of delivery it is going

to be where people just randomly sort of it's like

sort of random noise just randomly to travel around.

But in the data, you see a lot of them

right in the centre because this area observing the data,

a lot of employment.

So the only way for the model to be able

to actualise that is that the centre pays astronomical wages.

And so what we do is we compare the kind

of model predicted difference in wages across locations in the

city, for example, the variance of wages across locations with

the data, with the variance in the model.

And you're going to iterate over epsilon until we can

hit that moment.

Does that make sense?

Basically what you're going to find, you're going to find

that the objective function looks like this.

You see that you have you know it's only going

to be one epsilon.

You're going to hit it in terms of this one

is too small and too much of a gap between

the centre of the periphery.

If epsilon is very large, then the wage differentials in

wage differentials very small, and because people become extremely sensitive

to wage differences, and the very differences in the set

between the set that the periphery, does, that sort of

make sense?

So that's the way it's done this.

Then we have we have these two parameters.

We have epsilon and power from the gravity regression.

And if you have epsilon we can invert the model

and solve them.

So this is this.

So we can run the model and say what is

overall productivity and what are all the methods or activity.

We can say well productivity is high applications.

That prices are high, most prices are high.

And where wages are going to be higher and the

wages are this is just the wages.

So to be able to do this I on each

value in a production function parameter epsilon.

Um, and some portion buried somewhere.

Uh, yes.

If this is not needed for this one.

But if you get an energy version that you need

as well here, and in fact it's going to show

up indirectly.

The uh, term in this, in this system.

Both of these parameters to be able to invert the

model and to figure out what the manatees in quantities

are.

So, um, this is something that is going to do

as well.

This is sort of the property in Berlin.

And these are the managers in Berlin.

So this is sort of the kind of distribution of

amenities.

And if you look at them, I don't know, they

look kind of flat.

Yeah.

Uh, this melted.

So if you decompose, I want.

It's time to talk about it.

I like to talk about the paper is decompose the

overall the energy into the exogenous bit and the endogenous

bit.

And what you see is that exogenous immediately seem to

be high in the periphery, but the endogenous amenities seem

to be very, very high.

So the oral amenity doesn't carry that much.

But the composition of what that amenity is defines in

a very intuitive way between the sensitivity and this is

not the model, it's not the paper in the paper,

but it's not there.

But it is something that if you run the code,

you will see that that's the case.

Okay.

So I haven't talked about healthy controls.

Now this is the limit to the contribution of the

solvent is between the endogenous bit and the.

Which I won't have time to do that.

So you just, you can sort of go through this.

This is sort of in terms of the most, you

know, we use the kind of shot from division rejuvenation

to find these parameters in different settings, people that use

very different identifying assumptions.

The stuff that I explain in terms of running a

gravity regression, using some moment to back out epsilon, and

then inverting the model.

You'll see lots and lots of papers here.

If you need to estimate the strength of accommodation dispersion

forces, then a kind of an identification strategy that you

need is going to be very much off of the

shelf, but of whatever works in your setting, let's say,

whereas this sort of gravity inversion model is sort of

it's by now extremely standard.

Okay.

So this is the summary of this regression approach.

And let me stop here and sort of turn to

the clinical data set that we discussed in the last

half hour, um, of this, um, I think it's this

I'm going to bring up the kind of questions and

you can bring out the paper.

So let me first.

Say one thing in terms of introduction, and then you

go, so 24 is gone with the wind, renewable energy

infrastructure, welfare institution.

It's a kind of a classic kind of job market

paper in this first edition in this, uh, things.

But it'll be a little bit here in terms of

the as we go through this, this has some cool

reviews, some results in terms of what that kind of

the reduced effect of.

We build this and then it combines that with the

quantitative spatial model.

And some of the questions here are going to be,

first of all, the reduced form.

And then.

About.

What does the model have.

And that's the key thing to think about is sort

of why are we what is the value added of

the model.

You see quite a few papers where people will have

a model because they say, well, they told me to

have one.

That I clever.

On the market.

The model delivers very little in terms of tangible stuff

and that's bad.

The other is going to be better than nothing in

some sense.

In terms of what?

It means, but in terms of the sort of the

kind of typical job market kind of whatever, I have

to show that I'm good at everything.

The kind of the key, key thing in this literature

is that the model does something interesting to say, how

a model does nothing.

That is very disappointing.

You see a lot of papers where obviously there's not

much.

So this is sort of a paper that's a little

bit in between the model.

That's nothing.

But the model is absolutely breathtaking.

uh.

It's okay, but it's not.

It doesn't have in my ideas.

Doesn't sort of completely keep you out of the water.

And so let's think about it as you go through.

So the first question is what's behind that?

So the idea is are windmills in distress?

That's what the paper asks.

What's the idea of the windmill around to be allocated?

For sure.

A lot of the comments are not going to let

us pass without some medication.

So what is the kind of instrument here and how

plausibly exogenous is it?

Can you pull the holes into it?

So what's your assessment of how the economy is going

to take it?

So first of all, what is the idea of the

instrument.

You just quickly summarise all kind of idea behind the

instrument is.

How poorly the area is in terms of the slope

of at them.

It is going to be hilly.

But then it's going to be interactive with something.

Yes.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But not only it has wind.

Yeah.

So that's pretty rough to hear.

And who's on the side of the moon?

When the wind blows.

The wind blows.

But it's one is a big.

Wind graph.

That was.

Cool innovation.

You know, within this height.

So the area is differentiable.

So this is the cool.

This is the cool cool cool.

This is a 3D model.

This is sort of high.

In this.

But what was it the.

Technological innovation that allowed the fire.

It's a classic kind of a sort of a shift

share type thing where you see the locations are going

into close with a kind of real, really cool graphics.

Is this idea?

Here we go.

Yeah.

So this is a hill.

The wind comes.

From that.

Then in the past, this was a bad place to

build because it's just a shadow over hills.

If you build windmills and suddenly this place gets a

positive, productive shot.

So we have either technological progress that makes windmills cost

effective.

Um, certainly locations that previously were very attractive become attractive.

So that's a pretty cool instrument.

I don't know, can you pull any holes in it?

So the why is this one direction?

Why is this a cool graph?

So this is what's the benefit of this.

It says over this period the dark places after controlling

for some stages, the things are the places that experience

the biggest improvements in terms of this utility as witnessed.

So if you're on a plane and you know that

technology is completely pointless.

That wide area where these areas have increased a lot

in terms of tractors, windmills, and we're going to see

it's going to have a pretty strong message.

Any concerns of any.

Of the.

Hills walking around the city yourselves and I know.

There will be differences in population composition because of the

geography differences.

I think for example, here we areas also make harder

to install water infrastructure.

But we need to water.

Right.

Doesn't it also need to change over time?

That's right.

It's going to be fine.

It's going to be like it's a very high challenge,

but it's yeah, you know.

Maybe it's the.

Guys behind it all that weird.

Maybe they are.

Uh, but, um.

You could maybe pin the star line.

That's something along the lines of, uh, like we have

increased climate change.

So then maybe hilly areas experienced more ground erosion.

So people want to move away.

Yeah.

Because in the time, yeah, it's just become less attractive

anyways.

So the.

Slides here, we're going to make this a much more

dangerous place.

And people are going to move away from it not

because of the windmill but because it's just dangerous.

That would be a great one.

It's totally implausible.

But nevertheless it's a it's going to be hard because

obviously with any instrument you're good enough to go down

the labour route, you know, endlessly.

You come up with something on top.

It's not a pretty good instrument.

Yeah.

The the graph here is the graph here.

And this is very similar to this.

This is an example of the kind of effects of

the ranger station in the genocide.

And it looks very similar because there's certain valleys where

you can listen to that radio station and others.

We can't.

It's very similar identification situation where the hills is not

separate.

But I go to different the radio signal and it's

pretty cool.

So the instruments are going to find that basically what's

what is it going to find.

What are we.

What are you going to fight.

You're going to find that How do you like animals?

I'm sorry.

Educated people move away more than non educated people.

But all of them really dislike the.

Movement.

Of people to move away.

And we'll see how prices for.

Wages and.

Wages increase.

Even the reduced form in which data.

Okay.

So that's that's pretty cool.

Um, I don't know where the kind of where they

can produce some reductions that it must be further down

here.

This is the first stage and this is house prices.

But the school is seeing the house prices.

So this is a this is a surprise results that

show that house prices basically falling.

Um, when you, um, you know.

Yes.

Considering Say that.

The house price is not huge, but it is negative.

So in terms of contribution they apply to the UK.

And here it is useful.

And as they say let me regress house prices on

something not quite right.

And those are great.

But what have you got.

So we've learned that house prices fall in response to

a well identified, you know, random placement of a window,

which means it seems to be this amenity.

People do dislike it.

We can sort of, you know, argue about how big

this coefficient is and whether it's a 2% drop.

There's a lot of little house prices.

50% is not a thing.

So how do we find two, five, five, 6%?

This is a.

talk earlier today to estimate some some other setting 6%

negative effects of noise and pollution and traffic on roads

due to house prices.

It's difficult to find house price study that finds the

results, but whatever.

That might be the case.

Specifically, the burden setting house price drops close to the

wall are way up 2%, 60, 70% and more.

So depends on how big the shortest.

But what is the main disappointment of this sort of

table in terms of if the paper was ended here?

So in terms of thinking what passed the model at

the end of the paper here, why would it best

be publishable in the Journal of Economics, probably to everyone

in the Field Journal at this point.

And then we're going to talk about why not?

It's not obvious what the implication is, because I think

there's work showing people also just like coal plants.

And it just it's a matter of relative relative magnitude,

right.

If you're producing wind farms and substituting coal plants in

response, then the welfare of people wouldn't go up necessarily

because they also dislike it.

Yeah, this is going to be one thing in terms

of it's going to be one way of thinking about

sort of what is the sort of policy implications of

that.

So people like wind farms should be know again and

know that you have to sort of, you know, have

to have some data on something about proximity causation systems

of this, this kind of policy implications.

We just learned very little about the mechanisms.

Why what happens, what what is what are the kind

of acts and why did people decide it.

And you know, if you don't know what the mechanisms

are, we also know very little about what we could

do about it, and what you can do to try

and make things better.

Obviously, there's a whole series.

Regressions are very popular, and the lineage of it is

going to be about a year because it's just going

to go out.

Okay, cool.

Even if it's extremely this is a very well identified

house price regression, in the sense that I think that

the instrument is probably as good as it gets.

So this is a very credible estimate.

But nevertheless, as such it's not that interesting.

Okay.

That's a reduced form.

Let's think about the model.

And how many locations does the model include.

Is there asset economy offering.

You are the model the estimated such a large number

of locations.

I've kind of hinted at most of those already.

But to summarise sort of what you do and is

there you bar how does this whole thing become manageable?

They allow commuting within the regional labour market.

Exactly.

So the paper says it has 130,000 applications.

So 130,000 applications by 130 stations is more than any

computer can handle.

This is not the kind of stuff that you get

our hands on.

So the impossible to estimate a computer matrix that you

can use for the whole structure where he says, well,

I'm only going to compute troubled times within is it

called cities, which are municipalities in Germany.

And so then it becomes that point.

However, is there you are.

Is there a sort of a decision about moving to

a city and then you realise you shouldn't or.

There isn't.

I don't.

What are you trying to do?

What other assumption can you make in terms of.

The disadvantages.

So the beauty of this is no, you are as

everything.

All of Germany is one big city.

And so you can choose any age with this restriction

that you cannot commute from Munich to Berlin or so.

You can only commute within the cities.

So you can make things easy by cutting out the

kind of very crazy long distance commute.

The main disadvantages.

This is sort of the approach that the idea that

comes from integration.

Is within the same everywhere.

So it's not going to be any difference in terms

of how people react to changes between in terms of

the decisions between Berlin and Munich or in Berlin, which

is probably an unattractive decision, but it's probably not a

huge thing for this kind of paper.

So he just goes with this as.

How could you sort of.

Can you think of all of the how could we

change this model to make it, to make it have

a different name?

So what kind of model will we need?

That there is sort of a difference between the decision

of living in London and living in Birmingham and within

London, and the kind of decisions.

How?

Could you have to introduce like an elasticity term that's

like dependent on the distance?

They just function.

How they were.

In this.

Apartment.

You need it.

You can't make it.

Well, you could, in principle, try and make it a

function of the senses.

You could try and make the promise of the financial

distance quite messy, rather than nicer to have to set

up a definition.

It's just across cities.

It's different than with it.

And.

You'd have to have sort of a two stage in

all the way.

People just get sort of a draw.

So you'd have, for example, the economy where there are

several cities which are all little building models.

And in the first stage, people are going to decide

which of those parties to join.

And that is going to be another fresh issue, which

is going to have different variants and show up within

cities.

So then you would have to do a two stage

thing where it is, you know, several things are there

and people decide which are the ones choose and must

decide to choose the city that they're going to get

a visualisation for their optimal decision within the city.

So that would be a way to do it.

So yeah, I think this is sort of fine.

Um, to, to do that, it sort of keeps things

sort of uh, so the estimated the negative artefact up

to 27.83%, with the paper having been able to estimate

this effect with the the difference in different directions.

And we approach the section five.

So this is a discussion that says now we're going

to do this model.

The details and the model, the status of the results

of the table.

And finding that the cost of happiness for the journey

today is 0.8 3%.

Reduction of utility by 23%.

Could you have gotten this number somehow with this regression,

so we could work on the reduced form regression?

To go back to this here needs to go back

to the house price regression.

And then there are some more regressions here.

That's something on high skilled residents.

And then here is the summary paper.

So that's a summary table.

But it's sort of maybe just looking at half price

regression today.

Can I could I somehow use this from the from

the house price earnings.

The answer is no.

But why not.

What's the missing.

What how hard is this business to see this.

What is the model do to convert the house prices

and a couple of other things into into this effect.

And we have.

The nursing assistant program.

So we're just, um, looking at changes relative to each

other.

Yeah.

So there's.

Going to be.

A problem, which is a very interesting, um, point that

is the model really solves the problem.

That is this complicated question that's coming back to the

surface to think about how does the model know, what

does the model do to translate and reduce form into,

um.

I guess accounts for the impacts for changes in wages,

housing and sorting.

So sort of accounts for this feedback.

Is there a like g effects where people move and

moving that to the south?

Yeah.

So what are we going to do?

So it is so this kind of some funny stuff,

but they're sort of the first version of it, sort

of as one of the spaces of the papers or

the first version of the paper.

And then there's a full version of the paper.

But so what paper is going to do is going

to use the kind of amenity and model inversion idea

and say, oh, this region manages the function of how

many people choose the location of the house prices are

and what the access to to drop off is the

market access target, which sometimes he just uses the wages

in the old location, or sometimes he uses sort of,

you know, market access to locations around the community costs.

So this the paper alternates in some quite confusing way

between these two things, like, I don't know why he

did that, probably to The kind of the kind of

rose people decide, but this is sort of the standard

kind of instance.

This comes from the kind of the kind of the

inversion of amenities.

So it's subtle changes.

In moments.

But it's.

What is the distance between sort of what sort of

what structure does the model put onto this thing?

One way of looking at it is saying, this is

not a changes to the before or after the construction

of, of, uh, of this sort of, uh, windmills that

you observe that the instruments of solving the shock is

the change in amenities, is the change in residence and

change in house prices and the change in labour market

opportunities.

And so really what the model does in terms of

it just translates the changes in house prices, but also

the changes in residents and this.

Um, and so in some sense, the distance between the

model and the reduced form is not huge, but it's

put some structure that the economy is coming into this

year.

Um, and yeah, um, yeah.

We're going to do this complicated question.

Does it solve that problem?

It doesn't do it any kind of, um, trying to

map department delivery effects into like, aggregate effects.

So, like, I'm not really sure this issue.

Does the math of how to.

Aggregate.

But so what should happen in the model of what

should happen in reality is that as people move away

from those people dislike, be sure that people dislike me

because I would as well.

I have one right in my backyard.

So if you, um.

And if you just like this, you're going to go

away.

You're going to move away.

If you move away, this is going to change all

the residents, both your location and some other locations.

The destination location is going to change prices, both your

location and the destination location.

And it's going to change wages with your location and

the destination that's always been there.

What is labour supply?

Because whereas the wages are going to fall, whereas the

place where you're going to go, maybe there's going to

be crowding and then wages are going to go down.

So everything is going to change everywhere.

So it's definitely the problem of the missing intersect, or

there is going to be contamination of the control that

both the treated and the control areas are going to

be affected.

Just like a lot of spatial stuff.

Yeah.

And what you're observing in the data is really kind

of.

You know, we see that.

The treatment group goes down and maybe the control groups

that we still don't observe a gap in equilibrium in

amenities between people, if that's what we observe.

But we can't really tell whether it being sort of

just a decline in amenity.

So there's no shift in the control group or like

this or maybe like mostly the increase in amenities in

the, you know, people being driven away, maybe for rural

places into sort of at some point we don't know

what the kind of movement is.

Yeah.

So the kind of the models of this.

Can the models of this.

I guess we're not as interested in a counterfactual.

There are no windmills being built.

More about at least the focus of these papers seems

to be more about where should you go then?

More about allocation is that of half mills or no

mills.

Whereas if you're thinking.

That sort of an argument to say, well, it's not

that important, maybe it's okay to do that.

Um.

What is he going to do?

And to what extent could you use the model to

sort of solve the missing in this setting?

That is.

So.

I think they.

Want to invert the original metric and to calculate the

exact change.

That's true.

Yeah, but that's not.

Necessarily on the distribution effects.

It's not in the middle of the budget.

So he's going to do something.

So this is sort of Britain and changes sort of

in turbulent ways in the paper is to say, well,

let me just invert the model today and it's okay

to infer what the difference is in the energies are.

I'm going to get the masses.

And I think if you're going to regress, this kind

of energy is all my strength.

And I'm going to find the effect of windmills.

On.

The level of amenities today.

So if the instrument is exogenous, that is equivalent way

of doing the way.

All of these changes are going to get translated into

change in amenities.

I can also just.

Regress them on weakness.

So I'm going to progress model in terms of amenity

windmills.

I'm going to find negative effects to find that med

school.

But even in this regression I'm never going to be

able to tell whether amenities increased in some location decreased

another, or whether the kind of control is fixed and

just the kind of treatment goes down.

Is it a problem?

It should not be a problem here, in the sense

that amenities are only identified up to a multiplicative constant

anyway.

So you say that this has gone down and everything

has gone up.

Yeah, right.

But something else has happened.

Sort of this has gone up.

And so now it's the only amenities.

Amenity difference is not the level of amenities.

So what the kind of model counterfactual is going to

be, what he's going to do is actually is going

to say, let me just introduce the kind of differences

in this versus a two region model.

This is a beach without windmills.

Windmills.

And we're going to see well as a result of

a windmill.

The amenity value of this is going to decrease by

2%.

So I'm just going to simulate that.

I'm going to do that.

And then I'm going to set the model so people

can allocate themselves.

And then I'm going to observe in the model how

the distribution of residents is going to change, how house

prices are going to change in how wages are going

to change.

In that changes, we will see exactly what follows.

The missing intercept problem.

You would find that, you know, house prices have gone

up and house prices in the area have gone down.

And you know how much these two things happen.

And similarly with, with prices obviously with the number of

residents that that gets to the more context that you

would learn about the missing.

And this is a problem in terms of how much

the control will be used and how much is the

treatment group important.

But in the terms of when it comes to identifying

these differences for the sake of humanity.

What the gap is, is that open up, and that's

really all you need to know.

And so that's a bit of a complicated question to

this to this answer.

Okay.

What are all things.

So the final question is.

So the final question is the estimated value in in

terms of allocation of windmills.

It's the transition that creates those negative impact.

So that are going to be for the defining.

The question of is the answer is no.

So the question is why is that so.

So we look to see whether we're going to use

the model to say, well what would have happened if

we had put these windmills in different places?

And did you find that?

We can find that if you can find the allocation

that is much less costly in terms of utility.

reductions, mostly like putting stuff further away from us into

empty areas.

That's going to help.

So the question is, is this allocation that he's using?

The answer is no.

This is the problem.

This is how interesting it's about in terms of in

terms of what the model delivers delivers three things.

It delivers a point A3 welfare which is differential between

high and low skilled.

How exciting do we find that.

And the second the second kind of thing that the

model delivers is to say, well, I can use the

model to find the alternative allocation of windmills.

That is less costly.

I mean, how.

Can you find it isn't great.

I find it a bit suspicious.

Suspicious?

What's this?

You're referring to this thing when I said that they

should ideally allocate moves in areas with low skilled individuals.

Right.

And then they say, oh, this is not like this

has smaller welfare consequences.

But I think to everyone, it's pretty obvious that if

a government would introduce a strategy like that, that would

introduce huge welfare consequences, because, well, people would be extremely

unhappy.

About politicians.

Substantially.

I mean, maybe you could get away with secretly building

them in those areas.

But you couldn't do that.

So it really is a crazy state, kind of a

typical kind of there is almost kind of like, yeah,

yeah.

So unfortunately, a lot of the evidence from this paper,

and also lots of other related paper, shows that middle

class people care a lot about logistics, and they just

all the data tell us much less road noise and

didn't get very upset over noise.

Sorry.

So as a result, if you take that to the

extreme, so what he's going to do, he is going

to allocate windmills in empty regions and poor regions because

they don't care.

So it's not a feasible.

Kind of.

Alternative.

If you do that, it's not something that the German

government has proposed and be re-elected next time.

It's not re-elected anyway.

Yeah.

So I think.

That it was quite difficult to get quite a Navy

person who would actually have anything to do the opposite.

You'd start losing windmills in very rich areas to sort

of make sure that the pain.

Is.

Spread equally.

Everybody gets a windfall.

That's the kind of.

It's a very, you know.

I'm not sure I like that either.

But so anyway, so the counterfactual is going to happen.

Implication.

So how interesting is the counterfactual.

It's sort of interesting, but it's also a little bit

boneheaded in the sense that we're going to do something

here that's incredibly unpalatable.

Is it surprising?

It's sort of surprising that you can reduce the cost

so much.

So I think that from a positive spin, you would

say, if you told me ex-ante that you can bring

down the cost.

Sort of.

Suppose we did something where we didn't buy as the

windmills put in 100m further, 200m further away from all

houses.

But that makes a big difference.

It's something that I think is interesting.

So the kind of invisible kind of, you know, something

and say, you know, yes, it makes a huge difference.

We could have done something that is only marginally different

had a big impact.

I think that is kind of interesting.

It would help a congregation accomplish.

That.

Obviously the allocation is not optimal.

This is a problem.

This is going to be a problem.

This is not a problem.

This is the factual kind of rule of allocating.

It's not.

It's not.

There must be another sort of action.

It's even cheaper.

Yes.

Setting aside over a course of a year.

The fact that he has found the problem.

The problem is not a problem.

I guess the problem is, if you talk to him,

this is not the best thing.

But it's kind of what I have.

You ask, why can't I invest?

But then there is the.

I think he's sort of he has the constraint of

renewable capacity in aggregate.

So he's sure made that somewhat realistic.

Sure.

But that's you know, that's the rules of the game,

you say.

Is there an alternate application of the global warming mills?

And, you know, that would be a different counterfactual.

Well, what happens in other, you know, increase 20% of

the that's fine policymakers.

They're going to be perfectly fine with it.

I'm half of the kind of, you know, sort of

political survivability.

And they don't care.

Who cares about ultimate applications?

Yeah.

Economists.

Yeah.

If you ask the economist, the first thing is going

to say is she has the option.

You know, the government must be impossible to find the

optimum we're going to take.

We want to be at the bottom, not just sort

of somewhere close to the bottom, as opposed to the

economists and the kind of economists are going to be

very upset about this and say, no, no, no, no,

this is not the optimum.

You need to find a finding.

The optimum is really complicated problems of this sort of

trying to solve what the kind of welfare, minimising analysis

of loss, minimising applications is probably computationally infeasible.

And it's a very complicated problem.

It's not sort of sort of like micro 1 or

1 where you just go like, yeah, it's here.

First order derivative.

You know, it's really difficult to do that.

And it's kind of for a policy purpose.

No policymaker would spend one second saying, hey, I have

my policy of you tell me whether it's good.

Yeah, I know you're going to be interested in what

the optimal policy is kind of by this band, but

they will say perfectly happy to do rules or sorry,

not going to be able to solve some complicated optimisation

problem.

The main problem here is of.

